MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 26
Engels 1882-89     
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_26.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:40]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
26 
Engels 1882-89
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me26.htm [09/12/2010 15:24:46]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-970-9 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
CONTENTS 
Preface XIII 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
August 1882-December 1889 
1882 
August 
Manuscripts on Early German History 
1. On the Early History of the Germans 6 
Caesar and Tacitus 6 
The First Battles Against Rome 19 
Progress Until the Migration Period 33 
Note: The German Peoples 44 
2. The Frankish Period 58 
The Radical Transformation of the Relations of Landowner-
ship under the Merovingians and Carolingians 58 
The District and Army Structure 71 
Note: The Franconian Dialect 81 
1883 
May 
3. Georg Weerth  108 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
June 
4. The Book of Revelation 112 
5. Preface to the 1883 German Edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party 118 
1884 
March 
6. Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49) 120 
April-May 
7. The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State. In the 
Light of the Researches by Lewis H. Morgan 129 
Preface to the First Edition 131 
I. Prehistoric Stages of Culture 134 
1. Savagery 134 
2. Barbarism 136 
II. The Family 139 
III. The Iroquois Gens 190 
IV. The Grecian Gens 204 
V. The Emergence of the Athenian State 213 
VI. The Gens and the State in Rome 222 
VII. The Gens Among the Celts and Germans 232 
VIII. The Formation of the State Among the Germans 245 
IX. Barbarism and Civilisation 256 
June 
8. Introductory Note to the Separate 1884 Edition of Marx's Wage 
Labour and Capital 277 
October 
9. Marx and Rodbertus. Preface to the First German Edition of The 
Poverty of Philosophy by Karl Marx 278 
1885 
January 
10. Real Imperial Russian Privy Dynamiters 292 
February 
11. England in 1845 and in 1885 295 
12. Preface to the Third German Edition of The Eighteenth Brumaire 
of Louis Bonaparte by Marx 302 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
July 
13. Preface to the Pamphlet Karl Marx Before the Cologne Jury 304 
August 
14. To the Editors of the Severny Vestnik 311 
October 
15. On the History of the Communist League 312 
16. The Situation 331 
17. To the Editorial Committee of Le Socialiste 333 
18. How Not to Translate Marx 335 
November 
19. On the History of the Prussian Peasants. Introduction to 
Wilhelm Wolff's Pamphlet The Silesian Milliard 341 
1886 
20. Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German 
Philosophy 353 
I 357 
II 365 
III 374 
IV 381 
February 
21. Appendix to the American Edition of The Condition of the 
Working Class in England 399 
March 
22. On the Anniversary of the Paris Commune 406 
April 
23. A Statement to the Editorial Board of the New Yorker 
Volkszeitung  408 
May 
24. On the Strike at a Glass-Works in Lyons 409 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
October 
25. The Political Situation in Europe 410 
December 
26. Johann Philipp Becker 418 
1887 
January 
27. Preface to the Second Edition of The Housing Question 424 
28. The Labor Movement in America. Preface to the American 
Edition of The Condition of the Working Class in England 434 
February 
29. Letter to the Organising Committee of the International 
Festival in Paris 443 
March 
30. To the Federation of the Centre of the French Workers' 
Party 445 
December 
31. Introduction to Sigismund Borkheim's Pamphlet, In Memory of 
the German Blood-and-Thunder Patriots. 1806-1807 446 
32. The Role of Force in History 453 
33. Rough Draft of the Preface to The Role of  Force  in History 511 
1888 
January 
34. Preface to the 1888 English Edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party 512 
February 
35. Preface to the Pamphlet Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of 
Classical German Philosophy 519 
April 
36. Protection and Free Trade. Preface to the Pamphlet: Karl 
Marx, Speech on the Question of Free Trade 521 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
1889 
April 
37. Letter to the Editors of The Labour Elector 537 
May 
38. The Ruhr Miners' Strike of 1889 539 
August 
39. Possibilist Credentials 542 
40. Apropos of the London Dockers' Strike 545 
September 
41. The Abdication of the Bourgeoisie 546 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
1884 
1. On the Association of the Future 553 
2. On the Peasant War 554 
3. On the Decline of Feudalism and the Emergence of National 
States 556 
1886 
August 
4. Chartist Agitation 566 
1888 
5. Plan of Chapter Four of the Pamphlet The Role of Force in 
History 578 
6. Plan of the Final Section of Chapter Four of the Pamphlet The 
Role of  Force  in History 579 
7. Notes on My Journey Through America and Canada 581 
8. Impressions of a Journey Round America 584 
APPENDICES 
1883 
1. To the Editors of To-Day 589 
2. From Hermann Lopatin's Letter to Maria Oshanina 591 

=====第8页=====
X Contents 
1885 
3. The Insurrection of May 1849 594 
1886 
4. Lawyers' Socialism 597 
1887 
5. To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung 617 
6. Engels' Amendments to the Programme of the North of England 
Socialist Federation 619 
1888 
7. To the Editor of Justice 623 
8. Interview Given by Frederick Engels to the New Yorker Volks-
zeitung 626 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 631 
Name Index 699 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 730 
Index of Periodicals N 747 
Subject Index 751 
Glossary of Geographical Names 767 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
1. Map of German Settlement According to Engels' "On the Early 
History of the Germans" 51 
2. Page 17 of Engels' manuscript "The Frankish Period" 69 
3. Map of German Dialects According to Engels' "The Franconian 
Dialect" 94-95 
4. Cover of the first edition of The Origin of the Family, Private 
Property and the State 130-31 
5. Title page of the fourth edition of The Origin of the Family, 
Private Property and the State 257 
6. Title page of Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German 
Philosophy 355 
7. A page of the manuscript of The Role of  Force  in History 467 
8. Title page of the English edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party 513 
9. Programme of the North of England Socialist Federation with 
Engels' amendments 621 

=====第9页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
K. M. COOK: Works 14; Appendix 2 
NICHOLAS JACOBS: Works 23 
R. S. LIVINGSTONE: Works 13, 31 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: Works 1 
SALO RYAZANSKAYA: Works 2 
BARRIE SELMAN: Works 2 (Note), 16, 17, 19, 22, 25, 29, 
30, 33; From the Preparatory Materials 1-5, 8, 9; 
Appendices 3, 4, 5, 8 
STEPHEN SMITH: From the Preparatory Materials 6 
JOAN and TREVOR WALMSLY: Works 3, 10 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
XIII 
Preface 
Volume 26 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels contains works by Frederick Engels, most of which were 
written between August 1882 and December 1889. 
After Marx's death Engels took upon himself the complex tasks 
of the development of the theory and the ideological leadership of 
the international socialist movement, which for many decades had 
been performed by himself and Marx in close collaboration. "For 
after all, we wish to maintain intact, in so far as it is in my power, 
the many threads from all over the world which spontaneously 
converged upon Marx's study," he wrote to August Bebel on April 
30, 1883 (see present edition, Vol. 47). 
Throughout the 1880s Engels' links with members of the 
socialist working-class movement of various countries grew 
stronger and broader. The working-class struggle for emancipa­
tion acquired greater dimensions, and was joined by new strata of 
the proletariat. The process of forming independent working-class 
political parties begun in the preceding years continued, and by 
the end of the decade they had been set up or were in the stage of 
being set up in almost all the countries of Europe. Most of them 
based their programmes on the principles of scientific socialism. 
These principles were also reflected in the decisions of the Paris 
International Socialist Congress of 1889, which marked the 
beginning of the Second International. The creation of parties was 
an important new step in the process of combining socialism with 
the working-class movement. 
Engels constantly helped the young socialist parties and work­
ing-class organisations to draw up their programmes, tactics and 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
political line. He contributed actively to the socialist press and did 
his utmost to promote the dissemination of Marxism. He carried 
on an extensive correspondence with members of the working-
class and socialist movement of different countries. Alongside the 
preparation for the press of volumes II and III of Capital, a major 
part of Engels' activity consisted of publishing new editions of 
Marx's and his own works and organising translations of them into 
other languages. The prefaces to these editions published in this 
volume constitute an important part of his literary heritage. 
During this period Engels wrote two major theoretical works 
which occupy a central place in the volume: The Origin of the 
Family, Private Property and the State and Ludwig Feuerbach and the 
End of Classical German Philosophy. 
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State was an 
important contribution to the development of the materialist 
conception of history. The scientifically argued theses advanced in 
this work about the role of production in the development of 
society, the origin and evolution of the family, the origin of 
private property and classes, and the emergence and class essence 
of the state, fully retain their significance today. This work 
remains, to quote Lenin, "one of the fundamental works" of 
scientific communism (Collected Works, Vol. 29, Progress Pub­
lishers, Moscow, 1977, p. 473). It contains a profound theoretical 
generalisation of scientific achievements in the sphere of the 
history of primitive society and ethnography, first and foremost, 
of the studies of the progressive American scientist Lewis 
H. Morgan, whose results were set out in his book Ancient Society. 
This book was based to a large extent on many years of studying 
the life and customs of North American Indians. Morgan, Engels 
wrote in his preface to the first edition of The Origin of  the Family, 
"rediscovered ..., in his own way, the materialist conception of 
history that had been discovered by Marx forty years ago" (this 
volume, p. 131). The extensive material contained in Morgan's 
book provided Engels with "a factual basis we have hitherto 
lacked" (Engels to Karl Kautsky, April 26, 1884, present edition, 
Vol. 47), which enabled him to analyse the early stages of human 
development from the viewpoint of the materialist conception of 
history. 
Engels regarded his work as, "in a sense, the fulfilment of a 
behest" of Marx (p. 131), who himself had planned to write a 
book on the early period of human history drawing on the results 
of Morgan's studies. Engels made full use of Marx's notes in the 
latter's conspectus of Morgan's book, drawn up shortly before his 

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
death, and made the structure of this conspectus, which differed 
from that of Morgan, the basis for his work. He also drew on a 
great deal of additional material, including his own studies on the 
early history of Ireland and of the Germans, carried out in 
preceding years (all this is referred to in the Notes to this volume). 
In preparing a fourth edition of the book (1891) Engels made 
certain changes and important additions based on a study of the 
most recent scientific literature of his day. 
Engels based his work on the idea of two types of production, 
remarking in the preface: "According to the materialist concep­
tion, the determining factor in history is, in the last resort, the 
production and reproduction of immediate life. But this itself is 
again of a twofold character. On the one hand, the production of 
the means of subsistence, of food, clothing and shelter and the 
implements required for this; on the other, the production of 
human beings themselves, the propagation of the species. The 
social institutions under which men of a definite historical epoch 
and of a definite country live are determined by both kinds of 
production: by the stage of development of labour, on the one 
hand, and of the family, on the other" (pp. 131-32). 
Tracing the evolution of the family, Engels examined how its 
forms had changed under the influence of the development of 
productive forces and changes in the mode of production. He 
showed that at the early stages of human history, when private 
property and the division of society into classes had not yet arisen, 
family relations, ties of kinship played a very important part. With 
the growth of productive forces, however, this role was gradually 
reduced, and with the emergence of private property and classes 
the family became totally subjected to property relations. 
Substantiating in detail the thesis already advanced by him in 
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, to the effect that human society at 
the early stages of its development was a classless society based on 
a gentile structure and common ownership of the means of 
production, Engels summed up, as it were, his and Marx's many 
years of research in this sphere. He supplemented Marx's view of 
socio-economic formations expounded in the preface to A 
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, Part One (present 
edition, Vol. 29). 
In a note to the 1888 English edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party he made a major correction, quoting The Origin 
of the Family, to the Manifesto's thesis, that "the history of all 
hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles" (present 
edition, Vol. 6, p. 482). The emergence of classes, he pointed out, 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
was preceded by a lengthy period when communal, tribal 
ownership of the means of production reigned supreme. 
The periodisation of the early periods in the history of 
humanity, which Engels adopted from Morgan, i.e. the division 
into epochs of savagery and barbarism each sub-divided into three 
stages, is now regarded as obsolete in the light of new scientific 
data and recent research and is no longer used by scholars. 
However, in present-day research account is taken of Engels' 
outline of the main stages of development of the primitive-
communal system. Ideas of the individual stages in the develop­
ment of the family and the origin of the gens have also changed 
considerably. This applies, for example, to such stages in the 
evolution of the family, advanced by Morgan and accepted by 
Engels (although with certain reservations in the fourth edition of 
the book), as the consanguine family and the punaluan family, and 
also to certain other concrete theses which have not been 
confirmed by subsequent archaeological and ethnographic inves­
tigations. 
At the same time the methodological principles on which Engels 
based his work remain fully valid. Here for the first time he 
applied the dialectical-materialist method to the study of the 
history of the family, which enabled him to draw the highly 
important conclusion as to the dependence of forms of the family 
on the development of productive forces and changes in the mode 
of production. This was a major step forward in the development 
of the materialist conception of history. 
Equally important and relevant today is Engels' explanation of 
the causes of the inequality of women in a class society. Engels 
showed that this inequality is determined not by biological factors, 
but in the final analysis by economic causes, and that its very 
emergence is connected with the appearance of private ownership 
of the means of production. Thus the way was pointed to the 
establishment of the full equality of the sexes. 
Drawing on factual material from Morgan's book and other 
sources, Engels examined the process of the formation of 
antagonistic classes and showed that it was based on the 
development of productive forces, the growth of labour produc­
tivity. 
It was in The Origin of the Family that Engels, for the first time 
in Marxist literature, gave such a detailed picture of the 
emergence of the state. He showed that the state had not always 
existed, but arose at a certain stage of economic development. Its 
appearance was the result of the division of society into 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
antagonistic classes. It is proof that "society has become entangled 
in an insoluble contradiction with  itself,  that it has split into 
irreconcilable opposites which it is powerless to dispel" (p. 269) 
and therefore needs some force that could restrain them. The 
state is such a force. 
Developing the theory of the state set out by Marx most fully 
in The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte and The Civil War 
in France, and also in his own works The Housing Question 
and Anti-Diihring (see present edition, vols 11, 22, 23 and 25), 
Engels analysed the essence of the state, revealed the scientific in­
validity of the view of the state as a kind of "supra-class" force, and 
characterised it as an organ "of the most powerful, economically 
dominant class, which, through the medium of the state, becomes 
also the politically dominant class" (p. 271). The state retains this 
character in a bourgeois democratic republic as well. 
Engels did not limit himself to analysing the causes of the 
emergence of the state, and characterising its essence and 
explaining its structure, which already in itself meant developing 
further the theory of the state. He showed, in addition, that with 
the growth of productive forces the existence of antagonistic 
classes becomes an obstacle to the development of social produc­
tion and that this, in the final analysis, leads to their destruction 
on the basis of the nationalisation of the means of production and, 
consequently, the withering away of the state. 
The society of the future "which will reorganise production on 
the basis of a free and equal association of the producers, will put 
the whole machinery of state where it will then belong: into the 
museum of antiquities, by the side of the spinning-wheel and the 
bronze axe" (p. 272). 
This volume also contains one of the most famous Marxist 
philosophical works, Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical 
German Philosophy. Although the direct aim of this work was a 
critique of the book on Feuerbach by the Danish philosopher and 
sociologist Carl Starcke, its polemical aspect took second place. 
Here Engels expounded in positive form some vital philosophical 
problems: the subject of philosophy, the laws of its development 
and the struggle of materialism and idealism, the attitude of 
Marxism to its philosophical predecessors, above all, to Hegel and 
Feuerbach. Finally, he revealed the essence of Marxist philosophy, 
namely, dialectical and historical materialism, and showed how it 
differed fundamentally from preceding philosophical systems. 
2-1243 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
Engels' work was particularly important for the socialist move­
ment, because some Social-Democratic intellectuals were influ­
enced by idealist philosophical trends popular at that time, above 
all, by Neo-Kantianism. 
In his book Engels broached some of the main questions of 
philosophy, namely, the relationship of thinking to being, of mind 
to matter, a question which divides philosophers into two major 
camps: the idealists, who believe that the mind is primary, and the 
materialists, who believe in the primacy of matter. The answer to 
this question predetermines to a large extent the solution of other 
philosophical problems. The struggle between idealism and 
materialism is the main characteristic feature of the history of 
philosophy. Engels stresses that the question of the relationship of 
thinking to being has yet another aspect: is the reflection of being 
by the human consciousness identical to the real world? And is this 
world cognisable? Arguing that being is cognisable and criticising 
philosophers who deny the possibility of cognising it, Engels points 
out that the main criterion for the cognisability of the world is 
practical human activity. "The most telling refutation of this as of all 
other philosophical quirks is practice, namely, experimentation and 
industry" (p. 367). 
Here for the first time Engels advanced the thesis on the three 
great discoveries in natural science: the discovery of the cell, the 
theory of the transformation of energy and Darwin's theory of 
evolution, "which have advanced our knowledge of the intercon­
nection of natural processes by leaps and bounds" (p. 385) and 
thanks to which the dialectical nature of this connection was 
established. 
Engels regards Hegelian dialectics and Feuerbach's materialist 
views as the most important philosophical sources of Marxism. He 
characterises Hegelian philosophy as "the termination of the 
whole movement since Kant" (p. 359), and sees Hegel's dialectical 
method as "the way ... to real positive cognition of the world" 
(p. 362). In doing this Engels reveals the contradiction between 
this method and Hegelian idealism. 
Characterising the philosophical views of Feuerbach, Engels 
stresses his importance in reviving materialism in philosophy. At 
the same time he shows the limitations of Feuerbach's materialism, 
which did not extend to the materialist interpretation of social life. 
In criticising Hegel's idealism Feuerbach also rejected the main 
positive feature of Hegel's philosophy, his dialectical method. 
Feuerbach, wrote Engels, "as a philosopher, ... stopped halfway, 
was a materialist below and an idealist above" (p. 382). 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
The final chapter of Engels' work examines the essence of 
dialectical and historical materialism. The combining of the 
dialectical method with a consistently materialist world outlook 
meant in fact a revolutionary change in philosophy. "Thus 
dialectics reduced itself to the science of the general laws of 
motion, both of the external world and of human thinking" 
(p. 383). And the extension of the dialectical-materialist method to 
the study of the history of human society, the materialist 
conception of history, made it possible for the first time to reveal 
the objective laws of social development. It was established that the 
historical process is based on the development of productive 
forces and economic relations, changes in which bring about 
alterations in the political system and, eventually, in the forms and 
types of social consciousness—in other words, in the whole 
ideological superstructure. Here Engels notes the relative independ­
ence of the political superstructure and different forms of social 
consciousness and their ability to exert a reciprocal influence on 
the economic basis. 
The volume also includes a number of works defending Marx's 
economic teaching against the attacks of his ideological adver­
saries. 
During the period to which the works published in this volume 
belong Engels prepared for the press Volume II of Capital, which 
came out in 1885, and the third (1884) and fourth (1890) German 
editions of Volume I, and also edited its English translation which 
appeared in 1887. All these editions were provided with prefaces 
written by him. In the preface to Volume II (see present edition, 
Vol. 36) and in the article "Marx and Rodbertus" published in 
this volume and written as a preface to the first German edition of 
Marx's work The Poverty of  Philosophy,  Engels criticised the views of 
the German economist Karl Rodbertus, whose works had served as 
the theoretical basis for the "state-socialist" measures of Bismarck 
and become the banner of the so-called armchair socialists 
who advocated bourgeois reforms in solving the social question, 
disguised in pseudo-socialist phraseology. Rodbertus also had 
apologists within the ranks of the Social-Democrats. Engels 
convincingly disproved the fabrications of certain bourgeois 
economists who accused Marx of plagiarising Rodbertus' ideas on 
the origin of value, by showing the fundamental difference 
between Marx's theory of value and Rodbertus' views. He exposed 
the reactionary-utopian nature of his views on the formation of 
2* 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
value, his theory of "labour money" (pp. 288-89), and his 
statements on the ability of the modern state by means of 
legislative reforms to radically improve the position of the workers 
and to solve the social question, without touching the basis of the 
capitalist mode of production. 
With the aim of making Marx's great work accessible to the 
socialists of all countries, Engels did his utmost to promote 
translations of Capital into other languages, in particular, Russian, 
Polish and English. He showed constant concern as to their 
accuracy. The present volume contains his article "How Not to 
Translate Marx", written in connection with the publication in the 
London journal To-Day of an English translation of a few 
paragraphs from chapter one of Volume I of Capital. The 
translator was the leader of the English Social-Democratic Federa­
tion H. M. Hyndman, who used the pseudonym Broadhouse. 
Engels demanded that the translator should possess not only a 
perfect knowledge of both languages, but also a profound 
understanding of the content of the work to be translated. 
Engels was a careful observer of the development of the 
capitalist economy, particularly the new phenomena which 
emerged in it. Evidence of this can be found, among others, in the 
article "Protection and Free Trade" written as a preface to the 
American edition of Marx's "Speech on the Question of Free 
Trade" published on the initiative of American socialists. For the 
United States, where the struggle between the supporters and 
opponents of protectionism was continuing at this time, this 
publication was of great topical importance. Basing himself on an 
analysis of historical facts, Engels showed that whereas the 
protectionist system had for a certain time stimulated the 
development of capitalist production, with the growth of produc­
tive forces and technological progress it was becoming an obstacle 
to this development. "Free trade has become a necessity for the 
industrial capitalists," he noted (p. 536). One of the signs that 
protectionism had become obsolete in the United States, Engels 
considered, was the formation of large monopolies which, on the 
one hand, led to increased competition on the world market, but 
on the other, threatened the interests of the home consumer by 
setting up monopolistic prices. Engels stresses that the rapid 
development of capitalism, whether under protectionism or free 
trade, is inevitably accompanied by the growth of a revolutionary 
working class, "that is to say, the class which is fated one day to 
destroy the system  itself"  (p. 536). 
Many of the articles published in the present volume reflect the 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
great attention paid by Engels to the proletarian struggle for 
emancipation in various countries, and to the development of the 
international working-class and socialist movement. As well as 
corresponding regularly with the leaders and active members of 
the movement in almost all European countries and the United 
States, he maintained personal contact with them. Engels readily 
contributed to the German, French and English socialist press. He 
not only had his articles printed in the German Social-Democratic 
newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat, but gave daily assistance to its 
editors. His articles were published in the French newspaper Le 
Socialiste, the English organs The Commonweal, The Labour Elector 
and The Labour Leader, the German theoretical journal Die Neue 
Zeit, and others. The contents of the present volume provide a full 
picture of this collaboration. 
Engels devoted a great deal of energy to disseminating the 
major theoretical works by Marx and  himself.  With his participa­
tion and, as a rule, under his editorship the following works were 
published: a German translation of The Poverty of Philosophy and a 
French translation of The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte by 
Marx, the Italian and Danish editions of The Origin of the Family, 
Private Property and the State and many others. The present volume 
contains the prefaces to a new German edition (1883) prepared 
with Engels' participation and the English edition (1888) edited by 
him of the Manifesto of the Communist Party. In the latter he noted 
with satisfaction that "at present" the Manifesto "is undoubtedly 
the most widespread, the most international production of all 
Socialist Literature, the common platform acknowledged by 
millions of working men from Siberia to California" (p. 516). 
Engels paid special attention to German Social-Democracy, at 
that time the strongest, best organised and most militant detach­
ment of the international socialist movement, which rightly held 
pride of place in the latter. Engels gave it the utmost assistance to 
overcome reformist influences, to struggle against opportunist 
elements, to work out correct revolutionary tactics and to 
propagate scientific socialism. This assistance was all the more 
important because in the 1880s the party was operating in the 
intensely difficult conditions of the Anti-Socialist Law when its 
legal methods of activity were reduced to a minimum. In spite of 
the outstanding successes of the socialist working-class movement 
in Germany, it had not freed itself entirely from ideological 
influences alien to the interests of the working class. In the 
preface to the second edition of his work The Housing Question, 
published in this volume, Engels noted that "bourgeois and 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
petty-bourgeois socialism is strongly represented in Germany down 
to this very hour". And in the Social-Democratic Party itself there 
was "a certain petty-bourgeois socialism" (p. 427), which was 
explained by the special features of the country's historical 
development. 
Considering it most important in these conditions that progres­
sive German workers be educated in the spirit of revolutionary 
and internationalist traditions, Engels undertook in the 1880s the 
reprinting of a number of Marx's works relating to the period of 
the revolution of 1848-49, and also some of his own works, 
providing them with prefaces which are of specific scientific 
interest. Appearing, as a rule, in periodicals before the publication 
of the books for which they were intended, these prefaces, which 
substantiated revolutionary tactics, were extremely relevant in the 
conditions of the Anti-Socialist Law and were aimed directly 
against the opportunist elements within Social-Democracy. 
In his article "Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung" about the 
history of this newspaper, Engels reveals the special features of the 
Communist League's tactics in the bourgeois-democratic revolution 
of 1848-49. On the experience of the revolution he urged German 
Social-Democrats to struggle for the leading role of the working 
class in the solution of general democratic tasks, provided that 
it retained its independence, and spoke of the need not only 
to struggle against direct enemies, but also to denounce the false 
friends of the revolution. 
The work On the History of the Communist League was written as 
an introduction to a new edition of Marx's pamphlet Revelations 
Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne. It drew attention to one 
of the most vivid pages in the history of the German workers' 
struggle, stressing the historical continuity between the first 
international and German proletarian organisation, the ideological 
banner of which was the programme of scientific socialism, and 
German Social-Democracy. In so doing Engels demonstrated the 
invalidity of the statement that the foundations of the working-
class movement in Germany were laid by Lassalle's General 
Association of German Workers in 1863. He noted in particular 
the significance of the Communist League as an organisation 
which had educated many active members of the international 
working-class movement who subsequently played a major role in 
the First International and the socialist parties. He emphasised the 
vital importance of the international solidarity of the struggling 
proletariat, noting with satisfaction the enormous progress made 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
by the working-class movement and pointing out that the 
theoretical principles of the League "constitute today the strongest 
international bond of the entire proletarian movement in both 
Europe and America" (p. 312). 
In his preface to the pamphlet Karl Marx Before the Cologne Jury, 
containing Marx's speech at the trial of the Rhenish District 
Committee of Democrats in February 1849, Engels described this 
speech as a model defence of revolutionary principles before a 
bourgeois court. In denouncing the hypocrisy of the ruling circles 
in the German Empire, who persecuted the socialist working-class 
movement under the guise of "legality" while actually trampling 
upon it, Engels defended the right of the working class to struggle 
against reactionary orders with revolutionary means. Engels 
ridiculed attempts by reactionary circles, which to some extent 
found support in the moods of reformist elements within the 
party  itself,  to force German Social-Democracy to renounce its 
ultimate aims and thereby turn it into a party of the German 
philistines. 
These three articles of Engels, particularly On the History of the 
Communist League, are fine examples of Marxist historical research, 
combining a profound analysis of events of the comparatively 
recent past with the current problems of the struggle for 
emancipation of the working class. 
Also included in the present volume, the article "The Ruhr 
Miners' Strike of 1889" shows how much importance Engels 
attached to the entry of new detachments of the German working 
class into the organised labour movement. 
Engels paid increasing attention to socialist tactics in relation to 
the peasantry. On his initiative Wilhelm Wolff's series of articles, 
The Silesian Milliard, about the tragic state of the peasants in 
Silesia, printed in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1849, was 
published as a separate pamphlet. The article "On the History of 
the Prussian Peasants", also contained in this volume, was written 
as part of the introduction to this pamphlet. 
After describing the history of the enserfment of the peasantry 
in Prussia, Engels showed that the abolition of feudal obligations 
after the revolution of 1848 was accompanied by large-scale 
robbery of the mass of the peasants. Consequently, the objective 
conditions made the peasants the natural ally of the proletariat in 
the struggle against the bourgeois-Junker order. The same idea 
also pervades the above-mentioned preface to the second edition 
of The Housing Question. Here Engels showed that the broad 
development of domestic industry in Germany led to the ruin of 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
many peasant farms. And the inevitable destruction of these 
industries as a result of the development of large-scale machine 
production would lead to the complete expropriation of a 
considerable section of the peasantry and put it on the path of 
revolutionary struggle. 
An important place in the ideological education of progressive 
German workers and socialist intellectuals was allotted by Engels to 
the materialist explanation of German history in opposition to the 
reactionary, nationalist historiography that prevailed in the disci­
pline at that time. An explanation of the historical roots of the 
reactionary practices which had grown up in Germany was also 
essential for a correct assessment of the policy of the ruling circles 
at that time. And this was extremely important for elaborating the 
strategy and tactics of Social-Democracy and determining its 
long-term activity. 
In the 1880s Engels continued his studies of German history. 
The present volume contains two large manuscripts dealing with 
the history of the emergence and development of a class society 
among the Germans. They are based on a large amount of factual 
material: various historical sources, archaeological data, accounts 
by ancient writers, etc. 
Chronologically these manuscripts belong to 1881-82, but the 
reason for including them in the present volume is that Engels 
made extensive use of them in his work The Origin of the Family, 
Private Property and the State. 
The first of them, On the Early History of the Germans, covers the 
history of the Germans from the point when they appeared on the 
territory of present-day Europe up to the beginning of the 
migration of peoples. The clash of the Germanic tribes with the 
slave-owning Roman Empire which was declining is seen here as a 
major factor of social revolution, which led to the decay of the 
primitive-communal system of the conquerors themselves and to 
the emergence of a class of big land-owning feudal lords, to the 
development of feudalism and the formation of the Frankish state. 
In the manuscript The Frankish Period attention is focused on 
the agrarian relations in the age of early feudalism in Western 
Europe during the reigns of the Merovingians and Carolingians. 
Taking the history of the Franks as an example, Engels sought to 
trace the formation of the foundations of feudalism, the 
emergence of the main classes of feudal society. Pointing out the 
significant role of political factors in this process, he stressed 
however that they "only advance and accelerate an inevitable 
economic process" (p. 60). 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
In the mid-1880s Engels began preparing a new edition of his 
work The Peasant War in Germany, in which he presented the 
Reformation and the Peasant War as the first, albeit unsuccessful, 
bourgeois revolution, as an event which largely determined the 
whole subsequent history of Germany. He intended to revise his 
book thoroughly, in particular to provide it with a detailed 
introduction, the draft for which is published in this volume under 
the editors' title On the Decline of Feudalism and the Emergence of 
National States in the section "From the Preparatory Materials". 
Engels showed here the process of the emergence of capitalist 
relations and the formation of nations and national states in 
Western Europe during the decline of feudalism. He also revealed 
the progressive centralising role of the monarchy, a counterforce 
to feudal anarchy. 
Judging from these drafts, Engels intended to analyse the 
reasons why feudal fragmentation had lasted much longer in 
Germany than in most other European countries, which had a 
negative influence on her further development. 
Other commitments prevented Engels from completing the 
work which he had begun. 
The present volume also contains the unfinished work The Role 
of Force  in History which deals with the history of the unification of 
Germany under Prussia. It was to form the fourth chapter of a 
pamphlet of the same name as a supplement to the chapters of 
Anti-Diihring which contain a critique of the theory of force. 
Engels revealed the economic and political causes which led to the 
unification of Germany not in a revolutionary democratic way, but 
"from above", by means of wars and territorial aggrandizement, 
"blood and iron". He gave a profound and vivid description of 
the German Empire, its constitution, class structure, political 
parties, the domestic contradictions inherent in it and also the 
reforms carried out by Bismarck in the 1870s. A considerable 
section of the work was devoted to criticising Bismarck's aggressive 
foreign policy, and his policy of militarising the country, which 
threatened to cause an all-European war. 
The surviving preparatory materials for this work, its general 
plan and a plan of the final part, which are included in the 
present volume in the section "From the Preparatory Materials", 
indicate that Engels intended to continue his account up to the 
second half of the 1880s, to show the inevitability of the failure of 
Bismarck's domestic policies and the growing influence of 
revolutionary Social-Democracy. 
In a number of articles in this volume, "England in 1845 and in 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preface 
1885",  "Appendix to the American Edition of The Condition of the 
Working Class in England", "The Abdication of the Bourgeoisie", 
and others, Engels examines the condition and prospects of the 
English working-class movement. Analysing the changes in the 
position of the English working class over the last forty years, 
Engels notes a certain improvement in the conditions of its life 
and labour, particularly of factory-workers, and also a growth in 
the influence of the large trade unions uniting qualified workers. 
With regard to the majority of the working people, however, the 
state of misery and insecurity of their existence was "as low as 
ever, if not lower" (p. 299). An analysis of the tendencies in the 
development of the English economy in the 1870s and 1880s led 
Engels to conclude that signs had appeared which heralded 
England's loss of her industrial monopoly in the relatively near 
future. He assumed that this fact would lead to the loss by the 
English working class of its relatively privileged position compared 
with that of the proletariat of other countries and would stimulate 
the socialist movement in England. Engels placed great hopes on 
the process which began in the late 1880s of drawing the broad 
mass of unqualified workers into an organised struggle for their 
rights.  "It is a glorious movement," he wrote in connection with a 
strike by the London dockers (p. 545). 
Engels' great interest in the revolutionary traditions of the 
struggle for emancipation of the English proletariat can be seen 
from his manuscript "Chartist Agitation" published here in 
English for the first time. In this manuscript, which is essentially a 
brief conspectus of the history of Chartism, the activity of its 
revolutionary wing headed by Ernest Jones was brought out 
clearly for the first time. 
The material published in this volume testifies to Engels' keen 
interest in various aspects of the social life of the United States, 
in this country's remarkably rapid economic development and the 
special features of its history. In the summer of 1888, accom­
panied by Mr. and Mrs. Aveling and Carl Schorlemmer, he made 
a journey to the United States. He intended to record his 
impressions in travel notes, but this intention was not realised. The 
outlines for these notes are published in the section "From the 
Preparatory Materials". 
Engels paid constant attention to the struggle of the working 
class in the United States, which assumed a particularly turbulent 
nature in the 1880s. 
Engels maintained regular contacts with members of the Ameri­
can working-class movement and was well informed about its state. 

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
Engels attached great importance to the dissemination of the 
ideas of scientific socialism among the American workers, and he 
willingly agreed to the suggestion to publish his work The 
Condition of the Working-Class in England in the United States, 
editing the translation of it  himself.  The present volume includes 
the article "The Labor Movement in America" written as a 
preface to this edition. It was translated into many languages at 
that time and was published in the socialist press of a number of 
European countries. Noting the exceptionally rapid development 
and wide scope of the struggle of the American proletariat and 
the growth of its class consciousness, and describing the working-
class organisations which existed at that time in the United States, 
Engels stressed that most of the participants in the struggle of the 
working class for its rights did not have a clear, scientifically based 
programme and were therefore easily influenced by all manner of 
Utopian theories which did not express their true interests. A 
specific feature of the working-class movement in the United 
States was its lack of unity, the result primarily of the diverse 
national composition of the proletariat. At the same time the 
existence of free land in the West gave the American worker 
illusory hopes of becoming a small proprietor. Engels made a 
critical analysis of the programme of the American economist 
Henry George, who was the leader of the United Labor Party in 
New York in the mid-1880s, and showed that his theory, 
according to which the main cause of the poverty of the broad 
mass of the people was private ownership of land, did not explain 
the essence of capitalist exploitation and could therefore not serve 
as a theoretical basis for the programme of a party of the working 
class. 
Engels regarded the unification of the separate workers' organ­
isations into "one national Labor Army, with no matter how inade­
quate a provisional platform, provided it be a truly working class 
platform" (p. 441), as the main condition for the development of 
the working-class movement in the United States. He therefore 
showed a special interest in the activity of the Knights of Labor, 
and believed that this organisation, then highly influential among 
the working masses, could become the basis of such a unifica­
tion. 
Engels regarded this unification as the first step towards the 
creation of a mass working-class party, the programme of which 
"must and will be essentially the same as that now adopted by the 
whole militant working class of Europe" (p. 440), i.e. be based on 
the principles of scientific socialism. 

=====第26页=====
XXVIII Preface 
Engels criticised the Socialist Labor Party of North America 
which, although it proclaimed Marxist programme principles, 
remained—being in terms of composition to a large extent the 
party of German émigrés —far removed from the main mass of 
workers, the indigenous inhabitants of the country. He urged the 
party to overcome sectarian tendencies and carry on work in all 
the mass working-class organisations. 
The volume includes several articles, "The Situation", "To the 
Editorial Committee of Le Socialiste"' , "On the Anniversary of the 
Paris Commune" and others, which characterise Engels' relations 
with the working-class movement in France. His regular corres­
pondence with Paul and Laura Lafargue, and other members of 
the French Workers' Party, enabled him to keep constantly in 
touch with the events taking place in the country. Some of his 
letters were printed as articles in the French socialist press. 
Through his advice and reports in the press he helped the leaders 
of the party to solve theoretical problems and tactical tasks, to 
overcome errors of a sectarian nature and to struggle against 
opportunists. 
He welcomed the actions of workers' deputies in parliament and 
the formation of a socialist faction, noting that this "was sufficient 
to throw the ranks of all the bourgeois parties into disarray" 
(p. 407). 
Some of the material published here characterises Engels' 
attitude to the prospects for the revolutionary movement in 
Russia. He was deeply convinced that a democratic revolution 
would take place in this country in the not too distant future and 
would have a great influence on the whole international situation. 
"...Revolution ... in Russia," he said on September 19, 1888 in an 
interview for the socialist newspaper New Yorker Volkszeitung, 
"would revolutionise the whole European political situation" 
(p. 627). And in a talk with the Russian revolutionary Narodnik 
Hermann Lopatin five years earlier he is said by the latter to have 
remarked as follows: "Russia is the France of the present century. 
The revolutionary initiative of a new social reorganisation legally and 
rightly belongs to it" (p. 592). 
A number of articles analyse the international situation and the 
tasks of socialist parties in the struggle against the threat of war 
and the arms race. In his article "The Political Situation in 
Europe" Engels examined the reasons for the aggravation of 
relations between the major European powers, stressing that their 
rulers saw war as a means of preventing the coming revolution. 
" They see the spectre of social revolution looming up ahead of them, and 

=====第27页=====
Preface XXIX 
they know but one means of salvation: war" (p. 416). He urged the 
socialists of these countries to fight for peace. 
In his "Introduction to Sigismund Borkheim's pamphlet In 
Memory of the German Blood-and-Thunder Patriots. 1806-1807", 
Engels made a prophetic prediction of the nature, scale and 
consequences of the future war on the basis of an analysis of 
inter-state contradictions and the alignment of forces in Europe. It 
would be "a world war, moreover, of an extent and violence 
hitherto unimagined," he wrote. "Eight to ten million soldiers will 
be at each other's throats and in the process they will strip Europe 
barer than a swarm of locusts. The depredations of the Thirty 
Years'  War compressed into three to four years and extended over 
the entire continent; famine, disease, the universal lapse into 
barbarism, both of the armies and the people, in the wake of acute 
misery; irretrievable dislocation of our artificial system of trade, 
industry and credit, ending in universal bankruptcy; collapse of 
the old states and their conventional political wisdom to the point 
where crowns will roll into the gutters by the dozen, and no one 
will be around to pick them up; the absolute impossibility of 
foreseeing how it will all end and who will emerge as victor 
from the battle" (p. 451). 
In drawing this terrible picture of the consequences of the 
future war, Engels never for a moment lost his historical 
optimism. He foresaw that the universal exhaustion caused by the 
war would aggravate the contradictions inherent in capitalism and 
could create the conditions for the victory of the working class. 
Thirty years later this prediction of his found confirmation in the 
Great October Revolution in Russia. 
Engels devoted much energy to strengthening the international 
relations of socialists of different countries. He took a most active 
part in the preparation of the International Socialist Labour 
Congress held in Paris in 1889. Largely thanks to his efforts the 
attempts of opportunist elements—the French Possibilists and the 
leaders of the English Social-Democratic Federation—to take over 
leadership of the international working-class movement were 
thwarted. Materials published in this volume (the article "Possibil-
ist Credentials" and a letter to the editors of The Labour Elector) 
reflect this activity of his. 
* * * 
The present volume contains 41 works by Engels, six of which 
are published in English for the first time, including the articles 

=====第28页=====
XXX Preface 
"The Situation", "The Political Situation in Europe", "Real 
Imperial Russian Privy Dynamiters" and others. All eight docu­
ments in the section entitled "From the Preparatory Materials" are 
published in English for the first time, as are six of the eight 
documents in the Appendices. 
The material in the volume is arranged in chronological order. 
In cases where an edition other than the first is taken as the 
basis for publication, points of divergence with the first edition are 
given in the footnotes. 
In cases where there are different language versions of this or 
that work by Engels the English text is taken as the basis for 
publication and points of divergence are set out in the footnotes. 
The explanatory words in square brackets belong to the editors. 
Misprints in proper names, geographical names, statistical data, 
dates,  etc., have, as a rule, been corrected without comment on the 
basis of checking the sources used by Engels. The relevant literary 
and documentary sources are mentioned in the footnotes and in 
the index of quoted and mentioned literature. 
The compilation of the volume, preparation of the text and 
writing of the notes was by Tatiana Andrushchenko. The preface 
was written by Boris Tartakovsky and Tatiana Andrushchenko. 
Engels' manuscripts On the Early History of the Germans, The 
Frankish Period and the notes for them were prepared by 
Valentina Ostrikova and edited by Valentina Smirnova. 
The name index, the index of periodicals and the glossary of 
geographical names were compiled by Georgy Volovik. 
The index of quoted and mentioned literature was compiled by 
Tatiana Andrushchenko. 
The indexes for the manuscripts On the Early History of the 
Germans and The Frankish Period were prepared by Yelena 
Kofanova. 
The volume was edited by Boris Tartakovsky (Institute of 
Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The translations were made by Nicholas Jacobs, R. S. Living­
stone, Barbara Ruhemann, Barrie Selman, Joan and Trevor 
Walmsly (Lawrence & Wishart), K. M. Cook, Salo Ryazanskaya 
and Stephen Smith (Progress Publishers) and edited by Yelena 
Chistyakova, Yelena Kalinina, Margarita Lopukhina, Victor 
Schnittke, Stephen Smith, Yelena Vorotnikova (Progress Pub­
lishers) and Norire Ter-Akopyan, scientific editor (USSR Academy 
of Sciences). 
The volume was prepared for the press by Yelena Vorotnikova 
(Progress Publishers). 

=====第29页=====
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
August 1882-December 1889 

=====第30页=====

=====第31页=====
MANUSCRIPTS 
ON EARLY GERMAN HISTORY1 

=====第32页=====

=====第33页=====
5 
[Draft plan] 
1. Caesar and Tacitus. 
2. The district and army structure. 
3. The first battles against Rome. 
4. Progress until the migration period. 
Notes 
1. in the text 
2. the German peoples 
3. the Franconian dialect 
Written in mid-1878-early August 1882 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in MEGA, Abt. I. Bd. 25, Published in English for the first 
5. 307 time 

=====第34页=====
6 
[ON THE EARLY HISTORY OF THE GERMANS] 
CAESAR AND TACITUS 
The Germans are by no means the first inhabitants of the 
country they now occupy.* At least three races preceded them. 
The oldest traces of man in Europe are found in certain strata 
of southern England, which it has not yet been possible to date 
with accuracy, but which probably fall between the two glacial 
periods of the so-called Ice Age. 
After the second glacial period, as the climate gradually grew 
warmer, man appears all over Europe, North Africa and Anterior 
Asia up to India, together with the extinct great pachyderms 
(mammoth, straight-tusked elephant, woolly rhinoceros) and carni­
vores (cave lion, cave bear), and with still surviving animals 
(reindeer, horse, hyena, lion, bison, aurochs). The tools belonging 
to this period indicate a very primitive level of culture—crude 
stone knives, lozenge-shaped stone hatchets or axes, used without 
handles, scrapers for the preparation of animal skins, and borers, 
all made of flint—approximately corresponding to the stage of 
development of the present aborigines of Australia. The skeletal 
remains found so far do not enable us to form an idea of the 
physique of these men, from whose wide distribution and overall 
uniform culture it may be inferred that this period was of very 
long duration. 
We do not know what became of these early palaeolithic people. 
In none of the countries where they appeared, including India, 
have races survived that could be considered their representatives 
in present-day mankind. 
* I here follow in the main Boyd Dawkins, Early Man in Britain, London, 1880. 

=====第35页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 7 
In the caves of England, France, Switzerland, Belgium and 
Southern Germany the tools of these extinct people are found for 
the most part in the lowest layers of stratified deposits. Above this 
lowest cultural stratum, and frequently separated from it by a 
more or less substantial layer of stalagmite, a second tool-bearing 
layer is found. These tools belong to a later period and are 
already much more skilfully made, and also of more varied 
material. Although the stone implements are not yet polished, they 
are designed and fashioned in a manner more suited to their 
purpose; with them are found arrow- and spear-points of stone, 
reindeer antler and bone; daggers and sewing needles of bone or 
antler, necklaces of pierced animal teeth, etc. Individual pieces are 
in part ornamented with very vivid drawings of animals, reindeer, 
mammoth, aurochs, seal, whale, and also hunting scenes with 
naked people; we find even beginnings of sculpture in horn. 
If early palaeolithic people appeared in the company of animals 
of predominantly southern origin, animals of northern origin 
appear with the later palaeolithic people: two still surviving kinds 
of northern bear, the polar fox, the wolverine, the snowy owl. 
These people probably came in with these animals from the 
north-east, and the Eskimos would appear to be their last 
remaining descendants in the modern world. The tools of both 
correspond completely, not only in detail but in the ensemble. So 
do the drawings; the food of both is supplied by almost exactly the 
same animals. Their way of life, as far as we can reconstruct it for 
the extinct race, corresponds exactly. 
These Eskimos, who so far have only been traced north of the 
Pyrenees and the Alps, have also disappeared from European soil. 
As the American Redskins even in the last century, by an 
inexorable war of extermination, pressed the Eskimos back to the 
extreme north, so in Europe the now appearing new race seems 
gradually to have driven them back and eventually exterminated 
them without mixing with them. 
This new race came from the south, at least in Western Europe; 
it probably penetrated from Africa into Europe at a time when the 
two continents were still linked by land, both at Gibraltar and at 
Sicily. It stood on a considerably higher stage of culture than its 
predecessors. It knew agriculture; it had domestic animals (dogs, 
horses, sheep, goats, pigs and cattle). It knew hand pottery, 
spinning and weaving. Although its tools were still made of stone, 
they were already worked with great care and for the most part 
polished smooth (they are distinguished as neolithic from those of 
the earlier periods). The axes have handles and are thus for the 

=====第36页=====
8 Frederick Engels 
first time usable for felling trees; it thus became possible to hollow 
out tree trunks for boats in which one could cross over to the 
British Isles, now separated from the continent by the gradual 
sinking of the ground. 
In contrast to their predecessors they buried their dead with 
care;  we therefore have sufficient skeletons and skulls to judge of 
their physique. The long skulls, small stature (average for women 
1.46 metres, for men 1.65 metres), the low forehead, the aquiline 
nose,  strong brows and weak cheekbones and moderately de­
veloped jaw bones indicate a race whose last modern representa­
tives would seem to be the Basques. The neolithic inhabitants not 
only of Spain but of France, Britain and the whole region at least 
as far as the Rhine were in all probability of Iberian race. Before 
the arrival of the Aryans2 Italy also was inhabited by a similar 
small, dark-haired race, the closeness of whose relationship to the 
Basques is today difficult to judge. 
Virchow traces these long Basque skulls deep into northern 
Germany and Denmark,3  and the oldest neolithic pile dwellings of 
the northern slopes of the Alps also belong to them. 
Schaaff hausen, on the other hand, declares a series of skulls found 
near the Rhine to be decidedly Finnish, in particular Lappish, 13 
and the oldest history knows only Finns as the northern 
neighbours of the Germans in Scandinavia, of the Lithuanians and 
Slavs in Russia. These two small, dark-haired races, one from 
beyond the Mediterranean, the other directly from Asia north of 
the Caspian Sea, appear to have run into one another in Germany. 
It remains totally obscure in what circumstances this took place. 
These various immigrations were eventually followed, also still 
in prehistoric times, by that of the last great stock, the Aryans, the 
peoples whose languages are grouped around the most ancient of 
them, Sanscrit. The earliest immigrants were the Greeks and 
Latins, who took possession of the two south-eastern peninsulas of 
Europe; in addition probably also the now lost Scythians, 
inhabitants of the steppes north of the Black Sea, very likely most 
closely related to the tribes of the Medes and Persians. Then the 
Celts followed. We know of their migrations only that they took 
a Verhandlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urge­
schichte. Jahrg. 1878.— Zeitschrift für Ethnologie. Vol. X, Berlin, 1878, pp. 418-24. 
Quoted in W. B. Dawkins, op. cit., p. 314.— Ed. 
b H. Schaaff hausen [Paper presented to the Sixth General Congress of the 
German Society of Anthropology, Ethnology and Early History on August 11, 
1875],  Correspondenz-Blatt der deutschen Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und 
Urgeschichte, Brunswick, Munich, 1875 [Supplement], pp. 67,  81.—  Ed. 

=====第37页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 9 
place north of the Black Sea and by way of Germany. Their 
vanguard pressed through to France, conquered the country to 
the Garonne and subjugated even a part of western and central 
Spain. They were brought to a halt, here by the sea, there by the 
resistance of the Iberians, while behind them other Celtic tribes 
from both sides of the Danube pressed after them. They are 
known to Herodotus here at the ocean coast and at the sources of 
the Danube.3 But they must have arrived much earlier. The graves 
and other finds from France and Belgium prove that the Celts did 
not know any metal tools when they took possession of the 
country; in Britain, however, they appear from the beginning with 
bronze tools. Between the conquest of Gaul and the move to 
Britain a certain time must have gone by, during which the Celts 
acquired the knowledge of bronze, through their trading connec­
tions with Italy and Marseilles, and introduced it at home. 
In the meantime the Celtic peoples behind them, themselves 
pressed by the Germans, were pressing more and more strongly; 
before them the ways were barred, and thus a move in a 
south-easterly direction took place, as we find later also with the 
Germanic and Slav migrations. Celtic tribes crossed the Alps, 
moved through Italy, the Thracian Peninsula and Greece, and 
either met with destruction or found permanent settlement in the 
Po plain and in Asia Minor. The mass of the tribe is found about 
that time (—400 to —300*) in Gaul, as far as the Garonne, in 
Britain and Ireland, and north of the Alps on both sides of the 
Danube, as far as the Main and the Riesengebirge, if not beyond. 
For, even if Celtic mountain and river names are less frequent and 
more disputed in North Germany than in the south, it is not to be 
assumed that the Celts only chose the more difficult way through 
mountainous South Germany without at the same time using the 
more convenient way through the open North German plain. 
The Celtic immigration only partially displaced the existing 
inhabitants; especially in the south and west of Gaul these still 
formed the majority of the population, even if as an oppressed 
race,  and the present population has inherited their physique. It is 
clear from the custom of bleaching the hair with soap existing 
among both Celts and Germans in their new places of settlement 
that both dominated over a pre-existing dark-haired population. 
Fair hair was a feature of the ruling race, and where this was lost 
through mixing of the races, soap had to' come to the aid. 
* I distinguish the years before our era mathematically, by a minus sign (—), for 
brevity's sake. 

=====第38页=====
10 Frederick Engels 
The Celts were followed by the Germans, and here we can 
determine the time of their immigration with some probability, at 
least approximately. It will hardly have begun long before —400 
and was not yet quite completed in Caesar's time. 
About the year —325 Pytheas' account of his voyage gives us the 
first authentic information on the Germans.4 He went from 
Marseilles to the Amber coast and there mentions Guttons and 
Teutons, without doubt German peoples. But where was the 
Amber coast? It is true that we usually think only of the East 
Prussian one, and when Guttons are named as neighbours of that 
coast that certainly fits. However, the distances given by Pytheas 
do not fit this region but fit rather well the great bay of the North 
Sea between the North German coast and the Cimbric Peninsula.3 
The Teutons, also named as neighbours, fit in there, too. 
There—on the western side of Schleswig and Jutland—is another 
Amber coast; Ringkjöbing to this day has a considerable trade in 
the amber found there. It also seems most improbable that 
Pytheas should so early have already penetrated so far into quite 
unknown waters, and still more so that the complicated voyage 
from the Kattegat to East Prussia should not only remain entirely 
without mention in his very careful statements, but not fit into 
them at all. One should therefore decidedly declare for the view, 
first pronounced by Lelewel, that Pytheas' Amber coast must be 
sought on the North Sea, b were it not for the name of Guttons, 
who can only belong to the Baltic. A step towards removing this 
last obstacle has been taken by Miillenhoff, who reads Guttons as a 
distortion of Teutons.0 
About 180 before our era the Bastarnae, undoubtedly Germans, 
appear on the lower Danube and a few years later are noted as 
soldiers in the army of the Macedonian King Perseus against the 
Romans—the first mercenaries. They are savage warriors: 
"Men who do not know how to plough or sail the seas, who did not follow the 
life of herdsmen, but who were ever practising one business and one art, that of 
fighting and conquering their antagonists." 
It is Plutarch who gives us this first information of the way of 
life of a German people.d Centuries later we find these same 
Bastarnae north of the Danube, although in a more westerly 
a Jutland.—Ed. 
b J. Lelewel, Pythéas de Marseille et la géographie de son temps, Brussels, 1836, 
pp. 59-60.—Ed. 
c K. Müllenhoff, Deutsche Altertumskunde, Vol. 1, Berlin, 1870, p.  479.—Ed. 
d Plutarchus, Vitae parallelae: Aemilius Paullus, 12,  2.—Ed. 

=====第39页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 11 
region. Fifty years later Cimbri and Teutons broke into the Celtic 
Danube region, were repelled by the Celtic Boii, living in 
Bohemia, moved in several bands to Gaul and into Spain, and 
defeated one Roman army after another until at last Marius put 
an end to their almost twenty years of migration by destroying 
their no doubt already greatly weakened troops, the Teutons at 
Aix-en-Provence (—102) and the Cimbri at Vercelli in Northern 
Italy (-101). 
Half a century later Caesar met two new German armies in 
Gaul: first, on the Upper Rhine, that of Ariovistus in which seven 
different peoples were represented, including the Marcomanni 
and Suebi; soon afterwards, on the lower Rhine, that of the 
Usipetes and Tencteri, who, pressed by the Suebi, had left their 
former seats and reached the Rhine after wandering for three 
years.  Both armies succumbed to orderly Roman warfare, the 
Usipetes and the Tencteri also to Roman breach of treaty. In the 
first years of Augustus, Dio Cassius reports an invasion of Thrace 
by the Bastarnae; Marcus Crassus defeated them on the Hebrus 
(the present-day Maritza). The same historian also mentions a 
move of the Hermunduri, who at the beginning of our era left 
their homeland for unknown reasons and were settled by the 
Roman general Domitius Ahenobarbus "in a part of the country 
of the Marcomanni".3  These are the last migrations of that epoch. 
The consolidation of Roman rule on the Rhine and the Danube 
put a stop to them for quite a long time; but there are many signs 
which indicate that the peoples of the north-east, beyond the Elbe 
and the Riesengebirge, did not achieve permanent settlement for a 
long time. 
These expeditions of Germans formed the first act of that 
migration of peoples5 which, halted for three centuries by Roman 
resistance, towards the end of the third century swept irresistibly 
across the two border rivers, flooded Southern Europe and 
Northern Africa and only came to an end with the conquest of 
Italy by the Langobardi in 568—an end in so far as the Germans 
took part in them, but not for the Slavs, who long remained in 
movement in their rear. These were literally migrations of 
peoples. Entire peoples, or at least large parts of them, went on 
the move with wife and child, with goods and chattels. Wagons 
covered in skins served as dwellings and for the transport of 
women and children as well as of the paltry household effects; the 
a Dio Cassius, Historia Romana, LI, 24; LV, 10a. Quoted in Die  Geschichtschreiber 
der deutschen Vorzeit..., pp. 265-66, 307.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
12 Frederick Engels 
cattle were driven along with them. The men were armed and 
ready to overcome any resistance, to repel any attack; a military 
host by day, a military camp fortified by the wagons at night. The 
human losses during these moves, through constant fighting, 
through misery, hunger and sickness, must have been colossal. It 
was a life-and-death adventure. If the move succeeded, the 
survivors settled on foreign soil; if it failed, the migrating tribe 
disappeared from the earth. Those who were not killed in the 
slaughter of battle perished in slavery. The Helvetii and their 
allies,  whose migration was halted by Caesar, started out with 
368,000 head, including 92,000 fit to bear arms. After their defeat 
by the Romans only 110,000 were left, whom Caesar, exceptional­
ly, sent back home, for political reasons. The Usipetes and 
Tencteri crossed the Rhine with 180,000 head; almost all of them 
perished in battle or fleeing from pursuit. No wonder that during 
this long period of migration entire tribes often disappeared 
without trace. 
This migratory way of life of the Germans is fully matched by 
the conditions Caesar found on the Rhine. The Rhine was by no 
means a sharply defined border between Gauls and Germans. 
Belgic-Gallic Menapii had villages and fields on the right bank of 
the Rhine in the area of Wesel; on the other hand, the part of the 
Maas delta, on the left bank of the Rhine, was occupied by the 
German Batavi, and round Worms as far as Strassburg there lived 
German Vangiones, Tribocci and Nemetes, whether since Ariovis-
tus or even earlier is uncertain. The Belgae made constant wars 
upon the Germans, everywhere territory was still disputed. As yet 
no Germans were living south of the Main and the Erzgebirge; 
only shortly before, the Helvetii had been driven by the Suebi 
from the region between Main, Rhine, Danube and the Bohemian 
Forest, as had the Boii from Bohemia (Boihemum), which bears 
their name to this day. The Suebi did not occupy the land, 
however; they transformed it into that wooded wilderness, 600 
Roman 3 (150 German) miles long, which was to protect them from 
the south. Further east Caesar indicated more Celts (Volcae 
Tectosages) north of the Danube, where Tacitus later places the 
German Quadi.b Not until Augustus' time did Maroboduus lead 
his Suebian Marcomanni to Bohemia, while the Romans cut off 
the angle between Rhine and Danube with entrenchments and 
a The Roman mile equals approximately 1.5 km.— Ed. 
b Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico, VI, 24, 2; Tacitus, Germania, 42. Quoted 
in Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 215, 669-70.— Ed. 

=====第41页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 13 
peopled it with Gauls. The area beyond this fortified frontier 
seems to have been settled by Hermunduri. This shows conclusive­
ly that the Germans moved to Germany via the plains north of the 
Carpathians and the Bohemian border mountains; only after they 
had occupied the northern plains did they drive the Celts, who 
lived in the mountains more to the south, across the Danube. 
The way of life of the Germans as described by Caesar also 
proves that they were by no means yet settled in their country. 
They lived in the main by raising cattle, on cheese, milk and meat, 
less on corn; the chief occupation of the men was hunting and 
military training. They tilled the soil a little, but only as a sideline 
and in the most primitive forest fashion. Caesar reports that they 
worked the fields for just one year, the next year always taking 
new land under the plough.3 It seems to have been slash-and-burn 
cultivation, as is still practised today in northern Scandinavia and 
Finland; the forest—and outside the forest there were only 
swamps and peet-bogs, in those days useless for agriculture—was 
burnt down, the roots superficially removed and also burnt, 
together with the  turf;  the corn was sown into the soil fertilised by 
the ash. But even in that case Caesar's statement on the annual 
renewal of arable land is not to be taken literally and as a rule is to 
be understood as applying to a habitual passing on to new land 
after at least two or three harvests. The entire passage, the 
un-German distribution of land by princes and officials, and 
particularly the motivation attributed to the Germans for this 
rapid change, smacks of Roman concepts. This change of land was 
inexplicable to the Romans. To the Rhenish Germans, already in 
the process of transition to permanent settlement, it may already 
have appeared as an inherited custom, more and more losing 
purpose and meaning. To the Germans of the interior, the Suebi 
who were just arriving on the Rhine, and for whom it was mainly 
valid, it was still, however, an essential condition of a way of life by 
which the whole people moved slowly forward in whatever 
direction and at whatever pace the resistance they met permitted. 
Their constitution, too, was tailored to this way of life: the Suebi 
were divided into a hundred districts, every one of which supplied 
a thousand men annually to the army, while the rest of the men 
stayed at home, looking after cattle and fields and taking their 
turn in the army the second year. The mass of the people, with 
the women and children, only followed the army when it had 
a Caesar, op. cit., IV, 1, VI, 22. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 163, 
214.—  Ed. 

=====第42页=====
14 Frederick Engels 
conquered new territory. This is already an advance towards 
settlement compared with the migrating hosts of the time of the 
Cimbri. 
Caesar speaks repeatedly of the custom of the Germans to make 
themselves secure on the side facing an enemy, that is any alien 
people, by deep forest wildernesses.3  This is the same custom 
which lasted into the late Middle Ages. The Saxons north of the 
Elbe were protected by the border forest between Eider and Schlei 
(Old Danish Jarnwidhr) against the Danes, by the Saxon forest 
between the Bay of Kiel and the Elbe against the Slavs, and the 
Slav name of Brandenburg, Branibor, is again only a designation of 
such a protective forest (Czech braniti—to defend, bor—pine and 
pinewood). 
After all that there can be no doubt about the stage of 
civilisation of the Germans encountered by Caesar. They were far 
from being nomads in the sense of the contemporary Asiatic 
horse-riding peoples. Nomads need the steppe, and the Germans 
were living in the virgin forest. But they were equally far removed 
from the stage of settled peasant peoples. Strabo, sixty years later, 
still says of them: 
"It is a common characteristic of all these" (Germanic) "peoples that they 
migrate with ease, because of their simple way of life, for they do not till the soil or 
accumulate wealth; they live in huts which they can build in one day; and they live 
for the most part off their livestock, as the nomads do, and like the nomads they 
load their belongings on their wagons and with their herds move whithersoever 
they think best."b 
Comparative language studies prove that they had already 
brought with them from Asia a knowledge of agriculture; Caesar 
shows that they had not forgotten it. But it was the kind of 
agriculture that serves semi-nomadic warrior tribes, slowly pro­
ceeding through the wooded plains of central Europe, as a 
makeshift and subordinate source of livelihood. 
It follows from the above that in Caesar's time the immigration 
of the Germans into their new homeland between Danube, Rhine 
and North Sea was not yet completed or was at most in process of 
completion. That is by no means to say that at the time of Pytheas, 
Teutons, and perhaps also Cimbri, could not have reached the 
Jutland Peninsula, or the furthest advanced Germans the Rhine, 
as may be concluded from the absence of any signs of their 
arrival. A way of life compatible only with constant movement, 
a Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 164.— Ed. 
b Strabo, Geographica, VII, 1. Quoted in Die  Geschichtschreiber...,  pp. 373-74.—Ed. 

=====第43页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 15 
repeated moves to the west and south and lastly the fact that 
Caesar encountered the largest mass known to him, the Suebi, still 
in full movement, admit only one conclusion: obviously, we have 
here glimpses of the last moments of the great Germanic 
immigration into their main European settlement area. It was the 
Roman resistance on the Rhine and later on the Danube which 
put an end to this movement, confined the Germans to the region 
they were then occupying, and thus forced them to adopt 
permanent habitation. 
For the rest, our ancestors, as Caesar saw them, were proper 
barbarians. They only allowed merchants into the country to 
secure purchasers for their booty rather than to buy anything 
from them; for what need had they for foreign things, anyway? 
They even preferred their ill-favoured ponies to the fine, strong 
horses of the Gauls. The Suebi suffered no importation of wine 
whatever, believing the men were thereby rendered effeminate.3 
In this respect their Bastarnae cousins were more civilised; on the 
occasion of their invasion of Thraceb they sent envoys to Crassus, 
who made them drunk and elicited from them all he needed to 
know concerning the positions and intentions of the Bastarnae, 
whom he then lured into an ambush and destroyed. Even before 
the battle on the Idistavisus (16 of our era) Germanicus described 
the Germans to his soldiers as without armour or helmets, 
protected only by shields made of wicker or light boards, only the 
first rank having real lances, posterior ranks nothing but 
sharpened poles hardened by fire.c  Metal working was then 
therefore still scarcely known to the inhabitants of the Weser 
region, and the Romans will have taken good care not to let 
merchants carry arms into Germany. 
Fully a century and a half after Caesar, Tacitus gives us his 
famous description of the Germans.0 Here much already looks 
quite different. As far as the Elbe and beyond, the migrating 
tribes had come to a halt and settled down permanently. To be 
sure,  for a long time there was still no question of towns; 
settlement was made in villages consisting of individual farmsteads, 
either widely spaced or close together, but even in the latter case 
every house was free standing in its own space. Houses were built 
without quarry-stones or roof-tiles, roughly put together of 
a See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 164.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  11.—Ed. 
c Tacitus, Annales, II, 14. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 457-58.—Ed. 
d Tacitus, Germania, 16. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 655-56.— Ed. 

=====第44页=====
16 Frederick Engels 
untrimmed timber (materia informi must here mean this in 
contrast to caementa and tegulae); blockhouses, as still in northern 
Scandinavia, but no longer huts which can be built in one day, as 
with Strabo.3 We shall deal later with the agrarian constitution. 
The Germans also already had subterranean storage chambers, a 
kind of cellar where they dwelt in the winter for warmth and 
where the women practised weaving, according to Pliny.b Agricul­
ture is therefore already more important, but cattle is still the 
chief wealth; it is numerous, but of poor breed, the horses ugly 
and no runners, sheep and cattle small, the latter without horns. 
Under "nourishment" meat, milk and crab apples are listed, but 
no bread. Hunting was no longer much practised, hence the stock 
of game was already much reduced since Caesar. Clothing was also 
still very primitive, a rough blanket for the mass, otherwise naked 
(almost as among the Zulu Kaffirs), but the wealthiest already had 
closely fitting clothes; animal skins were also used; the women 
dressed much like the men, but already more often wore linen 
garments without sleeves. The children all ran about naked. 
Reading and writing were unknown, but one passage indicates that 
priests were already using runes, characters derived from the 
Latin, which they cut into wooden staves.0 Gold and silver were 
not treasured by the Germans of the interior, silver vessels 
presented by Romans to princes and envoys served the same 
common uses as earthenware. The insignificant trade was by 
simple barter. 
The men still had the custom common to all primitive peoples 
of leaving the work in the home and field to the women, old 
people and children, as something unmanly. They had, however, 
adopted two civilised customs: drinking and gambling, and they 
practised both with all the abandon of untouched barbarians, 
gambling to the extreme of throwing dice for their own persons. 
In the interior their drink was barley or wheat beer; if schnapps 
had already been invented, world history might well have taken a 
different course. 
At the borders of Roman territory further progress had been 
made: imported wine was drunk; to some extent people had 
become used to money, preference naturally being given to silver, 
as more handy for limited exchange, and, according to barbarian 
a Strabo, Geographica, V11, 1. Quoted in Die  Geschichtschreiber...,  pp. 373-74.—Ed. 
b Plinius, Naturalis historia, XIX, 1. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., 
p. 716.— Ed. 
c Tacitus, Germania, 10. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 651.—  Ed. 

=====第45页=====
On the  Early History  of the  Germans 17 
custom,  to coin with  a stamp well-known  of old. We  shall  see  that 
they had  good cause  for such precaution. Trade with  the Germans 
was only conducted  on the  banks  of the  Rhine  itself;  only  the 
Hermunduri, straddling  the  Limes Germanicus, went  at this time 
in and out of  Gaul  and  Rhaetia  for  trading purposes. 
Hence  the  first great phase  of German history,  the  final 
transition from  a migratory life  to permanent habitations, occur­
red in the  period between Caesar  and  Tacitus,  at least  for the 
greater part  of the  people, from  the  Rhine  to far  beyond  the  Elbe. 
The names  of the  individual tribes begin more  or less  to coalesce 
with certain tracts  of land. Information from ancient writers being 
contradictory,  and  names fluctuating  and  changing,  it is,  however, 
often impossible  to assign  a definite settlement area  to every tribe. 
It would also lead  us too far  from  our  subject.  A general 
statement found  in Pliny must suffice here: 
"There  are  five principal Germanic stocks:  the  Vindili,  who  include  the 
Burgundiones, Varini, Carini  and  Guttons;  the  second stock consists  of the 
Ingaevones, including  the  Cimbri, Teutons  and the  tribes  of the  Chauci.  The 
Iscaevones, including  the  Sugambri, live close  to the  Rhine.  The  Hermiones, 
comprising  the  Suebi, Hermunduri, Chatti  and  Cherusci, occupy  the  middle  of the 
country.  The  fifth stock comprises  the  Peucini,  and the  Bastarnae, whose 
neighbours  are the  Dacians."3 
A sixth branch  may be  added  to these:  the  Hilleviones, living  in 
Scandinavia.0 
Of all the  information  we  gather from  the  ancient writers this 
fits best with  the  later facts  and  with  the  preserved linguistic 
remains. 
The Vindili comprise peoples  of the  Gothic tongue  who 
occupied  the  Baltic coast between Elbe  and  Vistula  and  deep 
inland;  the  Guttons (Goths) were settled beyond  the  Vistula 
around  the  Frische  Haff. The scarce linguistic remains which have 
been preserved leave  not the  slightest doubt that  the  Vandals  (who 
must have formed part  of Pliny's Vindili, since  he transfers their 
name  to the  whole main stock)  and the  Burgundians spoke Gothic 
dialects. Only  the  Warni  (or Varini),  who are  usually,  on the  basis 
of information from  the 5 and 6  centuries, reckoned among  the 
Thuringians,  can  cause doubts;  we  know nothing  of their 
language. 
a Plinius, Naturalis historia,  IV, 14.  Quoted  in J.  Grimm's Geschichte  der deutschen 
Sprache,  Vol. 2,  Leipzig,  1848, p.  830.—  Ed. 
b Engels marks  the passage from "Peucini..."  to "Scandinavia" with  a vertical 
line in the  margin  of his  manuscript.—  Ed. 

=====第46页=====
18 Frederick Engels 
The second stock, the Ingaevones, first of all includes peoples 
speaking the Frisian tongues, inhabitants of the North Sea coast 
and the Cimbric Peninsula, and most probably also speakers of the 
Saxon tongue between Elbe and Weser, in which case the Cherusci 
must also be reckoned among them. 
The Iscaevones are at once singled out by the Sugambri, who 
joined them, as the later Franks, the inhabitants of the right bank 
of the Rhine from the Taunus down to the sources of the Lahn, 
Sieg, Ruhr, Lippe and Ems, bordered on the north by Frisians and 
Chauci. 
The Hermiones, or Herminones, as Tacitus calls them more 
correctly,3 are the later High Germans: the Hermunduri (Thuring-
ians),  Suebi (Swabians and Marcomanni-Bavarians), Chatti (Hes­
sians),  etc. The Cherusci are without doubt placed here in error. It 
is the only indubitable error in the whole of Pliny's list. 
The fifth stock, Peucini and Bastarnae, is lost. No doubt Jacob 
Grimm is right in reckoning it to the Gothic.b 
Finally, the sixth stock, the Hilleviones, comprises the inhabit­
ants of the Danish islands and the great Scandinavian peninsula. 
Hence the division of Pliny corresponds with surprising accuracy 
to the grouping of the German dialects which later actually 
appear. We know no dialects which do not belong to either Gothic, 
Frisian-Low Saxon, Franconian, High German or Scandinavian, 
and even today we can still acknowledge Pliny's division as 
exemplary. I shall examine anything that might possibly be said 
against it in my note on the German peoples.0 
We must therefore conceive of the original immigration of the 
Germans into their new homeland approximately as follows: In 
the first instance the Iscaevones advanced into the middle of the 
North German plain, between the southern mountains and the 
Baltic and North seas; close after them, but nearer to the coast, 
the Ingaevones. These appear to have been followed by the 
Hilleviones, who turned off to the islands, however. They are 
followed by the Goths (Pliny's Vindili), who left the Peucini and 
Bastarnae behind in the south-east; the Gothic name in Sweden 
testifies that individual sections joined the migrating Hilleviones. 
Finally, south of the Goths, the Herminones, who, at least for the 
greater part, moved only in Caesar's and even Augustus' time 
a See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 647.— Ed. 
b J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 1, p.  462.—Ed. 
c See this volume, pp. 44-57.—Ed. 

=====第47页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 19 
into their settlements, which they retained until the migration of 
peoples.3 
THE FIRST BATTLES AGAINST ROME 
Since Caesar, Romans and Germans faced each other across the 
Rhine, and since the subjection of Rhaetia, Noricum and Pannonia 
by Augustus across the Danube. In the meantime Roman rule had 
been consolidated in Gaul; Agrippa had covered the whole 
country with a network of military roads, fortresses had been built, 
a new generation, born under the Roman yoke, had grown up. 
Brought into the most direct communication with Italy by the 
Alpine roads over the Little and Great St. Bernard, built by 
Augustus, Gaul could serve as the base for the conquest of 
Germania from the Rhine. Augustus entrusted his stepson (or real 
son?) Drusus with the accomplishment of this conquest with the 
eight legions stationed on the Rhine. 
Pretexts were provided by constant friction among the border-
dwellers, by German intrusions into Gaul and by an alleged or 
actual conspiracy of the disaffected Belgae with the Sugambri, 
according to which the latter were to cross the Rhine and effect a 
general rising. Drusus made sure of the Belgic leaders (—12), 
crossed the river close by the island of Batavia above the Rhine 
delta, devastated the country of the Usipetes and partly that of the 
Sugambri, sailed down the Rhine, forced the Frisians to supply 
him with auxiliary foot soldiers and sailed with the fleet along the 
coast and into the mouth of the Ems to make war on the Chauci. 
But here his Roman seamen, unaccustomed to the tides, grounded 
the fleet during the ebb; he got it free only with the help of the 
allied Frisian troops, who were better acquainted with the matter, 
and returned home. 
This first campaign was only an extensive reconnaissance. In the 
following year (—11) he began the actual conquest. He crossed the 
Rhine again below the mouth of the Lippe, subjugated the 
Usipetes living there, threw a bridge across the Lippe and invaded 
the country of the Sugambri, who had just taken the field against 
the Chatti because these did not want to join the alliance against 
the Romans under the leadership of the Sugambri. On the 
confluence of the Lippe and the Eliso he then made a fortified 
camp (Aliso) and retreated again across the Rhine when winter 
a In the manuscript Engels inserted in pencil: "Here follows the chapter on the 
agrarian and military constitutions." 6—Ed. 
4 1243 

=====第48页=====
20 Frederick Engels 
approached. During this retreat he was ambushed in a narrow 
defile by the Germans, and it was only with the greatest difficulty 
that his army escaped annihilation. This year he also made 
another fortified camp "in the land of the Chatti, close to the 
Rhine".3 
This second campaign of Drusus already contains the complete 
plan of conquest as it was afterwards consistently followed. The 
region immediately to be conquered was fairly sharply delimited: 
the Iscaevonian interior to the border with the Cherusci and 
Chatti and the coastal strip belonging to it as far as the Ems, if 
possible to the Weser. The main job of subjecting the coastlands 
was allotted to the fleet. In the south, the base of operations was 
Mainz, founded by Agrippa and extended by Drusus, in the 
neighbourhood of which we must look for the fort built "in the 
land of the Chatti" (nowadays it is being sought in the Saalburg at 
Homburg). From here the course of the lower Main leads into the 
open country of the Wetterau and the upper Lahn, the occupation 
of which would separate Iscaevones and Chatti. In the centre of 
the front of attack the flat country through which the Lippe flows 
and particularly the broad ridge of hills between the Lippe and 
the Ruhr offered the most convenient line of operations to the 
main Roman force; by its occupation it could divide the region to 
be conquered into two approximately equal areas and at the same 
time separate the Bructeri from the Sugambri. From this position 
it could coordinate its action with the fleet, on the left; together 
with the column debouching from the Wetterau isolate the 
Iscaevonian slate mountains on the right, and in front keep the 
Cherusci in check. The fort of Aliso formed the most advanced 
stronghold of this line of operations; it was situated near the 
sources of the Lippe, either at Elsen near Paderborn at the 
confluence of the Alme and the Lippe, or at Lippstadt, where a 
big Roman fort has recently been discovered. b 
In the following year (—10) the Chatti, realising the common 
danger, at last allied themselves to the Sugambri. But Drusus 
attacked and forced them into subjection, at least in part. This 
cannot have outlasted the winter, however, for in the next spring 
( — 9)  he attacked once more, advanced as far as the Suebi (i.e., 
probably Thuringians, according to Florus and Orosius also 
a Dio Cassius, Historia Romana, LIV, 33. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., 
p. 276.—Ed. 
b See H. von Abendroth, Terrainstudien zu dem Rückzuge des Varus und den 
Feldzügen des Germanicus, Leipzig, 1862, p. 8.— Ed. 

=====第49页=====
On the, Early History of the Germans 21 
Marcomanni,3  who at that time still lived north of the Erzgebirge), 
then attacked the Cherusci, crossed the Weser arid only turned 
back at the Elbe. He devastated the whole land he moved through, 
but met everywhere with heavy resistance. On the way back he 
died, thirty years old, even before he reached the Rhine. 
To the above account, taken from Dio Cassius, we add from 
Suetonius that Drusus had the canal dug from the Rhine to the 
Ijssel by which he led his fleet to the North Sea through Frisia and 
the Flevo (Vliestrom—the present fairway between Vlieland and 
Terschelling, out of the Zuider Zee)b ; from Florus, that he erected 
over 50 forts along the Rhine and a bridge at Bonn and also 
fortified the line of the Maas, thus securing the position of the 
Rhenish legions both against risings of the Gauls and against 
incursions of the Germans. Florus' fables of forts and earthworks 
on the Weser and Elbe are empty boasting 0; he [Drusus] may have 
thrown up entrenchments there during his marches, but he was 
too good a general to leave even a single man as garrison there. 
But there is surely no doubt that he had the line of operations 
along the Lippe provided with fortified bases. He also fortified the 
passes over the Taunus. 
Tiberius, Drusus' successor on the Rhine, crossed the river in 
the following year (  — 8); the Germans, except the Sugambri, sent 
peace negotiators; Augustus, who was in Gaul, refused all 
negotiations as long as the Sugambri were not represented. When 
at last they also sent envoys, "numerous and respected men", says 
Dio, Augustus had them taken prisoner and interned them in 
various towns in the interior of the empire; "distressed at this, 
they took their own lives".d  In the following year (  — 7), Tiberius 
went again with an army to Germania, where already nothing had 
any longer to be combated, except a few insignificant instances of 
unrest. Velleius says of this time: 
"Tiberius so subdued the country (Germania) that it differed but little from a 
tributary province." e 
This success will probably have to be attributed not only to 
Roman arms and to the much vaunted diplomatic "wisdom" of 
a Florus, Epitomae de Tito Livio, IV, 12, 21-40 and Orosius, Historiae adversus 
paganos, VI, 21. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 279-80.— Ed. 
b Dio Cassius, op. cit., LV, 1, 2; Suetonius, De vita Caesarum: Claudius, 1. See 
Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 276-77,  280-81.—  Ed. 
c See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 279-80.— Ed. 
d Dio Cassius, op. cit., LV, 6. Quoted in Die  Geschichtschreiber...,  pp. 304-05.—Ed. 
e Velleius Paterculus, Historia Romana, II, 97. Quoted in Die Ge­
schichtschreiber..., p. 305.—Ed. 
4* 

=====第50页=====
22 Frederick Engels 
Tiberius, but in particular to the transplanting of Germans to the 
Roman bank of the Rhine. Already Agrippa had shifted the Ubii, 
who were always much attached to the Romans, to the left bank of 
the Rhine at Cologne, with their consent. Tiberius forced 40,000 
Sugambri to go over and settle, and with that he broke this 
powerful people's strength to resist for a considerable time. 
Tiberius now retired for some time from all affairs of state and 
we learn nothing of what went on in Germany during several 
years.  A fragment from Dio tells of a move of Domitius 
Ahenobarbus from the Danube to beyond the Elbe.3 Soon after 
that, however, about the first year of our era, the Germans rose. 
According to Velleius' statements, Marcus Vinicius, the Roman 
supreme commander, fought on the whole with success and in 
recognition received rewards.b  Nevertheless, in the year 4, soon 
after his adoption by Augustus, Tiberius had to cross the Rhine 
once more to restore the shaken Roman power. He subjected first 
the Canninefates and Chattuari, living next to the river, then the 
Bructeri, and "won over" the Cherusci. Further details are not 
given by Velleius, who participated in this and the following 
campaigns. The mild winter allowed the legions to remain in 
movement until December; then they went into winter quarters in 
Germany  itself,  probably at the sources of the Lippe. 
The campaign of the following year (5) was to complete the 
subjugation of western Germany. While Tiberius advanced from 
Aliso and defeated the Langobardi on the lower Elbe, the fleet 
sailed along the coast and "won over" the Chauci. On the lower 
Elbe the army met the fleet sailing up the river. With the success 
of this campaign the work of the Romans in the north appeared to 
be done, according to Velleius0; in the following year Tiberius 
turned to the Danube, where the Marcomanni, who had recently 
moved to Bohemia under Maroboduus, were threatening the 
frontier. Educated in Rome and familiar with Roman tactics, 
Maroboduus had an army of 70,000 foot and 4,000 cavalry, 
organised on the Roman pattern. Tiberius attacked this army on 
the Danube in the front, while Sentius Saturninus was to lead the 
legions from the Rhine through the country of the Chatti into the 
rear and the flank of the enemy. Then the Pannonians rose in 
Tiberius' own rear, and the army had to turn and reconquer its 
a See Die Geschichtschreiber.., p. 307.— Ed. 
b Velleius Paterculus, op. cit., II, 104. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 309-
10.—  Ed. 
c Ibid., II, 109. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 313-14.—Ed. 

=====第51页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 23 
base of operations. The fighting lasted three years; but the 
Pannonians had only just been defeated when in northern 
Germany things also took such a turn that there could no longer 
be any question of conquests in the land of the Marcomanni. 
Drusus' plan of conquest had been fully retained; but to carry 
it out in security, campaigns by land and by sea had become 
necessary as far as the Elbe. In the plan of campaign against 
Maroboduus the idea transpired of shifting the border to the 
Little Carpathians, the Riesengebirge and the Elbe as far as its 
mouth; but for the time being that was still in the remote future 
and soon became quite impracticable. We do not know how far up 
the Wetterau Roman forts may have reached; to all appearances 
this line of operations was at the time neglected in favour of the 
more important line along the Lippe. There, however, the 
Romans appeared to have made themselves fairly well at home. 
The Rhine plain on the right bank from Bonn downwards 
belonged to them; the Westphalian lowland from the Ruhr 
northwards to beyond the Ems, to the borders of the Frisians and 
the Chauci, remained in military occupation. In the rear, Batavi 
and Frisians were at that time still reliable friends; further west 
the Chauci, Cherusci and Chatti could be held to be mastered 
sufficiently, after their repeated defeats and after the blow which 
had also struck the Langobardi. And in any case, in those three 
peoples a fairly powerful party existed at the time which saw 
salvation only in joining Rome. In the south, the power of the 
Sugambri was broken for the time being; part of their territory, 
between Lippe and Ruhr, and also in the Rhine plain, was 
occupied, the rest was surrounded on three sides by the Roman 
positions on the Rhine, the Ruhr and in the Wetterau, and 
certainly often enough traversed by Roman columns. In the 
direction of the Lippe sources, from Neuwied to the Sieg, from 
Deutz and Neuss to the Wupper, Roman roads leading over 
dominating mountain ridges have recently been traced at least as 
far as the border of Berg and Mark. 3 Still further off the 
Hermunduri, in agreement with Domitius Ahenobarbus, occupied 
part of the area abandoned by the Marcomanni and were in 
peaceful intercourse with the Romans. And, finally, the well-
known disunity of the German peoples justified the expectation 
that the Romans would only have to conduct such minor wars as 
a See J. Schneider, Die römischen Militärstraßen an der Lippe und das Castell Aliso. 
Nach eigenen Lokalforschungen dargestellt, Düsseldorf, 1878.— Ed. 

=====第52页=====
24 Frederick Engels 
they themselves must have thought desirable for the purpose of 
gradually transforming their allies into subjects. 
The core of the Roman position was the country on both sides 
of the Lippe as far as the Osning. Here Roman rule and Roman 
customs were made acceptable by the constant presence of the 
legions in fortified camps and "virtually transformed" the 
barbarians, according to Dio. a Here, near the permanent army 
quarters, there arose those towns and markets of which the same 
historian writes and whose peaceful intercourse contributed most 
to the consolidation of the alien rule. Everything seemed to go 
splendidly. But it was to be otherwise. 
Quintilius Varus was appointed supreme commander of the 
troops in Germany. A Roman of the beginning decline, phlegmatic 
and indolent, inclined to rest on the laurels of his predecessors, 
and still more to take advantage of these laurels for  himself. 
"That he was no despiser of money is demonstrated by his governorship of 
Syria: he entered the rich province a poor man, but left it a rich man and the province 
poor" (Velleius).b 
Otherwise he was "a man of mild character"; but this mild 
character must have been greatly upset by the transfer to a 
country where extortion was made so difficult for him because 
there was almost nothing to extort. Varus nevertheless tried, and 
that by the method which had long become customary with 
Roman proconsuls and propraetors.7  First of all it was necessary as 
quickly as possible to arrange the occupied part of Germany on 
the footing of a Roman province, to replace the indigenous public 
authority, which had hitherto continued to function under the 
military rule, by Roman authority and thus to turn the country 
into a source of revenue—both for the fisc and for the proconsul. 
Varus accordingly tried to "transform" the Germans "more 
rapidly and effectively". He "issued orders to them as if they were 
slaves and exacted money as he would from subject nations" 
(Dio). c And the main instrument of subjugation and extortion he 
used there was the well-tried one of the power of supreme judge 
exercised by Roman provincial governors, which he here arro­
gated to himself and on the strength of which he sought to force 
Roman law on the Germans. 
Unfortunately Varus and his civilising mission were nearly one 
and a half thousand years in advance of history; for that was 
a Dio Cassius, op. cit., LVI, 18. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 326.— Ed. 
b Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 321.—  Ed. 
c Dio Cassius, op. cit., LVI, 18. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 326.—Ed. 

=====第53页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 25 
roughly how long it was before Germany was ready to "receive 
Roman law".8 In fact, Roman law with its classical dissection of 
private property relations must have appeared as pure nonsense to 
the Germans, whose title to the little private property that had 
developed amongst them derived solely from their common 
property in land. Similarly the solemn forms and procedural 
challenges, the constant adjournments that are a feature of Roman 
legal proceedings, must have seemed to them, who were used to 
finding judgment and sentence themselves in open public court 
within a few hours according to inherited custom, as just so much 
denial of justice; just as the swarm of officials and legal sharks 
surrounding the proconsul must have seemed to them what they 
in fact were—nothing but cut-throats. And now the Germans were 
supposed to surrender their free Thing, where fellow tribesmen 
judged fellow tribesman, and submit to the peremptory sentence 
of a single man who conducted the proceedings in a foreign 
language, and who at best based himself on a law unknown and 
quite inapplicable to them—and who himself was an interested 
party. The free German, whom according to Tacitus only a priest 
could physically chastise in seldom cases,3  who could forfeit life 
and limb only through treason against his people, but could 
otherwise atone for every offence, even murder, by a fine 
{wer geld),  and who was moreover used to exercising blood revenge 
for himself and his relations on his own—this free German was 
now supposed to submit to the scourge and the axe of the Roman 
lictor. 9 And all for no other reason than to throw the doors wide 
open to the exchequer bleeding the land white through taxation, 
and to the extortion and corruption of the proconsul and his 
accomplices. 
But Varus had miscalculated. The Germans were no Syrians. He 
impressed them with his enforced Roman civilisation only in one 
respect. He merely showed the neighbouring peoples pressed into 
alliance what an intolerable yoke awaited them also, and thus 
forced on them a unity which they had never before been able to 
achieve. 
Varus stood in Germany with three legions, Asprenas with 
another two on Lower Rhine, only five or six marches from Aliso, 
the centre of the position. In the face of such a force only a long 
and carefully prepared, but then suddenly struck, decisive blow 
offered a prospect of success. Conspiracy was therefore impera­
tive. Arminius undertook to organise it. 
a Tacitus, Germania, 12. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 653.—  Ed. 

=====第54页=====
26 Frederick Engels 
Arminius, of the Cheruscan nobility, son of Segimerus, who 
seems to have been a military leader of his people, had spent his 
early youth in Roman military service, mastered the Roman 
language and custom, and was a frequent and well received guest 
at the Roman headquarters, whose loyalty seemed beyond all 
doubt. Even on the eve of the surprise attack Varus relied on him 
as a rock. Velleius called him 
"a young man of noble birth, brave in action and alert in mind, more so than 
barbarians usually are; a young man whose countenance and eyes shone with the 
fire of the mind. He had been our constant companion on previous campaigns," 
(that is, against Germans) "and in addition to Roman citizenship, enjoyed the 
Roman dignity of equestrian rank".3 
But Arminius was more than all that, he was a great statesman 
and a considerable general. Once resolved to put an end to 
Roman rule on the right bank of the Rhine, he took the necessary 
steps without hesitation. The Cheruscan military nobility, already 
much dominated by Roman influence, had to be won over at least 
in great part, and the Chatti and Chauci, and even more so the 
Bructeri and Sugambri, who were directly under Roman yoke, had 
to be drawn into the conspiracy. All that took time, even though 
Varus' extortions had prepared the ground; and during this time 
it was necessary to lull Varus into security. This was done by 
taking him in with his hobby of dispensing justice and making a 
complete fool of him with it. Velleius tells us that the Germans, 
"who with their extreme savagery combine great cunning, to an extent scarcely 
credible to one who has had no experience with them, and are a race of born liars, 
by trumping up a series of fictitious lawsuits, now suing one another without cause, 
and now thanking him for settling their disputes with Roman justice, so that their 
own barbarous nature was being softened down by this new and hitherto unknown 
discipline and order, and that quarrels which had usually been settled by arms were 
now being settled by law—the Germans brought him to such a complete degree of 
negligence, that he came to look upon himself as a city praetor, administering 
justice in the forum, and not a general in command of an army in the heart of 
Germany" b 
So passed the summer of the year 9. To make still more certain 
of success, Varus was induced to split up his troops by detaching 
them in various ways, which cannot have been difficult given the 
character of the man and the circumstances. 
"Varus," Dio says, "did not keep his troops properly together, as was necessary 
in a hostile country, but lent teams of soldiers to people who needed help and 
a Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 322.— Ed. 
b Here and above Engels quotes from Velleius Paterculus, Historia Romana, II, 
118. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 321-22.— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 27 
asked for it, either to guard a fortified place, to catch robbers, or to escort grain 
transports."3 
In the meantime the chief conspirators, in particular Arminius 
and Segimerus, were constantly round him and frequently at his 
table. According to Dio, Varus was now already warned, but his 
confidence knew no bounds. At length, in the autumn, when all 
was ready for striking the blow, and Varus with the bulk of his 
troops had been lured deep into the land of the Cherusci, as far as 
the Weser, a feigned rising at some distance gave the signal. Even 
as Varus received the news and gave orders for departure, he was 
warned by another leader of the Cherusci, Segestes, who seems to 
have maintained a sort of clan feud with the family of Arminius. 
Varus would not believe him. Segestes thereupon proposed that 
he himself,  Arminius and the other leaders of the Cherusci should 
be put in chains before Varus marched off; success would show 
who was right. But Varus' confidence was unshakeable, even 
when on his departure the conspirators stayed behind, under the 
pretext that they were gathering allies to join him with them. 
This happened, indeed, though not as Varus expected. The 
troops of the Cherusci were already assembled. The first thing 
they did was to massacre the Roman detachments stationed with 
them at their own earlier request, and then to attack Varus on the 
flank while he was on the march. The latter was moving along bad 
forest paths, for here, in the land of the Cherusci, there were not 
yet any paved Roman military roads. Taken by surprise, he at last 
realised his situation, braced himself and from now on showed 
that he was a Roman general—but too late. He let his troops close 
up, had his large train of women, children, waggons, pack 
animals, etc., lined up in order and protected as well as was 
possible considering the narrow paths and dense woods, and 
turned towards his base of operations—which we must take to 
have been Aliso. Pouring rain softened the ground, hindered the 
march, constantly breaking up again the order of the ponderous 
train. With heavy losses Varus succeeded in reaching a densely 
wooded mountain, which, however, offered open space for a 
temporary camp. This was occupied and fortified still in fairly 
good order and according to regulations; the army of Germanicus, 
visiting the place six years later, still recognised there distinctly 
"the work of three legions".b With a resolve appropriate to the 
a Dio Cassius, op. cit., LVI, 19. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 326-
27.—Ed. 
b Tacitus, Annales, I, 61. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 443.—Ed. 

=====第56页=====
28 Frederick Engels 
situation Varus here had all the not absolutely necessary waggons 
and baggage burnt. The next day he moved through open country, 
but again suffered so heavily that the troops were separated still 
more widely, and in the evening the camp could no longer be 
fortified according to regulations; Germanicus found only one 
half-ruined mound and a shallow ditch. On the third day the 
march led again through wooded mountains, and here Varus and 
most of the leaders lost heart. Varus killed  himself,  the legions 
were destroyed almost to the last man. Only the cavalry escaped 
under Vala Numonius; individual refugees from the infantry also 
appear to have managed to get to Aliso. Aliso itself held out at 
least for some time, since the Germans did not know the regular 
siege attack; later the garrison somehow fought its way through, 
wholly or in part. Asprenas, intimidated, appears to have confined 
himself to a short advance to receive them. Bructeri, Sugambri 
and all the lesser peoples rose, and Roman power was again 
thrown back across the Rhine. 
The localities of this expedition have been much disputed. Most 
likely, before the battle Varus was stationed in the hollow of the 
Rinteln valley, somewhere between Hausberge and Hameln; the 
retreat decided upon after the first attack was in the direction of 
the Dören gap near Detmold, which forms a plain and broad pass 
through the Osning. This is the general view which has become 
traditional and fits in with the sources as well as the military 
exigencies of the war situation. Whether Varus reached the Dören 
gap remains uncertain; the breakthrough of the cavalry and 
perhaps the first ranks of the infantry would appear to show that 
he did. 3 
The news of the annihilation of the three legions and the rising 
of the whole of western Germany struck Rome like a thunder clap. 
Some already saw Arminius marching across the Rhine and 
spreading insurrection in Gaul, Maroboduus on the other side 
crossing the Danube and carrying with him the barely subdued 
Pannonians on a march across the Alps. And Italy was already so 
exhausted that it could hardly supply men any longer. Dio reports 
that there were only few young men capable of bearing arms left 
among the citizenry, that the older men refused to join the army 
so that Augustus punished them with confiscation of their wealth, 
and some even with death; that the emperor eventually managed 
to raise a few troops for the protection of Rome from among 
a H. von Abendroth, op. cit., p. 14.— Ed. 

=====第57页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 29 
freedmen and veterans, disarmed his German bodyguard and 
banned all Germans from the city.3 
Arminius did not cross the Rhine, however; Maroboduus was 
not thinking of any attack, and so Rome could indulge undis­
turbed in outbursts of fury at the "perfidious Germans". We have 
already seen Velleius' description of them as people who "with 
their extreme savagery combine great cunning ... and are a race of 
born liars". Similarly Strabo. He knows nothing of "German 
loyalty" and "Celtic perfidy"; quite to the contrary. While he calls 
the Celts "simple and straightforward", so simple-minded that 
they "gather for battle in full view of everybody and without any 
circumspection, thus making it easy for the enemy to carry the 
day",b he says of the Germans: 
"In dealing with them it was always advisable not to trust them, those who have 
been trusted have done great harm as, for instance, the Cherusci, in whose country 
three legions, with their general Varus, were destroyed by an ambush in violation 
of the treaties."0 
Not to speak of the indignant and vindictive verses of Ovid.d 
One could imagine to be reading French authors of the most 
chauvinistic period, boiling with rage at Yorck's breach of faith or 
the treachery of the Saxons at Leipzig.10 The Germans had 
become well acquainted with Roman loyalty to agreements and 
probity when Caesar attacked the Usipetes and Tencteri during 
the negotiations and the truce; they had become acquainted with it 
when Augustus had the envoys of the Sugambri taken prisoner, 
while before their arrival he had rejected any negotiations with the 
German peoples. All conquering nations have this in common that 
they will try to outwit their opponents by any means; and they 
find this quite in order; no sooner do their adversaries do the 
same thing, however, than they call this breach of faith and 
treachery. But the instruments of subjection must also be allowed 
to serve to throw off the yoke. So long as there are exploiting and 
ruling nations and classes on the one hand, and exploited and 
ruled ones on the other, so long the use of cunning side by side 
with force will for both sides be a necessity against which all moral 
preaching will be powerless. 
However childish the fantastic statue of Arminius erected at 
Detmold may be—it had only one good side, that it induced Louis 
a Dio Cassius, op. cit., LVI, 23. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 330-
31.—Ed. 
b Strabo, Geographica, IV, 4. Quoted in Die  Geschichtschreiber...,  pp. 370-71.—  Ed. 
c Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 374-75.— Ed. 
d Ovidius, Ex Ponto and Tristia. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 365.—Ed. 

=====第58页=====
30 Frederick Engels 
Napoleon to erect a similarly ridiculous, fantastic colossus of 
Vercingetorix on a mountain at Aliso [-Sainte-Reine] —it remains 
true that the Varus battle was one of the most decisive turning 
points in history. It decided Germany's independence of Rome 
once and for all. One can argue at length to no purpose about 
whether or not this independence was such a great gain for the 
Germans themselves; it is certain that without it the whole of 
history would have taken a different course. And even if in fact all 
the subsequent history of the Germans has been almost nothing 
but a long series of national disasters, mostly through their own 
fault, so much so that even the most brilliant successes almost 
always turned out to the detriment of the people, one must 
nevertheless say that here, at the beginning of their history, the 
Germans were decidedly fortunate. 
Caesar used the last vital forces of the dying Republic to 
subjugate Gaul. The legions, since Marius consisting of recruited 
mercenaries but still exclusively Italic men, since Caesar literally 
died out in the measure in which the Italic people themselves died 
out under the rapidly spreading latifundia and their slave 
economy. The 150,000 men who made up the compact infantry of 
the 25 legions could only be kept together by extreme measures. 
The 20-year service was not observed; veterans who had com­
pleted their service were forced to remain with the colours for an 
indefinite period. That was the chief reason for the mutiny of the 
Rhenish legions on the death of Augustus which Tacitus describes 
so imaginatively, 3 and which with its extraordinary mixture of 
refractoriness and discipline recalls so vividly the mutinies of the 
Spanish soldiers of Philip II in the Netherlands,11 in both cases 
testifying to the solidity of the army at a time when the Prince had 
broken the word he had given it. We saw how vain Augustus' 
attempt remained after the Varus battle to reinstate the old levy 
laws which had long gone out of use; how he had to fall back on 
veterans and even freedmen—he had used these once before, 
during the Pannonian insurrection.12 The reserve of free Italic 
peasants' sons had disappeared with the free Italic peasants 
themselves. Every new reserve contingent introduced into the 
legions worsened the army's quality. And since these legions, this 
core of the entire might of the army, which was difficult to 
maintain, had nevertheless to be spared as much as possible, the 
auxiliary troops came more and more to the fore and fought 
battles in which the legions only formed the reserve, so that 
a Tacitus, Annales, I, 31-52. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 421-37.— Ed. 

=====第59页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 31 
already in Claudius' time the Batavi could say: the provinces were 
being conquered with the blood of the provinces. 
With such an army, more and more alienating itself from the 
ancient Roman discipline and solidity and therewith from the 
ancient Roman manner of fighting, increasingly composed of 
provincials and eventually of barbarians alien to the empire, 
almost no great aggressive wars could any longer be conducted— 
soon no great offensive battles could be fought. The deterioration 
of the army placed the state on the defensive, which was first 
fought aggressively, then more and more passively, until at length 
the weight of the attack, now shifted completely to the side of the 
Germans, broke through irresistibly across the Rhine and Danube 
along the whole line from the North Sea to the Black Sea. 
In the meantime it was necessary, even to safeguard the line of 
the Rhine, to let the Germans feel once more, on their own 
territory, the superior strength of Roman arms. For this purpose 
Tiberius hastened to the Rhine, restored weakened discipline by 
his own example and strict punishment, limited the train of the 
mobile army to the absolutely necessary and marched through 
western Germany in two expeditions (years 10 and 11). The 
Germans did not present themselves for decisive battles, the 
Romans did not dare to occupy their winter camps on the right 
bank of the Rhine. There is no evidence that Aliso and the fort set 
up at the mouth of the Ems in the country of the Chauci retained 
their permanent garrison also in the winter, but it is probable. 
In the year 14, in August, Augustus died. The Rhenish legions, 
who after completing their service were neither dismissed nor 
given their pay, refused to recognise Tiberius and proclaimed 
Germanicus, son of Drusus, emperor. He calmed the rising 
himself,  returned the troops to obedience, and led them into 
Germany in three expeditions which have been described by 
Tacitus.3 Here Arminius confronted him and proved a general 
fully worthy of his opponent. He sought to avoid any decisive 
battles in open country, to hinder the Romans' march as much as 
possible, and to attack them only in swamps and defiles where 
they could not deploy their forces. But the Germans did not 
always follow him. Pugnacity often carried them away into fighting 
in unfavourable circumstances; greed for booty more than once 
saved Romans who were already sitting firmly in a trap. So 
Germanicus gained the two fruitless victories on the Idistavisus 
and on the Angrivarian limes,13 barely escaped on the retreats 
a Tacitus, Annales, I, 31-52. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 421-37.—Ed. 

=====第60页=====
32 Frederick Engels 
through narrow swamp passes, lost ships and crews through 
storms and floods on the Frisian coast, and was eventually recalled 
by Tiberius after the expedition of the year 16. With that the 
Roman expeditions into the interior of Germany came to an end. 
But the Romans knew only too well that a river line is only held 
if one also holds the crossings to the other bank. Far from 
retreating passively beyond the Rhine, the Romans transferred 
their defence to the right bank. The Roman fortifications which 
cover the regions of the lower Lippe, Ruhr and Wupper in big 
groups, at least in some cases corresponding to later districts, [and] 
the military roads built from the Rhine to the border of the Duchy 
of Mark, lead us to surmise here a system of defence works along 
a line from the Ijssel to the Sieg, corresponding to the present 
frontier line between Franks and Saxons, with occasional devia­
tions of the border of the Rhine province in the direction of 
Westphalia. This system, which was probably still to some extent 
defensible in the 7th century, must then also have kept the 
Saxons, who were advancing at that time, from reaching the 
Rhine, and thereby fixed their present ethnic border against the 
Franks. The most interesting discoveries have been made here in 
recent years (by J. Schneider) 3; we may well expect further 
discoveries. 
Farther up the Rhine the great Roman Limes was gradually 
built up, especially under Domitian and Hadrian; it runs from 
below Neuwied over the heights of Montabaur to Ems, there 
crosses the Lahn, turns west at Adolfseck, following the northern 
slopes of the Taunus, envelopes Grüningen in the Wetterau as its 
northernmost point, and thence, running in a south-south-easterly 
direction, reaches the Main south of Hanau. From here the Limes 
runs on the left bank of the Main to Miltenberg; thence in an only 
once broken straight line to the Württemberg Rems, near the 
castle of Hohenstaufen. Here the line, built further at a later time, 
probably under Hadrian, turns eastward via Dinkelsbühl, Gun-
zenhausen, Ellingen and Kipfenberg, and reaches the Danube at 
Irnsing above Kehlheim. Smaller entrenchments lay behind the 
Limes, and larger forts as support points at a greater distance. 
Thus enclosed, the country to the right of the Rhine, which at 
least south of the Main had lain deserted since the Helvetii were 
driven out by the Suebi, was peopled by Gallic vagrants, stragglers 
of the troops, according to Tacitus. b 
a See J. Schneider, Die römischen Militärstraßen an der Lippe und das Castell Aliso. 
Nach eigenen Lokalforschungen dargestellt, Düsseldorf, 1878.— Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania, 28. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 662-63.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 33 
Thus conditions gradually became calmer and safer on the 
Rhine, the Limes and the Danube. Fighting and expeditions 
continued, but the mutual borders remained unchanged for some 
centuries. 
PROGRESS UNTIL THE MIGRATION PERIOD 
Written sources on the situation and the events in the interior of 
Germany fail after Tacitus and Ptolemy. Instead a series of other, 
much more vivid sources is opening up for us: finds of antiquities 
in so far as they can be attributed to the period under discussion. 
We have seen that at the time of Pliny and Tacitus Roman trade 
with the interior of Germany was virtually non-existent. But we 
find in Pliny an indication of an old trade route, which in his time 
was still used occasionally, from Carnuntum (opposite the conflu­
ence of the March with the Danube), along the March and the 
Oder to the Amber coast.3  This route, and also another, through 
Bohemia along the Elbe, was probably used at a very early period 
by the Etruscans, whose presence in the northern valleys of the 
Alps is documented by numerous finds, particularly the 
Hallstatt find. 14 The invasion of the Gauls into northern Italy will 
have put an end to this trade (ca.—400) (Boyd Dawkins). b If this 
view is confirmed, this Etruscan trade, especially the importation 
of bronze goods, must have been conducted with the peoples who 
occupied the land on the Vistula and the Elbe before the 
Germans, probably with Celts, and the immigration of the 
Germans would have had as much to do with its interruption as 
the backflow of the Celts into Italy. The more easterly trade route, 
from the Greek cities on the Black Sea along Dniester and 
Dnieper to the area of the Vistula mouth, would then appear to 
have come into use only after this interruption. The ancient Greek 
coins found near Bromberg, in the island of Oesel and elsewhere 
suggest this interpretation; among them are pieces of the fourth, 
possibly the fifth century before our era, coined in Greece, Italy, 
Sicily, Cyrene, etc. 
The interrupted trade routes along the Oder and Elbe were 
bound to be restored again as soon as the migrating people came 
to a halt. At the time of Ptolemy not only these, but other roads of 
a Plinius, Naturalis historia, XXXVII, 45.— Ed. 
b W. Boyd Dawkins, Early Man in Britain and His Place in the Tertiary  Period, 
London, 1880, p.  472.—Ed. 

=====第62页=====
34 Frederick Engels 
traffic through Germany seem to have come into use again, and 
where Ptolemy's evidence fails, finds continue to bear witness. 
C. F. Wiberg* has clarified much here by careful compilation of 
the finds, and has provided the evidence that in the second 
century of our era the trade routes both through Silesia down the 
Oder and through Bohemia down the Elbe were used again. In 
Bohemia Tacitus already mentions 
"traders in booty and merchants" (lixae ac negotiatores) "out of our provinces 
whom avarice and oblivion of their homes have led into enemy territory and to 
Maroboduus' army camp".3 
So also the Hermunduri, who, long since friends of the Romans, 
had, according to Tacitus,b unhindered access to the Agri 
Decumates15  and Rhaetia as far as Augsburg, will surely have 
traded Roman goods and coins from the upper Main further to 
the Saale and Werra. Traces of a trade route into the interior have 
also been revealed further down the Roman Limes, on the Lahn. 
The route through Moravia and Silesia appears to have re­
mained the most important one. The only watershed that has to be 
crossed, that between the March, or Becva, and Oder, passes 
through open hill country and lies less than 325 metres above sea 
level; even now the railway passes along here. Beginning with 
Lower Silesia the north German lowlands open up, so that roads 
can branch out in all directions to the Vistula and the Elbe. 
Roman merchants must have resided in Silesia and Brandenburg 
in the second and third centuries. There we find not only urns of 
glass,  tear bottles and burial urns with Latin inscriptions (Massel 
near Trebnitz in Silesia and elsewhere), but even complete Roman 
sepulchral vaults with recesses for urns (columbaria), (Nacheln near 
Glogau). Undoubted Roman graves have also been found at Warin 
in Mecklenburg. Similarly, finds of coins, Roman metal ware, clay 
lamps, etc., are evidence of trade along this route. Generally 
speaking, the whole of eastern Germany, although never entered 
by Roman armies, is studded with Roman coins and manufactures, 
the latter frequently documented by the same trade marks as 
occur on finds in the provinces of the Roman Empire. Clay lamps 
found in Silesia bear the same trade mark as others found in 
Dalmatia, Vienna, etc. The mark: Ti. Robilius Sitalces, for instance, 
* Bidrag till kännedomen om Grekers och Romares förbindelse med Norden. German 
by Mestorf:  Der Einfluß der klassischen Völker etc., Hamburg, 1867. 
a Tacitus, Annales, II, 62.— Ed. 
b Op. cit.— Ed. 

=====第63页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 35 
is stamped on bronze vases of which one was found in 
Mecklenburg, another in Bohemia; this indicates a trade route 
along the Elbe. 
Moreover, in the first centuries after Augustus Roman merchant 
vessels sailed on the North Sea. This is proved by the find in 
Neuhaus on the Oste (Elbe mouth) of 344 Roman silver coins 
from Nero to Marcus Aurelius with remains of a ship which 
probably foundered there. Shipping also went along the southern 
coast of the Baltic, reaching the Danish islands, Sweden and 
Gotland, and we shall have to study this more closely. The 
distances given by Ptolemy and Marcianus (about the year 400) 
between the various points on the coast can only have been 
derived from the reports of merchants who sailed along that coast. 
They are given from the coast of Mecklenburg to Danzig and 
thence to Scandia. Finally, this trade is proved by innumerable 
other finds of Roman origin in Holstein, Schleswig, Mecklenburg, 
Western Pomerania, the Danish islands and southern Sweden, on 
sites lying closest to each other near the coast. 
How far this Roman traffic included the import of weapons into 
Germany is difficult to determine. The numerous Roman weapons 
found in Germany could equally well be booty, and the Roman 
border authorities naturally did everything to cut off supplies of 
arms to the Germans. Some could have come by sea, however, 
particularly to the more distant peoples such as those of the 
Cimbric peninsula. 
The rest of the Roman products which came to Germany by 
these various routes consisted of household goods, jewellery, toilet 
articles, etc. Household goods include bowls, measures, tumblers, 
vessels, cooking pots, sieves, spoons, scissors, ladles, etc., of bronze; 
a few vessels of gold or silver; clay lamps, which are very 
widespread; jewellery made of bronze, silver or gold: necklaces, 
diadems, bracelets and rings, clips rather like our brooches; 
among the toilet articles we find combs, pincers, ear spoons, 
etc.—not to mention articles the use of which is disputable. Most 
of these manufactures, according to Worsaae, were made under 
the influence of the tastes dominant in Rome in the first century.3 
The difference between the Germans of Caesar, and even of 
Tacitus, and the people who used these wares is great, even if we 
admit that they were used only by the nobler and wealthier 
families. The "simple dishes without much preparation" (sine 
a J. J. A. Worsaae, Die Vorgeschichte des Nordens nach gleichzeitigen Denkmälern, 
Hamburg, 1878, p. 109.— Ed. 
5-1243 

=====第64页=====
36 Frederick Engels 
apparatu) "or condiments" with which the Germans, according to 
Tacitus, "banished their hunger"3 had given way to a cuisine 
which already used a fairly sophisticated apparatus and in addition 
probably also obtained the corresponding condiments from the 
Romans. Contempt for gold- and silver-ware had given way to the 
desire to adorn oneself with them; indifference to Roman money 
to its spread all over German territory. And especially the toilet 
articles—what a transformation of customs is revealed by their 
mere presence among a people which, as far as we know, invented 
soap,  indeed, but used it only to bleach the hair! 
Concerning the goods which the Germans provided to the 
Roman traders in exchange for all this cash and these wares we 
are in the first instance dependent on the information of the 
ancient writers, who, as we have said, leave us almost completely in 
the dark. Pliny mentions vegetables, goose quills, woollen stuffs 
and soap as articles which the empire imported from Germany.b 
But this insipient trade at the border cannot be a standard for the 
later period. The chief article of trade of which we know was 
amber; it does not suffice, however, to explain a traffic which was 
spreading all over the country. Cattle, the chief wealth of the 
Germans, will also have been the most important export; the 
legions stationed at the border alone guaranteed a big demand for 
meat. Hides and furs, which in the time of Jornandes were sent 
from Scandinavia to the Vistula mouth, and thence into Roman 
territory, no doubt found their way there from the East German 
forests even in earlier periods. Wild beasts for the circus were 
brought in from the north by Roman seafarers, Wiberg thinks. 
But nothing could be got there save bears, wolves and possibly 
aurochs, and lions, leopards and even bears were easier to procure 
nearer home in Africa and Asia.—Slaves? asks Wiberg eventually, 
almost bashfully, and there he has probably got the right idea.c 
Indeed, apart from cattle, slaves were the only article Germany 
could export in sufficient quantities to balance its trade with 
Rome. The cities and latifundia of Italy alone used up an 
enormous slave population, which propagated itself only to a very 
small extent. The entire Roman large landed property economy 
had as its precondition that colossal importation of traded 
prisoners of war which flooded into Italy in the ceaseless wars of 
conquest of the decaying Republic, and even of Augustus. That 
a Tacitus, Germania, 23. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 659.—Ed. 
b Plinius, Naturalis historia, XVIII,  17.—Ed. 
c C. F. Wiberg, Der Einfluß der klassischen Völker..., p. 44.— Ed. 

=====第65页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 37 
had now come to an end. The empire was on the defensive within 
fixed borders. Defeated enemies, from whom the bulk of the 
slaves were recruited, were being supplied in decreasing numbers 
by the Roman army. One had to buy them from the barbarians. 
And should not the Germans also have appeared on the market 
as sellers? The Germans who were already selling slaves according 
to Tacitus (Germania, 24), a who were constantly at war with each 
other, who, like the Frisians, when money was scarce paid their tax 
to the Romans by giving their wives and children into slavery and 
who already in the third century, if not before, sailed on the Baltic 
Sea and whose maritime expeditions in the North Sea, from the 
Saxon voyages of the third century to the Norman voyages of the 
tenth, had as their main object, alongside other forms of piracy, 
the hunt for slaves—almost exclusively for the trade?—the same 
Germans who, a few centuries later, both during the migration of 
the peoples and in their wars against the Slavs acted as the prime 
slave hunters and slave traders of their time? Either we must 
assume that the Germans of the second and third centuries were 
quite different people from all the other neighbours of the 
Romans, and quite different from their own descendants of the 
third, fourth and fifth centuries and later, or we must admit that 
they also largely participated in the slave trade to Italy, which at 
the time was held to be quite decent and even honourable. And 
then the mysterious veil falls, which otherwise conceals the 
German export trade of that time. 
Here we must return to the Baltic traffic of those times. While 
the coast of the Kattegat has almost no Roman finds to show, the 
southern coast of the Baltic as far as Livland, Schleswig-Holstein, 
the southern fringes and the interior of the Danish islands, the 
southern and south-eastern coasts of Sweden, Oeland and Gotland 
are very rich in them. By far the greater part of these finds 
belongs to the so-called denarius period, of which we shall have 
more to say later, and which lasted until the first years of the 
reign of Septimius Severus, i.e. to about 200. Tacitus already calls 
the Suiones strong by virtue of their rowing fleets and says that 
they honour wealth 0; hence they surely already practised maritime 
trade. Shipping, which first developed in the Belts and in the 
Oeresund and Oelandsund and in coastal navigation, had to dare 
on to the high seas to draw Bornholm and Gotland into its circle; 
it had to have acquired considerable assurance in the handling of 
a See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 660.— Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania, 44. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 671.—Ed. 
5* 

=====第66页=====
38 Frederick Engels 
vessels to develop the lively traffic the centre of which was the 
island of Gotland, farthest away from the continent. Here, 
indeed, more than 3,200 Roman silver denarii have been found 
up to  1873,*  against about 100 on Oeland, barely 50 on the 
Swedish mainland, 200 on Bornholm and 600 in Denmark and 
Schleswig (of these 428 in a single find, Slagelse on Zealand). 16 An 
analysis of these finds shows that down to the year 161, when 
Marcus Aurelius became emperor, only a few, but from then on to 
the end of the century, masses of Roman denarii came to Gotland. 
In the last half of the second century shipping in the Baltic must 
already have achieved a considerable development; that it existed 
already earlier is shown by Ptolemy's statement3 that the distance 
from the Vistula mouth to Scandia was 1,200 to 1,600 stadia (30 to 
40 geographical milesb ). Both distances are about right for the 
eastern point of Blekinge as for the southern tip of Oeland or 
Gotland, depending on whether one measures from Rixhöft or 
Neufahrwasser and Pillau respectively. They can only rest on 
seamen's reports, just like the other distance measurements along 
the German coast to the mouths of the Vistula. 
That this sea traffic on the Baltic was not practised by the 
Romans is indicated, firstly, by their altogether nebulous concepts 
about Scandinavia and, secondly, by the absence of any finds of 
Roman coins on the Kattegat and in Norway. The Cimbric Cape 
(Skagen), which the Romans reached under Augustus, and from 
which they saw the endless sea spreading out, seems to have 
remained the limit of their direct sèa traffic. Hence the Germans 
themselves sailed on the Baltic and maintained the intercourse 
which brought Roman money and Roman manufactures to 
Scandinavia. Nor could it have been otherwise. Beginning with the 
second half of the third century the Saxon maritime expeditions 
appear quite suddenly on the coasts of Gaul and Britain, and that 
with a daring and assurance which they could not have acquired 
overnight, which rather presupposes long familiarity with naviga­
tion on the open sea. And the Saxons, by whom we must here 
also understand all the peoples of the Cimbric peninsula, hence 
also Frisians, Angles and Jutes, could only have acquired this 
familiarity on the Baltic. This big inland sea, without tides, where 
* Hans Hildebrand, Das heidnische Zeitalter in Schweden. Translated into German 
by J.  Mestorf.  Hamburg, 1873. 
a Ptolemaeus, Geographia, II, 11, 2.— Ed. 
b A German geographical mile equals 4.66 English geographical miles.— Ed. 

=====第67页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 39 
the Atlantic sou'westers only arrive having exhausted their fury in 
great part on the North Sea, this extensive, long basin with its 
many islands, its shallow, closed-in bays and straits, where on 
crossing from shore to shore one cannot see land only for short 
distances, was as if made to serve a newly developing navigation as 
training waters. Here the Swedish rock drawings, attributed to the 
bronze age, with their many representations of rowing boats, 
indicate a maritime traffic of great antiquity. Here the Nydam 
bog-find in Schleswig presents us with a boat made of oak timbers, 
70 feet long and eight to nine feet wide, dated to the beginning of 
the third century, and quite suitable for voyaging on the high 
seas. 3 Here that boat-building technique and sea-faring experience 
quietly grew which made possible the later conquering expeditions 
of Saxons and Normans on the high seas and laid the foundations 
which enabled the Germanic people to stand at the head of all 
sea-faring peoples of the world to this day. 
Roman coins which reached Germany before the end of the 
second century were predominantly silver denarii (1 denarius = 
1.06 mark). And moreover, as Tacitus informs us, the Germans 
preferred the old, well-known coins with serrated rim, the design 
including a team of two horses.b  Indeed, among the older coins 
many of these serrati bigatique have been found. These old coins 
only had some 5 to 10 per cent copper added to the silver; Trajan 
already ordered that 20 per cent copper be added to the silver 
and the Germans do not seem to have noticed this. But when 
Septimius Severus from 198 onwards raised the addition to 50-60 
per cent, the Germans thought it too bad; these devalued later 
denarii occur in the finds only quite exceptionally, the importation 
of Roman money ceased. It only began again after Constantine, in 
the year 312, established the gold solidus as the monetary unit (72 
solidi to the Roman pound of 327 g of fine gold, hence 1 so­
lidus = 4.55 g fine = 12.70 marks) and then it was predominantly 
gold coins, solidi, which came to Germany, but even more so to 
Oeland and particularly Gotland. This second period of Roman 
money importation, the solidus period, lasted to the end of the 
Western Empire for West Roman coins, and for Byzantine coins 
up to Anastasius (died 518). Most of the finds have been made in 
Sweden, on the Danish islands, and a few on the German Baltic 
coast; in the German interior they are sporadic. 
The counterfeiting of coins by Septimius Severus and his 
a See C. F. Wiberg, op. cit., p. 119.— Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania, 5. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 648-49.—Ed. 

=====第68页=====
40 Frederick Engels 
successors does not, however, suffice to explain the sudden 
cessation of trade relations between Germans and Romans. Other 
causes must have come into play. One is evidently to be sought in 
the political situation. In the beginning of the third century the 
aggressive war of the Germans against Rome started, and by 250 it 
had flared up all along the line from the Danube mouths to the 
Rhine delta. Of course, no regular trade could be conducted by 
the warring parties in these circumstances. But these sudden, 
general, persistent aggressive wars themselves require an explana­
tion. Internal Roman conditions do not explain them; on the 
contrary, as yet the empire resisted everywhere successfully and 
between individual periods of wild anarchy strong emperors were 
still produced, particularly around this time. The attacks must 
therefore have been conditioned by changes among the Germans 
themselves. And here again the finds provide the explanation. 
At the beginning of the sixties of our century finds of 
outstanding importance were made in two Schleswig peatbogs, 
which, carefully studied by Engelhardt in Copenhagen, have now, 
after various wanderings, been deposited in the Museum in Kiel. 
They are distinguished from other, similar finds by the coins 
belonging to them, which establish their age with fair certainty. 
One of these finds, from the Taschberg (Danish Thorsbjerg) moor 
near Süderbrarup, contains 37 coins from Nero to Septimius 
Severus; the other, from the Nydam moor, a peat-covered, 
silted-up sea bay, 34 coins from Tiberius to Macrinus (218). a 
Hence the finds are without doubt from the period between 220 
and 250. They contain not only objects of Roman origin but also 
numerous others, made in the country itself and which, being 
almost perfectly preserved thanks to the ferrous peat water, reveal 
with amazing clarity the state of the north German metal industry, 
weaving and shipbuilding, and through the runic letters even the 
writing in use in the first half of the third century. 
Here we are even more struck by the level of the industry  itself. 
The fine fabrics, the delicate sandals, and the neatly worked 
leather straps bear witness to a much higher stage of culture than 
that of the Germans of Tacitus; but what arouses particular 
amazement is the local metal work. 
Linguistic comparisons show that the Germans brought the 
knowledge of metals and their uses with them from their Asiatic 
homeland. The art of smelting and working metal was perhaps 
a C. Engelhardt, Thorsbjerg Mosefund, Copenhagen, 1863. Quoted in 
C. F. Wiberg, Der Einfluß der klassischen Völker..., pp. 104, 118-19.— Ed. 

=====第69页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 41 
also known to them, but they had barely retained it at the time 
when they came into collision with the Romans. At least the 
writers of the first century give no indication that iron or bronze 
were produced and worked between Rhine and Elbe; they rather 
suggest the opposite. Tacitus, it is true, says of the Gothines (in 
Upper Silesia?) that they were digging for iron,3 and Ptolemy 
attributes ironworks to the neighbouring Quadib; both may again 
have acquired a knowledge of smelting from the Danube area. 
Nor do the finds of the first century documented by coins contain 
any local metal products anywhere, but only Roman ones; and 
how could the masses of Roman metal ware have got to Germany 
if a home metalworking industry had existed there? Ancient 
casting moulds, incomplete castings and waste of bronze are 
indeed found there, but never with coins to document their age; 
in all probability these are traces of pre-Germanic times, the 
residue of the work of itinerant Etruscan bronze casters. In any 
case,  the question whether the German immigrants had lost the art 
of metalworking completely is pointless; all the evidence goes to 
show that no, or hardly any, metalworking was practised in the 
first century. 
Here now the Taschberg moor finds suddenly turn up. and 
reveal to us an unexpectedly high level of the indigenous metal 
industry. Buckles, metal plates for mountings, decorated with 
animal and human heads; a silver helmet which completely frames 
the face, leaving only eyes, nose and mouth free; chain armour of 
wire netting, which presupposes very laborious operations, since 
the wire had first to be hammered (wire drawing was not invented 
until 1306), and a head ring of gold, not to mention other objects 
the indigenous origin of which might be disputed. These finds 
agree with others—those from the Nydam moor and bog finds 
from Fyn, and lastly a find from Bohemia (Hofovice), likewise 
discovered at the beginning of the sixties, which contains 
magnificent bronze disks with human heads, buckle clips, etc., 
quite in the manner of the Taschberg finds, hence probably also 
of the same period. 
Beginning with the third century the metal industry will have 
spread over the whole German area, being increasingly perfected; 
by the time of the migration of the peoples, say by the end of the 
fifth century, it reached a relatively very high level. Not only iron 
a Tacitus, Germania, 43. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 670.— Ed. 
b Ptolemaeus, Geographia, II,  11.—Ed. 

=====第70页=====
42 Frederick Engels 
and bronze, gold and silver also were worked regularly, Roman 
coins imitated in gold bracteates,3 the base metals gilded; inlaid 
work, enamel and filigree work occur; highly artistic ornaments in 
good taste, only in part imitating Roman work, are found on 
otherwise often crudely made pieces, especially on clips and 
buckles or fibulae, which have certain characteristic forms in 
common. Buckles from Kerch on the Sea of Azov are lying in the 
British Museum next to quite similar ones found in England; they 
could be from the same manufactory. The style of these pieces is 
basically the same, from Sweden to the Lower Danube and from 
the Black Sea to France and England, though often with quite 
clearly distinguishable local peculiarities. This first period of the 
German metal industry came to an end on the continent with the 
end of the migration of the peoples and the general acceptance 
of Christianity; in England and Scandinavia it lasted a little 
longer. 
That this industry was widespread among the Germans in the 
6th and 7th centuries and that it had already become a separate 
branch of industry is proved by local laws [Volksrechte]. 17 Smiths, 
swordmakers, gold- and silversmiths are frequently mentioned, in 
the Alamannic law 18 even smiths who have passed a public 
examination (publice probati). Bavarian law punishes theft from a 
church, a ducal court, a smithy or a mill with harsher penalties 
"because these four are public buildings and are always open". 19 
In Frisian law20 the goldsmith has a higher wergeld by one fourth 
than other people of his estate; Salic law21 estimates the 
simple bondsman at 12 solidi, but one who is a smith (faber) 
at 35. 
We have already mentioned shipbuilding. The Nydam boats are 
rowing boats, the bigger one, made of oak, for fourteen pairs of 
rowers; the smaller one is of pine. Oars, rudder and scoops were 
still lying inside. It was not until the Germans began to navigate 
the North Sea, too, that they seem to have adopted sails from the 
Romans and Celts. 
They knew pottery already at the time of Tacitus, but probably 
only hand pottery. The Romans had large potteries on the 
borders, particularly inside the Limes in Swabia and Bavaria, 
which also employed Germans, as is proved by the workers' names 
burnt into the pots. With these workers the knowledge of glazing 
a A very thin coin usually of silver having a design stamped on one side 
only.— Ed. 

=====第71页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 43 
and the potter's wheel and also higher technical skill will have 
come to Germany. Glassmaking, too, was known to the Germans 
who broke in across the Danube; glass vessels, coloured glass beads 
and glass insets in metal ware, all of German origin, have often 
been found in Bavaria and Swabia. 
Finally, we now find runic writing widely spread and generally 
used. The Taschberg find has a sword sheath and a shieldboss 
which are ornamented with runes. The same runes are found on a 
gold ring found in Walachia, on buckles from Bavaria and 
Burgundy, and lastly, on the oldest runic stones in Scandinavia. It 
is the more complete runic alphabet, the one from which the 
Anglo-Saxon runes were later derived; it contains seven more 
characters than the Norse runic writing which predominated later 
in Scandinavia and indicates also an older linguistic form than the 
one in which the oldest Norse has been preserved. It was, 
incidentally, an extremely clumsy system of writing, consisting of 
Roman and Greek letters so changed that they were easily 
scratched [eingeritzt = writan] on stone, metal and especially on 
wooden staves. The rounded forms had to give way to angular 
shapes; only vertical or inclined strokes were possible, not 
horizontal ones on account of the wood grain; this way, however, 
it became a very clumsy writing for parchment or paper. And 
indeed, as far as we can see, it has only served for religious and 
magic purposes and for inscriptions, perhaps also for other brief 
communications; as soon as the need for real literary writing was 
felt, as among the Goths and later the Anglo-Saxons, it was 
discarded and a new adaptation of the Greek or Roman alphabet 
made which preserved only individual runic characters. 
Finally, the Germans will also have made considerable progress 
in tillage and cattle raising in the period here discussed. The 
restriction to permanent settlement forced them to it; the 
enormous population growth, which overflowed in the migration 
of the peoples, would have been impossible without it. Many a 
stretch of virgin forest must have been cleared, and most of the 
"Hochäcker" —stretches of wood which show traces of ancient 
cultivation—among them, in as far as they are situated on 
territory that was then German. Special proofs are here, of course, 
lacking. But if Probus already, towards the end of the third 
century, preferred German horses for his cavalry, and if the large 
white cattle, which replaced the small, black Celtic cattle in the 
Saxon areas of Britain, got here through the Anglo-Saxons, as is 
now assumed, this indicates a complete revolution also in the cattle 
raising, and consequently in the agriculture, of the Germans. 

=====第72页=====
44 Frederick Engels 
* * * 
The result of our study is that the Germans made considerable 
progress in civilisation in the period from Caesar to Tacitus, but 
that they progressed even more rapidly from Tacitus to the 
migration of the peoples—about 400. Trade came to them, 
brought to them Roman industrial products and with these at least 
some Roman needs; it awakened an industry of their own, which 
leaned on Roman patterns, to be sure, but at the same time 
developed quite independently. The bog finds in Schleswig 
represent the first phase of this industry which can be dated; the 
finds of the time of the migration of the peoples represent the 
second phase, showing a higher development. Here it is remarka­
ble that the more westerly peoples were decidedly more backward 
than those of the interior, and especially of the Baltic coasts. The 
Franks and Alamanni, and later still the Saxons, produced metal 
work of a quality inferior to that of the Anglo-Saxons, Scandina­
vians,  and the peoples who had moved out from the interior—the 
Goths on the Black Sea and the Lower Danube, the Burgundians 
in France. The influence of the old trade routes from the Middle 
Danube along the Elbe and Oder is here not to be gainsaid. At the 
same time the inhabitants of the coast turned themselves into 
skilled shipbuilders and bold seafarers; everywhere population was 
rapidly growing; the territory restricted by the Romans no longer 
sufficed. New movements of landseeking peoples arose, at first far 
in the east, until finally the billowing masses irresistibly overflowed 
at every point, over land and sea, to new territories. 
NOTE: THE GERMAN PEOPLES 
Roman armies only reached the interior of Germany proper by 
a few routes of march and during a short period of time, and then 
only as far as the Elbe; nor did merchants and other travellers get 
there often, or far into it up to Tacitus' time. Hence it is not 
surprising that intelligence on this country and its inhabitants is so 
meagre and contradictory; it is rather surprising that we learn as 
much for certain as we do. 
Even the two Greek geographers among our sources can only be 
used without reservations where they find independent confirma­
tion. Both had only book learning. They were collectors and in 
their own way and according to their resources also critical sifters 
of material now largely lost to us. They lacked personal knowledge 

=====第73页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 45 
of the country. Strabo makes the Lippe, so well known to the 
Romans, flow into the North Sea parallel with the Ems and Weser, 
instead of into the Rhine, and is honest enough to admit that the 
country beyond the Elbe is completely unknown. 3 While he 
disposes of the contradictions in his sources and his own doubts by 
means of a naive rationalism which often recalls the beginning of 
our century, the scientific geographer Ptolemy attempts to allot to 
the individual German peoples mentioned in his sources 
mathematically determined locations in the inexorable grid of his 
map.  Ptolemy's geography of Germany is as misleading as his work 
as a whole is grandiose for his time.b In the first place the material 
available to him is for the greater part vague and contradictory, 
often directly wrong. Secondly, however, his map is wrongly 
drawn, many rivers and mountain ranges are quite wrongly 
entered. It is as if an untravelled Berlin geographer, say about 
1820,  felt obliged to fill the empty spaces on the map of Africa by 
bringing into harmony the information of all sources since Leo 
Africanus and allotting to every river and every mountain range a 
definite location, to every people a precise seat. Such attempts to 
do the impossible can only worsen the errors of the sources used. 
Thus,  Ptolemy entered many peoples twice, Laccobardi on the 
lower Elbe, Langobardi from the middle Rhine to the middle 
Elbe;  he has two Bohemias, one inhabited by Marcomanni, the 
other by Bainochaimi, etc.c While Tacitus says specifically that 
there are no cities in Germany,0 Ptolemy, barely 50 years later, 
already is able to name 96 places.6 Many of those names may well 
be true place names; Ptolemy seems to have gathered much 
intelligence from merchants, who at this time already visited the 
east of Germany in greater numbers and began to learn the names 
of the places they visited, which were gradually becoming fixed. 
The origin of certain others is shown by the example of the 
alleged town of Siatutanda, which our geographer thinks he reads 
in Tacitus, probably from a bad manuscript, who wrote: ad sua 
tutanda} Side by side we find information of surprising accuracy 
and of the greatest historical value. Thus Ptolemy is the only 
ahcient writer who places the Langobardi, under the distorted 
name Laccobardi, it is true, exactly where to this day we find 
a Strabo, Geographica, VII, 1. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 374.— Ed. 
b Ptolemy describes Germany in his Geographia, II and III.— Ed. 
c Ptolemaeus, Geographia, II, 11,  12.—Ed. 
d Tacitus, Germania, 16. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 655.—Ed. 
e Ptolemaeus, op. cit., II, 12-15.—Ed. 
f "For his protection." See ibid., II, 11, 12. Tacitus, Annales, IV, 73.—Ed. 

=====第74页=====
46 Frederick Engels 
Bardengau and Bardenwik bear witness to them; similarly, 
Ingrioni in Engersgau where today we still find Engers on the 
Rhine at Neuwied. 3 He, also alone, gives the names of the 
Lithuanian Galindi and Suditi which to this day continue in the 
East Prussian districts Galinden and Sudauen. But such cases only 
show his great scholarship, not the correctness of his other 
statements. Moreover, the text is terribly distorted, especially 
where the main thing, the names, are concerned. 
The Romans remain the most direct sources, particularly those 
who visited the country themselves. Velleius was in Germany as a 
soldier and writes as a soldier, approximately in the manner of an 
officer of the grande armée 22 writing of the expeditions of 1812 
and 1813. His account does not enable us to establish the localities 
even for military events; not surprising in a country without 
towns. Pliny also served in Germany as a cavalry officer and visited 
the Chaucian coast among other places. He described all the wars 
conducted against the Germans in twenty books 23; this was 
Tacitus' source. Moreover Pliny was the first Roman to take a 
more than military and political interest in the affairs of the 
barbarian land; his interest was theoretical.13 His information on 
the German peoples must therefore be of special importance as 
resting on the Roman scientific encyclopaedist's own enquiries. It 
is traditionally maintained that Tacitus had been in Germany, but 
I cannot find the evidence. At all events, at that time he could 
have gathered direct information only from near the Rhine and 
Danube. 
Two classical works have tried in vain to square the charts of 
peoples in the Germania [of Tacitus] and of Ptolemy with one 
another and with the chaos of other ancient information: Kaspar 
Zeuss'  Deutsche and Jacob Grimm's Geschichte der deutschen Sprache. 
Where these two brilliant scholars did not succeed, nor anybody 
since, we will have to regard the task as insoluble with our present 
resources. The inadequacy of the resources is clear from the fact 
alone that both had to resort to the construction of false auxiliary 
theories; Zeuss thought that Ptolemy should have the last word in 
all disputed questions, although nobody has criticised Ptolemy's 
fundamental errors more sharply than he did; Grimm believed 
that the might which overthrew the Roman world empire must 
have grown on more extensive ground than the area between 
a Ptolemaeus, op. cit., II, 11, 9.— Ed. 
b Here the sentence "Moreover, he was a naturalist" is crossed out in the 
manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第75页=====
On the  Early History  of the  Germans  47 
Rhine, Danube  and  Vistula,  and  that therefore, with  the  Goths 
and Dacians,  the  greater part  of the  country  in the  north  and 
north-east  of the  lower Danube should  be taken  as German,  too. 
The assumptions  of both Zeuss  and  Grimm  are  today obsolete. 
Let us try to  bring  at least some clarity into  the  matter  by 
limiting  the  subject.  If we  succeed  in establishing  a more general 
grouping  of the  peoples into  a few  principal branches, later 
investigations into detail will have gained firm ground.  And  here 
we are  offered  a point  of departure  by Pliny3  in a  passage which 
has proved more  and  more reliable  in the  course  of the  enquiry 
and certainly leads  to fewer difficulties  and  involves  us in  fewer 
contradictions than  any  other. 
When  we  begin with Pliny  we must indeed drop  the  uncondi­
tional validity  of Tacitus' triad  and the old  legend  of Mannus  and 
his three sons  Ing, Isk and  Ermin.b  But  firstly, Tacitus himself  is 
unable  to do  anything with  his  Ingaevones, Iscaevones,  and 
Herminones.  He  makes  not the  least attempt  to group  the  peoples 
he lists individually under these three principal branches,  and 
secondly,  no one  else  has  succeeded  in doing this. Zeuss makes  a 
terrific effort  to force  the  Gothic peoples, whom  he conceives  as 
'Tstaevones", into  the  triad,  and  thereby only aggravates  the 
confusion.  As for the  Scandinavians,  he does  not  even attempt  to 
bring them into  it and  construes them  as a  fourth principal 
branch.  But  with that  the  triad  is destroyed quite  as much  as with 
the five principal branches  of Pliny. 
Now  let us  look  at these five branches individually. 
I. Vindili, quorum pars Burgundiones, Varini, Carini, Guttones.c 
Here  we have three peoples,  the  Vandals, Burgundians  and the 
Goths themselves,  of whom  it is  established, firstly, that they spoke 
Gothic dialects,  and  secondly that  at that time they lived deep  in 
the east  of Germany: Goths  at and  beyond  the  Vistula mouth; 
Burgundians, placed  by Ptolemy  in the  area  of the  Warta  and as 
far as the  Vistula/  and  Vandals, placed  in Silesia  by Dio  Cassius, 
who calls  the  Riesengebirge after them. 6 We  should surely also 
reckon  to this Gothic main branch,  to name  it by the  language,  all 
those peoples whose dialects Grimm derives from  the  Gothic, that 
is, in the  first place  the  areas  to which Procopius directly ascribes 
a Plinius, Naturalis historia,  IV, 14. See Die  Geschichtschreiber...,  p. 681.—  Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania,  2. See Die  Geschichtschreiber...,  pp. 646-47.—  Ed. 
c The  Vindili,  to  whom  the  Burgundians, Varini, Carini  and  Guttons 
belong.—  Ed. 
d Ptolemaeus, Geographia,  II, 11, 8.—Ed. 
e Dio  Cassius, Historia Romana,  XV, 1, 3.—Ed. 

=====第76页=====
48 Frederick Engels 
the Gothic language, including the Vandals.3  We know nothing of 
their earlier domicile, nor of that of the Heruli, whom Grimm 
places among the Goths, side by side with Skiri and Rugii. b Pliny 
names the Skiri on the Vistula,0 Tacitus the Rugii immediately 
next to the Goths on the coast.d  Hence the Gothic dialect occupied 
a fairly compact region between the Vandal mountains 
(Riesengebirge), the Oder and the Baltic up to and beyond the 
Vistula. 
We do not know who the Carini were. Some difficulty is caused 
by the Varini. Tacitus lists them next to the Angles among the 
seven peoples who sacrifice to Nerthus,6 of whom Zeuss already 
remarked, rightly, that they look uncommonly like Ingaevonesf 
But the Angles are counted by Ptolemy among the Suebi,g  which is 
obviously wrong. Zeuss sees in one or two names distorted by the 
same geographer the Varini and accordingly he places them in the 
Havelland and counts them as Suebi. h The heading of the ancient 
common law identifies Varini and Thuringians1 without qualifica­
tion; but the law itself is common to Varini and Angles. After all 
this we must leave it in doubt whether the Varini are to be 
reckoned to the Gothic or the Ingaevonian branch; since they have 
completely disappeared the question is not of great importance. 
II. Altera pars Ingaevones, quorum pars Cimbri, Teutoni ac 
Chaucorum gentes) 
Pliny here allocates the Cimbric Peninsula and the coastal 
districts between Elbe and Ems to the Ingaevones as their domicile. 
Of the three peoples here named, the Chauci were surely very 
close relatives of the Frisians. To this day the Frisian language 
predominates along the North Sea, in Dutch West Friesland, in 
Oldenburg Saterland and in Schleswig North Friesland. During 
the Carolingian period 24 Frisian was spoken almost exclusively 
along the whole coast, from the Sinkfal (the bay which today still 
a Procopius, De hello Vandalico, 1, 2. See J. Grimm, Geschichte..., Vol. 1, 
pp. 476-77.—Ed. 
b J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 1, p.  471.—Ed. 
c Plinius, Naturalis historia, IV, 13, 27. See J. Grimm, op. cit., p. 465.—Ed. 
d Tacitus, Germania, 44. See Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 669.—Ed. 
« Ibid., p. 668.—Ed. 
1 K. Zeuss, Die Deutschen und die Nachbarstämme, p. 79.—Ed. 
s Ptolemaeus, Geographia, II, 11,  8.—Ed. 
h K. Zeuss, op. cit., pp. 132-33.—Ed. 
1 Lex Angliorum et Werinorum, hoc est Thuringorum. Quoted in K. Zeuss, op. cit., 
p. 363.—Ed. 
J Another group — the Ingaevones, which include the Cimbri, Teutons and 
Chauci.—Ed. 

=====第77页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 49 
forms the boundary between Belgian Flanders and Dutch Zeeland) 
to Sylt and Schleswig Widau, and probably still a good deal 
further north; the Saxon language only on both sides of the Elbe 
mouth, to the sea. 
Pliny evidently understands by the Cimbri and Teutons the then 
inhabitants of the Cimbric Chersonesus,3 who therefore belonged 
to the Chauci-Frisian language branch. With Zeuss and Grimm we 
must therefore see in the North Frisians direct descendants of 
these oldest peninsular Germans. 
It is true that Dahlmann (Geschichte von Dänemark)* maintains 
that the north Frisians immigrated into the peninsula only in the 
fifth century, from the south-west. But he does not cite the 
smallest evidence for this statement which has rightly been left 
quite out of consideration in all later studies. 
Ingaevonian would accordingly here be in the first place 
synonymous with Frisian, in the sense that we name the entire 
linguistic branch after the dialect of which alone older memorials 
and surviving dialects remain. But is the extent of the Ingaevonian 
branch thereby exhausted? Or is Grimm right when he comprises 
in it the totality of what he, not quite accurately, terms Low 
German, that is alongside the Frisians also the Saxons?0 
To begin with, we may admit that Pliny allots to the Saxons 
quite the wrong place when he reckons the Cherusci among the 
Herminones. We shall find later that indeed no option is left but 
to reckon the Saxons also among the Ingaevones and thus to 
understand this main branch as the Frisian-Saxon one. 
Here it is in place to mention the Angles, whom Tacitus 
possibly, Ptolemy definitely reckons among the Suebi. The latter 
places them on the right bank of the Elbe,d opposite the 
Langobardi, by whom he can only mean the true Langobardi on 
the lower Elbe if the statement is at all to be taken to imply 
anything reliable; hence the Angles must have come from 
Lauenburg approximately as far as the Prignitz. Later we find 
them in the peninsula  itself,  where their name has been preserved 
and whence they went to Britain together with the Saxons. Their 
language now appears as an element of Anglo-Saxon, in particular 
the decidedly Frisian element of this newly formed dialect. 
a Plinius, Naturalis historia, IV, 99.— Ed. 
b F. C. Dahlmann, Geschichte von Dännemark, Vol. I, Hamburg, 1840, 
p. 16.—  Ed. 
c J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 2, p.  608.—Ed. 
d Tacitus, Germania, 40. Quoted in Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 668; Ptolemaeus, 
Geographia, II, 11,  8.—Ed. 

=====第78页=====
50 Frederick Engels 
Whatever may have become of those Angles who either remained 
behind in the interior of Germany or strayed there, this fact alone 
compels us to reckon the Angles among the Ingaevones, in 
particular to their Frisian branch. To them is due the far more 
Frisian than Saxon vocalisation of Anglo-Saxon and the fact that 
the further development of this language in many cases proceeds 
strikingly in parallel with that of the Frisian dialects. Of all the 
continental dialects the Frisian are today closest to the English. 
Similarly, the change of guttural sounds into sibilants in English is 
not of French but of Frisian origin. English  ch = c  instead of k, 
English dz for g before soft vowels could certainly originate from 
Frisian tz, tj for k, dz for g, but never from French ch and g. 
With the Angles we must also count the Jutes to the 
Frisian-Ingaevonian branch, whether they were already occupying 
the peninsula in the time of Pliny or Tacitus or did not immigrate 
there until later. Grimm finds their name in that of the Eudoses, 
one of Tacitus' peoples who worshipped Nerthus3; if the Angles 
are Ingaevonian, it becomes difficult to allot the remaining 
peoples of this group to another branch. In that case the 
Ingaevones would extend to the area of the Oder mouth, and the 
gap between them and the Gothic peoples is filled. 
III. Proximi autem Rheno Iscaevones (alias Istaevones), quorum pars 
Sicambri.b 
Already Grimm, and others after him, Waitz for example,0 more 
or less identify the Iscaevones and Franks. But their language 
confuses Grimm. From the middle of the 9th century all German 
documents of the realm of the Franks were composed in a dialect 
which cannot be distinguished from Old High German; hence 
Grimm assumes that Old Franconian perished in the alien country 
and at home was replaced by High German, and so he eventually 
reckoned the Franks to the High Germans. 
Grimm himself asserts as a result of his investigation of 
preserved linguistic remains that Old Franconian has the value of 
an independent dialect holding an intermediary position between 
Saxon and High German.d This suffices here for the time being; a 
closer investigation of the Frankish linguistic situation, where 
much is still unclear, must be reserved for a special note.6 
a J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 2, p.  738.—Ed. 
b Closer to the Rhine, however, the Iscaevones (or Istaevones), including the 
Sugambri.—Ed. 
c G. Waitz, Deutsche Verfassungsgeschichte, Vol. 1, Kiel, 1844, p. XVII.—Ed. 
d J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 1, p.  547.—Ed. 
e See this volume, pp. 81-107.— Ed. 

=====第79页=====
MAP 
OF GERMAN SETTLEMENT 
ACCORDING TO ENGELS' 
"ON THE EARLY HISTORY 
OF THE GERMANS" 
GERMAN PEOPLES 
GOTHS (Gothic peoples) 
(Pliny's "Vindiir): 
Goths Skiri 
Burgundians Rugii 
Vandals Bastarnae 
INGAEVONES (Frisian-Saxon peoples): 
Frisians 
Peninsular Frisians (Cimbri and Teutons 
Chauci 
Saxons 
Angles 
Jutes (Eudoses) 
Cherusci 
Varini (?) 
ISCAEVONES (Frankish peoples): 
Ubii Usipetes 
Chamavi Tribocci Ï Lesser 
Bructeri VangionesV (Iscaevonian?) 
Sugambri Nemetes I peoples 
Tencteri 
HERMINONES: 
Suebi (Langobardi, 
Swabians-Alamanni, 
Bavarians-Marcomanni), 
Hermunduri (Thuringians) 
Chatti (Hessians) 
Chatti peoples: Batavi and Chattuari 
SCANDINAVIANS (Hilleviones) 100 0 100 200 km 
h I I I I I I 

=====第80页=====

=====第81页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 53 
True enough, the area allotted to the Iscaevonian branch is 
comparatively small for an entire main German branch, and 
moreover one which has played such a mighty role in history. 
From the Rheingau onwards it accompanies the Rhine, extending 
inland to the sources of the Dill, Sieg, Ruhr, Lippe and Ems, 
northwards cut off from the sea by the Frisians and Chauci, and at 
the mouth of the Rhine penetrated by splinters of other peoples, 
mostly of Chattish origin: Batavi, Chattuari, etc. The Germans 
settled on the left bank of the lower Rhine will then also belong to 
the Franks; but also the Tribocci, Vangiones and Nemetes? The 
small extent of this area is explained, however, by the resistance 
offered to the expansion of the Iscaevones on the Rhine by the 
Celts and since Caesar the Romans; while in their rear the 
Cherusci had already settled, and on their flank Suebi, particularly 
the Chatti, hemmed them in more and more, as Caesar attests. 3 
Here a dense population, for German conditions, was compressed 
into a small space, as is proved by the constant pressing across the 
Rhine: at first by conquering hordes, later by voluntary transfer to 
Roman territory, as with the Ubii. For the same reason the 
Romans easily succeeded here, and only here, in transferring 
considerable sections of Iscaevonian peoples to Roman territory 
already at an early period. 
The investigation to be made in the note on the Franconian 
dialect will prove that the Franks form a separate group of 
Germans, composed of various branches, speaking a particular 
dialect divided into many subdialects, in short possessing all the 
marks of a main German branch, as is required if they are to be 
declared identical with the Iscaevones. On the individual peoples 
of this main branch J. Grimm has already said what is necessary.b 
In addition to the Sugambri he reckons among them Ubii, 
Chamavi, Bructeri, Tencteri and Usipetes, that is the peoples who 
inhabited the area on the right bank of the Rhine which we have 
earlier designated as Iscaevonic. 
IV.- Mediterranei Hermiones, quorum Suevi, Hermunduri, Chatti, 
Cherusci.c 
J. Grimm already identified the Herminones, to use the more 
correct spelling of Tacitus, with the High Germans/ The name 
a Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico, IV, 4. Cf. Die Geschichtschreiber..., 
p. 165.—  Ed. 
b J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 2, p.  831.—  Ed. 
c In the middle of the country, the Hermiones, comprising the Suebi, 
Hermunduri, Chatti and Cherusci.— Ed. 
d J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 1, p. 547.— Ed. 
6* 

=====第82页=====
54 Frederick Engels 
Suebi, which according to Caesar covered all High Germans as far 
as he knew them,3  is beginning to become differentiated. 
Thuringians (Hermunduri) and Hessians (Chatti) appear as 
separate peoples. The rest of the Suebi still remain undifferen­
tiated. Leaving aside as inscrutable the many mysterious names 
which get lost already in the next centuries, we must, however, 
distinguish among these Suebi three great branches of High 
German tongue which later played their part in history: the 
Alamanni-Swabians, the Bavarians and the Langobardi. We know 
for certain that the Langobardi lived on the left bank of the lower 
Elbe,  about the Bardengau, separated from their other branch 
comrades, advanced into the midst of Ingaevonian peoples. 
Tacitus describes this isolated position, which had to be main­
tained by prolonged fighting, excellently, without knowing its 
cause. b We also know since Zeuss and Grimmc that the Bavarians 
lived in Bohemia under the name of Marcomanni, the Hessians 
and Thuringians in their present abodes and in the neighbouring 
areas to the south. Since Roman territory began south of the 
Franks, Hessians and Thurihgians, no other space remained for 
the Swabians-Alamanni than that between Elbe and Oder, in the 
modern Mark Brandenburg and the Kingdom of Saxony; and 
here we find a Suebian people, the Semnones. Thus they were 
probably identical with these, bordering on Ingaevones in the 
north-west and on Gothic branches in the north-east and east. 
So far everything seems to go fairly smoothly. But now Pliny 
reckons also the Cherusci among the Herminones,d and here he 
decidedly makes a slip. Caesar already distinguishes them definitely 
from the Suebi, among whom he still reckons the Chatti.6 Nor does 
Tacitus know anything of Cherusci belonging to any High Ger­
man branch. Neither does Ptolemy, who extends the name 
Suebi to the Angles/ The mere fact that the Cherusci filled the 
space between Chatti and Hermunduri in the south and Lan­
gobardi in the north-east is not enough by a long way to conclude 
from that on any close branch kinship; although it may have been 
precisely that which misled Pliny here.g 
a Caesar, op. cit., VI, 10. Cf. Die Geschichtschreiber..., p. 207.— Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania, 40. Cf. Die Geschichtschreiber..., pp. 668-69.— Ed. 
c K. Zeuss, op. cit., pp. 364-80; J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 1, p. 502.— Ed. 
d Plinius, Naturalis historia, IV, 14.— Ed. 
e Caesar, Commentarii de bello Gallico, VI, 10. Cf. Die Geschichtschreiber..., 
p. 207.— Ed. 
f Ptölemaeus, Geographia, II, 11, 8.— Ed. 
s Plinius, Naturalis historia, IV, 14.— Ed. 

=====第83页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 55 
As far as I know, no scholar whose opinion matters counts the 
Cherusci among the High Germans. This only leaves the question 
whether they are to be reckoned among the Ingaevones or the 
Iscaevones. The few names which have come down to us show a 
Frankish stamp; ch instead of the later h in Cherusci, Chariomerus; 
e instead of i in Segestes, Segimerus, Segimundus. But almost all 
German names which came to the Romans from the banks of the 
Rhine seem to have been handed down to them by Franks in 
Frankish form. Moreover, we do not know whether the guttural 
aspirate of the first shift of the consonants, in the seventh century 
still ch with the Franks, did not sound ch with all West Germans in 
the first century and was only later weakened to the h common to 
them all. Nor do we otherwise find any branch kinship of the 
Cherusci with the Iscaevones, such as showed itself when the 
Sugambri took in the remaining Usipetes and Tencteri after they 
had escaped from Caesar. Moreover, the country on the right 
bank of the Rhine occupied at the time of Varus by the Romans 
and treated by them as a province coincides with Iscaevonian-
Frankish territory. Here Aliso and the other Roman forts were 
situated; of the Cheruscan country at most only the strip between 
the Osning and the Weser seems to have been actually occupied. 
Beyond it, the Chatti, Cherusci, Chauci and Frisians were more or 
less uncertain allies, held in check by fear, but autonomous in 
their internal affairs and free of permanent Roman garrisons. In 
this area the Romans, when met with resistance of any strength, 
always made the branch boundary the limit of conquest for the 
time being. Thus Caesar had done in Gaul; at the border of the 
Belgae he halted and only crossed it when he thought that he had 
made sure of Gaul proper, so-called Celtic Gaul. a 
Nothing remains but to reckon the Cherusci and their nearest 
relatives among the smaller neighbouring peoples to the Saxon 
branch, and hence among the Ingaevones, after J. Grimmb and 
the usual view. The fact that the old Saxon a is purest preserved 
just in the old Cheruscan area, against the o in the genitive plural 
and weak masculine which predominates in Westphalia, suggests 
the same thing. In this way all the difficulties disappear; the 
Ingaevonian branch, like the others, is given a fairly rounded 
territory into which only the Herminonian Langobardi penetrate a 
little.  Of the two great divisions of the branch, the Frisian-Anglian-
Jutish occupies the coast and at least the northern and western 
a Caesar, op. cit., II, 3, 7, 1.— Ed. 
b J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 2, p. 612.— Ed. 

=====第84页=====
56 Frederick Engels 
parts of the peninsula, the Saxon division the inner country and 
perhaps also now already a part of North Albingia, where soon 
afterwards Ptolemy first mentions the Saxones by name.3 
V. Quinta pars Peucini, Basternae contermini Dacis* 
The little we know of these two peoples stamps them as branch 
relatives of the Goths, as does even the form of the name, 
Bastarnae. If Pliny lists them as a separate branch, this is probably 
due to the fact that he heard of them from fhe lower Danube, 
through Greek intermediaries,25 while his knowledge of the Gothic 
peoples on the Oder and Vistula had been gained on the Rhine 
and the North Sea, so that the connection between Goths and 
Bastarnae escaped him. Both Bastarnae and Peucini are German 
peoples who stayed behind at the Carpathians and the Danube 
mouths and continued migrating for some time, preparing the 
later great realm of the Goths, in which they became immersed. 
VI. I mention the Hilleviones, the collective name under which 
Pliny lists the German Scandinavians,0 only for the sake of 
completeness and in order once more to establish that all the 
ancient authors allot to this main branch only the islands (which 
include Sweden and Norway), excluding them from the Cimbric 
peninsula. 
Thus we have five main German branches with five principal 
dialects. 
The Gothic, in the east and north-east, has -« in the genitive 
plural of the masculine and neuter, -6 and -ê in the feminine; the 
weak masculine has -a. The inflected forms of the present tense 
(the indicative) are still close to those of the originally related 
languages, in particular Greek and Latin, if the shifting of the 
consonants is borne in mind. 
The Ingaevonic, in the north-west, has -a in the genitive plural, 
and also for the weak masculine; in the present indicative all three 
persons in the plural end in -d or -dh, all nasal sounds being 
expunged. It is divided into the two main branches of the Saxon 
and Frisian, which merge again into one in the Anglo-Saxon. 
Close to the Frisian branch is 
the Scandinavian; genitive plural ending in -a, weak masculine 
in -i, weakened from -a, as shown by the whole declension. In the 
present indicative the original -s of the second person singular 
a Ptolemaeus, Geographia, II, 11, 7.— Ed. 
b The fifth group: Peucini and Bastarnae, whose neighbours are the 
Dacians.— Ed. 
c Plinius, Naturalis historia, IV,  13.—  Ed. 

=====第85页=====
On the Early History of the Germans 57 
passes into -r, the first person plural retains -m, the second -dh, 
the remaining persons are more or less mutilated. 
These three face the two southern branches: the Iscaevonic and 
Herminonic, in the later mode of expression the Franconian and 
the High German. The two have in common the weak masculine 
ending -o; most probably also the genitive plural ending -o, 
although it is not substantiated in the Franconian, and in the 
oldest western (Salic) documents the accusative plural ends in -as. 
In the present tense the two dialects, as far as we can document 
this for the Franconian, are close and, in this respect like Gothic, 
closely correspond with the originally related languages. But the 
whole course of linguistic history, from the very significant, 
archaic peculiarities of the oldest Franconian to the great 
differences between the modern dialects of both, precludes us 
from throwing the two dialects together into one; just as the whole 
course of the history of the peoples themselves makes it impossible 
for us to put them both into one main branch. 
If throughout this investigation I have considered only the 
forms of inflection and not the phonetic relations, this is to be 
explained from the considerable changes which have occurred in 
the latter—at least in many dialects—between the first century 
and the time when our oldest linguistic sources were drawn up. In 
Germany I need only recall the second shift of the consonants; in 
Scandinavia the alliterations of the oldest songs show how much 
the language altered between the time when they were composed 
and when they were written down. Whatever it may still be 
possible to do in this respect will most likely be done by competent 
German linguists; here it would only have made the investigation 
unnecessarily complicated. 
Written in mid-1878-early August 1882 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, 
Part I, Moscow, 1937 Printed according to the manu­
script 

=====第86页=====
58 
THE FRANKISH PERIOD 
THE RADICAL TRANSFORMATION OF THE RELATIONS 
OF LANDOWNERSHIP UNDER THE MEROVINGIANS27 
AND CAROLINGIANS 
The mark system28 remained the basis of almost the entire life 
of the German nation till the end of the Middle Ages. Eventually, 
after an existence of one and a half millennia, it gradually 
disintegrated for purely economic reasons. It succumbed to 
economic advances with which it was unable to keep pace. We 
shall later examine its decline and ultimate destruction and we 
shall see that remnants of the mark system continue to exist even 
today. 
It was only at the expense of its political importance that it was 
able to survive for so long. For centuries it had been the form 
embodying the freedom of the Germanic tribes. Then it became 
the basis of the people's bondage for a thousand years. How was 
this possible? 
The earliest community, as we have seen, comprised the whole 
people. Originally the people owned all the appropriated land. 
Later the whole body of inhabitants of a district [Gau], who were 
closely interrelated, became the owners of the territory settled by 
them, and the people as such retained only the right to dispose of 
the tracts which had not yet been claimed. The populace of the 
district in their turn handed over their field and forest marks to 
individual village communities, which likewise consisted of closely 
kindred people, and in this case too the land that was left over was 
retained by the district. The same procedure was followed when 
the original villages set up new village colonies—they were 
provided with land from the old mark by the parent village. 
With the growth of the population and the further development 
of the people the blood-ties, on which here as everywhere the 
entire national structure was based, increasingly fell into oblivion. 

=====第87页=====
The Frankish Period 59 
This was first the case with regard to the people as a whole. The 
common descent was less and less seen as real consanguinity, the 
memory of it became fainter and fainter and what remained was 
merely the common history and the dialect. On the other hand, 
the inhabitants of a district naturally retained an awareness of 
their .consanguinity for a longer time. The people thus came to 
mean merely a more or less stable confederation of districts. This 
seems to have been the state of affairs among the Germans at the 
time of the great migrations. Ammianus Marcellinus reports this 
definitely about the Alamanni, a and in the local law29 it is still 
everywhere apparent. The Saxons were still at this stage of 
development during Charlemagne's time and the Frisians until 
they lost their independence. 
But the migration on to Roman soil broke the blood-ties, as it 
was bound to. Although the intention was to settle by tribes and 
kindreds, it was impossible to carry this through. The long 
marches had mixed together not only tribes and kindreds but also 
entire peoples. Only with difficulty could the blood-ties of the 
individual village communities still be held together, and these 
became thus the real political units of which the people consisted. 
The new districts on Roman territory were from the start, or soon 
became, judicial divisions set up more or less arbitrarily—or 
occasioned by conditions found already in existence. 
The people thus disintegrated into an association of small village 
communities, between which there existed no or virtually no 
economic connection, for every mark was self-sufficient, producing 
enough to satisfy its own needs, and moreover the products of the 
various neighbouring marks being almost exactly the same. Hardly 
any exchange could therefore take place between them. And since 
the people consisted entirely of small communities, which had 
identical economic interests, but for that very reason no common 
ones,  the continued existence of the nation depended on a state 
power which did not derive from these communities but con­
fronted them as something alien and exploited them to an ever 
increasing extent. 
The form of this state power depends in its turn on the form of 
the communities at the time in question. Where, as among the 
Aryan peoples of Asia and the Russians, it arises at a time when 
the fields are still cultivated by the community for the common 
account, or when at any rate the fields are only temporarily 
a Ammianus Marcellinus, Rerum gestarum, XVIII, 2, 1; XX, 4, 1; XXX, 3, 
1.—Ed. 

=====第88页=====
60 Frederick Engels 
allotted by it to individual families, i.e. when there is as yet no 
private property in land, the state power appears as despotism. On 
the other hand, in the Roman lands conquered by the Germans, 
the individual shares in arable land and meadows already take, as 
we have seen, the form of the allodium, the owners' free property 
subject only to the ordinary mark obligations. We must now 
examine how on the basis of this allodium a social and political 
structure arose, which—with the usual irony of history—in the 
end dissolved the state and completely abolished the allodium in 
its classical form. 
The allodium made the transformation of the original equality 
of landed property into its opposite not only possible but 
inevitable. From the moment it was established on formerly 
Roman soil, the German allodium became what the Roman landed 
property adjacent to it had long been—a commodity. It is an 
inexorable law of all societies based on commodity production and 
commodity exchange that the distribution of property within them 
becomes increasingly unequal, the opposition of wealth and 
poverty constantly grows and property is more and more 
concentrated in a few hands. It is true that this law reaches its full 
development in modern capitalist production, but it is by no 
means only in it that this law operates. From the moment 
therefore that allodium, freely disposable landed property, landed 
property as commodity, arose, from that moment the emergence 
of large-scale landed property was merely a matter of time. 
But in the period we are concerned with, farming and 
stock-breeding were the principal branches of production. Landed 
property and its products constituted the by far largest part of 
wealth at that time. Other types of movable wealth that existed 
then followed landed property as a matter of course, and 
gradually accumulated in the same hands as landed property. 
Industry and trade had already deteriorated during the decline of 
the Roman empire; the German invasion ruined them almost 
completely. The little that was left was for the most part carried 
on by unfree men and aliens and remained a despised occupation. 
The ruling class which, with the emerging inequality in property, 
gradually arose could only be a class of big landowners, its form of 
political rule that of an aristocracy. Though, as we shall see, 
political levers, violence and deceit contribute frequently, and as it 
seems even predominantly, to the formation and development of 
this class, we must not forget that these political levers only 
advance and accelerate an inevitable economic process. We shall 
indeed see just as often that these political levers impede economic 

=====第89页=====
The Frankish Period 61 
development; this happens quite frequently, and invariably when 
the different parties concerned apply them in opposite or 
intersecting directions. 
How did this class of big landowners come into being? 
First of all we know that even after the Frankish conquest a 
large number of big Roman landowners remained in Gaul, whose 
estates were for the most part cultivated by free or bound 
copyholders against payment of rent (canon). 
Furthermore we have seen that as a result of the wars of 
conquest the monarchy had become a permanent institution and 
real power among all Germans who had moved out, and that it 
had turned the land which had formerly belonged to the people 
into royal domains and had likewise appropriated the Roman state 
lands.  These crown lands were constantly augmented by the 
wholesale seizure of the estates of so-called rebels during the many 
civil wars resulting from the partitions of the empire. But rapidly 
as these lands increased, they were just as rapidly squandered in 
donations to the Church and to private individuals, Franks and 
Romans, retainers (antrustions30 ) and other favourites of the king. 
Once the rudiments of a ruling class comprising the big and the 
powerful, landlords, officials and generals had formed, during 
and because of the civil wars, local rulers tried to purchase their 
support by grants of land. Roth has conclusively proved that in 
most cases these were real grants, transfers of land which became 
free,  inheritable and alienable property, until this was changed by 
Charles Martel.* 
When Charles took over the helm of state, the power of the 
kings was completely broken but, as yet, by no means replaced by 
that of the major-domos.31 The class of grandees, created under 
the Merovingians at the expense of the Crown, furthered the ruin 
of royal power in every way, but certainly not in order to submit 
to the major-domos, their compeers. On the contrary, the whole 
of Gaul was, as Einhard says, in the hands of these 
"tyrants, who were arrogating power to themselves everywhere" (tyrannos per 
totam Galliam dominatum sibi vindicantes).a 
This was done not only by secular grandees but also by bishops, 
who appropriated adjacent counties and duchies in many areas, 
* P. Roth, Geschichte des Beneficialwesens, Erlangen, 1850. One of the best books 
of the pre-Maurer period. I have borrowed a good deal from it in this chapter. 
a Einhardus, Vita Caroli Magni, 2. Quoted in P. Roth, Geschichte des Beneficialwe­
sens..., Erlangen, 1850, p. 352.— Ed 

=====第90页=====
62 Frederick Engels 
and were protected by their immunity and the strong organisation 
of the Church. The internal disintegration of the empire was 
followed by incursions of external enemies. The Saxons invaded 
Rhenish Franconia, the Avars Bavaria, and the Arabs moved 
across the Pyrenees into Aquitania.32 In such a situation, mere 
subjection of the internal enemies and expulsion of the external 
ones could provide no long-term solution. A method had to be 
found of binding the humbled grandees, or their successors 
appointed by Charles, more firmly to the Crown. And since their 
power was up to then based on large-scale landed property, the 
first prerequisite for this was a total transformation of the 
relations of landownership. This transformation was the principal 
achievement of the Carolingian dynasty.33 The distinctive feature 
of this transformation is that the means chosen to unite the 
empire, to tie the grandees permanently to the Crown and thus to 
make the latter more powerful, in the end led to the complete 
impotence of the Crown, the independence of the grandees and 
the dissolution of the empire. 
To understand how Charles came to choose this means, we must 
first examine the property relations of the Church at the time, 
which anyway cannot be passed over here, being an essential 
element of contemporary agrarian relations. 
Even during the Roman era, the Church in Gaul owned 
considerable landed property, the revenue from which was further 
increased by its great privileges with regard to taxes and other 
obligations. But it was only after the conversion of the Franks to 
Christianity34 that the golden age began for the Gallic Church. 
The kings vied with one another in making donations of land, 
money, jewels, church utensils, etc., to the Church. Already 
Chilperic used to say (according to Gregory of Tours): 
"See how poor our treasury has become, see, all our wealth has been 
transferred to the Church."3 
Under Guntram, the darling and lackey of the priests, the 
donations exceeded all bounds. Thus the confiscated lands of free 
Franks accused of rebellion mostly became the property of the 
Church. 
The people followed the lead of the kings. Small man and big 
could not give enough to the Church. 
"A miraculous cure of a real or imagined ailment, the fulfilment of an ardent 
wish, e.g. the birth of a son or deliverance from danger, brought the Church whose 
a Gregorius Turonensis, Historia Francorum, VI, 46. Quoted in P. Roth, op. cit., 
pp. 248-49, Note 6.— Ed 

=====第91页=====
The Frankish Period 63 
saint had proved helpful a gift. It was deemed the more necessary to be always 
open-handed as both among high and low the view was widespread that gifts to the 
Church led to the remission of sins" (Roth, p. 250). 
Added to this was the immunity protecting the property of the 
Church from violation at a time of incessant civil wars, looting and 
confiscation. Many a small man thought it wise to cede his 
property to the Church provided he retained its usufruct at a 
moderate rent. 
Yet all this was not sufficient for the pious priests. With threats 
of eternal punishment in hell they virtually extorted more and 
more donations, so that as late as 811 Charlemagne reproaches 
them with this in the Aachen Capitulary, 35 adding that they induce 
people 
"to commit perjury and bear false witness, so as to increase your" (the bishops' 
and abbots') "wealth".3 
Unlawful donations were obtained by hook or by crook in the 
hope that, apart from its privileged judicial status, the Church had 
sufficient means to cock a snook at the judiciary. There was hardly 
any Gallic Church Council in the sixth and seventh centuries that 
did not threaten to excommunicate anyone trying to contest 
donations to the Church. In this way even formally invalid 
donations were to be made valid, and the private debts of 
individual clerics protected against collection. 
"We see that truly contemptible means were employed to arouse, again and 
again, the desire for making donations. When descriptions of heavenly bliss and 
infernal torment were no longer effective, relics were brought from distant parts, 
translations were arranged and new churches built; this was a veritable business in 
the ninth century" (Roth, p. 254). "When the emissaries of the St. Medard 
monastery in Soissons by much assiduous begging obtained the body of Saint 
Sebastian in Rome and in addition stole that of Gregory, and both bodies were 
deposited in the monastery, so many people flocked to see the new saints that the 
whole area seemed to be swarming with locusts, and those seeking relief were 
cured not individually but in whole herds. The result was that the monks measured 
the money by the bushel, counting as many as 85, and their stock of gold 
amounted to 900 pounds" (p. 255). 
Deceit, legerdemain, the appearance of the dead, especially of 
saints,  and finally also, and even predominantly, the forging of 
documents, were used to obtain riches for the Church. The 
forging of documents was—to let Roth speak again— 
"practised by many clerics on a vast scale ... this business began very early.... 
The extent of this practice can be seen from the large number of forged 
documents contained in our collections. Of Bréquigny's 360 Merovingian certifi-
a Quoted in P. Roth, Geschichte des Beneficialwesens..., p.  253.—  Ed. 

=====第92页=====
64 Frederick Engels 
cates a nearly 130 are definitely forgeries.... The forged testament of Remigius was 
used by Hincmar of Reims b to procure his church a number of properties, which were 
not mentioned in the genuine testament, although the latter had never been lost and 
Hincmar knew very well that the former was spurious."0 
Even Pope John VIII tried to obtain the possessions of the 
St. Denis monastery near Paris by means of a document which he 
knew to be a forgery. (Roth, pp. 256 ff.) 
No wonder then that the landed property the Church amassed 
through donations, extortion, guile, fraud, forgery and other 
criminal activities assumed enormous proportions within a few 
centuries. The monastery of Saint-Germain-des-Prés, now within 
the perimeter of Paris, at the beginning of the ninth century 
owned landed property of  8,000  mansi or hides, d an area which 
Guérard estimates at 429,987 hectares with an annual yield of one 
million francs=800,000 marks. 36 If we use the same average, i.e. 
an area of 54 hectares with a yield of 125 francs=100 marks per 
hide of land, then the monasteries St. Denis, Luxeuil, St. Martin 
de Tours, each owning 15,000 mansi at that time, held landed 
property of 810,000 hectares with an income of IV2 million marks. 
And this was the position after the confiscation of Church 
property by Pepin the Short! e Roth estimates (p. 249) that the 
entire property of the Church in Gaul at the end of the seventh 
century was probably above, rather than below, one-third of the 
total area. 
These enormous estates were cultivated partly by unfree and in 
part also by free copyholders of the Church. Of the unfree, the 
slaves (servi) were originally subject to unmeasured service to their 
lords,  since they were not persons in law. But it seems that for 
the resident slaves too a customary amount of duties and serv­
ices was soon established. On the other hand, the services of the 
other two unfree classes, the colons and lites 37 (we have no in­
formation about the difference in their legal position at that 
time) were fixed and consisted in certain personal services and 
corvée as well as a definite part of the produce of their plot. 
These were long established relations of dependence. But for the 
Germans it was something quite new that free men were 
cultivating not their own or common land. It is true that the 
a L. G. O. F. de Bréquigny, F. J. G. La Porte du Theil, Diplomata, chartae, 
epistolae,  et alia documenta... In P. Roth,  Geschichte des Beneficialwesens..., p. XVII.— Ed. 
b Hincmar Remensis, Vita Remigii. Quoted in P. Roth, op. cit., pp. XIX, 
258.—  Ed. 
c Quoted in P. Roth, op. cit., pp. 256-58.— Ed. 
d Hide — a variable unit of area of land, enough for a household.— Ed. 
e See this volume, p. 66.— Ed. 

=====第93页=====
The Frankish Period 65 
Germans met quite frequently free Roman tenants in Gaul and in 
general in territories where Roman law prevailed; however during 
the settlement of the country care was taken to ensure that they 
themselves did not have to become tenants but could settle on 
their own land. Hence before free Franks could become some­
body's copyholders they must have in some way or other lost the 
allodium they received when the country was being occupied, a 
distinct class of landless free Franks must have come into 
existence. 
This class arose as. a result of the beginning concentration of 
landed property, owing to the same causes as led to this 
concentration, i.e., on the one hand civil wars and confiscations 
and on the other the transfer of land to the Church mainly due to 
the pressure of circumstances and the desire for security. The 
Church soon discovered a specific means to encourage such 
transfers, it allowed the donor not only to enjoy the usufruct of 
his land for a rent, but also to rent a piece of Church land as well. 
For such donations were made in two forms. Either the donor 
retained the usufruct of his farm during his lifetime, so that it 
became the property of the Church only after his death (donatio 
post obitum). In this case it was usual, and was later expressly laid 
down in the kings' Capitularies, that the donor should be able to 
rent twice as much land from the Church as he had donated. Or 
the donation took effect immediately (cessio a die praesente) and in 
this case the donor could rent three times as much Church land as 
well as his own farm, by means of a document known as precaria, 
issued by the Church—which transferred the land to him, usually 
for the duration of his life, but sometimes for a longer or shorter 
period. Once a class of landless free men had come into being, 
some of them likewise entered into such a relationship. The 
precaria they were granted seem at first to have been mostly 
issued for five years, but in their case too they were soon made 
out for life. 
There is scarcely any doubt that even under the Merovingians 
relations very similar to those obtaining on Church estates 
developed also on the estates of the secular magnates, and that 
here too free and unfree rent-paying tenants were living side by 
side.  They must have been very numerous as early as Charles 
Martel's rule for otherwise at least one aspect of the transforma­
tion of landownership relations initiated by him and completed by 
his son and grandson3 would be inexplicable. 
a Pepin III (the Short) and Charlemagne.— Ed. 

=====第94页=====
66 Frederick Engels 
This transformation depended basically on two new institutions. 
First, in order to keep the barons of the empire tied to the Crown, 
the Crown lands they received were now as a rule no longer a gift, 
but only a "beneficium", granted for life, and moreover on certain 
conditions nonfulfilment of which entailed the forfeiture of the 
land. Thus they became themselves tenants of the Crown. And 
secondly, in order to ensure that the free tenants of the barons 
turned up for military service, the latter were granted some of the 
district count's official powers over the free men living on their 
estates and appointed their "seniores". For the present we need 
only consider the first of these two changes. 
When subduing the rebellious small "tyrants" Charles proba­
bly—we have no information regarding this—confiscated their 
landed property according to old custom, but in so far as he 
reinstated them in their offices and dignities he will have granted 
it to them entirely or in part as a benefice. He did not yet dare to 
treat the Church land of recalcitrant bishops in the same way. He 
deposed them and gave their positions to people devoted to him, 
though the only clerical trait of many of them was their tonsure 
(sola tonsura clericus). These new bishops and abbots then began at 
his bidding to transfer large tracts of Church land to laymen as 
precaria. Such instances had occurred earlier too, but it was now 
done on a mass scale. His son Pepin went considerably further. 
The Church was in decay, the clergy despised, the Pope,3 hard 
pressed by the Langobardi, depended exclusively on Pepin's 
support. He helped the Pope, favoured the extension of his 
ecclesiastical rule and held the Pope's stirrup.38 But as a 
remuneration he incorporated the by far largest part of the 
Church land into the Crown estates and left the bishops and 
monasteries an amount just sufficient for their maintenance. The 
Church acquiesced passively in this first large-scale secularisation, 
the synod of Lestines39 confirmed it, albeit with a restrictive 
clause, which was, however, never observed. This huge mass of 
land placed the exhausted Crown estate once more on a secure 
footing and was to a large extent used for further grants, which in 
fact soon assumed the form of ordinary benefices. 
Let us add here that the Church was soon able to recover from 
this blow. Directly after the conflict with Pepin the worthy men of 
God resumed their old practices. Donations came once more thick 
and fast from all directions, the small free peasants were still in 
the same sorry plight between hammer and anvil as they had been 
a Stephen IL— Ed. 

=====第95页=====
The Frankish Period 67 
for the past 200 years. Under Charlemagne and his successors 
they fared far worse still and many entrusted themselves and all 
their possessions to the protection of the crosier. The kings 
returned some of their booty to favoured monasteries, and 
donated vast stretches of Crown land to others, especially in 
Germany. The blessed times of Guntram seemed to have returned 
for the Church during the reign of Louis the Pious. The 
monastery archives contain especially numerous records of dona­
tions made in the ninth century. 
The benefice, this new institution, which we must now examine 
closer, was not yet the future  fief,  but certainly its embryo. It was 
from the outset granted for the common span of life of both the 
conferrer and the recipient. If one or the other died, it reverted 
to the owner or his heirs. To renew the former relationship, a new 
transfer of property to the recipient or his heirs had to be made. 
Hence the benefice was subject to both "throne-fall" and 
"home-fall", to use a later terminology. Throne-fall soon fell into 
desuetude; the great beneficiaries became more powerful than the 
king. Home-fall, even at an early stage, not infrequently entailed 
the re-transfer of the estate to the heir of the former beneficiary. 
Patriciacum (Percy), an estate near Autun, which Charles Martel 
granted as a benefice to Hildebrannus, remained in the family 
passing from father to son for four generations, until in 839 the 
king presented it to the brother of the fourth beneficiary as full 
property. Similar cases occur quite frequently since the mid-eighth 
century. 
The benefice could be withdrawn by the conferrer in all cases in 
which confiscation of property was applicable. And there was no 
shortage of such cases under the Carolingians. The risings in 
Alamannia under Pepin the Short, the conspiracy of the Thuringi-
ans and the repeated risings of the Saxons ° invariably led to new 
confiscations, either of free peasant land or of magnates' estates 
and benefices. This occurred also, despite all treaty stipulations to 
the contrary, during the internal wars under Louis the Pious and 
his sons.41 Certain non-political crimes were also punished by 
confiscation. 
The Crown could moreover withdraw benefices if the be­
neficiary neglected his general obligations as a subject, e.g., did 
not hand over a robber who had sought asylum, did not turn up 
armed for a campaign, did not pay heed to royal letters, etc. 
Furthermore benefices were conferred on special terms, the 
infringement of which entailed their withdrawal, which of course 
did not extend to the rest of the property of the beneficiary. This 
7-1243 

=====第96页=====
68 Frederick Engels 
was the  case,  for  example, when former Church estates were 
granted  and the  beneficiary failed  to pay the  Church  the  dues that 
went with them (nonae  et decimae*).  Or if he let the  estate 
deteriorate,  in which case  a year's notice  was  usually first given  as 
a warning  so that  the  beneficiary could improve matters  to avert 
confiscation which would otherwise follow,  etc. The  transfer  of an 
estate could also  be tied  to definite services  and  this  was  indeed 
done more  and  more frequently  as the  benefice gradually 
developed into  the  fief proper.  But  initially this  was by no  means 
necessary, especially with regard  to military service,  for  many 
benefices were conferred  on  lower clerics, monks,  and  women 
both spiritual  and lay. 
Finally  it is by no  means impossible that  in the  beginning  the 
Crown also conferred land subject  to recall  or for a  definite 
period,  i.e. as  precaria. Some  of the  information  and the 
procedure  of the  Church make this probable.  But at any  rate this 
ceased soon  for the  granting  of land  as a  benefice became 
prevalent  in the  ninth century. 
For the  Church—and  we  must assume that this applied  to the 
big landowners  and  beneficiaries  as well—the Church, which 
previously granted estates  to its  free tenants mostly only  as 
precaria  for a  definite period  of time,  had to  follow  the  stimulus 
given  by the  Crown.  The  Church  not  only began  to grant 
benefices  as well,  but  this kind  of grant became  so predominant 
that already existing precaria were turned into lifelong ones  and 
imperceptibly became benefices, until  the  former merged almost 
completely into  the  latter  in the  ninth century. Beneficiaries  of the 
Church  and  also  of secular magnates must have played  an 
important part  in the  state  as early  as the  second half  of the  ninth 
century, some  of them must have been  men of  substantial 
property,  the  founders  of the  future lower nobility. Otherwise 
Charles  the  Bald would  not  have  so vigorously helped those  who 
had been without reason deprived  of their benefices  by Hincmar 
of Laon. 
The benefice,  as we see, has  many aspects which recur  in the 
developed  fief.  Throne-fall  and  home-fall  are  common  to both. 
The benefice, like  the fief, can  only  be revoked under certain 
conditions.  The  social hierarchy created  by the  benefices, which 
descends from  the  Crown through  the big  beneficiaries—the 
predecessors  of the  imperial princes—to  the  medium  be-
a Ninth  and  tenth part  of the  harvest  or other revenues.  See P.  Roth,  op. cit., 
pp. 363-64.— Ed. 

=====第97页=====
<$£. <fc<t'V --i«yCV<-*_ ,-»11 ^1) ii^i4gij 
'**-•*-! 
'jfiU~:/&*-~:/~''j<'^ 
try *..+...., .£,_ ^ A A I '-1 
«La* 
Page 17 of Engels' manuscript 77i£ Prankish Period 

=====第98页=====

=====第99页=====
The Frankish Period 71 
neficiaries—the future nobility—and from them to the free and 
unfree peasants, the bulk of whom lived in mark communities, 
formed the foundation for the future compact feudal hierarchy. 
Whereas the subsequent fief is, in all circumstances, held in return 
for services and entails military service for the feudal lord, the 
benefice does not yet require military service and other services 
are by no means inevitable. But the tendency of the benefice to 
become an estate held in return for services is already obvious, 
and spreads steadily during the ninth century; and in the same 
measure as it unfolds, the benefice develops into the  fief. 
Another factor contributed to this development, i.e., the changes 
which took place in the district and army structure first under 
the influence of big landed property and later under that of the 
big benefices, into which big landed property was increasingly 
transformed as a result of the incessant internal wars and the 
confiscations and retransfers associated with them. 
It is evident that only the pure, classical form of the benefice 
has been examined in this chapter, which was certainly only a 
transitory form and did not even appear everywhere simultane­
ously. But such historical manifestations of economic relations can 
only be understood if they are considered in their pure state, and 
it is one of the chief merits of Roth that he has laid bare this 
classical form of the benefice, stripping it of all its confusing 
appendages. 
THE DISTRICT AND ARMY STRUCTURE 
The transformation in the position of landed property just 
described was bound to influence the old structure. It caused just 
as significant changes in the latter, and these in their turn had 
repercussions on the relations of landed property. For the present 
we shall leave aside the remodelling of the political structure as a 
whole and confine ourselves to an examination of the influence 
the new economic position exerted on the still existing remnants 
of the old popular structure in the districts and the army. 
As early as the Merovingian period we frequently encounter 
counts and dukes as administrators of Crown estates. But it was 
not until the ninth century that certain Crown estates were 
definitely linked to the countship in such a way that the count of 
the day received their revenue. The formerly honorary office had 
been transformed into a paid one. In addition to this we find the 
counts holding royal benefices granted to them personally, which 

=====第100页=====
72 Frederick Engels 
is something self-evident under the conditions of that time. The 
count thus became a powerful landowner within his county. 
First of all it is obvious that the authority of the count was 
bound to suffer when big landed proprietors arose under him and 
side by side with him. People who had often enough scorned the 
commands of the kings under the Merovingians and early 
Carolingians could be expected to show even less respect for the 
orders of the count. Their free tenants, confident 'of the 
protection of powerful landlords, just as frequently disregarded 
the count's summons to appear in court or turn up for his levy to 
the army. This was one of the reasons that led to grants being 
made in the form of benefices instead of allodial grants and later 
to the gradual transformation of most of the formerly free big 
estates into benefices. 
This alone was not enough to ensure that the free men living on 
the estates of the magnates did in fact perform their services to 
the State. A further change had to be introduced. The king saw 
himself compelled to make the big landlords responsible for the 
appearance of their free tenants at court and for their perform­
ance of military and other traditional services to the State in the 
same way as hitherto the count was held accountable for all free 
inhabitants of his county. And this could only be accomplished if 
the king gave the magnates some of the count's official powers 
over their tenants. It was the landlord or beneficiary who had to 
make sure that his people appeared before the court, they 
therefore had to be summoned through him. He had to bring 
them to the army, therefore the levy had to be effected by him, 
and so that he might always be held accountable for them he had 
to lead them and have the right to impose military discipline on 
them. But it was and continued to be the king's service that the 
tenants performed, and the recalcitrant was punished not by the 
landlord but by the royal count, and the fine went to the royal 
fisc. 
This innovation too goes back to Charles Martel. At any rate 
only since his time do we find the custom of high ecclesiastical 
dignitaries taking the field themselves, a custom which, according 
to Roth, was due to the fact that Charles made his bishops join the 
army at the head of their tenants in order to ensure that the latter 
turned up. a Undoubtedly this also applied to the secular magnates 
and their tenants. Under Charlemagne the new arrangement is 
already firmly established and universally enforced. 
a See P. Roth, op. cit., p. 356.— Ed. 

=====第101页=====
The Frankish Period 73 
But this caused a substantial change also in the political position 
of the free tenants. They who had formerly been on an equal 
footing with their landlord before the law, however much they 
depended on him economically, now became his subordinates also 
in the legal sphere. Their economic subjection was politically 
sanctioned. The landlord becomes Senior, Seigneur, the tenants 
become his homines, the "lord" becomes the master of his "man". 
The legal equality of the free men has disappeared; the man on 
the lowest rung of the ladder, his full freedom already greatly 
impaired by the loss of his ancestral land, moves down another 
step nearer the unfree. The new "lord" rises that much higher 
above the level of the old communal freedom. The basis of the 
new aristocracy, already established economically, is recognised by 
the State and becomes one of the fully operative driving wheels of 
the State machinery. 
But alongside these homines made up of free tenants there 
existed yet another kind. These were impoverished free men who 
had voluntarily entered into the service or become retainers of a 
magnate. The retinue of the Merovingians were the antrustions, 
the magnates of that time will likewise have had their retainers. 
The retainers of the king were, under the Carolingians, called 
vassi, vasalli or gasindi, terms which had been used for unfree 
men in the oldest codes of common law, but had now come to 
mean usually free retainers. The same expressions were applied to 
the grandee's retainers, who now occur quite commonly and 
become an increasingly numerous and important element of 
society and State. 
Old treaty formulas show how the grandees came to have such 
retainers. One of them (Formulae Sirmondicae 44) for instance 
says: 
"Since it is known to one and all that I have not the wherewithal to feed and 
clothe  myself,  I ask of your" (the lord's) "piety that I may betake and commend 
myself into your protection" (mundoburdum—guardianship, as it were) "so that ... 
you will be obliged to aid me with food and clothing, according as I shall serve you 
and merit the same; in return, may I be obliged to render you service and 
obedience in the manner of a freeman (ingenuili ordine); nor shall it be in my 
power to withdraw from your authority and patronage during my lifetime but I 
shall spend my days under your authority and protection."42 
This formula provides full information about the origin and 
nature of the ordinary relations of allegiance stripped of all alien 
admixtures, and it is especially revealing because it presents the 
extreme case of a poor devil who has been reduced to absolute 
penury. The entry into the seignior's retinue was effected by the 

=====第102页=====
74 Frederick Engels 
two parties reaching a free agreement—free in the sense of 
Roman and modern law—often rather similar to the entry of a 
present-day worker into the service of a manufacturer. The 
"man" commended himself to the lord, and the latter accepted his 
commendation. It was confirmed by a handshake and an oath of 
allegiance. The agreement was lifelong and was only dissolved by 
the death of one of the two contractors. The liege man was 
obliged to carry out all services consistent with the position of a 
free man which his lord might impose on him. In return the lord 
provided for his keep and rewarded him as he thought fit. A 
grant of land was by no means necessarily involved and in fact it 
certainly did not take place in all cases. 
Under the Carolingians, especially since Charlemagne, this 
relationship was not only tolerated but directly encouraged and 
eventually, it seems, made compulsory for all ordinary free 
men—by a Capitulary of 847—and regulated by the State. For 
example, the liege man could unilaterally annul the relationship 
with his lord only if the latter attempted to kill him, hit him with a 
stick, dishonour his wife or daughter or deprive him of his 
hereditary property (Capitulary of 813). The liege man moreover 
was bound to his lord as soon as he had received a value 
equivalent to one solidus from him. This again clearly shows how 
little at that time the vassal relationship was linked with the 
granting of land. The same stipulations are repeated in a 
Capitulary of 816, with the addition that the liege man was 
released from his obligations if his lord wrongfully attempted to 
reduce him to the status of an unfree man or failed to afford him 
the promised protection although he was able to do  so.43 
With regard to his retainers the liege lord now had the same 
rights and duties towards the State as the landlord or beneficiary 
had with regard to his tenants. As before they were liable to serve 
the king, but here too the liege lord was interposed between the 
king and his counts. The liege lord brought the vassals to court, 
he called them up, led them in war and maintained discipline 
among them, he was responsible for them and their regulation 
equipment. This gave him a certain degree of penal authority over 
his subordinates, and was the starting point of the feudal lord's 
jurisdiction over his vassals, which developed later. 
In these two additional institutions, the formation of the 
retainer system and the transfer of the official powers of the 
counts, that is the State, to the landlord, the holder of a Crown 
benefice, and the liege lord over his subordinates—both tenants 
and landless retainers, who were soon all to be called vassi, vasalli 

=====第103页=====
The Frankish Period 75 
or homines—in this political confirmation and strengthening of the 
actual power of the lord over his vassals we see an important 
further development of the germ of the fief system contained in 
the benefices. The hierarchy of social estates, from the king 
downwards through the big beneficiaries to their free tenants and 
finally to the unfree men, has in its official capacity become a 
recognised element of the political organisation. The State 
recognises that it cannot exist without its help. We shall see later 
how in actual fact this help was given. 
The differentiation between retainers and tenants is only 
important in the beginning, in order to show that the dependence 
of free men came about in two ways. The two types of vassals very 
soon merged inseparably, in name as well as in fact. It became 
more and more customary for the big beneficiaries to commend 
themselves to the king, so that they were not only his beneficiaries 
but also his vassals. It was in the interest of the kings to make the 
magnates, bishops, abbots, counts and vassals swear the oath of 
allegiance to them personally (Annales Bertiniani 837 44 and other 
documents of the ninth century); consequently the distinction 
between the general oath of the subject and the specific oath of 
the vassal was bound to disappear soon. Thus all the great men 
gradually became vassals of the king. The slow transformation of 
the big landowners into a special estate, an aristocracy, was 
herewith recognised by the State, incorporated into the State 
structure and became one of its officially functioning elements. 
Similarly the retainers of the individual big landowners gradual­
ly became tenants. Apart from providing board at the manor-
house, which after all could only be done for a small number of 
people, there was but one way of assuring oneself of retainers, 
that is by settling them on the ground, by granting them land as a 
benefice. A numerous militant retinue, the main prerequisite for 
the existence of the magnates in those times of perpetual fighting, 
could therefore only be obtained by granting land to the vassals. 
Consequently landless retainers gradually disappear from the 
manor while the mass of those settled on the lord's land grows. 
But the more this new element penetrated the old structure, the 
more it was bound to weaken the latter. The old direct exercise of 
State power by the king and the counts was more and more 
replaced by an indirect method; the seignior, to whom the 
common free men were increasingly tied by personal allegiance, 
now stood between them and the State. The count, the mainspring 
of the mechanism of State, was bound to recede into the 
background more and more, and so he did. In this situation 

=====第104页=====
76 Frederick Engels 
Charlemagne acted as he generally used to do. First he encour­
aged the spread of the vassal relationship, as we have seen, until 
the independent small free men had almost disappeared, and 
when the weakening of his power to which this led became 
obvious, he tried to help it on its feet again by State intervention. 
Under such an energetic and formidable ruler this could be 
successful in some cases, but the force of circumstances created 
with his help asserted itself inexorably under his weak successors. 
Charlemagne's favourite method was to send out royal emis­
saries (missi dominici) with plenipotentiary powers. Where the 
ordinary royal official, the count, was unable to stem the spread of 
disorder, a special envoy was expected to do so. (This has to be 
historically substantiated and amplified.) 
There was, however, another method, and this was to put the 
count in such a position that he had at his disposal material means 
to enforce his authority which were at least equal to those of the 
magnates in his county. This was only possible if the count too 
became a big landowner, which again could be brought about in 
two ways. Certain estates could be attached to the office of the 
count in the various districts as a sort of endowment, so that the 
count of the day administered them ex officio and received the 
revenue they yielded. Many examples of this kind can be found, 
especially in documents, from as early as the end of the eighth 
century, and this arrangement is quite usual from the ninth 
century onwards. It is self-evident that such endowments come for 
the most part from the king's fiscal estates, and as early as the 
time of the Merovingians we often find counts and dukes 
administering the king's fiscal estates situated in their territory. 
Strangely enough there are also a good many examples (and 
even a formula for this purpose) of bishops using Church 
property to endow the office of the count, of course in the form 
of some sort of benefice since Church property was inalienable. 
The munificence of the Church is too well known to allow of any 
other reason for this but dire need. Under the growing pressure 
of neighbouring secular magnates no other resort was left to the 
Church but to ally itself with the remnants of the state authority. 
These appurtenances associated with the count's post (res 
comitatus, pertinentiae comitatus) were originally quite distinct from 
the benefices which were granted personally to the count of the 
day. These too were usually distributed generously, so that, 
endowment and benefices taken together, countships, originally 
honorary positions, had by then become very lucrative posts, and 
since Louis the Pious they were, like other royal favours, bestowed 

=====第105页=====
The Frankish Period 77 
on people whom the king wanted to win over to his side or of 
whom he wanted to be sure. Thus it is said of Louis the 
Stammerer that he "quos potuit conciliavit [sibi], dans eis comitatus et 
abbatias ac villas" {Annales Bertiniani 877). a The term honor, 
formely used to designate the office with reference to the 
honorary rights connected with it, acquired the same meaning as 
benefice in the course of the ninth century. And this necessarily 
caused a substantial change in the character of the count's office, 
as Roth rightly emphasises (p. 408). Originally the seigniory, in so 
far as it was of a public character, was modelled upon the office of 
the count and invested with some of the count's powers. Then, in 
the second half of the ninth century, the seigniory had become so 
widespread that it threatened to outweigh the count's office and 
the latter could only maintain its authority by more and more 
assuming the characteristics of seigniory. The counts increasingly 
sought, and not without success, to usurp the position of a seignior 
vis-à-vis the inhabitants of their districts (pagenses) with regard to 
both their private and their public relations. Just as the other 
"lords"  sought to subordinate the small people in their neighbour­
hood, so the counts tried, in an amicable way or by force, to 
induce the less well-off free inhabitants of their district to become 
their vassals. They succeeded the more easily as the mere fact that 
the counts could thus abuse their official power was the best proof 
that the remaining common free men could expect very little 
protection from the royal authority and its organs. Exposed to 
oppression from all quarters, the smaller free men had to be glad 
to find a patron, even at the cost of relinquishing their allodium 
and receiving it back as a mere benefice. Already in the Capitulary 
of 811 Charlemagne complained that bishops, abbots, counts, 
judges and centenarii h by continuous legal chicanery and repeated 
summonses to the army reduced the small people to such a state 
that they agreed to transfer or sell their allodium to them, and 
that the poor bitterly lamented that they were being robbed of 
their property, etc. The greater part of free property in Gaul had 
in this way already passed into the hands of the Church, the 
counts and other magnates by the end of the ninth century 
(Hincmar, Annales Remenses 869). And somewhat later no free 
landed property belonging to small free men existed any longer in 
a "Tried to win the support of all he could by giving them countships, abbacies 
and estates." See P. Roth, Geschichte des Beneficialwesens..., p. 420, Note 10.— Ed. 
h Subordinate judges, responsible to the court.— Ed. 

=====第106页=====
78 Frederick Engels 
some provinces (Maurer, Einleitung, p. 212). a When the increasing 
power of the beneficiaries and the declining power of the Crown 
had gradually caused benefices to become hereditary, the count's 
office as a rule became hereditary too. If we saw the beginnings of 
the subsequent nobility in the large number of royal beneficiaries, 
here we see the seed of the territorial sovereignty of the future 
princes that evolved from the district counts. 
While thus the social and political system changed completely, 
the old constitution of the army, based on the military service of 
all free men—a service which was both their right and their 
duty—remained outwardly unchanged, except that where the new 
relations of dependence existed, the seignior interposed himself 
between his vassals and the count. However, year by year the 
common free men were less able to carry the burden of military 
service. This consisted not only of personal service; the conscript 
had also to equip himself and to live at his own expense during 
the first six months. This continued until Charlemagne's incessant 
wars knocked the bottom out of the barrel. The burden became so 
unbearable that in order to rid themselves of it the small free men 
began en masse to transfer not only their remaining property but 
also their own person and their descendants to the magnates, and 
especially to the Church. Charlemagne had reduced the free 
warlike Franks to such a state that they preferred to become 
bondsmen or serfs to avoid going to war. That was the 
consequence of Charlemagne's insistence on maintaining, and even 
carrying to the extreme, a military system based on universal and 
equal landownership by all free men, at a time when the bulk of 
the free men had lost all or most of their landed property. 
The facts, however, were stronger than Charlemagne's obstinacy 
and ambition. The old army system was no longer tenable. To 
equip and provision the army at the expense of the State was even 
less feasible in that age of a subsistence economy run practically 
without money or commerce. Charlemagne was therefore obliged 
to restrict the liability to service in such a way that equipment and 
food could still remain the responsibility of the men themselves. 
This was done in the Aachen Capitulary of 807, at a time when 
a Hincmar Remensis, Annales Remenses: Annales ad annum 869 in G. L. Maurer, 
Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-,  Dorf-  und Stadt-Verfassung und der öffentlichen 
Gewalt, Munich, 1854, pp. 210-12 and notes 61 and  71.—  Ed. 

=====第107页=====
The Frankish Period 79 
the wars were reduced to mere border fights, and the continued 
existence of the empire seemed, on the whole, ensured. Firstly all 
the king's beneficiaries without exception had to turn up, then 
those owning twelve hides (mansi) of land were to appear clad in 
armour, and therefore presumably also on horseback (the word 
caballarius—knight is used in the same Capitulary). Owners of 
three to five hides of land were also obliged to serve. Two owners 
having two hides of land each, three owners having one hide of 
land each, or six owners each possessing half a hide of land, had 
to send one man equipped by the others. As to free men who had 
no land at all but personal property worth five solidi, every sixth 
of them was to take the field and receive one solidus as pecuniary 
aid from each of the other five men. Moreover the obligation of 
the various parts of the country to take part in the fighting, an 
obligation which applied fully when the war was waged in the 
neighbourhood, was in the case of more distant wars reduced to 
between one-half and one-sixth of the total manpower, depending 
on the distance from the theatre of war.a 
Charlemagne evidently attempted to adapt the old system to the 
changed economic position of the men liable to military service, to 
rescue what he could still rescue. But even these concessions were 
of no avail, and he was soon compelled to grant further 
exemptions in the Capitulare de exercitu promovendo? The whole 
contents of this Capitulary, which is usually regarded as antece­
dent to that of Aachen, shows that it was undoubtedly drawn up 
several years later. According to it, one man has to do military 
service from every four hides of land, instead of three as 
previously. The owners of half a hide of land and those without 
land appear to be exempt from military service, and as regards 
beneficiaries their obligation is also restricted to the provision of 
one man for every four hides of land. Under Charlemagne's 
successors the minimum number of hides of land obliged to 
provide one man seems even to have been raised to five. 0 
It is strange that the mobilisation of the armoured owners of 
twelve hides of land seems to have encountered the greatest 
difficulties. At any rate, the order that they must turn up clad in 
armour is repeated innumerable times in the Capitularies. 
Thus the common free men disappeared to an increasing 
extent. Just as the gradual separation from the land had driven 
a P. Roth, Geschichte des Beneficialwesens..., pp.  398-401.—  Ed. 
b Capitulary on the levy for military service.— Ed. 
c See P. Roth, op. cit., pp. 399-400.— Ed. 

=====第108页=====
80 Frederick Engels 
part of them to become vassals of the new big landlords, so the 
fear of being completely ruined by military service actually drove 
the other part into serfdom. How rapidly this submission to 
servitude proceeded can be seen from the polyptychon (land 
register) of the Saint-Germain-des-Prés monastery, which then still 
lay outside Paris. It was compiled by abbot Irminon early in the 
ninth century, and among the tenants of the monastery it lists 
2,080 families of colons, 35 of lites, 220 of slaves (servi), but only 
eight free families. 3 In the Gaul of those days, however, the word 
colonus definitely denoted a  serf.  The marriage of a free woman 
to a colonus or slave subjected her Jo the lord as defiled 
(deturpatam) (Capitulary of 817). Louis the Pious commanded that 
"colonus vel servus" (of a monastery at Poitiers) "ad naturale 
servitium velit nolit redeat". h They received blows (Capitularies of 
853, 861, 864 and 873) and were sometimes set free (see Guérard, 
Irmino). c And these enthralled peasants were by no means of 
Romance stock, but according to the testimony of Jacob Grimm 
(Geschichte der deutschen Sprache, I, p. [537]), who examined their 
names, "almost exclusively Frankish, far outweighing the small 
number of Romance ones". 
This huge rise in the unfree population in its turn changed the 
class relations of the Frankish society. Alongside the big landlords, 
who at that time rapidly emerged as a social estate in its own right, 
and alongside their free vassals there appeared now a class of 
unfree men which gradually absorbed the remnants of the 
common free men. But these unfree men had either themselves 
been free or were children of free men; those who had lived for 
three or more generations in hereditary bondage formed a small 
minority. Moreover, for the most part they were not Saxon, 
Wendish, or other prisoners of war brought in from outside, but 
natives of Frankish or Romance origin. Such people, especially 
when they began to constitute the bulk of the population, were not 
as easy to deal with as inherited or foreign serfs. They were not 
yet used to servitude, the blows which even the colonus received 
(Capitularies of 853, 861, 873) were still seen as a humiliation and 
not as something natural. Hence the many plots and risings of 
unfree men and even peasant vassals. Charlemagne himself 
a B. E. Ch. Guérard, Polyptyque de l'abbé Irminon in P. Roth, op. cit., 
p. 378.—  Ed. 
b "A colon or slave has to return to his natural servitude whether he is willing 
or not."—Ed. 
c Quoted according to P. Roth, op. cit., pp. 376-77.— Ed 

=====第109页=====
The Frankish Period 81 
brutally crushed  an uprising  of the  tenants  of the  bishopric  of 
Reims.  In a  Capitulary  of 821  Louis  the  Pious mentions slaves 
(servorum) plotting  in Flanders  and  Menapiscus  (on the  upper 
Lys).  Risings  of the  liege  men  (homines)  of the  Mainz bishopric  had 
to be put  down  in 848 and  866. a Orders  to stamp  out  such plots 
are reiterated  in capitularies from  779  onwards.  The  rising  of the 
Stellinga  in Saxony  5 must likewise  be included here.  The  fact that 
from  the end of the  eighth century  and the  beginning  of the  ninth 
gradually  a definite limit  was  fixed  for the  obligations  of the 
unfree  men, and  even  of the  settled slaves,  and  that this limit, 
which  was not to be  exceeded,  was  laid down  by Charlemagne  in 
his Capitularies,  was  obviously  a consequence  of the  threatening 
attitude  of the  enthralled masses. 
The price therefore which Charlemagne  had to pay for his new 
Roman Empire46  was the  annihilation  of the  social estate  of 
common free  men, who had  constituted  the  entire Frankish 
people  at the  time  of the  conquest  of Gaul,  and the  division  of the 
people into  big  landlords, vassals  and  serfs.  But  with  the  common 
free men the old  military system collapsed,  and  with these  two the 
monarchy went down. Charlemagne  had  destroyed  the  foundation 
of his own  power.  It could still sustain  him, but  under  his 
successors  it became evident what  the  work  of his  hands  had  been 
in reality. 
NOTE:  THE  FRANCONIAN DIALECT47 
This dialect  has  received curious treatment from philologists. 
Whereas Grimm  let it  disappear into French  and  High German,b 
more recent ones grant  it a  spread extending from Dunkirk  and 
Amsterdam  to the  Unstrut, Saale  and Rezat,  and in  some cases 
even  as far as the  Danube  and,  through colonisation,  to the 
Riesengebirge. While even  a philologist like Moritz Heyne 
constructs  an Old Low  Franconian language 0 from  a manuscript 
of the  Heliand prepared  in Werden, 48 a language that  is almost 
pure  Old  Saxon with  a very faint tinge  of Franconian, Braune 
lumps together  all the  truly  Low  Franconian dialects without 
further comment  as Saxon here  and  Dutch there. d And  finally 
a See P.  Roth,  op. cit., p. 378,  Note 47.—  Ed 
b J. Grimm, Geschichte  der deutschen Sprache,  Vol. 1,  Leipzig,  1848, p.  535.—  Ed. 
c M. Heyne, Kleine altsächsische  und  altniederfränkische Grammatik, Paderborn, 
1873,  p. 2.—Ed. 
d W.  Braune,  Zur  Kenntnis  des  Fränkischen  und zur  hochdeutschen  Lautverschiebung. 
In: Beiträge  zur  Geschichte  der deutschen Sprache  und  Literatur,  Vol. I, Halle,  1874, 
pp. 1-56.— Ed 

=====第110页=====
82 Frederick Engels 
Arnold limits the territory conquered by the Ripuarians to the 
area north of the watershed of the Ahr and the Mosel, letting 
everything situated to the south and south-west be occupied, first 
by Alamanni, later exclusively by the Chatti (whom he also lumps 
together with the Franks), thus letting them speak Alamannic-
Chattish. 3 
First let us reduce the Franconian language area to its real 
limits.  Thuringia, Hesse and Main Franconia have no other claim 
whatever to be included in it except that in the Carolingian period 
they were part of what was called Francia. The language spoken 
east of the Spessart and Vogelsberg and the Kahler Asten is 
anything but Franconian. Hesse and Thuringia have their own 
independent dialects, being inhabited by independent peoples; in 
Main Franconia a mixed Slav, Thuringian and Hessian population 
was permeated with Bavarian and Frankish elements and evolved 
its own peculiar dialect. Only if one employs as the main criterion 
the extent to which the High German sound shift penetrated into 
these dialects can these three linguistic branches be assigned to 
Franconian. Yet as we shall see, it is precisely this procedure which 
creates all the confusion when the Franconian language is assessed 
by non-Franks. 
Let us commence with the oldest records and first view Moritz 
Heyne's* so-called Old Low Franconian in the correct light. The 
so-called Cotton Manuscript of the Heliand, prepared in Werden 
and now preserved in Oxford, is supposed to be Old Low 
Franconian because it was produced in the monastery of Werden, 
still on Frankish soil though close to the Saxon frontier. Here the 
old tribal boundary is, to this day, the boundary between Berg and 
Mark; of the abbeys situated in between, Werden belongs to 
Franconia, Essen to Saxony. Werden is bounded in the immediate 
vicinity, to the east and north, by indisputably Saxon communities; 
in the plain between the Ruhr and the Lippe the Saxon language 
pushes forward in places almost to the Rhine. The fact that a 
Saxon work is copied in Werden, obviously by a Frank, and that 
here and there this Frank has let slip from his pen Franconian 
word forms, is far from being sufficient reason to declare the 
language of the copy to be Franconian. Apart from the Cotton 
Heliand Heyne considers as Low Franconian a number of 
* Kleine altsächsische und altniederfränkische Grammatik by Moritz Heyne, 
Paderborn, 1873. 
a W. Arnold, Deutsche Urzeit, Gotha, 1879, pp. 150-53.— Ed. 

=====第111页=====
The Frankish Period 83 
fragments from Werden that show the same character, and the 
remains of a psalm translation, 3 which according to him originated 
in the area of Aachen, whereas Kern (Glossen in der Lex Salica) h 
states quite simply that it is Dutch. In fact it does contain purely 
Dutch forms on the one hand, but also genuine Rhenish 
Franconian forms and even traces of the High German sound 
shift. It obviously originated on the frontier between Dutch and 
Rhenish Franconian, say between Aachen and Maastricht. Its 
language is much later than that of the two Heliand manuscripts. 
The Cotton Heliand alone is enough, however, for us to 
establish beyond doubt from the few Franconian forms that occur 
in it some of the main differences between Franconian and Saxon. 
I. In all Ingaevonian dialects the three persons of the present 
indicative plural all have the same ending, namely a dental 
preceded by a vowel: Old Saxon -à, Anglo-Saxon -dh, Old Frisian 
-th (which probably also stands for -dh). Thus Old Saxon hebbiad 
means "we have, you have, they have"; similarly, all three persons 
of fallan, gewinnan are the same:  fallad,  winnad.  It is the third 
person that has taken over all three, but, mark well, with the 
specifically Ingaevonian loss of n before -d or -dh, the loss 
affecting all the three dialects mentioned. Of all living dialects, 
only Westphalian has preserved this peculiarity; to this very day 
Westphalian has  vox,  ji, se hebbed,  etc. The other Saxon dialects no 
longer retain this feature, nor does West Frisian; they differentiate 
the three persons. 0 
The West Rhenish psalmsd  have, like Middle High German, -n 
in the first person plural, -t in the second, -nt in the third. 
However, at times the Cotton Heliand has, besides the Saxon 
forms,  quite different forms: tholônd —they suffer, gornônd —you 
complain, and as the imperative, marient —announce, seggient— 
say, where Saxon requires  tholôd,  gornôd, mâriad,  seggiad. These 
forms are not merely Franconian, they are in fact genuine local 
Werden, Berg dialect to this day. In Bergish we also find that all 
three persons of the present plural are the same, but end not as in 
a Altniederdeutsche Interlinearversion der Psalmen. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche 
Denkmäler published by Moritz Heyne, 2nd ed., Paderborn, 1867, pp. 1-40. For a 
description of the psalms see M. Heyne, Kleine altsächsische und altniederfränkische 
Grammatik, p. 2.— Ed. 
b H. Kern, Die Glossen in der Lex Salica und die Sprache der salischen Franken. 
Beitrag zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprachen, The Hague, 1869, p. 2, Note 1.— Ed. 
c Engels added in pencil here "and the 3rd person from the 2nd".— Ed. 
d See Altniederdeutsche Interlinearversion der Psalmen. — Ed. 
8-1243 

=====第112页=====
84 Frederick Engels 
Saxon in -à, but as in Franconian in -nt. As opposed to Märkish wi 
hebbed,  there right on the border they say wi hant, and as in the 
above imperative seggient they say seient ens—[German] sagt einmal 
(tell me). On the basis of this simple observation, that here in 
Bergish the three persons have been levelled, Braune and others 3 
have quite simply declared the entire Bergish highlands to be 
Saxon. The rule certainly advanced into the area from Saxony; 
unfortunately, however, it is put into effect in the Franconian 
manner, thus proving the reverse of what it is intended to prove. 
The loss of n before dentals in the Ingaevonian dialects is not 
restricted to this case; it is less common in Old Frisian, but fairly 
widespread in Old Saxon and Anglo-Saxon: mudh— Mund 
[mouth],  kudh—kund [known], us— uns [us], odhar— ein anderer 
[other].  The Frankish copyist of the Heliand in Werden twice has 
the Franconian form andar for odhar. b The Werden tax registers 49 
alternate between the Franconian form of the names Reinswind, 
Meginswind and the Saxon Reinswid and Meginswid. The psalms of 
the left bank of the Rhine,0  on the other hand, regularly have 
munt, kunt, uns; only once have the so-called Lipsius Glosses 50 
(excerpted from the lost manuscript of these psalms) farkutha 
abominabiles instead of farkuntha. Similarly, the Old Salic records 
have consistently preserved the n in the names  Gund,  Segenand, 
Chlodosindis, Ansbertus, etc., which is irrelevant. The modern 
Franconian dialects regularly have the n (sole exception in Bergish 
is the form 05— uns [us]). 
II. The linguistic records from which the so-called Old Saxon 
grammar is usually constructed all belong to south-western 
Westphalia, Münster, Freckenhorst, Essen. The language of these 
records shows a few essential deviations not only from the general 
Ingaevonian forms, but also from such forms as have been 
preserved for us in proper names from Engern and Eastphalia as 
genuine Old Saxon; however, they are in curious agreement with 
Franconian and Old High German. The latest grammarian of the 
dialect, Cosijn, therefore even terms it Old West Saxon. d 
Since in this investigation we must almost totally rely on proper 
names in Latin documents, the demonstrable differences in form 
between West and East Saxon can only be few in number; they are 
restricted to two cases, but these are very important. 
a See W. Braune, Zur Kenntnis des Fränkischen..., pp. 12, 16 and M. Heyne, 
Kleine altsächsische und altniederfränkische Grammatik, p. 50.— Ed. 
b M. Heyne, Kleine altsächsische und altniederfränkische Grammatik, p. 2.— Ed. 
c Altniederdeutsche Interlinearversion der Psalmen. —Ed. 
d P. J. Cosijn, Kurzgefaßte altwestsächsische Grammatik, Leiden,  1881.—  Ed. 

=====第113页=====
The Frankish Period 85 
1. Anglo-Saxon and Old Frisian have -a in the genitive plural of 
all declensions. Old West Saxon, Old Franconian and Old High 
German, on the other hand, have -6. So what is the correct Old 
Saxon form? Should this dialect in fact deviate from the 
Ingaevonian rule on this point? 
The documents from Engern and Eastphalia provide the 
answer. In Stedieraburg, Horsadal, Winethahûsen, Edingahûsun, 
Magathahurg and many other names, the first part of the 
compound is in the genitive plural and has -a. Even in Westphalia 
the -a has still not entirely disappeared: the Freckenhorst Roll 
once has Aningera lô and Wernera-Holthuson? and the -o in 
Osnabrück is likewise an old genitive plural. 
2. Similarly, the weak masculine in Franconian, as in Old High 
German, ends in -o, as opposed to Gothic-Ingaevonian -a. In Old 
West Saxon -o is likewise established as the rule; thus another 
deviation from Ingaevonian usage. But this by no means applies to 
Old Saxon as a whole. Not even in Westphalia did -o apply 
without exception; alongside -o the Freckenhorst Roll already has 
a whole succession of names in -a {Sîhoda, Uffa, Asica, Hassa, 
Wenda, etc.,); the Paderborn records in Wigand 51 nearly always 
show -a, only exceptionally -o; in documents from Eastphalia -a 
dominates almost exclusively; so that Jakob Grimm {Geschichte der 
deutschen Sprache) h already comes to the conclusion that there can 
be no mistaking the fact that -a and -an (in oblique cases) was the 
original Saxon form common to all parts of the nation. The 
advance of -o instead of -a was not restricted to Westphalia either. 
At the beginning of the 15th century the East Frisian men's names 
of the chronicles, etc., almost regularly have -o; Fokko, Occo, Enno, 
Smelo,  etc., as opposed to the earlier -a still preserved in odd cases 
in West Frisian. 
It may therefore be taken for established that both deviations of 
West Saxon from the Ingaevonian rule are not originally Saxon 
but caused by foreign influence. This influence is easily explained 
by the fact that West Saxony was formerly Frankish territory. Only 
after the departure of the main mass of the Franks did the Saxons 
move across the Osning and Egge gradually up to the line that 
even today divides Mark and Sauerland from Berg and Sieger-
land. The influence of the Franks who remained behind and have 
now merged with the Saxons shows in those two cases of -o 
a Freckenhorster Heberolle. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler, pp. 70, 
72.—  Ed. 
b J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 2. Leipzig, 1848, p. 649.— Ed. 
8* 

=====第114页=====
86 Frederick Engels 
instead of -a; it is still unmistakable in the present-day dialects. 
III. A peculiarity of the Rhenish Franconian language which 
extends from the Ruhr to the Mosel is the ending of the 1st 
[person] present indicative in -n, which is best preserved in cases 3 
where it is followed by a vowel: dat don ek— das tue ich [I do  that], 
ek han— ich habe [I have] (Bergish). This verb form applies to the 
whole lower Rhine and the Mosel, at least as far as the 
Lotharingian border: don, han. The same peculiarity is already 
found in the left-bank Rhenish psalms: biddon— ich bitte [I ask], 
wirthon—ich werde [I become], though not consistently. 0 This-n is 
lacking in the Salic dialect; there even the oldest record53  has ec 
forsacho, gelobo. It is also missing in Dutch. Old West Saxon is here 
distinct from Franconian in so far as it knows this -n in one 
conjugation only (the so-called second weak): skawôn —ich schaue [I 
look],  thionôn —ich diene [I serve], etc. It is quite alien to 
Anglo-Saxon and Old Frisian. We may therefore assume that this 
-n is also a Franconian remnant in Old West Saxon. 
Apart from the numerous proper names preserved in docu­
ments, etc., and the glosses of the Lex Salica, which are often 
distorted past recognition, we have almost no remains of the Salic 
dialect at all. Nevertheless, Kern (Die Glossen in der Lex Salica) has 
removed a considerable number of these distortions and estab­
lished the text, in many cases with certainty, in others with great 
likelihood, demonstrating that it is written in a language that is the 
immediate precursor of Middle and Modern Dutch. But the 
material reconstructed in this way is naturally not directly 
applicable for the grammar. Apart from this, all we possess is the 
brief abjuration charm 0 added to the Capitulary of Carloman of 
743 and probably drawn up at the synod of Lestines, thus in 
Belgium. And here we come across two characteristic Franconian 
words right at the outset: ec forsacho— ich entsage [I renounce]. Ec 
for ich [I] is widespread among the Franks even today. In Trier 
and Luxemburg eich, in Cologne and Aachen êch, in Bergish ek. 
Though written Dutch has ik, ek is often heard in the vernacular, 
particularly in Flanders. The Old Salic names Segenandus, Segemun-
dus, Segefredus are unanimous in showing e for i. 
In forsacho, ch stands for g between vowels: this occurs 
elsewhere in the records (rachineburgius) and is even today a sign 
a Engels' note in pencil in the margin: "Otfried". 52—Ed. 
b See M. Heyne, Kleine altsächsische und altnieder fränkische Grammatik, p. 50.— 
Ed. 
c Taufgelöbnis. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler, p. 85.— Ed. 

=====第115页=====
The Frankish Period 87 
of all the Franconian dialects from the Palatinate to the North Sea. 
We shall return to these two chief characteristics of Franconian—e 
often for i, and ch between vowels for g—in the individual 
dialects. 
As the result of the above investigation, which may be compared 
with Grimm's statements about Old Franconian in the Geschichte 
der deutschen Sprache at the end of the first volume [p. 547], we 
may posit this thesis, which anyway is hardly disputed now: that in 
the 6th and 7th centuries Franconian was already a dialect of its 
own, forming the transition between High German, in particular 
Alamannic, and Ingaevonian, in particular Saxon and Frisian, and 
at that time still completely at the Gothic-Low German stage of 
shifting. But once this has been conceded it has also been 
acknowledged that the Franks were not a mish-mash of different 
peoples allied by external circumstances, but a main German 
people in their own right, the Iscaevonians, who probably 
absorbed foreign constituents at different times but also had the 
strength to assimilate them. Similarly we may regard it as proven 
that each of the main branches of the Franconian people already 
spoke a peculiar dialect at an early stage, that the language 
divided into Salic and Ripuarian and that many distinguishing 
peculiarities of the old dialects still live on in the present-day 
vernacular. 
Let us now move on to these still living dialects. 
1. There is no longer any doubt that Salic lives on in the two 
Netherlands dialects, Flemish and Dutch, and at its purest in the 
areas that have been Frankish ever since the 6th century. For after 
the great tidal waves of the 12th, 13th and 14th centuries had 
wiped out almost all Zeeland and formed the Zuider Zee, the 
Dollart and the Jade, thus breaking the geographical, and also the 
political, cohesion of the Frisians, the remains of old Frisian liberty 
succumbed to the pressure of the surrounding landed gentry,54 
and with it, almost everywhere, the Frisian language, too. To the 
west it was hemmed in or wholly suppressed by Dutch, to the east 
and north by Saxon and Danish, in all cases leaving behind strong 
traces in the invading language. In the 16th and 17th centuries 
the old Frisian area of Zeeland and Holland became the centre 
and mainstay of the struggle for independence in the Nether­
lands, 55 just as they were already the seat of the main trading 
towns of the country. Thus it was chiefly here that the modern 

=====第116页=====
88 Frederick Engels 
written language of the Netherlands came into being, absorbing 
Frisian elements, words and word forms, which can be clearly 
distinguished from the Franconian foundation. On the other 
hand, the Saxon language advanced from the east on to formerly 
Frisian and Frankish territory. It must be left to detailed research 
to draw up the exact boundaries; purely Salic are only the 
Flemish-speaking parts of Belgium, North Brabant, Utrecht, along 
with Gelderland and Overijssel with the exception of the easterly, 
Saxon areas. 
Between the French linguistic boundary on the Maas and the 
Saxon boundary north of the Rhine, the Salians and the 
Ripuarians clashed. We shall discuss later the matter of the 
demarcation line, which here too has yet to be ascertained by 
detailed study. But first let us consider the grammatical 
peculiarities of Dutch. 
As for the vowels, we see at once that i is replaced by e in the 
true Franconian manner: brengen— bringen [bring], kreb— Krippe 
[crib],  hemel— Himmel  [sky],  geweten— Gewissen [conscience], ben— 
bin [am], stem— Stimme [voice]. This is even more frequently the 
case in Middle Dutch: gewes— gewiss [certain], es—ist [is], selver— 
Silber [silver], blent—blind [blind], where Modern Dutch has gewis, 
is, zilver,  blind.  Similarly in the vicinity of Ghent I find two places, 
Destelbergen and Desteldonck, according to which Distel [thistle] is to 
this day Destel. Middle Dutch, raised on pure Franconian soil, is 
here in exact agreement with Ripuarian, while the Modern Dutch 
written language, having been exposed to Frisian influence, is less 
so. 
Further, again in agreement with Ripuarian, o replaces u before 
m or n plus following consonant, though not so consistently as in 
Middle Dutch and Ripuarian. Beside konst, gonst,  kond,  Modern 
Dutch has kunst, gunst, kund [art, favour, known]; yet both agree in 
having mond— Mund [mouth], hond— Hund  [dog],  jong— jung 
[young],  ons— uns [us]. 
In contrast to Ripuarian, the long i (ij) has become ei as far as 
pronunciation is concerned, which does not yet seem to have been 
the case in Middle Dutch. However, this ei is not pronounced as 
High German ei  = ai, but really as  e + i, though not quite as thin as, 
e.g., the ej of the Danes and Slavs. Scarcely divergent from this 
sound is the diphthong written not ij but ei. Corresponding to 
High German au we find ou, ouw. 
The umlaut has disappeared from the inflexion. In the 
declension singular and plural have the same stem vowel, as do 
indicative and subjunctive in the conjugation. On the other hand, 

=====第117页=====
The Frankish Period 89 
umlaut does occur in word formation in two forms: 1. in the 
[mutation] of a to e by i common to all post-Gothic dialects; 2. in 
a form peculiar to Dutch that did not develop until later. Middle 
Dutch and Ripuarian still both have hus— Haus [house], brun — 
braun [brown], rum— geräumig [roomy], tun—Zaun [fence], plural 
huse, brune. Modern Dutch has only the forms huis, bruin, ruim, 
tuin (ui =High German eu), which are alien to Middle Dutch and 
Ripuarian. On the other hand, eu is already displacing short o 
(High German u) in Middle Dutch: jeughet, beside joghet, Modern 
Dutch jeugd— Jugend [youth]; doghet— Tugend [virtue], dor— Tür 
[door],  kor—Wahl [choice], alongside the forms with eu; Modern 
Dutch permits the forms  deugd,  keur, deur only. This is in perfect 
agreement with the eu that developed from the 12th century in 
Northern French for Latin stressed o. Kern draws attention to a 
third case 3: the mutated form ei from ê (ee) in Modern Dutch. All 
these three forms of umlaut are unknown in Ripuarian, as in the 
other dialects, and are a special characteristic of Dutch. 
Aid, alt, old, olt, uld, ult turn into oud, out. This transition is 
already present in Middle Dutch, in which, however, guldin, hulde, 
sculde still occur alongside goudin, houde, scoude (sollte) [should], so 
that it is possible to establish roughly the time when it was 
introduced. It is also peculiar to Dutch, at least as opposed to all 
the other continental Germanic dialects; it does, however, exist in 
the Lancashire dialect of English:  gowd, howd,  owd for  gold, hold, 
old. 
As far as the consonants are concerned, Dutch has no pure g 
(the guttural Italian, French or English g). This consonant is 
pronounced as a strongly aspirated gh, which in certain sound 
combinations does not differ from the deeply guttural (Swiss, 
Modern Greek or Russian) ch. We have seen that this transition of 
g into ch was already known in Old Salic. It is also found in a part 
of Ripuarian and the Saxon dialects that developed on formerly 
Frankish soil, e.g. in Münsterland, where, as in Bergish, even 
initial j, especially in foreign words, on occasion sounds like ch, 
and it is possible to hear Choseph and even Chahr (Jahr) [year]. If 
M. Heyne had taken this into account, 0 he might have spared 
himself his difficulty with the frequent confusion and mutual 
alliteration of j, g and ch in the Heliand. 
In some cases Dutch retains the initial wr: wringen—ringen 
[ring],  wreed—cruel, harsh, wreken— rächen [avenge]. There is also a 
remnant of this in Ripuarian. 
a H. Kern, Die Glossen in der Lex Salica..., p. Ill, Note 1.— Ed. 
b M. Heyne, Kleine altsächsische und altniederfränkische Grammatik, p.  21.—  Ed. 

=====第118页=====
90 Frederick Engels 
The softening of the diminutive -ken to -tje, -je is derived from 
Frisian: mannet je —Männchen [little man], biet je — Bienchen [little 
bee],  halsje — Hälschen [little throat], etc. But k is also retained: 
vrouken — Frauchen [little woman], hoedeken — Hütchen [little hat]. 
Flemish better preserves the k, at least in the vernacular; the 
famous little man in Brussels is called Manneken-Pis. 56 The French 
have thus borrowed their mannequin, and the English their 
manikin, from Flemish. The plural of both endings is -5: vroukens, 
mannetjes. We shall come across this -s again in Ripuarian. 
In common with Saxon and even Scandinavian dialects, Dutch 
shows the loss of d between vowels, especially betwen two e's: leder 
and leer, weder and weer, neder and neer, vader and vaer, moeder 
and moer—Mutter [mother]. 
The Dutch declension shows a complete mixture of strong and 
weak forms, so that, as the plural umlaut is also lacking, the Dutch 
plural forms only in the rarest cases agree with even the Ripuarian 
or Saxon ones, and this, too, is a very tangible characteristic of the 
language. 
Common to Salic and Ripuarian and all the Ingaevonian dialects 
is the loss of the nominative indicator in er, der, wer [he, the, 
who]:  Dutch hij, de (article) and die (demonstrative pronoun), 
wie. 
To go into the conjugation would take us too far. What has 
been said here will suffice to distinguish the present-day Salic 
language everywhere from the neighbouring dialects. Closer 
examination of the Dutch dialects is bound to bring to light much 
of importance. 
II. Rhenish Franconian. With this term I denote all the remain­
ing Franconian dialects. I do not place Salic in opposition to 
Ripuarian in the old manner, and there is a very good reason for 
this. 
Even Arnold3  has drawn attention to the fact that the 
Ripuarians in the proper sense occupied a relatively limited area, 
the southern boundary of which is more or less marked by the two 
places Reifferscheid near Adenau and near Schleiden. This is 
correct in so far as in this way the purely Ripuarian territory is 
demarcated linguistically too from the territories occupied by 
genuine Ripuarians after, or at the same time as, other German 
tribes.  Since the name Low Franconian has already acquired 
another meaning which also includes Salic, I am left only with the 
a W. Arnold, Deutsche Urzeit, Gotha, 1879, p. 150.— Ed. 

=====第119页=====
The Frankish Period 91 
term Ripuarian—in the narrower sense—to denote the group of 
closely related dialects which extend from the Salic linguistic 
boundary up to this line. 
1. Ripuarian. The dividing line between this group of dialects 
and the Salic by no means coincides with the Dutch-German 
border. On the contrary, the major part of the district Rees, where 
in the area of Wesel Salic, Ripuarian and Saxon meet, still belongs 
to Salic on the right bank of the Rhine. On the left bank the areas 
of Kleve and Geldern are Salic, roughly as far as a line drawn 
from the Rhine between Xanten and Wesel, south of the village of 
Vluyn (west of Mors) and from there south-west towards Venlo. A 
more exact definition of the boundary is only possible on the spot 
since many Ripuarian names have been preserved on the maps in 
Salic-Dutch form as the result of many years of Dutch administra­
tion not only in Geldern but also in the county of Mors. 
From the area of Venlo upwards the greater part of the right 
bank of the Maas seems to be Ripuarian, so that here the political 
border nowhere crosses Salic territory but only Ripuarian and this 
extends almost as far as Maastricht. Names in -heim (not -hem) 
and the specifically Ripuarian ending -ich occur here in great 
numbers on Dutch territory, further south already names in 
-broich (Dutch -broek), e.g. Dallenbroich near Roermond; likewise in 
-rade (Bingelrade near Sittard, plus Amstenrade, Hobbelrade and 6 
or 7 others); the little piece of German territory that has fallen to 
Belgium to the right of the Maas, is entirely Ripuarian (cf. 
Kriitzenberg, 9 kilometres from the Maas, with Kruisberg, north of 
Venlo). Indeed, left of the Maas, in the Belgian so-called Limburg 
I find Kessenich near Maaseyk, Stockheim and Reekheim on the 
Maas,  Gellik near Maastricht as proof that no purely Salic 
population lives here. 
The Ripuarian border with Saxony starts from the area of 
Wesel, running south-east at an increasing distance from the 
Rhine, between Mülheim on the Ruhr and Werden on the 
Franconian side and Essen on the Saxon side, to the border 
between Berg and Mark, here even now the border between the 
Rhine Province and Westphalia. It does not leave this border 
until south of Olpe, where it proceeds eastwards, dividing the 
Siegerland as Franconian from the Saxon Sauerland. Further east, 
the Hessian dialect soon takes over. 
The above-mentioned southern border with the dialect which I 
term Middle Franconian is in rough agreement with the southern 
borders of the old districts of Avalgau, Bonngau and Eiflia, and 
from there runs westwards to Wallonia, keeping rather to the 

=====第120页=====
92 Frederick Engels 
south. This area thus circumscribed includes the big old district of 
Ripuaria as well as parts of the districts adjoining it to the north 
and west. 
As already stated, Ripuarian agrees in many respects with 
Dutch, but in such a way that Middle Dutch is closer to it than 
Modern Dutch. Ripuarian agrees with Modern Dutch in its 
pronunciation of ei  = e+ i and ou for au, the transition of i to e, 
which goes much further in Ripuarian and Middle Dutch than in 
Modern Dutch: the Middle Dutch gewes, es, blend,  selver (silver) are 
still good Ripuarian to this day. Similarly, and consistently so, u 
changes into o before m or n with a following consonant: jong, 
lomp, domm, konst. If this following consonant is a d or a t, this 
changes to g or k in some dialects; e.g. honk— Hund  [dog],  plural 
höng, where the softening to g is an aftereffect of the loss of the 
final vowel, e. 
However, the situation as regards umlaut in Ripuarian is very 
different from that of Dutch; it is in general agreement with High 
German, and in odd exceptions with Saxon (e.g. hanen for Hähne 
[cocks]). 
Initial wr has become hardened to fr, retained in fringen—to 
wring water out of a cloth, etc., and frêd (Dutch wreed) with the 
meaning hardy, weather-beaten. 
For er, der, wer it has hê, de, wê. 
The declension is midway between High German and Saxon. 
Plural forms in -5 are common, but are hardly ever in agreement 
with the Dutch; this -5 becomes -r in local High German in correct 
memory of the linguistic development. 
The diminutive -ken, -chen is changed to -sehen after n: 
männschen; the plural has -5 as in Dutch (männsches). Both forms 
extend all the way into Lorraine. 
r is lost before s, st, d, t, z, the preceding vowel remaining short 
in some dialects, being lengthened in others. Thus hart [hard] 
becomes halt (Bergish), haad (Cologne). In the process st becomes 
seht through Upper German influence: Durst [thirst] —  doascht 
(Bergish), dôscht (Cologne). 
Similarly, initial si, sw, st, sp have become schl, etc., through High 
German influence. 
As in Dutch, pure g is unknown in Ripuarian. Some of the 
dialects on the Salic border, as well as Bergish, have aspirated gh 
for initial and medial g, though softer than in Dutch. Thé rest 
have j. Final g is everywhere pronounced as ch, though not like 
the hard Dutch sound, but like the soft Rhenish Franconian ch, 
which sounds like a hardened j. The essentially Low German 

=====第121页=====
The Frankish Period 93 
character of Ripuarian is attested by terms such as boven for oben 
[above]. 
The majority of the voiceless consonants are everywhere at the 
first stage of the sound shift. Only t and medial and final k, 
occasionally p, show the High German sound shift in the southern 
dialects: they have lôsze for löten—lassen  [let],  holz for holt [wood], 
rich for rik— reich  [rich],  êch for ek— ich [I], pief for pipe— Pfeife 
[pipe].  But et, dat, wat and a few others are retained. 
It is this not even consistently carried out intrusion of the High 
German sound shift in three cases on which the usual demarcation 
of Middle and Low Franconian is based. But in this way a group 
of dialects that belong together on. account of definite features in 
the sound system, as demonstrated, which are still recognised in 
the popular mind as belonging together, are torn apart arbitrarily 
and on the basis of a characteristic that is here quite fortuitous. 
Quite fortuitous, I say. Each of the other Central German 
dialects, Hessian, Thuringian, Upper Saxon, etc., is generally 
speaking at a specific stage of the High German sound shift. They 
may show rather less shifting on the Low Saxon border and rather 
more on the Upper German border, but that is at most only 
enough to justify local differences. Franconian, on the other hand, 
shows no shifting at all on the North Sea, Maas and Lower Rhine, 
on the Alamannic border almost entirely Alamannic shifting; in 
between there are at least three intermediate stages. The shift thus 
penetrated into Rhenish Franconian when it had already de­
veloped independently, splitting it up into several pieces. The last 
trace of this shift need not by any means vanish on the border of a 
particular group of dialects that was already in existence; it may 
die out in the midst of such a group, as it in fact does. On the 
other hand, the truly dialect-forming influence of the shift, as we 
shall see, does indeed cease on the border of two dialect groups 
that were already different beforehand. And did not the schl, schw, 
etc., and the final seht come to us from High German in a similar 
way and at an even later date? These however—at least the 
first—even go deep into Westphalia. 
The Ripuarian dialects formed a fixed group long before some 
of them learnt to shift t and medial and final k and p. How far 
this change was able to advance within the group was and remains 
for the group a matter of chance. The dialect of Neuss is identical 
with that of Krefeld and München-Gladbach —apart from minor 
differences that a stranger cannot hear at all. Nevertheless, one is 
supposed to be Middle Franconian, the other Low Franconian. 
The dialect of the Berg industrial country merges into that of the 

=====第122页=====
94 Frederick Engels 
south-west Rhine plain in imperceptible stages. And yet they are 
supposed to belong to two totally different groups. For anyone 
who is at home in the region it is obvious that book-learning is 
here forcing the living dialects, with which it is scarcely acquainted 
if at all, into the Procrustean bed of characteristics constructed a 
priori. 
As a result of this purely superficial distinction the southern 
Ripuarian dialects are lumped together into a so-called Middle 
Franconian with other dialects from which they diverge, as we 
shall see, far more than they do from the so-called Low 
Franconian. Owing to the same superficial distinction, a narrow 
strip is held back because you are at a loss what to do with it and 
are finally obliged to declare one part Saxon and another Dutch, 
which is in glaring contradiction to the state of affairs in these 
dialects. 
Let us take, for instance, the Bergish dialect, which Braune 
without much ado calls Saxon. a It forms, as we have seen, all three 
persons plural of the present indicative in the same way, but as in 
Franconian, with the ancient form -nt. It regularly has o instead of 
u before m and n followed by a consonant, which according to 
the same Braune is definitely un-Saxon and specifically Low 
Franconian. It agrees with the other Ripuarian dialects in all the 
characteristics set out above. While it imperceptibly merges into the 
dialect of the Rhine plain from village to village, from farm 
to farm, it is most sharply separated from the Saxon dialect on the 
Westphalian border. Perhaps nowhere else in all Germany is there 
such an abruptly drawn linguistic border as here. And what a 
distance between the languages! The whole vowel system seems to 
be turned upside down; the sharp Low Franconian ei contrasts 
abruptly with the broadest ai, just as ou contrasts with au; not one 
of the many diphthongs and vocalic glides is in agreement; here 
sch as in the rest of Germany, there s-ch as in Holland; here wi 
hant, there wi  hebbed;  here the dual forms get and enk used as the 
plural (German ihr and euch), there only i, ji, and ü, jü; here the 
sparrow is called common Ripuarian Masche, there common 
Westphalian Lüning. Not to mention other peculiarities specific to 
the Bergish dialect which also suddenly vanish here on the border. 
The individuality of a dialect is most apparent to the stranger if 
the person in question is not speaking dialect but High German, 
which is more intelligible to the stranger, and which in the case of 
most Germans is, of course, strongly coloured by their respective 
a W. .Braune, Zur Kenntnis des Fränkischen..., p. 11.—  Ed. 

=====第123页=====
The Frankish Period 95 
dialect. But then the allegedly Saxon inhabitant of the Berg 
industrial district is for the non-native quite indistinguishable from 
the inhabitant of the Rhine plain, who is supposed to be Middle 
Franconian, except for the somewhat more harshly aspirated gh, 
where the other says j. A man from Heckinghaus in Berg (from 
Oberbarmen, left of the Wupper), however, and a man from 
Langerfeld in Mark, who lives scarcely a kilometre further east, 
are further apart in the local High German of everyday life than 
the man from Heckinghaus and one from Coblenz, let alone 
anyone from Aachen or Bonn. 
The advance of the shift of t and final k makes such a small 
impression on the Rhenish Frank himself as a linguistic boundary 
that even in an area well known to him he will first have to reflect 
where the border runs between t and z, k and ch, and that, when 
crossing this border, he finds that one comes almost as naturally to 
him as the other. This is made even easier by the many High 
German words with shifted 5z, z, ch and / that have entered the 
dialects. A striking example is afforded by the old Bergish penal 
code from the 14th century (Lacomblet, Archiv, I, p. 79  ff. a). There 
we find zo, uiss (aus), zween, bezahlen; alongside them in the same 
sentence: selten, dat nutteste (nutzeste); likewise Dache, redelich beside 
reichet (reicht); Upiaden, upheven, hulper (Helfer) beside verkouffen. 
In another paragraph p. 85 it has alternately zo and tho— zu. In 
short, the dialects of the mountain and the plain are continually 
getting mixed up without this disturbing the scribe in the slightest. 
As usual, this final wave with which the High German sound shift 
washed over Frankish territory was also the weakest and shallow­
est. It is surely of interest to mark out the line showing how far 
this wave extends. But this line cannot be a dialect boundary; it is 
not able to tear apart an independent group of anciently and 
closely related dialects and provide the pretext for allocating the 
fragments thus violently divided to more distant groups in 
contradiction with all linguistic facts. 
2. Middle Franconian. From the above it is quite obvious that I 
place the northern border of Middle Franconian much further to 
the south than is customary. 
From the fact that the Middle Franconian region on the left 
bank of the Rhine seems to have been in the possession of the 
Alamanni at the time of Clovis, Arnold b finds reason to investigate 
a Archiv für die Geschichte des Niederrheins. Hrsg. von T. J. Lacomblet, Abt. 1: 
Sprach- und Rechtsalterthümer, Bd. 1, Heft 1, Düsseldorf, 1831, pp. 79-110.— Ed. 
b W. Arnold, Deutsche Urzeit, pp. 140-41.—  Ed. 

=====第124页=====
96 Frederick Engels 
the place-names there for traces of Alamannic settlement, and 
comes to the result that it is possible to prove the existence of a 
pre-Frankish, Alamannic population as far as the line Cologne-
Aachen; the traces, most numerous in the south, naturally 
becoming rarer and rarer to the north. The place-names, so he 
says,  point to 
"a temporary advance by the Alamanni as far as and beyond the area around 
Coblenz and Aachen, and also a longer occupation of the Wetterau and the 
southern areas of Nassau. For the names with the genuine Alamannic endings -ach, 
-brunn, -felden, -hofen, -ingen, -schwand, -stetten, -wangen, and -weiler, which nowhere 
occur in purely Frankish territory, are found scattered from Alsace onwards over 
the entire Palatinate, Rhenish Hesse and Rhenish Prussia, only they become rarer 
to the north, giving way more and more to the Franconian names par excellence in 
-bach,  -berg,  -dorf,  -born,  -feld,  -hausen, -heim, and -scheid"  (Deutsche Urzeit, p. [140]). 
Let us first examine the allegedly Alamannic names of the 
Middle Franconian country. I have not found the endings -brunn, 
-stetten, -felden, -wangen anywhere on the Reymann map57  (which I 
am using here, let it be said once and for all). The ending 
-schwand occurs once: Metzelschwander Hof near Winn weiler, and 
then again Schwanden north of Landstuhl. Thus both in the Upper 
Franconian Palatinate, with which we are not concerned here. In 
-ach we have along the Rhine Kreuznach, Bacharach, Hirzenach 
near St. Goar, Rübenach near Coblenz (Ribiniacus of the Spruner-
Menke District Map 58), Andernach (Antunnacum of the Romans), 
as well as Wassenach. Now, as the Romanised Celtic ending -acum 
occurs generally the whole length of the left bank of the Rhine in 
Roman times—Tolbiacum (Zülpich), Juliacum (Jülich), Tiberiacum 
(Ziewerich) near Bergheim, Mederiacum —in the majority of these 
cases the choice of the form -ach for -ich, at most, might betray 
Alamannic influence. Only one, Hirzenach (= Hirschenbach), is 
definitely German, and this was formerly called Hirzenowe, 
Hirschenau, not Hirschenbach, according to the district map. But 
how then do we explain Wallach, between Büderich and Rhein-
berg, close by the Salic border? At any rate it is certainly not 
Alamannic. 
In the Mosel region there are also a few -ach: Irmenach east of 
Bernkastel, Waltrach, Crettenach near Trier, Mettlach on the Saar. 
In Luxemburg Echternach, Medernach, Kanach; in Lorraine on the 
right of the Mosel only: Montenach, Rodelach, Brettnach. Even if we 
wished to concede that these names indicate an Alamannic 
settlement, then it is only a thinly scattered one, which, moreover, 
does not extend beyond the southernmost part of the Middle 
Franconian territory. 

=====第125页=====
The Frankish Period 97 
There remain -weiler, -hofen, and -ingen which require closer 
examination. 
Firstly, the ending -weiler is not properly speaking Alamannic 
but the provincial Latin villarium, villare, and is found only very 
exceptionally outside the old frontiers of the Roman Empire. The 
Germanisation of villare to weiler was not the privilege of the 
Alamanni, but they had a predilection for using this ending also 
for new settlements in large numbers. In so far as Roman villaria 
occurred, the Franks too were obliged to take over the ending, 
Germanising it as wilare, later weiler, or drop it altogether. 
Probably they did now one, now the other, just as they certainly 
gave new settlements names in -weiler here and there, but far 
more rarely than the Alamanni. Arnold 3 cannot find any 
important places in -weiler north of Eschweiler near Aachen and 
Ahrweiler. But the present importance of the place has nothing to 
do with it; the fact of the matter is that on the left bank of the 
Rhine the names in -weiler extend almost as far as the Salic border 
to the north (Garzweiler and Holzweiler are less than five miles 
from the nearest Dutch-speaking place of the Geldern area) and 
north of the line Eschweiler-Ahrweiler there are at least twenty of 
them. They are, understandably, commonest in the vicinity of the 
old Roman road from Maastricht via Jülich to Cologne, two of 
them, Walwiller and Nyswiller, even being on Dutch territory; are 
these Alamannic settlements too? 
Further south they hardly occur in the Eifel at all; the Malmedy 
section (Reymann, No. 159) has not one single case. In Luxem­
burg, too, they are rare, as on the lower Mosel and as far as the 
crest of the Hunsrück. Yet they frequently occur on the upper 
Mosel on both sides of the river, becoming increasingly common 
towards the east, becoming more and more the dominating ending 
to the east of Saarlouis. But this is where the Upper Franconian 
language begins, and here it is not disputed by anyone that the 
Alamanni had occupied the country before the Franks. 
Thus for the Middle Franconian and Ripuarian area the -weiler 
do not indicate Alamannic settlement any more than do the many 
-villers in France. 
Let us move on to -hofen. This ending is still less exclusively 
Alamannic. It occurs throughout the Franconian area, including 
present-day Westphalia, which was later occupied by the Saxons. 
On the right bank of the Rhine just a few examples: Wehofen near 
Ruhrort, Mellinghofen and Eppinghofen near Duisburg, Benningho-
a W. Arnold, op. cit., p.  141.—  Ed. 

=====第126页=====
98 Frederick Engels 
fen near Mettmann, another Eppinghofen near Dinslaken, in 
Westphalia Kellinghofen near Dorsten, Westhofen near Castrop, 
Wellinghofen, Wichlinghofen, Niederhofen, two Benninghofens, Bergho-
fen, Westhofen, Wandhofen, all on the H ell weg, etc. Ereshofen on the 
Agger, Martis villa, reaches back into pagan times, and the very 
designation of the god of war as Eru proves that no Alamanni are 
conceivable here: they called themselves Tiuwâri, thus calling the 
god not Eru but Tin, later shifted to Ziuf 
On the left bank of the Rhine it is even more difficult to 
demonstrate the Alamannic derivation of -hofen. There is another 
Eppinghofen south-east of Xanten, hence possibly Salic already, 
and from there on to the south the whole Ripuarian area is 
teeming with -hofen, alongside -hof for single farms. But if we 
proceed to Salic country, it gets even worse. The Maas is 
accompanied by -hofen on either side, from the French linguistic 
boundary onwards. For the sake of brevity let us pass to the west 
bank straight away. In Holland and Belgium we find at least seven 
Ophovens, in Holland Kinckhoven, etc; for Belgium let us first turn 
to the section for Löwen (Reymann, No. 139). Here we find 
Ruykhoven, Schalkhoven, Bommershoven, Wintershoven, Mettecoven, 
Helshoven, Engelmannshoven near Tongern; Zonhoven, Reekhoven, 
Konings-Hoven near Hasselt, further west Bogenhoven, Schuerhoven, 
Nieuwenhoven, Gippershoven, Baulershoven near St. Truyen; most 
westerlv Gussenhoven and Droenhoven east and north-east Tirlem-
ont (Thienen). The section for Turnhout (No. 120) has at least 33 
-hoven, most of them on Belgian territory. Further to the 
south-west the -hove (the dative -n is regularly dropped here) skirt 
the entire French linguistic border: from Heerlinkhove and 
Nieuwenhove near Ninove, which is itself a Romanised -hove,— 
omitting the intermediate ones, about ten in number—to 
Ghyverinckhove and Pollinchove near Dixmuyden and Volckerinck-
hove near St. Omer in French Flanders. Nieuwenhove occurs three 
times,  which proves that the ending is still living among the 
people. In addition a great number of single farms in -hof On this 
basis the supposedly exclusively Alamannic character of -hofen may 
be judged. 
Finally to -ingen. The designation of common descent with -ing, 
-ung, is common to all the Germanic peoples. Since settlement took 
place by kin, the ending plays an important part in place-names 
everywhere. Sometimes it is linked, in the genitive plural, with a 
local ending: Wolvarad-inga-husun near Minden, Snotingaham 
a J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. I, p.  508.—  Ed. 

=====第127页=====
The Frankish Period 99 
(Nottingham) in England. Sometimes the plural alone stands for 
the designation of place: Flissingha (Vlissingen), Phladirtinga 
(Vlaardingen), Crastlingi in Dutch Frisia; Grupilinga, Britlinga, 
Otlinga in Old Saxony. These names have mostly been reduced to 
the dative nowadays, ending in -ingen, rarely in -ing. Most peoples 
know and employ both forms; the Alamanni, so it seems, chiefly 
the latter, at any rate now.* Since, however, this also occurs among 
the Franks, Saxons and Frisians, it is very audacious to immediate­
ly deduce Alamannic settlement from the occurrence of place-
names in -ingen. 
The above mentioned names prove that names in -ingas 
(nominative plural) and -ingum, -ingon (dative plural) were 
nothing unusual either among the Frisians or among the Saxons, 
from the Scheide to the Elbe. Even today the -ingen are no rarity 
throughout Lower Saxony. In Westphalia on either side of the 
Ruhr, south of the line Unna-Soest, there are at least twelve 
-ingen,  alongside -ingsen and -inghausen. And as far as Franconian 
territory extends, we find names in -ingen. 
On the right bank of the Rhine we first find in Holland 
Wageningen on the Rhine and Genderingen on the Ijssel (and we 
exclude all possibly Frisian names), in the Berg country Huckingen, 
Ratingen, Ehingen (close behind them on Saxon territory Hattingen, 
Sodingen, Ummingen), Heisingen near Werden (which Grimm 
derives from the Silva Caesia of Tacitus c and which would thus be 
very ancient), Solingen, Hnsingen, Leichlingen (on the district map d 
Leigelingon, thus almost a thousand years old), Quettingen and on 
the Sieg Büdingen and Röcklingen, not counting two names in -ing. 
Henningen near Rheinbrohl and Ellingen in the Wied area provide 
the link with the area between Rhine, Lahn and Dill, which at a 
low estimate counts 12 -ingen. It is pointless to go any further 
south, since here begins the country that indisputably passed 
through a period of Alamannic settlement. 
* Rümmingen near Lörrach was formerly (764) called Romaninchova, so that 
sometimes the Swabian -ingen are also only of recent origin (Mone, Urzeit des 
badischen Landes, I, p. 213). a The Swiss -kon and -kofen have nearly all been 
contracted from -inghofen: Zollinchovun—Zollikhofen, Smarinchova—Schmerikon, etc. 
Cf. F. Beust, Historischer Atlas des Kantons Zürich} 3 where there are dozens of them 
on map 3, representing the Alamannic period. 
a F. J. Mone, Urgeschichte des badischen Landes bis zu Ende des siebenten 
Jahrhunderts, Vol. 1, "Die Römer im oberrheinischen Gränzland", Karlsruhe, 1845, 
p. 213.—  Ed. 
b F. Beust, Kleiner historischer Atlas des Kantons Zürich, Zurich,  1873.—  Ed. 
c J. Grimm, op. cit., Vol. 1, p. 483.—  Ed. 
d Spruner-Menke, Hand-Atlas... —Ed. 
9-1243 

=====第128页=====
100 Frederick Engels 
Left of the Rhine we have Millingen in Holland above 
Nimwegen, Lüttingen below Xanten, another Millingen below 
Rheinberg, then Kippingen, Rödingen, Höningen, Worringen, 
Fühlingen, all further north than Cologne, Wesselingen and 
Köttingen near Brühl. From here the names in -ingen follow two 
directions. In the High Eifel they are rare; we find near Malmedy 
on the French linguistic border: Büllingen, Hünningen, Mürringen, 
Iveldingen, Eibertingen as a transition to the very numerous -ingen 
in Luxemburg and on the Prussian and Lotharingian upper 
Mosel. Another connecting line follows the Rhine and the side 
valleys (in the Ahr area 7 or 8) and finally the Mosel valley, 
likewise after the area above Trier, where the -ingen predominate, 
but cut off from the great mass of Alamannic-Swabian -ingen first 
by the -weiler and then by the -heim. So if we, according to 
Arnold's demand, "consider all the facts in their context", 3 we 
shall come to the conclusion that the -ingen of the upper German 
Mosel area are Franconian and not Alamannic. 
How little we need Alamannic help here becomes even clearer 
as soon as we trace the -ingen from the French-Ripuarian 
linguistic border near Aachen on to Salic territory. Near Maaseyk 
west of the Maas lies Geystingen, further west near Brée Gerdingen. 
Then we find, turning back to section No. 139, Löwen: Moperting-
en, Vlytingen, Rixingen, Aerdelingen, Grimmersingen, Gravelingen, 
Ordange (for Ordingen), Bevingen, Hatingen, Buvingen, Hundeling-
en, Bovelingen, Curange, Raepertingen, Boswinningen, Wimmertingen, 
and others, in the area of Tongern, St. Truyen and Hasselt. The 
most westerly, not far from Löwen, are Willebringen, Redingen, 
Grinningen. Here the connection seems to break off. But if we 
move on to territory that is now French-speaking but from the 6th 
to the 9th century was in dispute between the two languages, we 
find from the Maas onwards an entire belt of French -ange, a form 
which corresponds to -ingen in Lorraine and Luxemburg too, 
stretching from east to west: Ballenge, Roclenge, Ortrange, Lan-
tremange, Roclange, Libertange, Noderange, Herdange, Oderinge, 
Odange, Gobertang, Wahenges; slightly further west Louvrenge near 
Wavre and Revelinge near Waterloo form the link with Huysinghen 
and Buisinghen, the outpost of a group of over 20 -inghen, 
stretching south-west of Brussels from Hal to Grammont along the 
linguistic boundary. And finally in French Flanders: Gravelingen, 
Wulverdinghe (thus exactly the Old Saxon Wolvaradinges-hûsun), 
Leubringhen, Leulinghen, Bonninghen, Peuplingue, Hardinghen, Her-
a W. Arnold, op. cit., p. 141.—Ed. 

=====第129页=====
The Frankish Period 101 
melinghen, near St. Omer and as far as behind Boulogne 
Herbinghen, Hocquinghen, Velinghen, Lottinghen, Ardinghen, all 
sharply distinguished from the even more numerous names in 
-inghem (= -ingheim) in the same area. 
Thus the three endings which Arnold regards as typically 
Alamannic turn out to be every bit as much Franconian, and the 
attempt to prove an Alamannic settlement on Middle Franconian 
territory before the Franconian one on the basis of these names 
must be considered to have failed. While the possibility of a not 
very strong Alamannic element in the south-eastern part of this 
territory can still be conceded. 
From the Alamanni, Arnold leads us to the Chatti. With the 
exception of the Ripuarians proper, they are supposed to have 
occupied the area south of the Ripuaria district, the same one, in 
other words, as we call Middle and Upper Franconia, after and 
alongside the Alamanni. This too is substantiated by references to 
the Hessian place-names found in the area beside the Alamannic 
ones. 
"The agreement in the place-names on this and the other side of the Rhine as 
far as the Alamannic border is so peculiar and so striking that it would be a miracle 
indeed if it were coincidental; on the other hand, it seems quite natural as soon as 
we assume that the immigrants gave their native place-names to their new 
domiciles, as still occurs in America all the time."3 
There is little to object to in this sentence. But all the more to 
object to in the conclusion that the Ripuarians proper had nothing 
to do with the settlement of the whole Middle and Upper 
Franconian country, that we only find Alamanni and Chatti here. 
Most of the Chatti who left their home for the west seem to have 
joined the Iscaevones from time immemorial (as did the Batavi, 
Canninefates and Chattuari); and where else should they turn? In 
the first two centuries A. D. the Chatti were only linked with the 
other Herminones in the rear through the Thuringians; on the 
one side they had the Ingaevonian Cherusci, on the other the 
Iscaevones, and before them the Romans. The Herminonian 
tribes,  which later appear united as Alamanni, came from the 
heart of Germania, having been separated from the Chatti for 
centuries by Thuringians and other peoples and having become 
more alien to them than the Iscaevonian Franks, with whom they 
were allied by a centuries-old brotherhood in arms. The Chatti's 
participation in the occupation of the area in question is thus not 
doubted. But the exclusion of the Ripuarians is. This can only be 
a W. Arnold, op. cit., p. 156.— Ed. 
9* 

=====第130页=====
102 Frederick Engels 
proved if no specifically Ripuarian names occur there. The 
situation is quite the reverse. 
Of the endings stated by Arnold3  to be specifically Franconian, 
-hausen is common to Franks, Saxons, Hessians and Thuringians; 
-heim is Salic -ham; -bach Salic and Lower Ripuarian -beek; of the 
others, only -scheid is really characteristic. It is specifically Ripuarian, 
just like -ich, -rath or -rade and -siepen. Further, common to both 
Franconian dialects are -loo (-loh), -donk and -bruch or -broich (Salic 
broek). 
-scheid occurs only in the mountains and, as a rule, in places on 
the watershed. The Franks left this ending behind throughout 
Westphalian Sauerland as far as the Hessian border, where it 
occurs, only as mountain names, as far as eastern Korbach. On the 
Ruhr Old Franconian -scheid encounters the ending in its Saxon 
form, -Schede: Melschede, Selschede, Meschede; in the near vicinity, 
Langscheid, Ramscheid, Bremscheid. Frequent in the Berg area, it is 
found as far as the Westerwald and into it, but not further south, 
on the right side of the Rhine. Left of the Rhine, however, the 
-scheid understandably do not commence until the Eifel*; in 
Luxemburg there are at least 21 of them, in the Hochwald and 
Hunsrück they are common. But as south of the Lahn, here too, 
on the eastern and southern sides of the Hunsrück and Soonwald, 
they are joined by the form  -schied,  which seems to be a Hessian 
adaption. Both forms together move southwards across the Nahe 
as far as the Vosges, where we find: Bisterscheid west of 
Donnersberg, Langenscheid near Kaiserslautern, a plateau called 
Breitscheid south of Hochspeyer, Haspelscheid near Bitsch, the 
Scheidwald north of Lützelstein, and finally as the southernmost 
outpost Walscheid on the north slope of the Donon, even further 
south than the village of Hessen near Saarburg, the most 
advanced Chattic outpost in Arnold. 6 
Also specifically Ripuarian is -ich, from the same root, Gothic 
-ahva (water), as -ach; both are also German forms of the 
Belgian-Roman -acum, as proved by Tiberiacum, on the district 
map c Civiraha, today Ziewerich. It is not very frequent on the right 
side of the Rhine; Meiderich and Lirich near Ruhrort are the most 
* In the plain I can only find Waterscheid, east of Hasselt in Belgian Limburg, 
where we have already observed a strong Ripuarian mixture above [see this volume, 
p. 90]. 
a Ibid., p. 141.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 144.— Ed. 
c Spruner-Menke, Hand-Atlas...— Ed. 

=====第131页=====
The Frankish Period 103 
northerly, from where they skirt the Rhine as far as Biebrich. The 
plain on the left of the Rhine, from Büderich opposite Wesel 
onwards, is full of them; they cross the Eifel as far as the 
Hochwald and Hunsrück, but vanish in the Soonwald and the 
region of the Nahe, even before -scheid and -roth stop. In the 
western part of our territory, however, they continue to the 
French linguistic border and beyond. The Trier area, which has a 
lot of them, we shall pass over; in Dutch Luxemburg I count 
twelve, on the other side, in the Belgian part, Törnich and Merzig 
(Messancy—the spelling -ig makes no difference, etymology and 
pronunciation are the same), in Lorraine, Soetrich, Sentzich, 
Marspich, Daspich west of the Mosel; east of it Kuntzich, Penserich, 
Cemplich, Destrich, twice Kerprich, Hibrich, Hilsprich. 
The ending -rade, -rad, on the left bank of the Rhine -rath, also 
considerably exceeds the bounds of its old Ripuarian homeland. It 
fills the whole Eifel and the middle and lower Mosel valley, as well 
as its side valleys. In the same area where -scheid mixes with 
-schied,  -rod, -roth occurs alongside -rad and -rath on both banks of 
the Rhine, also of Hessian origin, except that on the right bank, in 
the Westerwald, the -rod extend further north. In the Hochwald 
the northern slope has -rath, the southern slope -roth, as a rule. 
The least advanced is -siepen, shifted -seifen. The word means a 
small stream-valley with a steep fall and is still in general use with 
this meaning. Left of the Rhine it does not extend far beyond the 
old Ripuarian border; on the right it is found in the Westerwald 
on the N ister and even near Langenschwalbach {Langenseifen). 
To examine the other endings would take us too far. But at any 
rate we may assert that the countless -heim, which accompany the 
Rhine upstream from Bingen deep into Alamannic territory and 
are found everywhere where the Franks settled, are not Chattic 
but Ripuarian. Their home is not in Hesse, where they rarely 
occur and seem to have entered later, but in the Salic country and 
the Rhine plain around Cologne, where they occur alongside the 
other specifically Ripuarian names in almost equal numbers. 
Thus the result of this investigation is that the Ripuarians, far 
from being held back by the stream of Hessian immigration at the 
Westerwald and Eifel, on the contrary overran the entire Middle 
Franconian area themselves. And more strongly in a south­
westerly direction, towards the upper Mosel area, than to the 
south-east towards the Taunus and the area of the Nahe. This is 
also corroborated by the language. The south-western dialects, 
right into Luxemburg and western Lorraine, are much closer to 
Ripuarian than the eastern ones, particularly those on the right 

=====第132页=====
104 Frederick Engels 
bank of the Rhine. The former might be regarded as a more High 
German shifted extension of Ripuarian. 
The characteristic thing about the Middle Franconian dialects is 
firstly the penetration of the High German sound shift. Not the 
mere shift of a few tenues to aspirates, applying to relatively few 
words and not affecting the character of the dialect, but the 
beginning shift of the voiced-stopped consonants, which brings about 
the peculiarly Middle and Upper German confusion of b and p, g 
and k, d and t. Only where the impossibility of making a sharp 
distinction between initial b and p, d and t, g and k appears, in 
other words what the French particularly mean by accent 
allemand —only then does the Low German feel the great cleft 
which the second sound shift has torn through the German 
language. And this cleft runs in between the Sieg and the Lahn, 
the Ahr and the Mosel. Accordingly, Middle Franconian has an 
initial g which is lacking in more northern dialects, whereas 
medially and finally it still pronounces a soft ch for g. Further­
more, the ei and ou of the northern dialects turn into ai and au. 
A few genuinely Franconian peculiarities: in all the Salic and 
Ripuarian dialects Bach, unshifted Beek, is feminine. This is also 
true at least of the largest, western part of Middle Franconian. 
Like the numerous other -backs with the same name in the 
Netherlands and on the lower Rhine, the Luxemburg Glabach 
{Gladbach, Dutch Glabeek) is also feminine. On the other hand, 
girls'  names are treated as neuter: it is not only das Mädchen, das 
Mariechen, das Lisbethchen, but also das Marie, das Lisbeth, from 
Barmen to Trier and beyond. Near Forbach in Lorraine the map, 
originally made by the French, shows a " Karninschesberg" (Kanin-
chenberg). Thus the same diminutive -sehen, plural  -sches,  which we 
found above to be Ripuarian. 
With the watershed between Mosel and Nahe and on the right 
bank of the Rhine with the hill-country south of the Lahn, a new 
group of dialects begins: 
3. Upper Franconian. Here we are in a region which was 
indisputably first Alamannic territory by conquest (disregarding 
the earlier occupation by Vangiones, etc., of whose tribal affinities 
and language we know nothing) and where a fairly strong Chattic 
admixture can be readily conceded. But here too the place-names, 
as we need not repeat, indicate the presence of not insignificant 
Ripuarian elements, especially in the Rhine plain. And the 
language even more so. Let us take the southernmost definable 
dialect which at the same time has a literature, that of the 
Palatinate. Here we again encounter the general Franconian 

=====第133页=====
The Frankish Period 105 
inability to pronounce medial and final g in any other way but as 
a soft eh.* They say there: Vbchel, Flechel, geleche (gelegen)  [lain], 
gsacht— gesagt, licht —liegt, etc. Similarly the general Franconian w 
instead of b in the medial position: Bûwe —Buben, glâwe —glauben 
(but i glâb), bleiwe, selwer —selbst, halwe —halbe. The shift is far 
from being as complete as it looks; there is even reverse shifting, 
particularly in foreign words, i.e. the initial voiceless consonant is 
shifted not one stage forwards, but backwards: t becomes d, p 
becomes b, as will be seen; initial d and p remain at the Low 
German stage: dun—tun, dag, dame, dür, dodt; but before r: trinke, 
trage;  paff —Pfaff,  peife, pah —Pfalz, parre —Pfarrer. Now as d and 
p stand for High German t and pf, initial t is shifted back to d, 
and initial p to b, even in foreign words: derke— Türke, 
dafel— Tafel, babeer—Papier, borzlan— Porzellan, bulwer—Pulver. 
Then the Palatinate dialect, agreeing only with Danish on this 
score, cannot tolerate any tenues between vowels: ebbes— etwas, 
labbe— Lappen, schlubbe— schlüpfen, schobbe— Schoppen, Peder — 
Peter, dridde— dritte, rodhe— raten. The only exception is k: brocke, 
backe. But in foreign words g: musigande— Musikanten. This is also 
a relic of the Low German stage of the sound system which has 
spread out further by means of reverse shifting 3; only because 
dridde, hadde remained unshifted could Peter become Peder and 
the corresponding High German t receive the same impartial 
treatment. Similarly, the d in halde— halten, aide— alte, etc., 
remains at the Low German stage. 
Despite the decidedly High German impression it makes on Low 
Germans, the dialect of the Palatinate is far from having adopted 
the High German sound shift even to the extent that our written 
language has preserved it. On the contrary, by means of its 
reverse shift the Palatinate dialect is protesting against the High 
German stage, which, having entered from without, proves to be a 
foreign element in the dialect to this day. 
This is the place to look at a feature that is usually 
misunderstood: the confusion between d and t, b and p and even 
g and k among those Germans in whose dialects the voiced-
stopped consonants have undergone the High German sound shift. 
This confusion does not arise as long as everyone speaks his own 
* All quotations are from Fröhlich Pah, Gott erhaltsl Gedichte in Pfälzer Mundart, 
by K. G. Nadler, Frankfurt am Main, 1851. 
a Engels' note in pencil in the margin: "Agrees with Otfrid." (See Otfrid, Liber 
Evangeliorum domini gratia theotisce conscriptus. In: W. Braune, Zur Kenntnis des 
Fränkischen..., pp. 3, 52).— Ed. 

=====第134页=====
106 Frederick Engels 
dialect. On the contrary. We have just seen that the native of the 
Palatinate, for example, makes a very nice distinction here, so 
much so that he even shifts back foreign words in order to adapt 
them to the requirements of his dialect. The foreign initial t only 
becomes d for him because written German t corresponds to his d, 
foreign p only becomes b because his p corresponds to written 
German pf. Nor do the voiceless consonants get mixed up in the 
other Upper German dialects as long as people speak dialect. Each 
of these dialects has its own, precisely applied sound-shift law. But 
the position is different as soon as the written language or a 
foreign language is spoken. The attempt to apply to it the shifting 
law of the dialect concerned—and this attempt is made involun­
tarily—collides with the attempt to speak the new language 
correctly. In the process the written b and p, d and t lose all fixed 
meaning, and thus it is that Börne, for instance, in his letters from 
Paris complains that the French were unable to distinguish 
between b and p, because they obstinately insisted that his name, 
which he pronounced Feme, commenced with a p.* 
But back to the Palatinate dialect. The evidence that the High 
German sound shift was foisted on it from without, so to speak, 
and has remained a foreign element to this day, not even reaching 
the sound-system stage of the written language either (far 
exceeding which the Alamanni and the Bavarians on the whole 
preserve one Old High German stage or another)—this proof 
alone suffices to establish the predominantly Franconian character 
of the Palatinate dialect. For even in Hesse, which is much further 
north, the shift has, on the whole, been carried further, thus 
reducing the allegedly chiefly Hessian character of the Palatinate 
dialect to modest proportions. In order to offer such resistance to 
the High German sound shift hard by the Alamannic border 
among the Alamanni that remained behind, there must have been 
at least as many Ripuarians alongside the Hessians, who were 
themselves essentially High Germans. And their presence is 
further proved—apart from the place-names—by two generally 
Franconian peculiarities: the preservation of the Franconian w 
instead of b medially, and the pronunciation of g as ch in medial 
and final positions. To this may be added a lot of individual cases 
of agreement. With the Palatinate Gundach— "guten Tag" —you 
will get by as far as to Dunkirk and Amsterdam. Just as "a certain 
man" is ein sichrer Mann in the Palatinate, in the entire 
a L. Börne, Schilderungen aus Paris (1822 und 1823). In: L. Börne, Gesammelte 
Schriften, Vol. 3, Hamburg, Frankfurt am Main, 1862, pp.  19-21.—  Ed 

=====第135页=====
The Frankish Period 107 
Netherlands it is een zekeren man. Handsching for Handschuh 
[glove] corresponds to the Ripuarian Händschen. Even g for j in 
Ghannisnacht (Johannisnacht [midsummer night]) is Ripuarian and 
extends, as we have seen, into the Münster area. And baten (to 
improve, be of use, from bat—-better), common to all the Franks, 
and the Netherlanders too, is in current use in the Palatinate: '5 
badd alles nix—it's all no use—where the t is not even shifted to 
High German tz but is softened to d between vowels in the 
Palatinate manner. 
Written in mid-1878-early August 1882 
First published in full in: Marx and 
Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, 
Vol. XVI, Part 1, Moscow, 1937 
"The Franconian Dialect" was first pub­
lished, as a book in Russian, in 1935 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第136页=====
5EÎ)er MalkmokrotB 
- -œ* 5enfxaf-g>rgon  ber beuffdjen §o$afomofoatit  "**§*  -
[GEORG WEERTH] 
"SONG OF THE APPRENTICES" by Georg Weerth (1846) 59 
At the time when the cherries blossomed, 
In Frankfurt we did stay. 
At the time when the cherries blossomed, 
In that city we did stay. 
Up spake mine host, the landlord: 
"Your coats are frayed and worn." 
"Look here, you lousy landlord, 
That's none of your concern. 
"Now give us of your wine, 
And give us of your beer, 
And with the beer and wine, 
Bring us a roast in here." 
The cock crows in the bunghole, 
Out comes a goodly flow, 
And in our mouths it tastes 
Like urinatio. 
And then he brought a hare 
In parsley leaves bedight, 
And at this poor dead hare 
We all of us took fright. 
And when we were in bed, 
Our nightly prayers reciting, 
Early and late in bed 
The bed-bugs kept on biting. 
It happened once in Frankfurt, 
That town so fine and fair, 
That knows who did once dwell 
And who did suffer there.3 
3 Translated into English by Alex Miller.— Ed. 

=====第137页=====
Georg Weerth 109 
I came across this poem by our friend Weerth once again when 
looking through Marx's estate. Weerth, the German proletariat's 
first and most important poet, was born in Detmold of Rhenish 
parents, where his father was a superintendent of churches. When 
I was staying in Manchester in 1843, Weerth came to Bradford as 
a clerk for his German firm, and we spent many an enjoyable 
Sunday together. In 1845, when Marx and I were living in 
Brussels, Weerth took over the continental agency of his trading 
house, and organised things in such a way that he could set up his 
headquarters in Brussels as well. 60 After3  the March Revolution of 
1848 we all met up in Cologne for the founding of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. Weerth took charge of the feuilleton, and I 
doubt whether any other newspaper ever had such a witty and 
spirited feuilleton. One of his main contributions was Leben und 
Thaten des berühmten Ritters Schnapphahnski, describing the adven­
tures of Prince Lichnowski, who was given that name by Heine in 
Atta Troll? The facts are all true; how we found out about them 
we shall perhaps leave to another time. Those Schnapphahnski 
feuilletons were published together as a book by Hoffmann and 
Campe in 1849, and are still today most entertaining. However, 
since Schnapphahnski-Lichnowski, together with the Prussian 
General von Auerswald (also a member of parliament), went 
riding out on September 18, 1848 to spy on the columns of 
peasants who were joining up with the Frankfurt fighters at the 
barricades, on which occasion he and Auerswald received their 
just deserts and were beaten to death by the peasants for spying, 
the German Imperial Vice-Regent brought charges against Weerth 
for libelling the deceased Lichnowski, and Weerth, who had now 
been in England for some time, was given a three months' prison 
sentence long after the forces of reaction had put paid to the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. He then duly served his three months' sentence, 
because his business interests obliged him to visit Germany from 
time to time. 
In 1850-51 he travelled to Spain on behalf of another Bradford 
firm, and then to the West Indies and across almost all of South 
America. After a short visit to Europe he returned to his beloved 
West Indies. He did not wish to forego the pleasure there of 
seeing, just once, the real original of Louis Napoleon III, the 
a The text to the end of the article is checked with the available manu­
script.— Ed. 
h H. Heine, Atta Troll,  I.—Ed. 

=====第138页=====
110 Frederick Engels 
black King Soulouque of Haiti. But, as W. Wolff wrote to Marx on 
August 28, 1856, he had 
"problems with the quarantine authorities, had to give up his project, and on 
the trip contracted (yellow) fever, with which he arrived in Havana. He took to his 
bed, his condition was complicated by inflammation of the brain, and—on 
July 30—our Weerth died in Havana". 
I called him the first and most important poet of the German 
proletariat. His socialist and political poems are indeed far 
superior to Freiligrath's in terms of their originality and wit, and 
particularly in their fervent passion. He often employed forms of 
Heine's, but only in order to fill them with an entirely original and 
independent content. At the same time, he differed from most 
other poets inasmuch as he was totally unconcerned about his 
poems once he had written them down. Once he had sent a copy 
to Marx or me, he would forget about the poems and it was often 
difficult to persuade him to have them printed. Only during the 
time of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was it otherwise. The reason 
why is shown by the following extract from a letter Weerth wrote 
to Marx from Hamburg, April 28, 1851: 
"By the way, I hope to see you again in London at the beginning of July, for I 
cannot bear these  GRASSHOPPERS  in Hamburg any longer. I stand under threat here 
of a splendid existence, but it frightens me. Anyone else would seize it with both 
hands.  But I am too old to become a philistine, and across the sea there is the far 
West... 
"Recently I have written all kinds of things, but have completed nothing for I 
see no point at all, no aim in writing. When you write something on economics 
there is a point and meaning to it. But me? Cracking feeble jokes, making up 
cheap jibes in order to squeeze a stupid smile from the faces of the rascals at 
home — in all seriousness, I know nothing more pitiable! My days as a writer ended 
well and truly with the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
"I must admit: much as it grieves me to have wasted the last three years on 
absolutely nothing, it thrills me when I think of the time we spent at Cologne. We 
did not compromise ourselves. That is the main thing! Since Frederick the Great 
nobody has treated the German people so completely en canaille3  as the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung. 
"I don't mean to say that the entire credit was due to me; but I was there... 
"O Portugal! O Spain!" (Weerth had just come from there.) "If only we had 
your beautiful skies, your wine, your oranges and myrtles! But not even that! 
Nothing but rain and long noses and smoked meat! 
"Yours in the rain and with a long nose, 
G. Weerth." 
Where Weerth was a master, where he outstripped Heine 
(because he was more wholesome and unadulterated) and where 
a Ungraciously.— Ed. 

=====第139页=====
Georg Weerth 111 
he is only surpassed by Goethe in the German language, is in 
his expression of natural, robust sensuality and carnal lust. Many 
a reader of the Sozialdemokrat would be horrified were I to have 
reprinted here some of the articles from the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. I have no intention of doing that, however. Nevertheless I 
cannot help remarking that the moment must come for the 
German socialists too when they openly reject this last German 
philistine prejudice, that deceitful, petty-bourgeois moral prudery, 
which in any case is no more than a cover for furtively cracking 
dirty jokes. If one reads Freiligrath's poetry, for example, one 
might well believe that human beings were completely devoid of 
sex organs. And yet nobody took more pleasure in slipping in a 
piece of filth than the very same Freiligrath who was so extremely 
chaste in his poetry. It is high time that the German workers at 
least got used to speaking just as freely about things they 
themselves do every day or every night, about natural, essential 
and extremely pleasurable things, as the Romance peoples do, like 
Homer and Plato did, like Horace and Juvenal, like the Old 
Testament and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Moreover Weerth also wrote less offensive things, and I shall 
allow myself the liberty, from time to time, to send some of them 
to the feuilleton of the Sozialdemokrat. 
Written in late May 1883 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, 
No. 24, June 7, 1883 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第140页=====
112 
THE BOOK OF REVELATION61 
A science almost unknown in this country, except to a few 
liberalising theologians, who contrive to keep it as secret as they 
can, is the historical and linguistic criticism of the Bible, the 
inquiry into the age, origin, and historical value of the various 
writings comprising the Old and New Testament. 
This science is almost exclusively German. And, moreover, what 
little of it has penetrated beyond the limits of Germany is not 
exactly the best part of it: it is that latitudinarian criticism which 
prides itself upon being unprejudiced and thoroughgoing, and, at 
the same time, Christian. The books are not exactly revealed by 
the holy ghost, but they are revelations of divinity through the 
sacred spirit of humanity, etc. Thus, the Tübingen school (Baur, 
Gfrörer, etc.) 62 are the great favorites in Holland and Switzerland, 
as well as in England, and, if people will go a little further, they 
follow Strauss. The same mild, but utterly unhistorical, spirit 
dominates the renowned Ernest Renan, who is but a poor 
plagiarist of the German critics. Of all his works nothing belongs 
to him but the aesthetic sentimentalism of the pervading thought, 
and the milk-and-water language which wraps it up. 
One good thing, however, Ernest Renan has said: 
"When you want to get a distinct idea of what the first Christian communities 
were, do not compare them to the parish congregations of our day; they were 
rather like local sections of the International Working Men's Association." 
And this is correct. Christianity got hold of the masses, exactly 
as modern socialism does, under the shape of a variety of sects, 
and still more of conflicting individual views—some clearer, some 

=====第141页=====
The Book of Revelation 113 
more confused, these latter the great majority—but all opposed to 
the ruling system, to "the powers that be". 
Take, for instance, our Book of Revelation, of which we shall 
see that, instead of being the darkest and most mysterious, it is the 
simplest and clearest book of the whole New Testament. For the 
present we must ask the reader to believe what we are going to 
prove by-and-bye. That it was written in the year of our era 68 or 
January, 69, and that it is therefore not only the only book of the 
New Testament, the date of which is really fixed, but also the 
oldest book. How Christianity looked in 68 we can here see as in a 
mirror. 
First of all, sects over and over again. In the messages to the 
seven churches of Asia3 there are at least three sects mentioned, of 
which, otherwise, we know nothing at all: the Nicolaitanes, the 
Balaamites, and the followers of a woman typified here by the 
name of Jezebel. Of all the three it is said that they permitted 
their adherents to eat of things sacrificed to idols, and that they 
were fond of fornication. It is a curious fact that with every great 
revolutionary movement the question of "free love" comes in to 
the foreground. With one set of people as a revolutionary 
progress, as a shaking off of old traditional fetters, no longer 
necessary; with others as a welcome doctrine, comfortably covering 
all sorts of free and easy practices between man and woman. The 
latter, the philistine sort, appear here soon to have got the upper 
hand; for the "fornication" is always associated with the eating of 
"things sacrificed to idols", which Jews and Christians were strictly 
forbidden to do, but which it might be dangerous, or at least 
unpleasant, at times to refuse. This shows evidently that the free 
lovers mentioned here were generally inclined to be everybody's 
friend, and anything but stuff for martyrs. 
Christianity, like every great revolutionary movement, was made 
by the masses. It arose in Palestine, in a manner utterly unknown 
to us, at a time when new sects, new religions, new prophets arose 
by the hundred. It is, in fact, a mere average, formed spontane­
ously out of the mutual friction, of the more progressive of such 
sects,  and afterwards formed into a doctrine by the addition of 
theorems of the Alexandrian Jew, Philo, and later on of strong 
stoic infiltrations. 63 In fact, if we may call Philo the doctrinal father 
of Christianity, Seneca was her uncle. Whole passages in the New 
Testament seem almost literally copied from his works b; and you 
a Revelation 2:6, 14, 20.— Ed 
b See the chapter "Seneca im Neuen Testament" in B. Bauer's Christus und die 
Caesaren, pp.  47-61.—  Ed 

=====第142页=====
114 Frederick Engels 
will find, on the other hand, passages in Persius' satires which 
seem copied from the then unwritten New Testament.3 Of all 
these doctrinal elements there is not a trace to be found in our 
Book of Revelation. Here we have Christianity in the crudest form 
in which it has been preserved to us. There is only one dominant 
dogmatic point: that the faithful have been saved by the sacrifice 
of Christ. But how, and why is completely indefinable. There is 
nothing but the old Jewish and heathen notion, that God, or the 
gods,  must be propitiated by sacrifices, transformed into the 
specific Christian notion (which, indeed, made Christianity the 
universal religion) that the death of Christ is the great sacrifice 
which suffices once for all. 
Of original sin, not a trace. Nothing of the trinity. Jesus is "the 
lamb",  but subordinate to God. In fact, in one passage (15:3) he is 
placed upon an equal footing with Moses. Instead of one holy 
ghost there are "the seven spirits of god" (3:1 and 4:5). The 
murdered saints (the martyrs) cry to God for revenge: 
"How long, O Lord, dost thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that 
dwell on the earth?" (6:10) — 
a sentiment which has, later on, been carefully struck out from the 
theoretical code of morals of Christianity, but carried out 
practically with a vengeance as soon as the Christians got the 
upper hand over the heathens. 
As a matter of course, Christianity presents itself as a mere sect 
of Judaism. Thus, in the messages to the seven churches: 
"I know the blasphemy of them which say that they are Jews" (not Christians), 
"and are not, but are the synagogue of Satan" (2:9); 
and again, 3:9: 
"Them of the synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, but are not." 
Thus,  our author, in the 69th year of our era, had not the 
remotest idea that he represented a new phase of religious 
development, destined to become one of the greatest elements of 
revolution. Thus also, when the saints appear before the throne of 
God, there are at first 144,000 Jews, 12,000 of each of the twelve 
tribes,  and only after them are admitted the heathens who have 
joined this new phase of Judaism. 
Such was Christianity in the year 68, as depicted in the oldest, 
and the only, book of the New Testament, the authenticity of 
which cannot be disputed. Who the author was we do not know. 
a [A. Persius Flacus,] A. Persii Flacci satirarum  liber.—  Ed.. 

=====第143页=====
The Book of Revelation 115 
He calls himself John. He does not even pretend to be the 
"apostle" John, for in the foundations of the "new Jerusalem" are 
"the names of the twelve apostles of the lamb" (21:14). They 
therefore must have been dead when he wrote. That he was a Jew 
is clear from the Hebraisms abounding in his Greek, which 
exceeds in bad grammar, by far, even the other books of the New 
Testament. That the so-called Gospel of John, the epistles of John, 
and this book have at least three different authors, their language 
clearly proves, if the doctrines they contain, completely clashing 
one with another, did not prove it. 
The apocalyptic visions which make up almost the whole of the 
Revelation, are taken in most cases literally, from the classic 
prophets of the Old Testament and their later imitators, beginning 
with the Book of Daniel (about 160 before our era, and 
prophesying things which had occurred centuries before) and 
ending with the "Book of Henoch", an apocryphal concoction in 
Greek written not long before the beginning of our era. The 
original invention, even the grouping of the purloined visions, is 
extremely poor. Professor Ferdinand Benary, to whose course of 
lectures in Berlin University, in 1841, I am indebted for what 
follows,64 has proved, chapter and verse, whence our author 
borrowed every one of his pretended visions. It is therefore no use 
to follow our "John" through all his vagaries. We had better come 
at once to the point which discovers the mystery of this at all 
events curious book. 
In complete opposition with all his orthodox commentators, who 
all expect his prophecies are still to come off, after more than 
1,800 years, "John" never ceases to say, 
"The time is at hand", all this will happen shortly.3 
And this is especially the case with the crisis which he predicts, 
and which he evidently expects to see. 
This crisis is the great final fight between God and the 
"Antichrist", as others have named him. The decisive chapters are 
13 and 17. To leave out all unnecessary ornamentations, "John" 
sees a beast arising from the sea which has seven heads and ten 
horns (the horns do not concern us at all) 
"and I saw one of his heads, as it were, wounded as to death; and his deadly 
wound was healed". 
This beast was to have power over the earth, against God and 
the lamb for forty-two months (one half of the sacred seven years), 
a Revelation 1:3.— Ed. 
10-1243 

=====第144页=====
116 Frederick Engels 
and all men were compelled during that time to have the mark of 
the beast or the number of his name in their right hand, or in 
their forehead. 
"Here is wisdom. Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast: 
for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred threescore and six" 
Irenaeus, in the second century, knew still that by the head 
which was wounded and healed, the Emperor Nero was meant. 
He had been the first great persecutor of the Christians. At his 
death a rumour spread, especially through Achaia and Asia, that 
he was not dead, but only wounded, and that he would one day 
reappear and spread terror throughout the world (Tacitus, Ann. 
VI, 22).a At the same time Irenaeus knew another very old 
reading, which made the number of the name 616, instead of 
666.b 
In Chapter 17, the beast with the seven heads appears again, 
this time mounted by the well-known scarlet lady, the elegant 
description of whom the reader may look out in the book  itself. 
Here an angel explains to John: 
"The beast that thou sawest was, and is not.... The seven heads are seven 
mountains, on which the woman sitteth; and there are seven kings: five are fallen, 
and one is, and the other is not yet come; and when he cometh, he must continue a 
short space. And the beast that was, and is not, even he is the eighth, and is of the 
seven....  And the woman which thou sawest is the great city, which reigneth over 
the kings of the earth." 
Here, then, we have two clear statements: (1) The scarlet lady is 
Rome, the great city which reigneth over the kings of the earth; 
(2) at the time the book is written the sixth Roman emperor 
reigns; after him another will come to reign for a short time; and 
then comes the return of one who "is of the seven," who was 
wounded but healed, and whose name is contained in that 
mysterious number, and whom Irenaeus still knew to be Nero. 
Counting from Augustus, we have Augustus, Tiberius, Caligula, 
Claudius, Nero the fifth. The sixth, who is, is Galba, whose 
ascension to the throne was the signal for an insurrection of the 
legions, especially in Gaul, led by Otho, Galba's successor. 65 Thus 
our book must have been written under Galba, who reigned from 
June 9th, 68, to January 15th, 69. And it predicts the return of 
Nero as imminent. 
a The reference is inaccurate. See Tacitus, Historiarum, II, 8.— Ed 
b Irenaeus, Refutation and Overthrow of Gnosis falsely so  called.  (Against the 
Heresies),  V, 28-30.— Ed. 

=====第145页=====
The Book of Revelation 117 
But now for the final proof—the number. This also has been 
discovered by Ferdinand Benary, and since then it has never been 
disputed in the scientific world. 
About 300 years before our era the Jews began to use their 
letters as symbols for numbers. The speculative Rabbis saw in this 
a new method for mystic interpretation or Kabbala. Secret words 
were expressed by the figure, produced by the addition of the 
numerical values of the letters contained in them. This new 
science they called gematriah, geometry. Now this science is applied 
here by our "John". We have to prove (1) that the number 
contains the name of a man, and that man is Nero; and (2) that 
the solution given holds good for the reading 666 as well as for 
the equally old reading 616. We take Hebrew letters and their 
values — 
} (nun) n= 50 j?(kof) k = 100 
1 (resh) r = 200 d(samech) s= 60 
1 (vav) for o= 6 ^(resh) r = 200 
Î (nun) n = 50 
Neron Kesar, the Emperor Neron, Greek Néron Kaisar. Now, if 
instead of the Greek spelling, we transfer the Latin Nero Caesar 
into Hebrew characters, the nun at the end of Neron disappears, 
and with it the value of fifty. That brings us to the other old 
reading of 616, and thus the proof is as perfect as can be desired.* 
The mysterious book, then, is now perfectly clear. "John" predicts 
the return of Nero for about the year 70, and a reign of terror under 
him which is to last forty-two months, or 1,260 days. After that term 
God arises, vanquishes Nero, the Antichrist, destroys the great city 
by fire, and binds the devil for a thousand years. The millennium 
begins, and so forth. All this now has lost all interest, except for 
ignorant persons who may still try to calculate the day of the last 
judgment. But as an authentic picture of almost primitive 
Christianity, drawn by one of themselves, the book is worth more 
than all the rest of the New Testament put together. 
Frederick Engels 
Written in June-July 1883 Reproduced from the magazine 
First published in  Progress,  Vol. II, No. 2, 
August, 1883 
* The above spelling of the name, both with and without the second nun, is the 
one which occurs in the Talmud, and is therefore authentic. 
10* 

=====第146页=====
118 
[PREFACE TO THE 1883 GERMAN EDITION 
OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY] 
The preface to the present edition I must, alas, sign alone. 
Marx, the man to whom the whole working class of Europe and 
America owes more than to anyone else, rests at Highgate 
Cemetery and over his grave the first grass is already growing. 
Since his death, there can even be less thought of revising or 
supplementing the Manifesto. All the more do I consider it 
necessary again to state here the following expressly: 
The basic thought running through the Manifesto—that 
economic production and the structure of society of every 
historical epoch necessarily arising therefrom constitute the 
foundation for the political and intellectual history of that epoch; 
that consequently (ever since the dissolution of the primeval 
communal ownership of land) all history has been a history of 
class struggles, struggles between exploited and exploiting, be­
tween dominated and dominating classes at various stages of social 
development; that this struggle, however, has now reached a stage 
where the exploited and oppressed class (the proletariat) can no 
longer emancipate itself from the class which exploits and 
oppresses it (the bourgeoisie), without at the same time forever 
freeing the whole of society from exploitation, oppression and 
class struggles—the basic thought belongs solely and exclusively to 
Marx.* 
* "This proposition," I wrote in the preface to the English translation,3 "which, 
in my opinion, is destined to do for history what Darwin's theory has done for 
biology, we, both of us, had been gradually approaching for some years before 
1845.  How far I had independently progressed towards it, is best shown by my 
a See this volume, p. 517.— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
Preface to the Manifesto 119 
I have already stated this many times; but precisely now it is 
necessary that it also stand in front of the Manifesto  itself. 
London, June 28, 1883 
F. Engels 
First published in Das Kommunistische Printed according to the 1890 
Manifest, Hottingen-Zurich, 1883 German edition, checked with the 
1883 edition 
Condition of the Working Class in England. But when I again met Marx at Brussels, 
in spring, 1845, he had it ready worked out, and put it before me, in terms almost 
as clear as those in which I have stated it here." [Note by Engels to the 1890 German 
edition.] 

=====第148页=====
120 
MARX AND THE NEUE RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG 
(1848-49)67 
On the outbreak of the February Revolution, the German 
"Communist Party", as we called it, consisted only of a small core, 
the Communist League, which was organised as a secret propagan­
da society. The League was secret only because at that time no 
freedom of association or assembly existed in Germany. Besides 
the workers' associations abroad, from which it obtained recruits, it 
had about thirty communities, or sections, in the country itself and, 
in addition, individual members in many places. This inconsidera­
ble fighting force, however, possessed a leader, Marx, to whom all 
willingly subordinated themselves, a leader of the first rank, and, 
thanks to him, a programme of principles and tactics that still has 
full validity today: the Communist Manifesto. 
It is the tactical part of the programme that concerns us here in 
the first instance. This part stated in general: 
"The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to 
other working-class parties. 
"They have no interests separate and apart from those of the 
proletariat as a whole. 
"They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by 
which to shape and mould the proletarian movement. 
"The Coirfmunists are distinguished from the other working-
class parties by this only: 1. In the national struggles of the 
proletarians of the different countries, they point out and bring to 
the front the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently 
of all nationality. 2. In the various stages of development which the 
struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass 
through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the 
movement as a whole. 

=====第149页=====
Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49) 121 
"The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, 
the most resolute section of the working-class parties of every 
country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the other 
hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the proletariat 
the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the 
conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian 
movement."3 
And for the German party it stated in particular: 
"In Germany the Communist Party fights with the bourgeoisie 
whenever it acts in a revolutionary way, against the absolute 
monarchy, the feudal landowners and philistinism. 
"But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the 
working class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile 
antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the 
German workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against 
the bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the 
bourgeoisie must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy, 
and in order that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in 
Germany, the fight against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately 
begin. 
"The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, 
because that country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution," etc. 
(Manifesto, Section IV.)b 
Never has a tactical programme proved its worth as well as this 
one. Devised on the eve of a revolution, it stood the test of this 
revolution; whenever, since this period, a workers' party has 
deviated from it, the deviation has met its punishment; and today, 
after almost forty years, it serves as the guiding line of all resolute 
and self-confident workers' parties in Europe, from Madrid to 
St. Petersburg. 
The February events in Paris precipitated the imminent German 
revolution and thereby modified its character. The German 
bourgeoisie, instead of conquering by virtue of its own power, 
conquered in the tow of a French workers' revolution. Before it 
had yet conclusively overthrown its old adversaries—the absolute 
monarchy, feudal landownership, the bureaucracy and the cow­
ardly petty bourgeosie—it had to confront a new enemy, the 
proletariat. However, the effects of the economic conditions, which 
lagged far behind those of France and England, and thus of the 
a See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 497. Engels' italics.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 519.— Ed. 

=====第150页=====
122 Frederick Engels 
backward class situation in Germany resulting therefrom, im­
mediately showed themselves here. 
The German bourgeoisie, which had only just begun to establish 
its large-scale industry, had neither the strength nor the courage 
to win for itself unconditional domination in the state, nor was 
there any compelling necessity for it to do so. The proletariat, 
undeveloped to an equal degree, having grown up in complete 
intellectual enslavement, being unorganised and still not even 
capable of independent organisation, possessed only a vague 
feeling of the profound conflict of interests between it and the 
bourgeoisie. Hence, although in point of fact the mortal enemy of 
the latter, it remained, on the other hand, its political appendage. 
Terrified not by what the German proletariat was, but by what it 
threatened to become and what the French proletariat already 
was, the bourgeoisie saw its sole salvation in some compromise, 
even the most cowardly, with the monarchy and nobility; as the 
proletariat was still unaware of its own historical role, the bulk of 
it had, at the start, to take on the role of the forward-pressing, 
extreme left wing of the bourgeoisie. The German workers had 
above all to win those rights which were indispensable to their 
independent organisation as a class party: freedom of the press, 
association and assembly—rights which the bourgeoisie, in the 
interest of its own rule, ought to have fought for, but which it 
itself in its fear now began to dispute when it came to the workers. 
The few hundred separate League members vanished in the 
enormous mass that had been suddenly hurled into the move­
ment. Thus, the German proletariat at first appeared on the 
political stage as the extreme democratic party. 
In this way, when we founded a major newspaper in Germany, 
our banner was determined as a matter of course. It could only be 
that of democracy, but that of a democracy which everywhere 
emphasised in every point the specific proletarian character which 
it could not yet inscribe once for all on its banner. If we did not 
want to do that, if we did not want to take up the movement, 
adhere to its already existing, most advanced, actually proletarian 
side and to advance it further, then there was nothing left for us 
to do but to preach communism in a little provincial sheet and to 
found a tiny sect instead of a great party of action. But we had 
already been spoilt for the role of preachers in the wilderness; we 
had studied the Utopians too well for that, nor was it for that we 
had drafted our programme. 
When we came to Cologne, preparations by the democrats,and 
partly by the Communists, had been made there for a major 

=====第151页=====
Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49) 123 
newspaper; they wanted to make this a purely local Cologne paper 
and to banish us to Berlin. But in twenty-four hours, especially 
thanks to Marx, we had conquered the field, and the newspaper 
became ours, in return for the concession of taking Heinrich 
Bürgers* into the editorial board. The latter wrote one article (in 
No. 2) and never another. 
Cologne was where we had to go, and not Berlin. First, Cologne 
was the centre of the Rhine Province, which had gone through the 
French Revolution, which had provided itself with modern legal 
conceptions in the Code Napoléon, 68 which had developed by far 
the most important large-scale industry and which was in every 
respect the most advanced part of Germany at that time. The 
Berlin of that time we knew only too well from our own 
observation, with its hardly hatched bourgeoisie, its cringing petty 
bourgeoisie, audacious in words but craven in deeds, its still wholly 
undeveloped workers, its mass of bureaucrats, aristocratic and 
court  riff-raff,  its entire character of a mere "Residenz". a Decisive, 
however, was the following: in Berlin the wretched Prussian 
Landrecht 69 prevailed and political cases were tried by professional 
magistrates; on the Rhine the Code Napoleon was in force, which 
knows no press trials, because it presupposes censorship, and if 
one did not commit political misdemeanours but only crimes, one 
came before a jury; in Berlin after the revolution young Schlöffel 
was sentenced to a year's imprisonment for a trifle, 70 while on the 
Rhine we had unconditional freedom of the press—and we used it 
to the last drop. 
Thus we began, on June 1, 1848, with very limited share capital, 
of which only a little had been paid up and the shareholders 
themselves were more than unreliable. Half of them deserted us 
immediately after the first number came out and by the end of the 
month we no longer had any at all. 
The editorial constitution was simply the dictatorship of Marx. 
A major daily paper, which has to be ready at a definite hour, 
cannot observe a consistent policy with any other constitution. 
Moreover, Marx's dictatorship was a matter of course here, 
undisputed and willingly recognised by all of us. It was above all 
his clear vision and firm attitude that made this publication the 
most famous German newspaper of the years of revolution. 
The political programme of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
consisted of two main points: 
* Later became a liberal. [Note by the Sozialdemokrat editors.] 
a Residenz: Seat of the reigning prince.— Ed. 

=====第152页=====
124 Frederick Engels 
A single, indivisible, democratic German republic, and war with 
Russia, including the restoration of Poland. 
The petty-bourgeois democracy were divided at that time into 
two factions: the North German, which would not mind putting 
up with a democratic Prussian emperor, and the South German, 
then almost all specifically Baden, which wanted to transform 
Germany into a federative republic after the Swiss model. We had 
to fight both of them. The interests of the proletariat forbade the 
Prussianisation of Germany just as much as the perpetuation of its 
division into petty states. These interests called for the unification 
of Germany at long last into a nation, which alone could provide 
the battlefield, cleared of all traditional petty obstacles, on which 
proletariat and bourgeoisie were to measure their strength. But 
they equally forbade the establishment of Prussia as the head. The 
Prussian state with its set-up, its tradition and its dynasty3 was 
precisely the sole serious internal adversary which the revolution 
in Germany had to overthrow; and, moreover, Prussia could unify 
Germany only by tearing Germany apart, by excluding German 
Austria. Dissolution of the Prussian and disintegration of the 
Austrian state, real unification of Germany as a republic—we 
could not have any other immediate revolutionary program­
me. And this could be accomplished through war with Russia and 
only through such a war. I will come back to this last point 
later. 
Incidentally, the tone of the newspaper was by no means 
solemn, serious or enthusiastic. We had altogether contemptible 
opponents and treated them, without exception, with the utmost 
scorn. The conspiring monarchy, the camarilla, the nobility, the 
Kreuz-Zeitung, the entire "reaction", about which the philistines 
were morally indignant—we treated them only with mockery and 
derision. No less so the new idols that had appeared on the scene 
through the revolution: the March ministers, 7 the Frankfurt and 
Berlin Assemblies, both the Rights and the Lefts in them. The 
very first number began with an article which mocked at the 
inanity of the Frankfurt parliament, the pointlessness of its 
long-winded speeches, the superfluity of its cowardly resolutions.b 
It cost us half the shareholders. The Frankfurt parliament was not 
even a debating club; hardly any debates took place there, but for 
the most part only academic dissertations prepared beforehand 
a The Hohenzollerns.— Ed. 
b F. Engels, "The Assembly at Frankfurt".— Ed. 

=====第153页=====
Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49) 125 
were ground out and resolutions adopted which were intended to 
inspire the German philistines but of which no one else took any 
notice. 
The Berlin Assembly was of more importance: it confronted a 
real power, it did not debate and pass resolutions in the air, in a 
• Frankfurt cloud-cuckoo land. Consequently, it was dealt with in 
more detail. But there too, the idols of the Lefts, Schulze-
Delitzsch, Berends, Eisner, Stein, etc., were just as sharply attacked 
as those in Frankfurt; their indecisiveness, hesitancy and pettiness 
were mercilessly exposed, and it was proved how step by step they 
compromised themselves into betraying the revolution. This, of 
course, evoked a shudder in the democratic petty bourgeois, who 
had only just manufactured these idols for his own use. To us, this 
shudder was a sign that we had hit the bull's eye. 
We came out likewise against the illusion, zealously spread by 
the petty bourgeoisie, that the revolution had come to an end with 
the March days and that now one had only to pocket the fruits. 
To us, February and March could have the significance of a real 
revolution only if they were not the conclusion but, on the contra­
ry, the starting-points of a long revolutionary movement in which, 
as in the Great French Revolution, the people developed further 
through its own struggles and the parties became more and more 
sharply differentiated until they coincided entirely with the great 
classes, bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie and proletariat, and in 
which the separate positions were won one after another by the 
proletariat in a series of battles. Hence, we everywhere opposed 
the democratic petty bourgeoisie as well when it tried to gloss over 
its class antagonism to the proletariat with the favourite phrase: 
after all, we all want the same thing; all the differences rest on 
mere misunderstandings. But the less we allowed the petty 
bourgeoisie to misunderstand our proletarian democracy, the 
tamer and more amenable it became towards us. The more 
sharply and resolutely one opposes it, the more readily it ducks 
and the more concessions it makes to the workers' party. We have 
seen this for ourselves. 
Finally, we exposed the parliamentary cretinism (as Marx called 
it) of the various so-called National Assemblies.72 These gentlemen 
had allowed all means of power to slip out of their hands, in part 
had voluntarily surrendered them again to the governments. In 
Berlin, as in Frankfurt, alongside newly strengthened, reactionary 
governments there stood powerless assemblies, which nevertheless 
imagined that their impotent resolutions would shake the world in 
its foundations. This cretinous self-deception prevailed right to the 

=====第154页=====
126 Frederick Engels 
extreme Lefts. We told them plainly that their parliamentary 
victory would coincide with their real defeat. 
And it so happened both in Berlin and in Frankfurt. When the 
"Lefts"  obtained the majority, the government dispersed the 
entire Assembly; it could do so because the Assembly had forfeited 
all credit with the people. 
When later I read Bougeart's book on Marat,3  I found that in 
more than one respect we had only unconsciously imitated the 
great model of the genuine "Ami du Peuplé' (not the one forged 
by the royalists) and that the whole outburst of rage and the whole 
falsification of history, by virtue of which for almost a century only 
an entirely distorted Marat had been known, were solely due to 
the fact that Marat mercilessly removed the veil from the idols of 
the moment, Lafayette, Bailly and others, and exposed them as 
ready-made traitors to the revolution; and that he, like us, did not 
want the revolution declared complete, but lasting. 
We openly proclaimed that the trend we represented could 
enter the struggle for the attainment of our real party aims only 
when the most extreme of the official parties existing in Germany 
came to the helm: then we would form the opposition to it. 
Events, however, saw to it that besides mockery at our German 
opponents there also appeared fiery passion. The insurrection of 
the Paris workers in June 1848 found us at our post. From the 
first shot we were unconditionally on the side of the insurgents. 
After their defeat, Marx paid tribute to the vanquished in one of 
his most powerful articles.15 
Then the last remaining shareholders deserted us. But we had 
the satisfaction of being the only paper in Germany, and almost in 
Europe, that had held aloft the banner of the crushed proletariat 
at the moment when the bourgeois and petty bourgeois of all 
countries were trampling the vanquished in the ground with a 
torrent of slander. 
Our foreign policy was simple: to support every revolutionary 
people, and to call for a general war of revolutionary Europe 
against the mighty bulwark of European reaction — Russia. From 
February 2473 onwards it was clear to us that the revolution had 
only one really formidable enemy, Russia, and that the more the 
movement took on European dimensions the more this enemy was 
compelled to enter the struggle. The Vienna, Milan and Berlin 
events were bound to delay the Russian attack, but its final coming 
a A. Bougeart, Marat, L'ami du peuple, vols I-II.— Ed 
b K. Marx, "The June Revolution".— Ed. 

=====第155页=====
Marx and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49) 127 
became all the more certain the closer the revolution came to 
Russia. But if Germany could be successfully brought to make war 
against Russia, it would be the end for the Habsburgs and 
Hohenzollerns and the revolution would triumph along the whole 
line. 
This policy pervaded every issue of the newspaper until the 
moment of the actual invasion of Hungary by the Russians, which 
fully confirmed our forecast and decided the defeat of the 
revolution. 
When, in the spring of 1849, the decisive battle drew near, the 
language of the paper became more vehement and passionate with 
every issue. Wilhelm Wolff reminded the Silesian peasants in the 
"Silesian Milliard" (eight articles), 74 how on being emancipated 
from feudal services they had been cheated out of money and 
land by the landlords with the help of the government, and he 
demanded a thousand million talers in compensation. 
It was at the same time, in April, that Marx's essay on wage 
labour and capital appeared in the form of a series of editorial 
articles3 as a clear indication of the social goal of our policy. Every 
issue, every special number, pointed to the great battle that was in 
the making, to the sharpening of antagonisms in France, Italy, 
Germany and Hungary. In particular, the special numbers in 
April and May were as much proclamations to the people to hold 
themselves in readiness for direct action. 
"Out there, in the Reich", wonder was expressed that we 
carried on our activities so unconcernedly within a Prussian 
fortress of the first rank, in the face of a garrison of  8,000  troops 
and confronting the guardhouse; but, on account of the eight 
rifles with bayonets and 250 live cartridges in the editorial room, 
and the red Jacobin caps of the compositors, our house was 
reckoned by the officers likewise as a fortress which was not to be 
taken by a mere coup de main. 
At last, on May 18, 1849, the blow came. 
The insurrection in Dresden and Elberfeld was suppressed, that 
in Iserlohn was encircled; the Rhine Province and Westphalia 
bristled with bayonets which, after completing the rape of the 
Prussian Rhineland, were intended to march against the Palatinate 
and Baden. Then at last the government ventured to come to 
close quarters with us. Half of the editorial staff were prosecuted, 
the other half were liable to deportation as non-Prussians. Nothing 
could be done about it, as long as a whole army corps stood 
a K. Marx, "Wage Labour and Capital".— Ed. 

=====第156页=====
128 Frederick Engels 
behind the government. We had to surrender our fortress, but we 
withdrew with our arms and baggage, with band playing and flag 
flying, the flag of the last, red issue, in which we warned the 
Cologne workers against hopeless putsches, and called to them: 
"In bidding you farewell, the editors of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung thank you for the sympathy you have shown them. Their 
last word everywhere and always will be: emancipation of the working 
class!"* 
Thus the Neue Rheinische Zeitung came to an end, shortly before 
it had completed its first year. Begun almost without financial 
resources—the little that had been promised it very soon, as we 
said, was lost—it had achieved a circulation of almost  5,000  by 
September. The state of siege in Cologne suspended it; in the 
middle of October it had to begin again from the start. But in May 
1849,  when it was suppressed, it again had 6,000 subscribers, while 
the Kölnische, at that time, according to its own admission, had not 
more than 9,000. No German newspaper, before or since, has ever 
had the same power and influence or been able to electrify the 
proletarian masses as effectively as the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
And that it owed above all to Marx. 
When the blow fell, the editorial staff dispersed. Marx went to 
Paris where the dénouement, then in preparation there, took place 
on June 13, 1849 75; Wilhelm Wolff took his seat in the Frankfurt 
parliament—now that the Assembly had to choose between being 
dispersed from above or joining the revolution; and I went to the 
Palatinate and became an adjutant in Willich's volunteer corps. 76 
Fr. Engels 
Written in mid-February and early Printed according to the news-
March, 1884 paper 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat. 
No. 11, March 13, 1884 
3 K. Marx, F. Engels, "To the Workers of Cologne" (see present edition, Vol. 9, 
p. 467).— Ed. 

=====第157页=====
THE ORIGIN OF THE FAMILY, 
PRIVATE PROPERTY AND THE STATE 
IN THE LIGHT OF THE RESEARCHES 
BY LEWIS H. MORGAN77 

=====第158页=====
Written in early April-May 26, 1884 Printed according to the 1891 
edition collated with the 1884 
First published as a book in Zurich in edition 
1884 
Signed: Frederick Engels 

=====第159页=====
131 
PREFACE [TO THE FIRST EDITION] 
The following chapters constitute, in a sense, the fulfilment of a 
behest. It was no less a person than Karl Marx who had planned 
to present the results of Morgan's researches in connection with 
the conclusions arrived at by his own—within certain limits I 
might say our own—materialist investigation of history and only 
thus to make clear their whole significance. For Morgan rediscov­
ered in America, in his own way, the materialist conception of 
history that had been discovered by Marx forty years ago, and in 
his comparison of barbarism and civilisation was led by this 
conception to the same conclusions, in the main points, as Marx. 
And just as Capital was for years both zealously plagiarised and 
persistently hushed up by the official economists in Germany, 
so was Morgan's Ancient Society* treated by the spokesmen of 
"prehistoric" science in England. My work can offer but a meagre 
substitute for that which my departed friend was not destined to 
accomplish. However, I have before me, in his extensive extracts 
from Morgan,78 critical notes which I reproduce here as far as 
they refer to the subject in any way. 
According to the materialist conception, the determining factor 
in history is, in the last resort, the production and reproduction of 
immediate life. But this itself is again of a twofold character. On 
* Ancient Society, or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from Savagery 
through Barbarism to Civilization. By Lewis H. Morgan, London, MacMillan & Co., 
1877.  This book was printed in America, and is remarkably difficult to obtain in 
London. The author died a few years ago. 
11-1243 

=====第160页=====
132 Frederick Engels 
the one hand, the production of the means of subsistence, of food, 
clothing and shelter and the implements required for this; on the 
other, the production of human beings themselves, the propaga­
tion of the species. The social institutions under which men of a 
definite historical epoch and of a definite country live are 
determined by both kinds of production: by the stage of 
development of labour, on the one hand, and of the family, on the 
other. The less labour is developed and the more limited the 
volume of its products and, therefore, the wealth of society, the 
more predominantly the social order appears to be dominated by 
ties of kinship. However, within this structure of society based on 
ties of kinship, the productivity of labour develops more and 
more; with it, private property and exchange, differences in 
wealth, the possibility of utilising the labour power of others, and 
thereby the basis of class antagonisms: new social elements, which 
strive in the course of generations to adapt the old structure of 
society to the new conditions, until, finally, incompatibility of the 
two leads to a complete transformation. The old society, based on 
ties of kinship, bursts asunder with the collision of the newly 
developed social classes; in its place a new society appears, con­
stituted in a state, the lower units of which are no longer groups 
based on ties of kinship but territorial groups, a society in which 
the family system is entirely dominated by the property system, 
and in which the class antagonisms and class struggle, which make 
up the content of all hitherto written history now freely unfold. 
Morgan's great merit lies in having discovered and recon­
structed this prehistoric foundation of our written history in its 
main features, and in having found in the ties of kinship of the 
North American Indians the key to the most important, hitherto 
insoluble, riddles of the earliest Greek, Roman and German 
history. His book, however, was not the work of one day. He 
grappled with his material for nearly forty years until he 
completely mastered it. But for this reason his book is one of the 
few epoch-making works of our time. 
In the following exposition the reader will, on the whole, easily 
be able to distinguish between what has been taken from Morgan 
and what I have added  myself.  In the historical sections dealing 
with Greece and Rome I have not limited myself to Morgan's 
evidence, but have added what I had at my disposal. The sections 
dealing with the Celts and the Germans are substantially my own; 
here Morgan had at his disposal almost exclusively second-hand 
sources, and, as far as German conditions were concerned—with 
the exception of Tacitus—only the wretched liberal falsification of 

=====第161页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 133 
Mr. Freeman.3 The economic arguments, sufficient for Morgan's 
purpose but wholly inadequate for my own, have all been 
elaborated afresh by  myself.  And, finally, I, of course, am 
responsible for all conclusions wherever Morgan is not expressly 
quoted. 
Written in late May 1884 
First published in F. Engels, Der Ursprung Printed according to the book 
der Familie, des Privateigenthums und des 
Staats, Hottingen-Zurich, 1884 
a E. A. Freeman, Comparative Politics.— Ed. 
1 l* 

=====第162页=====
134 
I 
PREHISTORIC STAGES OF CULTURE 
Morgan was the first specialist to attempt to introduce a definite 
order into the prehistory of man; unless important additional 
material necessitates alterations, his classification may be expected to 
remain in force. 
Of the three main epochs, savagery, barbarism and civilisation, 
he is naturally concerned only with the first two, and with the 
transition to the third. He subdivides each of these two epochs 
into a lower, middle and upper stage, according to the progress 
made in the production of the means of subsistence; for, as he 
says: 
"Upon their skill in this direction, the whole question of human supremacy on 
the earth depended. Mankind are the only beings who may be said to have gained 
an absolute control over the production of food. [...] The great epochs of human 
progress have been identified, more or less directly, with the enlargement of the 
sources of subsistence."3 
The evolution of the family proceeds concurrently, but does not 
offer such conclusive criteria for the delimitation of the periods. 
1. SAVAGERY 
1. Lower Stage. Infancy of the human race. Man still lived in his 
original habitat, tropical or subtropical forests, dwelling, at least 
partially, in trees; this alone explains his survival in face of the 
large beasts of prey. Fruits, nuts and roots served him as food; the 
a L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 19. This proposition is also set forth in 
"Marx's Excerpts from Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient Society" in The Ethnological 
Notebooks of Karl Marx, p. 99.— Ed. 

=====第163页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 135 
formation of articulate speech was the main achievement of this 
period. None of the peoples that became known during the 
historical period were any longer in this primeval state. Although 
this period may have lasted for many thousands of years, we have 
no direct evidence to prove its existence; but once we admit the 
descent of man from the animal kingdom, the acceptance of this 
transitional stage is inevitable. 
2. Middle Stage. Begins with the utilisation of fish (under which 
heading, we also include crabs, shellfish and other aquatic animals) 
for food and with the employment of fire. These two are 
complementary, since fish food becomes fully available only by the 
use of fire. This new food, however, made men independent of 
climate and locality. By following the rivers and coasts they were 
able,  even in their savage state, to spread over the greater part of 
the earth's surface. The crudely fashioned, unpolished stone 
implements of the earlier Stone Age—the so-called palaeolithic— 
which belong wholly, or predominantly, to this period, being 
scattered over all the continents, are evidence of these migrations. 
The newly occupied territories as well as the unceasingly active 
urge for discovery, linked with the command of the art of 
producing fire by friction, made available new foodstuffs, such as 
farinaceous roots and tubers, baked in hot ashes or in baking pits 
(ground ovens), and game, which was occasionally added to the 
diet after the invention of the first weapons—the club and the 
spear. Exclusively hunting peoples, such as figure in books, that is, 
peoples subsisting solely by hunting, have never existed, since the 
fruits of the chase are much too precarious for that. As a 
consequence of the continued uncertainty with regard to sources 
of food, cannibalism appears to have arisen at this stage, and 
continued for a long time. The Australians and many Polynesians 
are to this day in this middle stage of savagery. 
3. Upper Stage. Begins with the invention of the bow and arrow, 
making game a regular item of food and hunting one of the 
normal occupations. To be sure, bow, string and arrow constitute 
a very composite instrument, the invention of which presupposes 
long accumulated experience and sharpened mental powers, and, 
consequently, a simultaneous acquaintance with a host of other 
inventions. If we compare the peoples which, although familiar 
with the bow and arrow, are not yet acquainted with the art of 
pottery (from which point Morgan dates the transition to 
barbarism), we actually already find a few beginnings of settlement 
in villages, a certain mastery of the production of means of 
subsistence: wooden vessels and utensils, finger weaving (without 

=====第164页=====
136 Frederick Engels 
looms) with filaments of bast, baskets woven from bast or rushes, 
and polished (neolithic) stone implements. Also for the most part, 
fire and the stone axe have already provided the dug-out canoe 
and, in places, timber and planks for house-building. All these 
advances are to be found, for example, among the Indians of the 
American North-West, who, although familiar with the bow and 
arrow, know nothing of pottery. The bow and arrow was for 
savagery what the iron sword was for barbarism and the firearm 
for civilisation, namely, the decisive weapon. 
2. BARBARISM 
1. Lower Stage. Dates from the introduction of pottery. The 
latter had its origin, demonstrably in many cases and probably 
everywhere, in the coating of woven or wooden vessels with clay in 
order to render them  fire-proof;  though it was soon discovered 
that moulded clay also served the purpose without the inner 
vessel. 
Up to this point we have been able to regard the course of 
evolution as being generally valid for a definite period among all 
peoples, irrespective of locality. With the advent of barbarism, 
however, we reach a stage where the difference in natural 
endowment of the two great continents begins to assert  itself.  The 
characteristic feature of the period of barbarism is the domestica­
tion and breeding of animals and the cultivation of plants. Now 
the Eastern Continent, the so-called Old World, possessed almost 
all the animals suitable for domestication and all the cultivable 
cereals with one exception; while the Western one, America, 
possessed only one domesticable mammal, the llama, and even this 
only in a part of the South; and of all cultivable cereals only one, 
but the best: maize. The effect of these different natural 
conditions was that from now on the population of each 
hemisphere went its own separate way, and the landmarks on the 
borderlines between the various stages are different in each of the 
two cases. 
2. Middle Stage. Begins, in the East, with the domestication of 
animals; in the West, with the cultivation of edible plants by means 
of irrigation, and with the use of adobes (bricks dried in the sun) 
and stone for buildings. 
We shall commence with the West, because there this stage was 
nowhere surpassed until the European Conquest. 
At the time of their discovery, the Indians in the lower stage of 

=====第165页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 137 
barbarism (to which all those found east of the Mississippi 
belonged) already engaged to a certain extent in the garden 
cultivation of maize and perhaps also of pumpkins, melons and 
other garden plants, which supplied a very substantial part of their 
food. They lived in wooden houses, in villages surrounded by 
stockades. The tribes of the North-West, particularly those living 
in the region of the Columbia River, still remained in the upper 
stage of savagery and were familiar neither with pottery nor with 
any kind of plant cultivation. On the other hand, the so-called 
Pueblo Indians of New Mexico,79 the Mexicans, Central Americans 
and Peruvians were in the middle stage of barbarism at the time 
of the Conquest. They lived in fort-like houses built of adobe or 
stone; they cultivated, in artificially irrigated gardens, maize and 
other edible plants, varying according to location and climate, 
which constituted their chief source of food, and they had even 
domesticated a few animals—the Mexicans the turkey and other 
birds,  and the Peruvians the llama. They were furthermore 
acquainted with the working of metals—except iron, which was 
the reason why they could not yet dispense with stone weapons 
and stone implements. The Spanish Conquest cut short all further 
independent development. 
In the East, the middle stage of barbarism commenced with the 
domestication of milk and meat-yielding cattle, while plant 
cultivation appears to have remained unknown until well into this 
period. The domestication and breeding of cattle and the 
formation of large herds seem to have been the cause of the 
differentiation of the Aryans and the Semites from the remaining 
mass of barbarians. Names of cattle are still common to the 
European and the Asiatic Aryans, the names of cultivable plants 
hardly at all. 
The formation of herds led in suitable places to pastoral life; 
among the Semites, on the grassy plains of the Euphrates and the 
Tigris; among the Aryans, on those of India, of the Oxus and 
the Jaxartes, of the Don and the Dnieper. The domestication of 
animals must have been first accomplished on the borders of such 
pasture lands. It thus appears to later generations that the pastoral 
peoples originated in areas which, far from being the cradle of 
mankind, were, on the contrary, almost uninhabitable for their 
savage forebears and even for people in the lower stage of 
barbarism. Conversely, once these barbarians of the middle stage 
had taken to pastoral life, it would never have occurred to them to 
leave the grassy watered plains of their own accord and return to 
the forest regions which had been the home of their ancestors. 

=====第166页=====
138 Frederick Engels 
Even when the Semites and Aryans were driven farther north and 
west, they found it impossible to settle in the forest regions of 
Western Asia and Europe until they were enabled, by the 
cultivation of cereals, to feed their cattle on this less favourable 
soil, and particularly to pass the winter there. It is more than 
probable that the cultivation of cereals was introduced here 
primarily because of the need to provide fodder for cattle and 
only later became important for human nourishment. 
The abundant diet of meat and milk among the Aryans and the 
Semites, and particularly the beneficial effects of these foods on 
the development of children, may, perhaps, explain the superior 
development of these two races. In fact, the Pueblo Indians of 
New Mexico, who are reduced to an almost exclusively vegetarian 
diet, have a smaller brain than the Indians at the lower stage of 
barbarism who ate more meat and fish. At any rate, cannibalism 
gradually disappears at this stage, and survives only as a religious 
rite or, what is almost identical in this instance, sorcery. 
3. Upper Stage. Begins with the smelting of iron ore and passes 
into civilisation through the invention of alphabetic script and its 
utilisation for literary records. At this stage, which, as we have 
already noted, was traversed independently only in the eastern 
hemisphere, more progress was made in production than in all the 
previous stages put together. To it belong the Greeks of the 
Heroic Age, the Italic tribes shortly before the foundation of 
Rome, the Germans of Tacitus and the Normans of the days of 
the Vikings.3 
Above all, we encounter here for the first time the iron 
ploughshare drawn by cattle, making possible land cultivation on a 
wide scale—tillage—and, in the conditions of that time, a 
practically unlimited increase in the means of subsistence; in 
connection with this we find also the clearing of forests and their 
transformation into arable and pasture land—which, again, would 
have been impossible on a wide scale without the iron axe and 
spade. But with this there also came a rapid increase in the 
population and dense population of small areas. Prior to tillage 
only very exceptional circumstances could have brought together 
half a million people under a single central leadership; in all 
probability this had never happened. 
In the poems of Homer, particularly the  Iliad,  we find the 
a The 1884 edition had "and the Germans of Caesar (or, as we would rather 
say, of Tacitus)" instead of "the Germans of Tacitus and the Normans of the days 
of the Vikings".— Ed. 

=====第167页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 139 
upper stage of barbarism at its zenith. Improved iron tools, the 
bellows, the handmill, the potter's wheel, the making of oil and 
wine, the advanced working of metals developing into a craft, 
waggons and war chariots, shipbuilding with beams and planks, 
the beginnings of architecture as an art, walled towns with towers 
and battlements, the Homeric epic and the whole of mythology— 
these are the chief heritages carried over by the Greeks from 
barbarism to civilisation. If we compare with this Caesar's and 
even Tacitus' descriptions of the Germans,3 who were at the 
beginning of that stage of culture from which the Homeric Greeks 
were preparing to advance to a higher one, we will see what 
wealth was embodied in the development of production at the 
upper stage of barbarism. 
The picture of the evolution of mankind through savagery and 
barbarism to the beginnings of civilisation that I have here 
sketched after Morgan is already rich enough in new and, what is 
more, incontestable features, incontestable because they are taken 
straight from production; nevertheless it will appear faint and 
meagre compared with the picture which will unfold at the end of 
our journey. Only then will it be possible to give a full view of the 
transition from barbarism to civilisation and the striking contrast 
between the two. For the time being we can generalise Morgan's 
periodisation as follows: Savagery—the period in which the 
appropriation of natural products, ready for use, predominated; 
the things produced by man are, in the main, instruments that 
facilitate this appropriation. Barbarism—the period in which 
knowledge of cattle breeding and land cultivation is acquired, in 
which methods of increasing the yield of nature's products 
through human activity are learnt. Civilisation — the period in which 
knowledge of the further processing of nature's products, of 
industry proper, and of art are acquired. 
II 
THE FAMILY 
Morgan, who spent the greater part of his life among the 
Iroquois—who still inhabit the State of New York—and was 
adopted by one of their tribes (the Senecas), found a system of 
consanguinity prevailing among them that stood in contradiction 
to their actual family relations. Marriage between single pairs, with 
a See Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico and Tacitus, Germania. — Ed, 

=====第168页=====
140 Frederick Engels 
easy dissolution by either side, which Morgan termed the "pairing 
family", was the rule among them. The offspring of such a 
married couple was known and recognised by all, and no doubt 
could arise as to the person to whom the designation father, 
mother, son, daughter, brother, sister should be applied. But the 
actual use of these terms contradicted this. The Iroquois calls not 
only his own children sons and daughters, but those of his 
brothers also; and they call him father. On the other hand, he 
calls his sisters' children his nephews and nieces; and they call him 
uncle. Conversely, the Iroquois woman calls her sisters' children 
her sons and daughters along with her own; and they call her 
mother. On the other hand, she calls her brothers' children her 
nephews and nieces; and she is called their aunt. In the same way, 
the children of brothers call one another brothers and sisters, and 
so do the children of sisters. The children of a woman and those 
of her brother, in contrast, call each other cousins. And these are 
no mere empty terms, but expressions of ideas actually in force 
concerning proximity and remoteness, equality and inequality of 
blood relationship; and these ideas serve as the foundation of a 
fully elaborated system of consanguinity, capable of expressing 
several hundred different relationships of a single individual. 
Furthermore, this system not only exists in full force among all 
American Indians (no exceptions have as yet been discovered), but 
also prevails almost unchanged among the aborigines of India, 
among the Dravidian tribes in the Deccan and the Gaura tribes in 
Hindustan. The terms of kinship current among the Tamils of 
South India and the Seneca Iroquois in the State of New York are 
identical even at the present day for more than two hundred 
different relationships. And among these tribes in India, too, as 
among all the American Indians, the relationships arising out of 
the prevailing form of the family stand in contradiction to the 
system of consanguinity. 
How is this to be explained? In view of the decisive role which 
kinship plays in the social order of all peoples in the stage of 
savagery and barbarism, the significance of so widespread a system 
cannot be explained away by mere phrases. A system which is 
generally prevalent throughout America, which likewise exists in 
Asia among peoples of an entirely different race, and more or less 
modified forms of which abound everywhere throughout Africa 
and Australia, needs to be historically explained, not talked away, 
as McLennan, for example, attempted to do.a The terms father, 
a See J. F. McLennan, Primitive Marriage and Studies in Ancient History.— Ed. 

=====第169页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 141 
child, brother and sister are no mere honorary titles, but carry 
with them absolutely definite and very serious mutual obligations, 
the totality of which forms an essential part of the social 
constitution of these peoples. And the explanation was found. In 
the Sandwich Islands (Hawaii) there existed as late as the first half 
of the present century a form of the family which yielded just 
such fathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, sons and daugh­
ters,  uncles and aunts, nephews and nieces, as are demanded by 
the American and ancient Indian system of consanguinity. But 
strangely enough, the system of consanguinity prevalent in Hawaii 
again did not coincide with the actual form of the family existing 
there. There, all first cousins, without exception, are regarded as 
brothers and sisters, and as the common children, not only of 
their mother and her sisters, or of their father and his brothers, 
but of all the brothers and sisters of their parents without 
distinction. Thus, if the American system of consanguinity 
presupposes a more primitive form of the family, no longer 
existing in America  itself,  but actually still found in Hawaii, the 
Hawaiian system of consanguinity, on the other hand, points to an 
even more primitive form of the family, which, though we cannot 
prove it still exists anywhere, must nevertheless have existed, for 
otherwise the system of consanguinity corresponding to it could 
not have arisen. 
"The family," says Morgan, "represents an active principle. It is never 
stationary, but advances from a lower to a higher form as society advances from a 
lower to a higher condition. [...] Systems of consanguinity, on the contrary, are 
passive; recording the progress made by the family at long intervals apart, and only 
changing radically when the family has radically changed."3 
"And," adds Marx, "the same applies to political, juridical, 
religious and philosophical systems generally."b While the family 
continues to live, the system of consanguinity becomes ossified, 
and while this latter continues to exist in the customary form, the 
family outgrows it. However, just as Cuvier could with certainty 
conclude, from the pouch bones of an animal skeleton found near 
Paris,  that this belonged to a marsupial and that now extinct 
marsupials had once lived there, so we, with the same certainty, 
can conclude, from a historically transmitted system of consan­
guinity, that an extinct form of the family corresponding to it did 
once exist. 
a L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p.  435.—  Ed 
b "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 112.— Ed 

=====第170页=====
142 Frederick Engels 
The systems of consanguinity and forms of the family just 
referred to differ from those which prevail today in that each 
child has several fathers and mothers. According to the American 
system of consanguinity, to which the Hawaiian family corre­
sponds, brother and sister cannot be the father and the mother of 
one and the same child; but the Hawaiian system of consanguinity 
presupposes a family in which this, on the contrary, was the rule. 
We are confronted with a series of forms of the family which 
directly contradict the forms hitherto generally accepted as being 
the only ones prevailing. The traditional conception knows 
monogamy only, along with polygamy on the part of individual 
men, and even, perhaps, polyandry on the part of individual 
women, and hushes up the fact—as is the way with moralising 
philistines—that in practice these bounds imposed by official 
society are silently but unblushingly transgressed. The study of 
primeval history, on the contrary, reveals to us conditions in which 
men live in polygamy and their wives simultaneously in polyandry, 
and the common children are, therefore, regarded as being 
common to them all; in their turn, these conditions undergo a 
whole series of modifications until they are ultimately dissolved in 
monogamy. These modifications are of such a character that the 
circle of people embraced by the common tie of marriage—very 
wide originally—becomes narrower and narrower, until, finally, 
only the single couple is left, which predominates today. 
By thus constructing the history of the family in reverse, 
Morgan, in agreement with the majority of his professional 
colleagues, arrived at a primitive stage at which promiscuous 
intercourse prevailed within a tribe, so that every woman belonged 
equally to every man and every man to every woman.3  There had 
been talk about such a primitive condition ever since the last 
century, but only in general clichés; Bachofen was the first—and 
this was one of his great services—to take this condition seriously 
and to search for traces of it in historical and religious traditions. 6 
We know today that the traces he discovered do not at all lead 
back to a social stage of sexual promiscuity, but to a much later 
form, group marriage. That primitive social stage, if it really 
existed, belongs to so remote an epoch that we can scarcely expect 
a The 1884 edition had after this: "The discovery of this primitive stage is 
Bachofen's first great merit.* It is probable that at a very early stage there 
developed from this primitive condition:". In the 1891 edition this sentence was 
replaced by the text that follows below, up to the paragraph "1. The Consanguine 
Family" (see p. 147).— Ed. 
b J. J. Bachofen, Das Mutterrecht. —Ed 

=====第171页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 143 
to find direct evidence of its one-time existence in social fossils, 
among backward savages. What Bachofen deserves credit for is 
that he placed this question in the forefront of investigation.* 
It has become the fashion of late to deny the existence of this 
initial stage in the sexual life of mankind. The aim is to spare 
humanity this "shame". Apart from pointing to the absence of any 
direct evidence, reference is particularly made to the example of 
the rest of the animal world; wherefrom Letourneau (L'évolution 
du manage et de la famille, 1888) collected numerous facts 
purporting to show that here, too, complete sexual promiscuity 
belongs to a lower stage. The only conclusion I can draw from all 
these facts, however, is that they prove absolutely nothing as far as 
man and his primeval conditions of life are concerned. The fact 
that vertebrates mate for lengthy periods of time can be 
sufficiently explained on physiological grounds; for example, 
among birds, the female's need for assistance during brooding 
time;  the examples of faithful monogamy among birds prove 
nothing whatsoever for human beings, since these are not actually 
descended from birds. And if strict monogamy is to be regarded 
as the acme of all virtue, then the palm must be given to the 
tapeworm, which possesses complete male and female genitals in 
every one of its 50 to 200 proglottides or body segments, and 
passes the whole of its life cohabiting with itself in every one of 
these segments. If, however, we limit ourselves to mammals, we 
find all forms of sexual life among them: promiscuity, suggestions 
of group marriage, polygamy and monogamy. Only polyandry is 
absent. This was only achieved by humans. Even our nearest 
relatives, the tetrapods, exhibit all possible variations in the 
grouping of male and female; and, if we draw the line closer and 
consider only the four anthropoid apes, Letourneau can tell us 
only that they are sometimes monogamous and sometimes 
polygamous, while Saussure, quoted by Giraud-Teulon, asserts 
* How little Bachofen understood what he had discovered, or rather guessed, is 
proved by his description of this primitive condition as hetaerism. This word was 
used by the Greeks, when they introduced it, to describe intercourse between 
unmarried men, or those living in monogamy, and unmarried women; it always 
presupposes the existence of a definite form of marriage outside of which this 
intercourse takes place, and includes prostitution, at least as a possibility. The word 
has never been used in any other sense and I use it in this sense like Morgan. 
Bachofen's highly important discoveries are everywhere incredibly mystified by his 
fantastic belief that the historically arisen relations between man and woman sprang 
from human beings' religious ideas in each given period and not from their actual 
conditions of life. 

=====第172页=====
144 Frederick Engels 
that they are monogamous.3 The recent assertions by Westermarck 
(The History of Human Marriage, London, 1891) regarding 
monogamy among anthropoid apes are no proof by any means. In 
short, the reports are of such a character that the honest 
Letourneau admits: 
"For the rest, there exists among the mammals absolutely no strict relations 
between the degree of intellectual development and the form of sexual union." 
And Espinas (Des sociétés animales, 1877) says point-blank: 
"The horde is the highest social group observable among animals. It seems to be 
composed of families, but right from the outset the family and the horde stand in 
antagonism to each other, they develop in inverse ratio."0 
As is evident from the above, we know next to nothing 
conclusive about the family and other gregarious groupings of the 
anthropoid apes. The reports directly contradict one another. Nor 
is this surprising. How contradictory, how much in need of critical 
examination and sifting are the reports in our possession 
concerning even savage human tribes! But ape communities are still 
more difficult to observe than human ones. We must, therefore, for 
the present reject every conclusion drawn from such absolutely 
unreliable reports. 
The passage from Espinas, quoted above, however, provides us 
with a better clue. Among the higher animals the horde and the 
family are not complementary, but antagonistic to each other. 
Espinas describes very neatly how jealousy amongst the males in 
the rutting season loosens, or temporarily dissolves, every grega­
rious horde. 
"Where the family is closely bound together hordes are rare exceptions. On the 
other hand, the horde arises almost naturally where free sexual intercourse or 
polygamy is the rule....For a horde to arise the family ties must have been loosened 
and the individual freed again. That is why we so rarely find organised flocks 
among birds.... Among mammals, on the other hand, more or less organised 
communities are to be found, precisely because the individual in this case is not 
merged in the family.... Thus, at its inception, the collective feeling of the horde can 
have no greater enemy than the collective feeling of the family. Let us not hesitate to 
say: if a higher social form than the family has evolved, it can have been due solely to 
the fact that it incorporated within itself families which had undergone a fundamental 
transformation; which does not exclude the possibility that, precisely for this reason, 
these families were later able to reconstitute themselves under infinitely more 
favourable circumstances" (Espinas, op. cit. [Ch. I]; quoted by Giraud-Teulon in his 
Origines du mariage et de la famille, 1884, pp. 518-20). 
a A. Giraud-Teulon, Les origines du mariage et de la famille, p. XV.— Ed. 
b Ch. Letourneau, L'évolution du mariage et de la famille, p.  41.—  Ed. 
c Quoted from Giraud-Teulon's book, p. 518, Note "a".— Ed. 

=====第173页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 145 
From this it becomes apparent that animal communities have, 
to be sure, a certain value in drawing conclusions regarding 
human ones—but only in a negative sense. As far as we have 
ascertained, the higher vertebrates know only two forms of the 
family: polygamy or the single pair. In both cases only one adult 
male, only one husband is permissible. The jealousy of the male, 
representing both the ties and limits of the family, brings the 
animal family into conflict with the horde. The horde, the higher 
form of gregariousness, is rendered impossible here, loosened 
there, or dissolved altogether during the rutting season; at best, its 
continued development is hindered by the jealousy of the male. 
This alone suffices to prove that the animal family and primitive 
human society are incompatible things; that primitive man, 
working his way up out of the animal stage, either knew no family 
whatsoever, or at the most knew a family that is non-existent 
among animals. Such an unarmed animal as man in the making 
could survive in small numbers even in isolation, which knows 
monogamy as its highest form of gregariousness, as ascribed by 
Westermarck to the gorilla and chimpanzee on the basis of 
hunters' reports. For evolution out of the animal stage, for the 
accomplishment of the greatest advance known to nature, an 
additional element was needed: the replacement of the individual's 
inadequate power of defence by the united strength and joint 
effort of the horde. The transition to the human stage out of 
conditions such as those under which the anthropoid apes live 
today would be absolutely inexplicable. These apes rather give the 
impression of being stray sidelines gradually approaching extinc­
tion, and, at any rate, in process of decline. This alone is sufficient 
reason for rejecting all conclusions based on parallels drawn 
between their family forms and those of primitive man. Mutual 
toleration among the adult males, freedom from jealousy, was, 
however, the first condition for the formation of those large and 
enduring groups in the sole midst of which the transition from 
animal to man could take place. And indeed, what do we find as 
the oldest, most primitive form of the family, of which undeniable 
evidence can be found in history, and which even today can be 
studied here and there? Group marriage, the form in which whole 
groups of men and whole groups of women belong to one 
another, and which leaves but little scope for jealousy. And 
further, we find at a later stage of development the exceptional 
form of polyandry, which still more militates against all feeling of 
jealousy, and is, therefore, unknown to animals. Since, however, 
the forms of group marriage known to us are accompanied by 

=====第174页=====
146 Frederick Engels 
such peculiarly complicated conditions that they necessarily point 
to earlier, simpler forms of sexual behaviour and thus, in the last 
analysis, to a period of promiscuous intercourse coinciding with 
the period of transition from animality to humanity, references to 
the forms of marriage among animals bring us back again to the 
very point from which they were supposed to have led us away 
once and for all. 
What, then, does promiscuous sexual intercourse mean? That 
the prohibitive restrictions in force at present or in earlier times 
did not exist. We have already witnessed the collapse of the 
barrier of jealousy. If anything is certain, it is that jealousy is an 
emotion of comparatively late development. The same applies to 
the conception of incest. Not only did brother and sister live as 
man and wife originally, but sexual intercourse between parents 
and children is permitted among many peoples to this day. 
Bancroft (The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America, 
1875,  Vol. I) testifies to the existence of this among the Kadiaks of 
the Bering Strait, the Kadiaks near Alaska and the Tinnehs in the 
interior of British North America. Letourneau has collected 
reports of the same fact among the Chippewa Indians, the Cucus 
in Chile, the Caribbeans and the Karens of Indo-China, not to 
mention the accounts of the ancient Greeks and Romans 
concerning the Parthians, Persians, Scythians, Huns, etc. Prior to 
the discovery of incest (and it is a discovery, and one of the 
utmost value), sexual intercourse between parents and children 
could be no more disgusting than between other persons 
belonging to different generations—such as indeed occurs today 
even in the most Philistine countries without exciting great horror; 
in fact, even old "maids" of over sixty, if they are rich enough, 
sometimes marry young men of about thirty. However, if we 
eliminate from the most primitive forms of the family known to us 
the conceptions of incest that are associated with them— 
conceptions totally different from our own and often in direct 
contradiction to them—we arrive at a form of sexual intercourse 
which can only be described as promiscuous—promiscuous insofar 
as the restrictions later established by custom did not yet exist. But 
it by no means necessarily follows from this that a higgledy-
piggledy promiscuity was daily practice. Temporary monogamous 
pairings are by no means excluded; in fact, even in group 
marriage they now constitute the majority of cases. And if 
Westermarck, the latest to deny this original state, defines as 
marriage every case where the two sexes remain mated until the 
birth of offspring, then it may be said that this kind of marriage 

=====第175页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 147 
could very well occur under the conditions of promiscuous 
intercourse, without in any way contradicting promiscuity, that is, 
the absence of barriers to sexual intercourse set up by custom. 
Westermarck, to be sure, starts out from the viewpoint that 
"promiscuity involves a suppression of individual inclinations," so that 
"prostitution is its most genuine form".3 
To me it rather seems that all understanding of primitive 
conditions remains impossible so long as we regard them through 
brothel spectacles. We shall return to this point again when 
dealing with group marriage. 
According to Morgan, there developed out of this original 
condition of promiscuous intercourse, probably at a very early 
stage: 
1. The Consanguine Family, the first stage of the family. Here 
the marriage groups are ranged according to generations: all the 
grandfathers and grandmothers within the limits of the family are 
all mutual husbands and wives, the same being the case with their 
children, the fathers and mothers, whose children will again form 
a third circle of common marriage partners, their children—the 
great-grandchildren of the first—in turn, forming a fourth circle. 
Thus,  in this form of the family, only ancestors and descendants, 
parents and children, are excluded from the rights and obligations 
(as we would say) of marriage with one another. Brothers and 
sisters, male and female cousins of the first, second and more 
remote degrees are all mutually brothers and sisters, and precisely 
because of this are all mutually husbands and wives. At this stage 
the relation of brother and sister includes the exercise of sexual 
intercourse with one another as a matter of course.* In its typical 
* Marx, in a letter written in the spring of 1882,80 expresses himself in the 
strongest possible terms about the utter falsification of primeval times appearing in 
Wagner's Nibelung text.81 "Whoever heard of a brother embracing his sister as his 
bride?"  b To these "lewd gods" of Wagner's, who in quite modern style spiced their 
love affairs with a little incest, Marx gave the answer: "In primeval times the sister 
was the wife, and that was moral" [Note by Engels to the 1884 edition.] 
A French friend and admirer of Wagner does not agree with this note, and 
points out that already in the Ögisdrekka, the Elder Edda, 82 which Wagner took as his 
model, Loki reproaches Freya thus: "Thine own brother has thou embraced be­
fore the gods." c Marriage between brother and sister, he claimed, was 
a E. Westermarck, The History of Human Marriage, pp. 70,  71.—  Ed. 
b R. Wagner, Die Walküre. Erster Tag aus der Trilogie: der Ring des Nibelungen. 
Zweiter Aufzug, S. 29.— Ed. 
c Here and below see Die Edda die ältere und jüngere... Die ältere Edda, 
pp. 68-69.— Ed 
12-1243 

=====第176页=====
148 Frederick Engels 
form, such a family would consist of the descendants of a couple, 
among whom, again, the descendants of each degree are all 
brothers and sisters, and, precisely for that reason, all mutual 
husbands and wives. 
The consanguine family has become extinct. Even the crudest 
peoples known to history furnish no verifiable example of this 
form of the family. The conclusion that it must have existed, 
however, is forced upon us by the Hawaiian system of consanguin­
ity, still prevalent throughout Polynesia, which expresses degrees 
of consanguinity such as can arise only under such a form of the 
family; and we are forced to the same conclusion by the entire 
further development of the family, which postulates this form as a 
necessary preliminary stage. 
2. The Punaluan Family. If the first advance in organisation was 
the exclusion of parents and children from mutual sexual 
intercourse, the second was the exclusion of brothers and sisters. 
In view of the greater similarity in the ages of the participants, this 
step forward was infinitely more important, but also more 
difficult, than the first. It was accomplished gradually, commenc­
ing most probably0 with the exclusion of natural brothers and 
sisters (that is, on the maternal side) from sexual intercourse, at 
first in isolated cases, then gradually becoming the rule (in Hawaii 
exceptions to this rule still existed in the present century), and 
ending with the prohibition of marriage even between collateral 
brothers and sisters, or, as we would call them, between first, 
second and third cousins. According to Morgan it 
proscribed already at that time. The Ogisdrekka is the expression of a time when 
belief in the ancient myths was completely shattered; it is a truly Lucianian satire 
on the gods. If Loki, as Mephistopheles, thus reproaches Freya, it argues rather 
against Wagner. A few verses later, Loki also says to Njordr: "You begat [such] a 
son by your sister" (vidh systur thinni gaztu slikan mög). Now, Njordr is not an Asa 
but a Vana, and says, in the Ynglinga saga, 83 that marriages between brothers and 
sisters are customary in Vanaland, which is not the case amongst the Asas.a  This 
would seem to indicate that the Vanas were older gods than the Asas. At any rate, 
Njordr lived among the Asas as their equal, and the Ogisdrekka is thus rather proof 
that intermarriage between brothers and sisters, at least among the gods, did not 
yet arouse any revulsion at the time the Norwegian Sagas of the gods originated. 
If one wants to excuse Wagner, one would do better to cite Goethe instead of the 
Edda, for Goethe, in his ballad of God and the Bayadere, b makes a similar mistake 
regarding the religious surrender of women, which he likens far too closely to modern 
prostitution. [Addition by Engels in the 1891 edition.] 
a Snorri Sturluson, Ynglinga Saga, 4.— Ed. 
b J. W. Goethe, "Der Gott und die Bajadere". — Ed. 
c The words "most probably" were added in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 

=====第177页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 149 
"affords a good illustration of the operation of the principle of natural 
selection".3 
It is beyond question that tribes among whom inbreeding was 
restricted by this advance were bound to develop more rapidly 
and fully than those among whom intermarriage between brothers 
and sisters remained both rule and duty. And how powerfully the 
effect of this advance was felt is proved by the institution of the 
gens, which arose directly from it and shot far beyond the mark. 
The gens was the foundation of the social order of most, if not all, 
the barbarian peoples of the world, and in Greece and Rome we 
pass directly from it into civilisation. 
Every primeval family had to split up after a couple of 
generations, at the latest. The original communistic common 
household, which prevailed without exception until the late middle 
stage of barbarism, determined a certain maximum size of the 
family community, varying according to circumstances but fairly 
definite in each locality. As soon as the conception of the 
impropriety of sexual intercourse between the children of a 
common mother arose, it was bound to have an effect upon such 
divisions of old and the foundation of new household communities 
(which, however, did not necessarily coincide with the family 
group).  One or more groups of sisters became the nucleus of one 
household, their natural brothers the nucleus of the other. In this 
or some similar way the form of the family which Morgan calls the 
punaluan family developed out of the consanguine family. 
According to the Hawaiian custom, a number of sisters, either 
natural or collateral (that is, first, second or more distant cousins), 
were the common wives of their common husbands, from which 
relation, however, their brothers were excluded. These husbands 
no longer addressed one another as brothers—which indeed they 
no longer had to be—but as punalua, that is, intimate companion, 
associé, as it were. In the same way, a group of natural or collateral 
brothers held in common marriage a number of women, who were 
not their sisters, and these women addressed one another as 
punalua. This is the classical form of family structure which later 
admitted of a series of variations, and the essential characteristic 
feature of which was: mutual community of husbands and wives 
within a definite family circle, from which, however, the brothers 
of the wives—first the natural brothers, and later the collateral 
brothers also—were excluded, the same applying conversely to the 
sisters of the husbands. 
a L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p.  425.—  Ed. 
12* 

=====第178页=====
150 Frederick Engels 
This form of the family now furnishes us with the most 
complete accuracy the degrees of kinship as expressed in the 
American system. The children of my mother's sisters still remain 
her children, the children of my father's brothers being likewise 
his children, and all of them are my brothers and sisters; but the 
children of my mother's brothers are now her nephews and nieces, 
the children of my father's sisters are his nephews and nieces, and 
they all are my cousins. For while my mother's sisters' husbands 
still remain her husbands, and my father's brothers' wives likewise 
still remain his wives—by right, if not always in actual fact—the 
social proscription of sexual intercourse between brothers and 
sisters now divided the first cousins, hitherto indiscriminately 
regarded as brothers and sisters, into two classes: some remain 
(collateral) brothers and sisters as before; the others, the children 
of brothers on the one hand and of sisters on the other, can no 
longer be brothers and sisters, can no longer have common 
parents, whether father, mother, or both, and therefore the class 
of nephews and nieces, male and female cousins—which would 
have been senseless in the previous family system—becomes 
necessary for the first time. The American system of consanguini­
ty, which appears to be utterly absurd in every family form based 
on some kind of individual marriage, is rationally explained, and 
naturally justified, down to its minutest details, by the punaluan 
family. To the extent that this system of consanguinity was 
prevalent, to exactly the same extent, at least, must the punaluan 
family, or a form similar to it,a have existed. 
This form of the family, proved actually to have existed in 
Hawaii, would probably have been demonstrable throughout 
Polynesia, had the pious missionaries—like the quondam Spanish 
monks in America—been able to perceive in these unchristian 
relations something more than mere "abomination".* When 
Caesar tells us of the Britons, who at that time were in the middle 
stage of barbarism, that "by tens and by twelves they possessed 
their wives in common; and it was mostly brothers with brothers 
* There can no longer be any doubt that the traces of indiscriminate sexual 
intercourse, his so-called "Sumpfzeugung" which Bachofen believes he has 
discovered, lead back to group marriage. "If Bachofen regards these punaluan 
marriages as 'lawless', a man of that period would likewise regard most present-day 
marriages between near and distant cousins on the father's or the mother's side as 
incestuous, that is, as marriages between consanguineous brothers and sisters" 
(Marx). b 
a The words "or a form similar to it" were added in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
b "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit. p. 237. Engels quotes with slight changes.— Ed, 

=====第179页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 151 
and parents with their children",3 this is best explained as group 
marriage.b Barbarian mothers have not ten or twelve sons old 
enough to be able to keep wives in common, but the American 
system of consanguinity, which corresponds to the punaluan 
family, provides many brothers, since all a man's near and distant 
cousins are his brothers. The expression "parents with their 
children" may be a misunderstanding on Caesar's part; this 
system, however, does not absolutely exclude the presence of 
father and son, or mother and daughter, in the same marriage 
group, though it does exclude the presence of father and 
daughter, or mother and son. In the same way, this or a similar 
form of group marriage0 provides the simplest explanation of the 
reports by Herodotusd and other ancient writers concerning 
community of wives among savage and barbarian peoples. This 
also applies to the description of the Tikurs of Oudh (north of the 
Ganges) given by Watson and Kaye in The People of India [Vol. II, 
p. 85]: 
"They live together" (that is, sexually) "almost indiscriminately in large 
communities, and when two people are regarded as married, the tie is but 
nominal." 
In by far the majority of cases the institution of the gens seems 
to have originated directly from the punaluan family. To be sure, 
the Australian class system84 also offers a starting-point for it: the 
Australians have gentes; but they have not yet the punaluan 
family; they have a cruder form of group marriage.6 
In all forms of the group family it is uncertain who the father of 
a child is, but it is certain who the mother is. Although she calls all 
the children of the aggregate family her children and is charged 
with the duties of a mother towards them, she, nevertheless, 
knows her natural children from the others. It is thus clear that, 
wherever group marriage exists, descent is traceable only on the 
maternal side, and thus the female line alone is recognised. This, in 
fact, is the case among all savage peoples and among those 
belonging to the lower stage of barbarism; and it is Bachofen's 
second great service to have been the first to discover this. He 
terms this exclusive recognition of lineage through the mother, 
a Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico, V, 14.—  Ed. 
b The 1884 edition has "punaluan family" instead of "group marriage".— Ed 
c The 1884 edition has "form of the family" instead of "or a similar form of group 
marriage".— Ed 
d Herodotus, Historiae, I, 216; IV, 104.— Ed 
e The 1884 edition has "their organisation, however, is too isolated for us to 
consider it" instead of "they have a cruder form of group marriage".— Ed 

=====第180页=====
152 Frederick Engels 
and the inheritance relations that arose out of it in the course of 
time,  mother right. I retain this term for the sake of brevity. It is, 
however, an unhappy choice, for at this stage of society, there is as 
yet no such thing as right in the legal sense. 
Now if we take from the punaluan family one of the two typical 
groups—namely, that consisting of a number of natural and 
collateral sisters (i.e., those descendant from natural sisters of the 
first, second or more remote degree), together with their children 
and their natural or collateral brothers on the mother's side (who 
according to our premiss are not their husbands), we obtain 
exactly that circle of persons who later appear as members of a 
gens in the original form of this institution. They all have a 
common ancestress, whose female descendants, generation by 
generation, are sisters by virtue of descent from her. These sisters' 
husbands, however, can no longer be their brothers, i.e., cannot be 
descended from this ancestress, and, therefore, do not belong to 
the consanguineous group, later the gens; but their children do 
belong to this group, since descent on the mother's side alone is 
decisive, because it alone is certain. Once the proscription of 
sexual intercourse between all brothers and sisters, including even 
the most remote collateral relations on the mother's side, becomes 
established, the above group is transformed into a gens—i.e., 
constitutes itself as a defined circle of blood relatives in the female 
line,  who are not allowed to marry one another; from now on it 
increasingly consolidates itself through other common institutions 
of a social and religious character, and differentiates itself from 
the other gentes of the same tribe. We shall deal with this in detail 
later. If, however, we find that the gens not only necessarily, but 
even obviously, evolved out of the punaluan family, then there is 
ground for assuming almost for certain that this form of the 
family used to exist among all peoples for whom gentile 
institutions can be established—i.e., virtually all barbarian and 
civilised peoples.3 
At the time Morgan wrote his book our knowledge of group 
marriage was still very limited. A little was known about the group 
marriages current among the Australians, who were organised in 
classes, and, in addition, Morgan, as early as 1871, had published 
the information that reached him concerning the Hawaiian 
punaluan family.b On the one hand, the punaluan family provided 
a The text below, up to the paragraph: "3. The Pairing Family" (see p. 156), was 
added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
b See L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human 
Family.— Ed. 

=====第181页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 153 
a complete explanation of the system of consanguinity prevalent 
among the American Indians—the system which was the starting-
point of all Morgan's investigations; on the other hand, it 
constituted a ready-made point of departure for the derivation of 
the mother-right gens; and, finally, it represented a far higher 
stage of development than the Australian classes. It was, therefore, 
comprehensible that Morgan should conceive the punaluan family 
as a stage of development necessarily preceding the pairing family, 
and assume that it was generally prevalent in earlier times. Since 
then we have learned of a number of other forms of group 
marriage and now know that Morgan went too far in this respect. 
Nevertheless, in his punaluan family, he had the good fortune to 
come across the highest, the classical form of group marriage, the 
form from which the transition to a higher stage is most easily 
explained. 
We are indebted to the English missionary Lorimer Fison for 
the most substantial enrichment of our knowledge of group 
marriage, for he studied this form of the family for years in its 
classical home, Australia.3  He found the lowest stage of develop­
ment among the Australian Negroes of Mount Gambier in South 
Australia. The whole tribe is here divided into two large 
classes—Kroki and Kumite. Sexual intercourse within each of 
these classes is strictly proscribed; on the other hand, every man of 
one class is the born husband of every woman of the other class, 
and she is his born wife. Not individuals, but entire groups are 
married to one another, class to class. And let it be noted, no 
reservations at all are made here concerning difference of age, or 
special blood relationship, other than those determined by the 
division into two exogamous classes. A Kroki has every Kumite 
woman as his legitimate wife; since, however, his own daughter, 
being the daughter of a Kumite woman, is, according to mother 
right, also a Kumite, she is thereby the born wife of every Kroki, 
and thus also her father. At all events, the class organisation, as we 
know it, imposes no restriction here. Hence, this organisation 
either arose at a time when, despite all dim impulses to limit 
inbreeding, sexual intercourse between parents and children was 
not yet regarded with any particular horror, in which case the 
class system would have arisen directly out of a condition of 
promiscuous sexual behaviour. Or intercourse between parents 
and children had already been proscribed by custom when the 
classes arose, in which case the present position points back to the 
a L. Fison and A. Howitt, Kamilaroi and Kurnai.— Ed. 

=====第182页=====
154 Frederick Engels 
consanguine family, and is the first advance beyond it. The latter 
is the more probable. Cases of marital contacts between parents 
and children have not, as far as I am aware, been reported from 
Australia; and the later form of exogamy, the mother-right gens, 
also,  as a rule, tacitly presupposes the prohibition of such contacts 
as something already existing upon its establishment. 
Apart from Mount Gambier, in South Australia, the too-class 
system is likewise to be found along the Darling River, farther 
east, and in Queensland, in the North-East, thus being very 
widespread. This system excludes only marriage between brothers 
and sisters, between the children of brothers and between the 
children of sisters on the mother's side, because these belong to 
the same class; on the other hand, the children of brother and 
sister are permitted to marry. A further step towards the 
prevention of inbreeding is to be found among the Kamilaroi, 
along the Darling River, in New South Wales, where the two 
original classes are split into four, and each of these four classes is 
likewise married lock, stock and barrel to a certain other class. The 
first two classes are the born spouses of each other; the children 
become members of the third or the fourth class, depending on 
whether the mother belongs to the first or the second class; and 
the children of the third and fourth classes, which are likewise 
married to each other, belong again to the first and second classes. 
So that one generation always belongs to the first and second 
classes, the next belongs to the third and fourth, and the next 
again to the first and second. According to this system, the 
children of brothers and sisters (on the mother's side) may not 
become man and wife—their grandchildren, however, may. This 
strangely complicated system is made even more intricate by 
the—at any rate, subsequent— superimposition of mother-right 
gentes; but we cannot go into this here. We see, then, how the 
impulse towards the prevention of inbreeding asserts itself time 
and again, but in a groping, spontaneous way, without a clear 
consciousness of the purpose. 
Group marriage, which in the case of Australia is still class 
marriage, the state of marriage of a whole class of men, often 
scattered over the whole breadth of the continent, with an equally 
widely distributed class of women—this group marriage, when 
observed more closely, does not appear quite so horrible as is 
fancied by the Philistine in his brothel-tainted imagination. On the 
contrary, long years passed before its existence was even sus­
pected, and indeed, it has again been disputed only quite recently. 
To the superficial observer it appears to be a kind of loose 

=====第183页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 155 
monogamy and, in places, polygamy, accompanied by occasional 
infidelity. One must spend years, as Fison and Howitt did, in 
order to discover the law that regulates these states of marriage— 
which in practice rather remind the average European of his own 
marital customs—the law according to which an Australian Negro, 
even when a stranger thousands of miles away from his home, 
among people whose language he does not understand, neverthe­
less, quite often, in roaming from camp to camp, from tribe to 
tribe,  finds women who guilelessly, without resistance, give 
themselves to him; and according to which he who has several 
wives cedes one of them to his guest for the night. Where the 
European can see only immorality and lawlessness, strict law 
actually reigns. The women belong to the stranger's marriage 
class,  and are therefore his born wives; the same moral law which 
assigns one to the other, prohibits, on pain of banishment, all 
intercourse outside the marriage classes that belong to each other. 
Even where women are abducted, which is frequently the case, 
and in some areas the rule, the class law is scrupulously observed. 
Incidentally, the abduction of women reveals even here a trace 
of the transition to monogamy—at least in the form of the pairing 
marriage: After the young man has abducted, or eloped with, the 
girl with the assistance of his friends, all of them have sexual 
intercourse with her one after the other, whereupon, however, she 
is regarded the wife of the young man who initiated the 
abduction. And, conversely, should the abducted woman run away 
from the man and be captured by another, she becomes the 
latter's wife, and the first man loses his privilege. Thus, exclusive 
relations, pairing for longer or shorter periods, and also 
polygamy, establish themselves alongside and within the system of 
group marriage, which, in general, continues to exist; so that here 
too group marriage is gradually dying out, the only question being 
which will disappear first from the scene as a result of European 
influence—group marriage or the Australian Negroes who 
indulge in it. 
In any case, marriage based on whole classes, such as prevails in 
Australia, is a very low and primitive form of group marriage; 
whereas the punaluan family is, as far as we know, its highest 
stage of development. The former would seem to be the form 
corresponding to the social status of roving savages, while the 
latter already presupposes relatively stable settlements of com­
munistic communities and leads directly to the next higher stage 
of development. Some intermediate stages will assuredly be found 

=====第184页=====
156 Frederick Engels 
between these two; here an only just opened and barely trodden 
field of investigation lies before us. 
3. The Pairing Family. A certain pairing for longer or shorter 
periods took place already under group marriage, or even earlier. 
Among his numerous wives, the man had a principal wife (one can 
scarcely yet call her his favourite wife) and he was the principal 
one of all her husbands. This situation contributed in no small 
degree to the confusion among missionaries, who saw in group 
marriage,3 now promiscuous community of wives, now wanton 
adultery. Such habitual pairing, however, necessarily became more 
and more established as the gens developed and as the numbers of 
classes of "brothers" and "sisters" between which marriage was 
now impossible increased. The impetus given by the gens to the 
prevention of marriage between blood relatives drove things still 
further. Thus we find that among the Iroquois and most other 
Indian tribes in the lower stage of barbarism marriage is 
prohibited between all relatives recognised by their system, and 
these are of several hundred kinds. This growing complexity of 
marriage prohibitions rendered group marriages more and more 
impossible; they were supplanted by the pairing family. At this 
stage one man lives with one woman, yet in such a manner that 
polygamy and occasional infidelity remain men's prerogative, even 
though the former is seldom practised for economic reasons; at 
the same time, the strictest fidelity is usually demanded of the 
woman during the period of cohabitation, adultery on her part 
being cruelly punished. The marriage bond can, however, be 
easily dissolved by either side, and the children still belong solely 
to the mother. 
Even in this ever widening exclusion of blood relatives from 
marriage bonds, natural selection continues to have its effect. In 
Morgan's words, 
"marriage between non-consanguineous gentes tended to create a more 
vigorous stock physically and mentally. ... When two advancing tribes ... are 
blended into one people the new skull and brain would ... widen and lengthen to 
the sum of the capabilities of both".b 
Tribes constituted according to gentes were bound, therefore, to 
gain the upper hand over the more backward ones, or carry them 
along by force of their example. 
a The 1884 edition has "the punaluan family" instead of "group mar­
riage".— Ed 
b This is a rendering of the passage from L. H. Morgan's Ancient  Society,  p. 459. 
See also "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 118.— Ed. 

=====第185页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 157 
Thus,  the evolution of the family in prehistoric times consisted 
in the continual narrowing of the circle—originally embracing the 
whole tribe—within which marital community between the two 
sexes prevailed. By the successive exclusion, first of closer, then of 
ever more remote relatives, and finally even of those merely 
related by marriage, every kind of group marriage was ultimately 
rendered practically impossible; and in the end there remained 
only the couple, for the moment still loosely united, the molecule, 
with the dissolution of which marriage itself ceases completely. 
This fact alone shows how little individual sex love, in the modern 
sense of the word, had to do with the origin of monogamy. The 
practice of all peoples in this stage affords still further proof of 
this. Whereas under previous forms of the family men were never 
in want of women but, on the contrary, had a surfeit of them, 
women now became scarce and were sought after. Consequently, 
with pairing marriage there begins the abduction and purchase of 
women—widespread symptoms, but nothing more, of a much more 
deeply rooted change that had set in. These symptoms, mere 
methods of obtaining women, McLennan, the pedantic Scot, 
nevertheless metamorphosed into special classes of families which 
he called "marriage by abduction" and "marriage by purchase".3 
Moreover, among the American Indians, and elsewhere (at the 
same stage), the arrangement of a marriage is not the affair of the 
two parties to the same, who are often not even consulted at all, 
but of their respective mothers. Two complete strangers are thus 
often betrothed and only learn of the conclusion of the deal when 
the marriage day approaches. Prior to the marriage, presents are 
given by the bridegroom to the gentile relatives of the bride (that 
is, to her relatives on her mother's side, not to the father and his 
relatives), these presents serving as purchase gifts for the ceded 
girl. The marriage may, as before, be dissolved at the discretion of 
either of the two spouses. Nevertheless, among many tribes, for 
example, the Iroquois, public sentiment gradually developed 
against such separations. When conflicts arise, the gentile relatives 
of both parties intervene and attempt a reconciliation, and 
separation takes place only if this proves fruitless, the children 
remaining with the mother and each party being free to marry 
again. 
The pairing family, itself too weak and unstable to make an 
independent household necessary, or even desirable, did not by 
any means dissolve the communistic household inherited from 
a J. F. McLennan, Primitive Marriage, particularly Ch. I and II.— Ed. 

=====第186页=====
158 Frederick Engels 
earlier times. But the communistic household implies the suprema­
cy of women in the house, just as the exclusive recognition of a 
natural mother, because of the impossibility of determining the 
natural father with certainty, signifies high esteem for the women, 
i.e. for the mothers. That woman was the slave of man at the 
commencement of society is one of the most absurd notions that 
have come down to us from the Enlightenment of the eighteenth 
century. Woman occupied not only a free but also a highly 
respected position among all savages and all barbarians of the 
lower and middle stages and partly even of the upper stage. Let 
Arthur3 Wright,85 missionary for many years among the Seneca 
Iroquois, testify what her place still was in the pairing marriage: 
"As to their family system, when occupying the old long houses" 
(communistic households embracing several families) 
"it is probable that some one clan" (gens) "predominated, the women taking in 
husbands ... from other clans" (gentes). "...Usually, the female portion ruled the 
house...; the stores were in common; but woe to the luckless husband or lover who was 
too shiftless to do his share of the providing. No matter how many children, or 
whatever goods he might have in the house, he might at any time be ordered to pick 
up his blanket and budge; and after such orders it would not be healthful for him to 
attempt to disobey. The house would be too hot for him; and ... he had to retreat to his 
own clan" (gens); "or, as was often done, go and start a new matrimonial alliance in 
some other. The women were the great power among the clans" (gentes), "as 
everywhere else. They did not hesitate, when occasion required, ... to knock off the 
horns,  as it was technically called, from the head of the chief and send him back to the 
ranks of the warriors."b 
The communistic household, in which most or even all of the 
women belong to one and the same gens, while the men come 
from various other gentes, is the material foundation of that 
predominancy of women which universally obtained in primitive 
times;  and Bachofen's discovery of this constitutes his third great 
service.—  I may add, furthermore, that the reports of travellers 
and missionaries about women among savages and barbarians 
being burdened with excessive toil in no way conflict with what has 
been said above. The division of labour between the two sexes is 
determined by causes entirely different from those that determine 
the status of women in society. Peoples whose women have to 
work much harder than we would consider proper often have far 
more real respect for women than our Europeans have for theirs. 
The social status of the lady of civilisation, surrounded by sham 
homage and estranged from all real work, is infinitely lower than 
a Should be: Asher.— Ed 
b Quoted from L. H. Morgan's Ancient Society, p. 455. See also "Marx's 
Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 116.— Ed. 

=====第187页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 159 
that of the hard-working woman of barbarism, who was regarded 
among her people as a real lady (LADY, frowa, Frau=mistress) 
and was such by the nature of her position. 
Whether or not the pairing marriage has totally supplanted 
group marriage3 in America today must be determined by closer 
investigation among the North-Western, and particularly among 
the South American, peoples, who are still in the higher stage of 
savagery. So very many instances of sexual freedom are reported 
with regard to the latter that the complete suppression of the old 
group marriage can scarcely be assumed.b At any rate, not all 
traces of it have as yet disappeared. Among at least forty North 
American tribes, the man who marries an eldest sister is entitled to 
all her sisters as wives as soon as they reach the requisite age—a 
survival of the community of husbands for the whole group of 
sisters. And Bancroft relates that the inhabitants of the Californian 
peninsula (in the upper stage of savagery) have certain festivities 
during which several "tribes" congregate for the purpose of 
indiscriminate sexual intercourse.0 These are manifestly gentes for 
whom these festivities represent dim memories of the times when 
the women of one gens had all the men of another as their 
common husbands, and vice versa.d The same custom still prevails 
in Australia. Among a few peoples it happens that the older men, 
the chiefs and sorcerer-priests, exploit the community of wives for 
their own ends and monopolise most of the women for 
themselves; but they, in their turn, have to allow the old common 
possession to be restored during certain feasts and great public 
gatherings and permit their wives to enjoy themselves with the 
young men. Westermarck (pp. 28 and 29) adduces a whole series 
of examples of such periodical Saturnalian feasts86  during which 
the old free sexual intercourse comes into force again for a short 
period, as, for example, among the Hos, the Santals, the Panjas 
a The 1884 edition has "punaluan family" instead of "group marriage".— Ed. 
b This sentence was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
c H. Bancroft, The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America, 
pp. 352-53.— Ed. 
d The text below, up to the words "The pairing family arose on the borderline 
between savagery and barbarism" (see p. 162), was added by Engels in the 1891 
edition. In the 1884 edition this paragraph ended with the following text, partly 
used in the 1891 edition and partly omitted: "Similar remnants from the world of 
antiquity are familiar enough, such as the surrender of Phoenician girls in the 
temple at the festivals of the Astarte: even the medieval right of the first night, 
which was very well established despite neoromantic German whitewashing, was 
presumably a piece of the punaluan family passed on by the Celtic gens 
(clan)."—Ed. 

=====第188页=====
160 Frederick Engels 
and Kotars of India, among some African peoples, etc. Curiously 
enough, Westermarck concludes from this that they are relics, not 
of group marriage, which he rejects, but—of the rutting season 
common alike to primitive man and the other animals. 
We now come to Bachofen's fourth great discovery, that of the 
widespread transitionary form between group marriage and 
pairing. What Bachofen construes as a penance for infringing the 
ancient commandments of the gods, the penance with which the 
woman buys her right to chastity, is in fact nothing more than a 
mystical expression for the penance by means of which the woman 
purchases her redemption from the ancient community of 
husbands and acquires the right to give herself to one man only. 
This penance takes the form of limited surrender: the Babylonian 
women had to surrender themselves once a year in the Temple of 
Mylitta. Other Middle Eastern peoples sent their girls for years to 
the Temple of Anaitis, where they had to practise free love with 
favourites of their own choice before they were allowed to marry. 
Similar customs bearing a religious guise are common to nearly all 
Asiatic peoples between the Mediterranean and the Ganges. The 
expiatory sacrifice for the purpose of redemption becomes ever 
lighter in the course of time, as Bachofen notes: 
"The annually repeated offering yields place to the single performance; the 
hetaerism of the matrons is succeeded by that of the maidens, its practice during 
marriage by practice before marriage, the indiscriminate surrender to all by 
surrender to certain persons" (Mutterrecht, p. XIX). 
Among other peoples, the religious guise is absent; among 
some—the Thracians, Celts, etc., of antiquity, and many aborigi­
nal inhabitants of India, the Malay peoples, South Sea Islanders 
and many American Indians even to this day—the girls enjoy the 
greatest sexual freedom until their marriage. Particularly is this 
the case throughout almost the whole of South America, as 
anybody who has penetrated a little into the interior can testify. 
Thus,  Agassiz (A Journey in Brazil, Boston and New York, 1868, 
p. 266) relates the following about a rich family of Indian descent. 
When he was introduced to the daughter and enquired after her 
father, who, he supposed, as the mother's husband, an officer on 
active service in the war against Paraguay, the mother answered 
smilingly: "naö  tern pat, é filha da fortuna"—she has no father, she is 
the daughter of chance. 
"It is the way the Indian or half-breed worr\en here always speak of their 
illegitimate children, unconscious of any wrong or shame. So far is this from being 
an unusual case that the opposite seems the exception. Children [often] know 
[only] about their mother, for all the care and responsibility falls upon her; but 

=====第189页=====
Origin  of the  Family, Private Property  and  State  161 
they have  no knowledge  of their father,  nor  does  it seem  to occur  to the  woman 
that she or her  children have  any  claim upon him."3 
What appears  so strange  to the  civilised  man  here  is simply  the 
rule according  to mother right  and in  group marriage. 
Among still other peoples,  the  bridegroom's friends  and 
relatives,  or the  wedding guests, exercise their  old traditional right 
to the  bride  at the  wedding  itself, and the  bridegroom  has his  turn 
last of all; for  instance,  on the  Balearic Islands  and  among  the 
African Augilas  of antiquity,  and  among  the  Bareas  of Abyssinia 
even  now. In the  case  of still other peoples, again,  an official 
person—the chief  of the  tribe  or of the  gens,  the cacique, shaman, 
priest, prince  or whatever  his title—represents  the  community  and 
exercises  the  right  of the  first night with  the  bride. Despite  all 
neoromantic whitewashing, this  jus primae noctis h persists  to this 
day as a  relic  of group marriage among most  of the  natives  of the 
Alaska territory (Bancroft, Native Races,  I, p. 81),  among  the 
Tahus  in North Mexico (ibid.,  p. 584) and  among other peoples; 
and it existed throughout  the  Middle Ages  at least  in the  originally 
Celtic countries, where  it was  directly transmitted from group 
marriage;  for instance,  in Aragon. While  the peasant  in Castile  was 
never  a serf, in  Aragon  the most ignominious serfdom prevailed 
until abolished  by the  decree issued  by Ferdinand  the  Catholic  in 
I486. 87 This public  act states: 
"We pass judgment  and  declare that  the  aforementioned lords" (senores, bar­
ons) "...  also shall  not  sleep  the  first night with  the  woman taken  in wedlock  by 
a peasant,  nor on the  wedding night, after  she has  gone  to bed,  stride over  it and 
over the  woman  as a  sign  of their authority;  not  shall  the  aforementioned lords 
avail themselves  of the  services  of the  sons  or daughters  of the  peasant, with  or 
without payment, against their will." (Quoted  in the  Catalonian original  by 
Sugenheim, Leibeigenschaft, Petersburg,  1861, p. 35. c) 
Bachofen  is again absolutely right when  he contends throughout 
that the  transition from what  he  terms "hetaerism"  or 
" Sumpfzeugung"  to  monogamy  was  brought about essentially  by 
the women.  The  more  the old  traditional sexual relations lost their 
naïve, primeval character,  as a  result  of the  development  of the 
economic conditions  of life, that  is, with  the  undermining  of the 
old communism  and the  growing density  of the  population,  the 
more degrading  and  oppressive they must have appeared  to the 
a Op. cit., pp.  266-67.—  Ed. 
b Right  of the  first night.—  Ed. 
c S. Sugenheim,  Geschichte  der Aufhebung der Leibeigenschaft  und Hörigkeit  in Europa 
bis um die  Mitte  des  Neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. —Ed 

=====第190页=====
162 Frederick Engels 
women; the more fervently they must have longed for the right to 
chastity, to temporary or permanent marriage with one man only, 
as a deliverance. This advance could not have originated from the 
men, if only for the reason that they have never—not even to the 
present day—dreamed of renouncing the pleasures of actual 
group marriage. Only after the transition to pairing marriage had 
been effected by the women could the men introduce strict 
monogamy—for the women only, of course. 
The pairing family arose on the borderline between savagery 
and barbarism, mostly at the upper stage of savagery already, and 
here and there only at the lower stage of barbarism. It is the form 
of the family characteristic of barbarism, in the same way as group 
marriage is characteristic of savagery and monogamy of civilisa­
tion. For its further development to stable monogamy, causes 
different from those we have hitherto found operating were 
required. In the pairing family, the group was already reduced to 
its last unit, its diatomic molecule—to one man and one woman. 
Natural selection had completed its work by constantly extending 
the circle excluded from the community of marriage; there was 
nothing more left for it to do in this direction. If no new, social 
driving forces had come into operation, there would have been no 
reason why a new form of the family should arise out of the 
pairing family. But these driving forces did begin to operate. 
We now leave America, the classical soil of the pairing family. 
There is no evidence enabling us to conclude that a higher form 
of the family developed there, or that strict monogamy existed in 
any part of it at any time before its discovery and conquest. It was 
otherwise in the Old World. 
Here the domestication of animals and the breeding of herds 
had developed a hitherto unsuspected source of wealth and 
created entirely new social relations. Until the lower stage of 
barbarism, fixed wealth consisted almost entirely of the house, 
clothing, crude ornaments and the implements for procuring and 
preparing food: boats, weapons and household utensils of the 
simplest kind. Food had to be won anew day by day. Now, with 
herds of horses, camels, donkeys, oxen, sheep, goats and pigs, the 
advancing pastoral peoples—the Aryans in the Indian land of the 
five rivers and the Ganges area, as well as in the then much more 
richly watered steppes of the Oxus and the Jaxartes, and the 
Semites on the Euphrates and the Tigris—acquired possessions 
demanding merely supervision and most elementary care in order 
to propagate in ever-increasing numbers and to yield the richest 
nutriment in milk and meat. All previous means of procuring food 

=====第191页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 163 
now sank into the background. Hunting, once a necessity, now 
became a luxury. 
But to whom did this new wealth belong? Originally, doubtless, 
to the gens. But private ownership of herds must have developed 
at a very early stage. It is hard to say whether Father Abraham 
appeared to the author of what is known as the First Book of 
Moses as the owner of his herds and flocks in his own right as 
head of a family community or by virtue of his status as actual 
hereditary chief of a gens. 3 One thing, however, is certain, and 
that is that we must not regard him as a property owner in the 
modern sense of the term. Equally certain is that on the threshold 
of authenticated history we find everywhere the herds as already 
the separate property b of the family chiefs, in exactly the same 
way as were the artistic products of barbarism, metal utensils, 
articles of luxury and, finally, human cattle—the slaves. 
For now slavery too had been invented. The slave was of no 
value to the barbarian of the lower stage. It was for this reason 
that the American Indians treated their vanquished foes quite 
differently from the way they were treated in the upper stage. 
The men were either killed or adopted as brothers by the tribe of 
the victors. The women were either taken in marriage or likewise 
just adopted along with their surviving children. Human labour 
power at this stage yielded no noticeable surplus as yet over the 
cost of its maintenance. With the introduction of cattle breeding, 
of metalworking, of weaving and, finally, of field cultivation, this 
changed. Just as the once so easily obtainable wives had now 
acquired an exchange valuec and were bought, so it happened 
with labour power, especially after the herds had finally been 
converted into familyd possessions. The family did not multiply as 
rapidly as the cattle. More people were required to mind them; 
the captives taken in war were useful for just this purpose, and, 
furthermore, they could be bred like the cattle themselves. 
Such riches, once they had passed into the private possession of 
families6 and there rapidly multiplied, struck a.powerful blow at a 
society founded on pairing marriage and mother-right gens. 
Pairing marriage had introduced a new element into the family. 
By the side of the natural mother it had placed the attested 
a Genesis 12:16, 13:2.— Ed. 
b The 1884 edition has "private property" instead of "separate property".— Ed 
c The 1884 edition has "numerous wives had now acquired value" instead of 
"easily obtainable wives had now acquired an exchange value".— Ed. 
d The 1884 edition has "private" instead of "family" here.— Ed. 
e The words "of families" are added in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
13-1243 

=====第192页=====
164 Frederick Engels 
natural father—who was probably better attested than many a 
"father" of the present day. According to the division of labour 
then prevailing in the family, the procurement of food and the 
means of labour necessary thereto, and therefore, also, the 
ownership of the latter, fell to the man; he took them with him in 
case of separation, just as the woman retained the household 
goods. Thus, according to the custom of society at that time, the 
man was also the owner of the new sources of food—the 
cattle—and later, of the new means of labour—the slaves. 
According to the custom of the same society, however, his children 
could not inherit from him, for the position in this respect was as 
follows. 
According to mother right, that is, as long as descent was 
counted solely through the female line, and according to the 
original custom of inheritance in the gens, it was the gentile 
relatives that at first inherited from a deceased member of the 
gens.  The property had to remain within the gens. In view of the 
insignificance of the objects in question, it may, from time 
immemorial, have passed in practice to the nearest gentile 
relatives—that is, to the blood relatives on the mother's side. The 
children of the deceased man, however, belonged not to his gens, 
but to that of their mother. In the beginning, they inherited from 
their mother, along with the rest of their mother's blood relatives, 
and later, perhaps, had first claim upon her property; but they 
could not inherit from their father, because they did not belong 
to his gens, and his property had to remain in the latter. On the 
death of the herd owner, therefore, his herds passed, first of all, 
to his brothers and sisters and to his sisters' children or to the 
descendants of his mother's sisters. His own children, however, 
were disinherited. 
Thus,  as wealth increased, it, on the one hand, gave the man a 
more important status in the family than the woman, and, on the 
other hand, created a stimulus to utilise this strengthened position 
in order to overthrow the traditional order of inheritance in 
favour of the children. But this was impossible as long as descent 
according to mother right prevailed. This had, therefore, to be 
overthrown, and it was overthrown. It was not so difficult to do 
this as appears to us now. For this revolution—one of the most 
far-reaching ever experienced by mankind—did not have to affect 
one single living member of a gens. All the members could remain 
what they had been previously. The simple decision sufficed that 
in future the descendants of the male members should remain in 
the gens, but that those of the females were to be excluded from 

=====第193页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 165 
the gens by being transferred to that of their father. The 
reckoning of descent through the female line and the right of 
inheritance through the mother were thus overthrown and male 
lineage and right of inheritance from the father instituted. We 
know nothing as to how and when this revolution was effected 
among the civilised peoples. It falls entirely within prehistoric 
times.  That it was actually effected is more than sufficiently proved 
by the abundant traces of mother right which have been collected, 
especially by Bachofen. How easily it is accomplished can be seen 
from a whole number of Indian tribes, among whom it has only 
recently taken place and is still proceeding, partly under the 
influence of increasing wealth and changed mode of life (reloca­
tion from the forests to the prairies), and partly under the moral 
influence of civilisation and the missionaries. Of eight Missouri 
tribes,  six have male, and two still retain the female, lineage and 
inheritance line. Among the Shawnees, Miamis and Delawares it 
has become the custom to transfer the children to the father's gens 
by giving them one of the gentile names obtaining therein, in 
order that they may inherit from him. "Innate casuistry of man to 
change things by changing names! And to find loopholes for 
breaking through tradition within tradition  itself,  wherever actual 
interest provided a powerful motive!" (Marx.) 3 As a consequence, 
hopeless confusion arose; and matters could only be straightened 
out, and partly were straightened out, by the transition to father 
right. "This appears altogether to be the most natural transition." 
(Marx.)—As for what the experts on comparative method have to 
tell us regarding the ways and means by which this transition was 
effected among the civilised peoples of the Old World—almost 
only hypotheses, of course—see M. Kovalevsky, Tableau des 
origines et de l'évolution de la famille et de la propriété, Stockholm, 
1890. b 
The overthrow of mother right was the world-historic defeat of the 
female sex. The man seized the reins in the house too, the woman 
was degraded, enthralled, became the slave of the man's lust, a 
mere instrument for breeding children. This humiliated position 
of women, especially manifest among the Greeks of the Heroic 
and still more of the Classical Age, has become gradually 
embellished and dissembled and, in part, clothed in a milder form, 
but by no means abolished. 
The first effect of the sole rule of the men that was now 
a "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 181.—  Ed 
b This sentence was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed 
13* 

=====第194页=====
166 Frederick Engels 
established is shown in the intermediate form of the family which 
now emerges, the patriarchal family. Its chief attribute is not 
polygamy—of which more anon—but 
"the organisation of a number of persons, bond and free, into a family, under 
paternal power of the head of the family. In the Semitic form, this family chief 
lives in polygamy, the bondsman has a wife and children, and the purpose of the 
whole organisation is the care of flocks and herds over a limited area".3 
The essential features are the incorporation of bondsmen and 
paternal power; the Roman family, accordingly, constitutes the 
perfected type of this form of the family. The word familia did 
not originally signify the ideal of our modern philistine, which is a 
compound of sentimentality and domestic discord. Among the 
Romans, in the beginning, it did not even refer to the married 
couple and their children, but to the slaves alone. Famulus means 
a household slave and familia signifies the totality of slaves 
belonging to one individual. Even in the time of Gaius the familia, 
id est Patrimonium (i.e., the inheritance) was bequeathed by will. 
The expression was invented by the Romans to describe a new 
social organism, the head of which had under him wife and 
children and a number of slaves, under Roman paternal power, 
with power of life and death over them all. 
"The term, therefore, is no older than the ironclad family system of the Latin 
tribes,  which came in after field agriculture and after legalised servitude, as well as 
after the separation of the Greeks and (Aryan) Latins."b 
To which Marx adds: "The modern family contains in embryo 
not only slavery (servitus) but serfdom also, since from the very 
beginning it is connected with agricultural services. It contains 
within itself in miniature all the antagonisms which later develop 
on a wide scale within society and its state."0 
Such a form of the family shows the transition of the pairing 
marriage to monogamy. In order to guarantee the fidelity of the 
wife,  that is, the paternity of the children, the woman is placed in 
the man's absolute power; if he kills her, he is but exercising his 
right.d 
With the patriarchal family we enter the field of written history 
and, therewith, a field in which the science of comparative law can 
a In the 1884 edition the quotation marks are missing. This passage is a 
summary of the text on pp. 465-66 of L. H. Morgan's Ancient Society, See also 
"Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., pp. 118-19.— Ed 
b L. H. Morgan, op. cit., p. 470. Quoted with slight changes.— Ed 
c "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 120.— Ed 
d The text below, up to the words "A few words more about polygamy" (see 
p. 169), was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed 

=====第195页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 167 
render us major assistance. And in fact it has brought us 
considerable progress here. We are indebted to Maxim Kovalevsky 
(Tableau etc. de la famille et de la propriété, Stockholm, 1890, 
pp. 60-100) for the proof that the patriarchal household communi­
ty, such as we still find today among the Serbs and the Bulgars 
under the designations of Zâdruga (meaning something like 
fraternity) or Bratstvo (brotherhood), and among the Oriental 
peoples in a modified form, constituted the transition stage 
between the mother-right family which evolved out of group 
marriage and the individual family of the modern world. This 
appears to be proved at least as far as the civilised peoples of the 
Old World, the Aryans and Semites, are concerned. 
The South Slavic Zâdruga provides the best still surviving 
example of such a family community. It embraces several 
generations of the descendants of one father and their wives, who 
all live together on one farm, till their fields in common, feed and 
clothe themselves from the common stocks and communally own 
all surplus yield. The community is under the supreme manage­
ment of the master of the house (domacin), who represents it in 
external affairs, may dispose of smaller objects, and manages the 
finances, being responsible for the latter as well as for the regular 
conduct of business. He is elected and does not by any means 
need to be the eldest. The women and their work are under the 
direction of the mistress of the house (domacica), who is usually the 
domacin's wife. In the choice of husbands for the girls she has an 
important, often the decisive voice. Supreme power, however, is 
vested in the Family Council, the assembly of all adult members, 
women as well as men. The master of the house reports back to 
this assembly; it makes all the important decisions, administers 
justice among the members, decides on purchases and sales of any 
importance, especially of landed property, etc. 
It was only about ten years ago that the existence of such large 
family communities also in Russia was proved3; they are now 
generally recognised as being just as firmly rooted in the popular 
customs of the Russians as the obscina, or village community. They 
figure in the most ancient Russian law code—the Pravda of 
Yaroslav88—under the same name (verv) as in the Dalmatian 
Laws, 89 and references to them may be found also in Polish and 
Czech historical sources. 
According to Heusler (Institutionen des deutschen Rechts h), the 
a See M. KoBaAeBCKiÄ, IJepeoôvmiHoe npaeo, Bun. I Po4i>, crp. 32-38.— Ed. 
b A. Heusler, Institutionen des Deutschen Privatrechts, Vol. II, p.  271.—  Ed. 

=====第196页=====
168 Frederick Engels 
economic unit among the Germans as well was not originally the 
individual family in the modern sense, but the "household 
community", consisting of several generations, or individual 
families, and often enough including bondsmen besides. The 
Roman family, too, has been traced back to this type, and in 
consequence the absolute power of the head of the house, as also 
the lack of rights of the remaining members of the family in 
relation to him, has recently been strongly questioned. Similar 
family communities are likewise supposed to have existed among 
the Celts in Ireland; in France they continued to exist in Nivernais 
under the name of parçonneries right up to the French Revolution, 
while in Franche-Comté they are not quite extinct even today. In 
the district of Louhans (Saône et Loire) there may be seen large 
peasant houses with a lofty communal central hall reaching up to 
the roof,  surrounded by sleeping rooms to which access is had by 
staircases of six to eight steps, and in which dwell several gene­
rations of the same family. 
In India, the household community with common tillage of the 
soil was already mentioned by Nearchus,3  at the time of Alexander 
the Great, and exists to this day in the same area, in the Punjab 
and the entire North-Western part of the country. Kovalevsky 
himself was able to testify to its existence in the Caucasus. It still 
exists in Algeria among the Kabyles. It is said to have occurred 
even in America; attempts are being made to find it in the 
calpullis in ancient Mexico, 91 described by Zuritab ; Cunow, on the 
other hand, has proved fairly clearly (in Ausland, Nos 42-44, 
1890),° that a kind of Mark constitution existed in Peru (where, 
peculiarly enough, the Mark was called marca) at the time of the 
Conquest, with periodical allotment of the cultivated land, that is, 
individual tillage. 
At any rate, the patriarchal household community with common 
land ownership and common tillage now assumes quite another 
significance than hitherto. We can no longer doubt the important 
transitional role which it played among the civilised and many 
other peoples of the Old World between the mother-right family 
and the monogamian family. We shall return later on to the 
further conclusion drawn by Kovalevsky, namely, that it was 
likewise the transition stage out of which developed the village, 
a [Strabo] Strabonis rerum geographicarum libri  XVII,  XV, 1.— Ed. 
b A. de Zurita, Rapport sur les différentes  classes  de chefs de la Nouvelle-Espagne... in 
Voyages, relations et mémoires, pp. 50-64.— Ed 
c H. Cunow, "Die altperuanischen  Dorf-  und Markgenossenschaften", Das 
Ausland, Nos 42-44, October 20, 27 and November 3, 1890.— Ed. 

=====第197页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 169 
or Mark, community with individual cultivation and at first 
periodical, then definitive, allotment of arable and pasture lands. 
As regards family life within these household communities, it 
should be noted that in Russia, at least, the head of the house is 
reputed to be strongly abusing his position as far as the younger 
women of the community, particularly his daughters-in-law, are 
concerned, and to be very often making a harem of them for 
himself;  this is rather eloquently reflected in the Russian folk 
songs. 3 
A few words more about polygamy and polyandry before we 
deal with monogamy, which developed rapidly following the 
overthrow of mother right. Both these marriage forms can only be 
exceptions, historical luxury products, so to speak, unless they 
appeared side by side in one country, which, it will be recalled, is 
not the case. As, therefore, the men, excluded from polygamy, 
could not console themselves with the women left over from 
polyandry, the numerical strength of men and women without 
regard to social institutions having been fairly equal hitherto, it is 
evident that neither the one nor the other form of marriage could 
rise to general prevalence. Actually, polygamy on the part of a 
man was clearly a product of slavery and limited to a few 
exceptional positions. In the Semitic patriarchal family, only the 
patriarch himself and, at most, a couple of his sons lived in 
polygamy; the others had to be content with one wife each. It 
remains the same today throughout the entire Orient. Polygamy is 
a privilege of the rich and of the nobility, the wives being re­
cruited chiefly by the purchase of female slaves; the mass of the 
people live in monogamy. Just such an exception is provided 
by polyandry in India and Tibet, the certainly not uninteresting 
origin of which from group marriage b requires closer investigation. 
In its practice, at any rate, it appears to be much more generous 
than the jealous harem system of the Mohammedans. At least, 
among the Nairs in India, the men, in groups of three, four or 
more, have, to be sure, one wife in common; but each of them can 
simultaneously have a second wife in common with three or more 
other men, and, in the same way, a third wife, a fourth and so on. 
It is a wonder that McLennan did not discover a new class—that 
of club marriage—in these marriage clubs, of which one could 
belong to several at a time, and which he himself described. This 
marriage club system, however, is by no means real polyandry; on 
a M. Kovalevsky, op. cit., pp. 56-59.— Ed. 
b The 1884 edition has "punaluan family" instead of "group marriage".— Ed. 

=====第198页=====
170 Frederick Engels 
the contrary, as has been noted by Giraud-Teulon, it is a 
specialised form of group marriage, the men living in polygamy, the 
women in polyandry.3 
4. The Monogamian Family. As already indicated, this arises out 
of the pairing family in the transition period from the middle to 
the upper stage of barbarism, its final victory being one of the 
signs of fledgling civilisation. It is based on the supremacy of the 
man; its express aim is the procreation of children of undisputed 
paternity, this paternity being required in order that these 
children may in due time inherit their father's wealth as his 
natural heirs. The monogamian family differs from pairing 
marriage in the far greater rigidity of the marriage bond, which 
can now no longer be dissolved at the pleasure of either party. 
Now, as a rule, only the man can dissolve it and disown his wife. 
The right of conjugal infidelity remains his even now, sanctioned, 
at least, by custom (the Code Napoléon expressly concedes this right 
to the husband as long as he does not bring his concubine into the 
conjugal home b), and is exercised more and more with the 
growing development of society. Should the wife recall the ancient 
sexual practice and desire to revive it, she is punished more 
severely than ever before. 
We are confronted with this new form of the family in all its 
severity among the Greeks. While, as Marx observes,0 the position 
of the goddesses in mythology represents an earlier period, when 
women still occupied a freer and more respected place, in the 
Heroic Age we already find women degraded owing to the 
predominance of the man and the competition of female slaves.0 
One may read in the Odyssey how Telemachus cuts his mother 
short and enjoins silence upon her.e In Homer the young female 
captives become enslaved to the sensual lust of the victors; the 
military chiefs, one after the other, according to rank, choose the 
most beautiful ones for themselves. The whole of the  Iliad,  as we 
know, revolves around the quarrel between Achilles and Agamem­
non over such a female slave. In connection with each Homeric 
a The last sentence was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
b Code Napoléon, Art. 230.—Ed. 
c "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 121.—  Ed. 
d In the 1884 edition the end of this sentence reads: "find women in an isolation 
bordering on imprisonment to ensure their children proper paternity". The text 
below, up to the words "the Greek women found opportunities often enough for 
deceiving their husbands" (see p. 173), was almost entirely added by Engels in the 
1891 edition, only a few sentences being used from the 1884 edition.— Ed. 
e Homer, Odyssey, Canto I.— Ed. 

=====第199页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 171 
hero of importance mention is made of a captive maiden with 
whom he shares tent and bed. These maidens are taken back 
home and into the conjugal house, as was Cassandra by 
Agamemnon in Aeschylus.3 Sons born of these slaves receive a 
small share of their father's estate and are regarded as freemen. 
Teucer was such an illegitimate son of Telamon and was 
permitted to adopt his father's name. The wedded wife is 
expected to tolerate all this, but to maintain strict chastity and 
conjugal fidelity  herself.  True, in the Heroic Age the Greek wife is 
more respected than in the period of civilisation; for the husband, 
however, she is, in reality, merely the mother of his legitimate 
heirs,  his chief housekeeper, and the superintendent of the female 
slaves, whom he may make, and does make, his concubines at will. 
It is the existence of slavery side by side with monogamy, the 
existence of beautiful young female slaves who belong to the man 
with all they have, that from the very beginning stamped on 
monogamy its specific character as monogamy only for the woman, 
but not for the man. And it retains this character to this day. 
As regards the Greeks of later times, we must differentiate 
between the Dorians and the Ionians. The former, of whom 
Sparta was the classical example, have in many respects more 
ancient marriage relationships than even Homer indicates. In 
Sparta we find a form of pairing marriage—modified by the state 
in accordance with the conceptions there prevailing—which still 
displays many vestiges of group marriage. Childless marriages are 
dissolved: King Anaxandridas (about 560 B.C.) took another wife 
in addition to his first, childless one, and maintained two 
households; King Aristones of the same period added a third wife 
to two who were barren, one of whom he, however, let go. On the 
other hand, several brothers could have a wife in common. A 
person having a preference for his friend's wife could share her 
with him; and it was regarded as proper to place one's wife at the 
disposal of a strapping "stallion", as Bismarck would say, even 
when this person was not a citizen. A passage in Plutarch, where a 
Spartan woman refers a lover who is pursuing her with his 
attentions to her husband, would indicate, according to 
Schoemann, still greater freedom of manners.b Real adultery, the 
infidelity of the wife behind the back of her husband, was thus 
unheard of. On the other hand, domestic slavery was unknown in 
a Aeschylus, Oresteia: Agamemnon.— Ed. 
b G. F. Schoemann, Griechische Alterthümer, Vol. l,p. 268. See also Plutarch, Short 
Sayings of Spartan Women, V.— Ed. 

=====第200页=====
172 Frederick Engels 
Sparta, at least in its heyday; the serf Helots lived separately on 
the estates and thus there was less temptation for the Spartiates 92 
to pursue their women. That in all these circumstances the women 
of Sparta enjoyed a very much more respected position than all 
other Greek women was quite natural. The Spartan women and 
the élite of the Athenian hetaerae are the only Greek women of 
whom the ancients speak with respect, and whose remarks they 
consider as being worthy of record. 
Among the Ionians—of whom Athens is characteristic—things 
were quite different. Girls learned only spinning, weaving and 
sewing, at best a little reading and writing. They were practically 
kept in seclusion and consorted only with other women. The 
women's quarter was a separate part of the house, on the upper 
floor, or in the rear of the building, not easily accessible to men, 
particularly strangers; to this the women retired when male 
visitors came. The women did not go out unless accompanied by a 
female slave; at home they were positively kept under guard; 
Aristophanes speaks of Molossian hounds kept to frighten off 
adulterers, while in Asiatic towns, at least, eunuchs were main­
tained to keep guard over the women; they were manufactured 
for the trade in Chios as early as Herodotus' day, and according to 
Wachsmuth, not merely for the barbarians. In Euripides, the wife 
is described as oikurema,* a thing for housekeeping (the word is a 
neuter), and apart from the business of bearing children, she was 
nothing more to the Athenian than the chief housemaid. The 
husband had his gymnastic exercises, his public affairs, from 
which the wife was excluded; in addition, he often had female 
slaves at his disposal and, in the heyday of Athens, extensive 
prostitution, which was viewed with favour by the state, to say the 
least. It was precisely on the basis of this prostitution that the sole 
outstanding characters of Greek women developed, who by their 
esprit and artistic taste towered as much above the general level of 
ancient womanhood as the Spartan women did by virtue of their 
character. That one had first to become a hetaera in order to 
become a woman is the strongest indictment of the Athenian 
family. 
In the course of time, this Athenian family became the model 
upon which not only the rest of the Ionians, but also all the 
Greeks of the mainland and of the colonies increasingly moulded 
a W. Wachsmuth, Hellenische Alterthumskunde aus dem Gesichtspunkte des Staates, 
Part II, Section II, p. 77. See also Aristophanes, Thesmophoriazusae  ; Herodotus, 
Historiae, VIII, 105; Euripides,  Orestes. — Ed. 

=====第201页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 173 
their domestic relations. But despite all the seclusion and 
surveillance the Greek women found opportunities often enough 
for deceiving their husbands. The latter, who would have been 
ashamed to evince any love for their own wives, amused 
themselves with hetaerae in all kinds of amours. But the 
degradation of the women recoiled on the men and degraded 
them too, until they sank into the perversion of boy-love, 
degrading both themselves and their gods by the myth of 
Ganymede. 
This was the origin of monogamy, as far as we can trace it 
among the most civilised and highly developed people of antiquity. 
It was not in any way the fruit of individual sex love, with which it 
had absolutely nothing to do, for the marriages remained 
marriages of convenience, as before. It was the first form of the 
family based not on natural but on economic conditions,3 namely, 
on the victory of private property over original, naturally 
developed, common ownership. The rule of the man in the family, 
the procreation of children who could only be his, destined to be 
the heirs of his wealth—these alone were frankly avowed by the 
Greeks as the exclusive aims of monogamy. For the rest, it was a 
burden, a duty to the gods, to the state and to their own ancestors, 
which just had to be fulfilled. In Athens the law made not only 
marriage compulsory, but also the fulfilment by the man of a 
minimum of so-called conjugal duties.b 
Thus,  monogamy does not by any means make its appearance in 
history as the reconciliation of man and woman, still less as the 
highest form of such a reconciliation. On the contrary, it appears 
as the subjection of one sex by the other, as the proclamation of a 
conflict between the sexes hitherto unknown throughout preced­
ing history. In an old unpublished manuscript, the work of Marx 
and myself in 1846, I find the following: "The first division of 
labour is that between man and woman for child breeding."0 And 
today I can add: The first class antithesis which appears in history 
coincides with the development of the antagonism between man 
and woman in monogamian marriage, and the first class oppres­
sion with that of the female sex by the male. Monogamy was a 
great historical advance, but at the same time it inaugurated, along 
with slavery and private wealth, that epoch, surviving to this day, 
a The 1884 edition has "social conditions" and the sentence ends here.— Ed. 
b This sentence was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
c Cf. K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5, 
p. 44).—  Ed. 

=====第202页=====
174 Frederick Engels 
in which every advance is likewise a relative regression, in which 
the well-being and development of some are attained through the 
misery and repression of others. It is the cellular form of civilised 
society, in which we can already study the nature of the antitheses 
and contradictions which develop fully in the latter. 
The old relative freedom of sexual intercourse by no means 
disappeared with the victory of the pairing marriage, or even of 
monogamy. 
"The old conjugal system, now reduced to narrower limits by the gradual 
disappearance of the punaluan groups, still environed the advancing family, which 
it was to follow to the verge of civilisation.... It finally disappeared in the new form 
of hetaerism, which still follows mankind in civilisation as a dark shadow upon the 
family."3 
By hetaerism Morgan means that extramarital sexual intercourse 
between men and unmarried women which exists alongside 
monogamy, and, as is well known, has flourished in the most 
diverse forms during the whole period of civilisation and is 
steadily developing into open prostitution.6 This hetaerism is 
directly traceable to group marriage, to the sacrificial surrender of 
the women, whereby they purchased their right to chastity. The 
surrender for money was at first a religious act, taking place in the 
temple of the Goddess of Love, and the money originally flowed 
into the coffers of the temple. The hierodules93 of Anaitis in 
Armenia, of Aphrodite in Corinth, as well as the religious dancing 
girls attached to the temples in India—the so-called bayaderes (the 
word is a corruption of the Portuguese bailadeira, a female 
dancer)—were the first prostitutes. This sacrificial surrender, 
originally obligatory for all women, was later practised by these 
priestesses alone on behalf of all other women. Hetaerism among 
other peoples grows out of the sexual freedom permitted to girls 
before marriage—hence likewise a survival of group marriage, 
only transmitted to us by another route. With the rise of property 
differentiation—that is, as far back as the upper stage of 
barbarism—wage labour appears sporadically alongside slave 
labour; and simultaneously, as its necessary correlate, the profes­
sional prostitution of free women appears side by side with the 
forced surrender of the female slave. Thus, the heritage be­
queathed to civilisation by group marriage is double-sided, just as 
everything engendered by civilisation is double-sided, two-
faced, self-contradictory and antagonistic: on the one hand, 
a L. H. Morgan, op. cit., p. 504.— Ed 
b The text below, up to the words "Hetaerism is as much a social institution..." 
(see p. 175), was added in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 

=====第203页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 175 
monogamy, on the other, hetaerism, including its most extreme 
form, prostitution. Hetaerism is as much a social institution as any 
other; it is a continuation of the old sexual freedom—in favour of 
the men. Although, in reality, it is not only tolerated but even 
practised with gusto, particularly by the ruling classes, it is 
condemned in words. In reality, however, this condemnation by 
no means falls on the men who indulge in it, it falls only on the 
women: they are scorned and cast out in order to proclaim once 
again the absolute domination of the men over the female sex as 
the fundamental law of society. 
A second contradiction, however, is hereby developed within 
monogamy  itself.  By the side of the husband, whose life is 
embellished by hetaerism, stands the neglected wife.3  And it is just 
as impossible to have one side of a contradiction without the other 
as it is to retain the whole of an apple in one's hand after eating 
half of it. Nevertheless, the men appear to have thought 
differently, until their wives taught them to know better. Two 
permanent social figures, previously unknown, appear on the 
scene along with monogamy—the wife's steady lover and the 
cuckold. The men had gained the victory over the women, but the 
act of crowning the victor was magnanimously undertaken by the 
vanquished. Adultery—proscribed, severely penalised, but irre­
pressible—became an unavoidable social institution alongside 
monogamy and hetaerism. The assured paternity of children was 
now, as before, based, at best, on moral conviction; and in order 
to solve the insoluble contradiction, Article 312 of the Code 
Napoléon decreed: 
"L'enfant conçu pendant le manage a pour père le mari," "a child conceived during 
marriage has for its father the husband." 
This is the final outcome of three thousand years of monogamy. 
Thus,  in the monogamian family, in those cases that faithfully 
reflect its historical origin and that clearly bring out the sharp 
conflict between man and woman resulting from the exclusive 
domination of the male, we have a picture in miniature of the very 
antagonisms and contradictions in which society, split up into 
classes since the commencement of civilisation, moves, without 
being able to resolve and overcome them. Naturally, I refer here 
only to those cases of monogamy where matrimonial life really 
takes its course according to the rules governing the original 
character of the whole institution, but where the wife rebels 
against the domination of the husband. That this is not the case 
a These two sentences were added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 

=====第204页=====
176 Frederick Engels 
with all marriages no one knows better than the German 
philistine, who is no more capable of ruling in the home than in 
the state, and whose wife, therefore, with full justification, wears 
the breeches of which he is unworthy. But in consolation he 
imagines himself to be far superior to his French companion in 
misfortune, who, more often than he, fares far worse. 
The monogamian family, however, did not by any means appear 
everywhere and always in the classically harsh form which it 
assumed among the Greeks. Among the Romans, who as future 
world conquerors took a broader, if less refined, view than the 
Greeks, woman was more free and respected. The Roman believed 
the conjugal fidelity of his wife to be adequately safeguarded by 
his power of life and death over her. Besides, here the wife, just 
as well as the husband, could dissolve the marriage voluntarily. 
But the greatest advance in the development of monogamy 
definitely occurred with the entry of the Germans into history, 
because, probably owing to their poverty, monogamy does not yet 
appear to have completely evolved among them out of the pairing 
marriage. We conclude this from three circumstances mentioned 
by Tacitus: Firstly, despite their firm belief in the sanctity of 
marriage—"each man is contented with a single wife, and the 
women lived fenced around with chastity"3—polygamy existed for 
high society and the tribal chiefs, a situation similar to that of the 
Americans among whom pairing marriage prevailed. Secondly, the 
transition from mother right to father right could only have been 
accomplished a short time previously, for the mother's brother— 
the closest male gentile relative according to mother right—was 
still regarded as being an almost closer relative than one's own 
father, which likewise corresponds to the standpoint of the 
American Indians, among whom Marx found the key to the 
understanding of our own prehistoric past, as he often used to 
say. And thirdly, women among the Germans were highly 
respected and were influential in public affairs too—which 
directly conflicts with the domination of the male characteristic of 
monogamy. Nearly all these are points on which the Germans are 
in accord with the Spartans, among whom, likewise, as we have 
already seen, pairing marriage had not completely disappeared.b 
Thus,  in this connection also, an entirely new element acquired 
world supremacy with the emergence of the Germans. The new 
monogamy, which now developed out of the mingling of races on 
a Tacitus, Germania, 18-19.— Ed. 
b This sentence was added in the 1891 edition.— Ed 

=====第205页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 177 
the ruins of the Roman world, clothed the domination of the men 
in milder forms and permitted women to occupy, at least 
externally, a far more respected and freer position than classical 
antiquity had ever known. This, for the first time, created the 
possibility for the greatest moral advance which we derive from 
and owe to monogamy—a development taking place within it, 
parallel with it, or in opposition to it, as the case may be, namely, 
modern individual sex love, previously unknown to the whole 
world. 
This advance, however, definitely arose out of the circumstance 
that the Germans still lived in the pairing family, and as far as 
possible, superimposed the position of woman corresponding 
thereto onto monogamy. It by no means arose as a result of the 
legendary, wonderful moral purity of natural disposition of the 
Germans, which was limited to the fact that, in practice, the 
pairing marriage did not reveal the same glaring moral antagon­
isms as monogamy. On the contrary, the Germans, in their 
migrations, particularly south-eastwards, to the nomads of the 
steppes on the Black Sea, suffered considerable moral degenera­
tion and, apart from their horsemanship, acquired serious 
unnatural vices from them, as is attested to explicitly by 
Ammianus about the Taifali, and by Procopius about the Heruli. 3 
Although monogamy was the only known form of the family 
under which modern sex love could develop, it does not follow 
that this love developed exclusively, or even predominantly, within 
it as the mutual love of the spouses. The whole nature of strict 
monogamian marriage under male domination ruled this out. 
Among all historically active classes, i.e., among all ruling classes, 
matrimony remained what it had been since pairing marriage—a 
matter of convenience arranged by the parents. And the first form 
of sex love that historically emerges as a passion, and as a passion 
in which any person (at least of the ruling classes) has a right to 
indulge, as the highest form of the sex drive—which is precisely 
its specific feature—this, its first form, the chivalrous love of the 
Middle Ages, was by no means conjugal love. On the contrary, in 
its classical form, among the Provencals, it steers under full sail 
towards adultery, and their poets praise this. The Albas, in 
German Tagelieder, are the flower of Provençal love poetry. 94 They 
describe in glowing colours how the knight lies in bed with his 
love—the wife of another—while the watchman stands guard 
a Ammianus Marcellinus, Rerum gestarum libri qui supersunt, XXXI, 9 and 
Procopius of Caesarea, The Histories. The Gothic War, II, 14.— Ed. 

=====第206页=====
178 Frederick Engels 
outside, calling him at the first faint streaks of dawn (alba) so that 
he may yet escape unnoticed. The parting scene then constitutes 
the climax. The Northern French, as well as the worthy Germans, 
likewise adopted this style of poetry, along with the manners of 
chivalrous love which corresponded to it; and on this same 
suggestive theme our own old Wolfram von Eschenbach has left us 
three exquisite Tagelieder, which I prefer to his three long heroic 
95 
poems. 
Bourgeois marriage of our own times is of two kinds. In 
Catholic countries the parents, as heretofore, still provide a 
suitable wife for their young bourgeois son, and the consequence 
is naturally the fullest unfolding of the contradiction inherent in 
monogamy—flourishing hetaerism on the part of the husband, 
and flourishing adultery on the part of the wife. The Catholic 
Church doubtless abolished divorce only because it was convinced 
that for adultery, as for death, there is no cure whatsoever. In 
Protestant countries, on the other hand, it is the rule that the 
bourgeois son is allowed to seek a wife for himself from his own 
class,  more or less freely. Consequently, marriage can be based on 
a certain degree of love which, for decency's sake, is always 
assumed, in accordance with Protestant hypocrisy. In this case, 
hetaerism on the part of the man is less actively pursued, and 
adultery on the woman's part is not so much the rule. Since, in 
every kind of marriage, however, people remain what they were 
before they married, and since the bourgeoisie of Protestant coun­
tries are mostly philistines, this Protestant monogamy leads merely, 
if we take the average of the best cases, to a wedded life of leaden 
boredom, which is described as domestic bliss. The best mirror of 
these two ways of marriage is the novel; the French novel for the 
Catholic style, and the German3 novel for the Protestant. In both 
cases "he gets it": in the German novel the young man gets the 
girl; in the French, the husband gets the cuckold's horns. Which 
of the two is in the worse plight is not always made out. For the 
dullness of the German novel excites the same horror in the 
French bourgeois as the "immorality" of the French novel excites 
in the German philistine, although lately, now that "Berlin is 
becoming a metropolis", the German novel has begun to deal a 
little less timidly with hetaerism and adultery, long known to exist 
there. 
In both cases, however, marriage is determined by the class 
position of the participants, and to that extent always remains 
a The 1884 edition has "and Swedish".— Ed. 

=====第207页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 179 
marriage of convenience.3 In both cases, this marriage of 
convenience often enough turns into the crassest prostitution— 
sometimes on both sides, but much more usually on the part of 
the wife, who differs from the ordinary courtesan only in that she 
does not hire out her body, like a wage worker, on piecework, but 
sells it into slavery once and for all. And Fourier's maxim holds 
good for all marriages of convenience: 
"Just as in grammar two negatives make a positive, so in the morals of 
marriage, two prostitutions make one virtue."b 
Sex love in the relationship of husband and wife is and can 
become the genuine rule only among the oppressed classes, that is, 
at the present day, among the proletariat, no matter whether this 
relationship is officially sanctioned or not. But here all the 
foundations of classical monogamy are removed. Here, there is a 
complete absence of all property, for the safeguarding and 
bequeathing of which monogamy and male domination were 
established. Therefore, there is no stimulus whatever here to 
assert male domination. What is more, the means, too, are absent; 
bourgeois law, which protects this domination, exists only for the 
propertied classes and their dealings with the proletarians. It 
costs money, and therefore, owing to the worker's poverty, 
has no validity in his position vis-à-vis his wife. Personal and 
social factors of quite a different sort are decisive here. 
Moreover, since large-scale industry has moved the woman from 
the house to the labour market and the factory, and made her, 
often enough, the bread-winner of the family, the last remnants of 
male domination in the proletarian home have lost all founda­
tion—except, perhaps, for a bit of that brutality towards women 
which became firmly rooted with the establishment of monogamy. 
Thus,  the proletarian family is no longer monogamian in the strict 
sense, even with most passionate love and strictest faithfulness of 
the two parties, and despite all spiritual and worldly benedictions 
which may have been received. The two eternal adjuncts of 
monogamy—hetaerism and adultery—therefore, play an almost 
negligible role here; the woman has regained, in fact, the right of 
dissolution of marriage, and when the man and woman cannot get 
along they prefer to part. In short, proletarian marriage is 
a The text below, up to the words "Sex love in the relationship of husband and 
wife...",  was added in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
b Ch. Fourier, Théorie de l'unité universelle, Vol. 3, p. 120.— Ed. 
14-1243 

=====第208页=====
180 Frederick Engels 
monogamous in the etymological sense of the word, but by no 
means in the historical sense.3 
Our lawyers, to be sure, hold that the progress of legislation to 
an increasing degree removes all cause for complaint on the part 
of the woman. Modern civilised systems of law are recognising 
more and more, first, that, in order to be effective, marriage must 
be an agreement voluntarily entered into by both parties; and 
secondly, that during marriage, too, both parties must have equal 
rights and responsibilities vis-à-vis each other. If, however, these 
two demands were consistently carried into effect, women would 
have all they could ask for. 
This typical lawyer's reasoning is exactly the same as that with 
which the radical republican bourgeois dismisses and enjoins 
silence on the proletarian. The labour contract is supposed to be 
voluntarily entered into by both parties. But it is taken to be 
voluntarily entered into as soon as the law has put both parties on 
an equal footing on paper. The power given to one party by its 
specific class position, the pressure it exercises on the other—the 
real economic position of the two—all this is no concern of the 
law. And both parties, again, are supposed to have equal rights for 
the duration of the labour contract, unless one or the other of the 
parties has explicitly waived them. That the concrete economic 
situation compels the worker to forego even the slightest 
semblance of equal rights—this again is something the law cannot 
help. 
As far as marriage is concerned, even the most progressive law 
is fully satisfied as soon as the parties formally register their 
voluntary desire to get married. What happens behind the scenes 
of the law where real life is enacted, how this voluntary agreement 
is arrived at—is no concern of the law and the lawyer. And yet 
the simplest comparison of laws should serve to show the lawyer 
what this voluntary agreement really amounts to. In countries 
where the children are legally guaranteed an obligatory share of 
their parents' property and thus cannot be disinherited—in 
Germany, in the countries under French law, etc.—the children 
are bound by their parents' consent in the question of marriage. 
In countries under English law, where parental consent to 
marriage is not legally requisite, the parents have full testatory 
freedom over their property and can disinherit their children at 
a The rest of the section, except the last paragraph beginning with the words 
"In the meantime, let us return to Morgan" (see p. 189), was added in the 1891 
edition.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 181 
their discretion. It is clear, therefore, that despite this, or rather 
just because of this, among those classes where there is something 
to inherit, freedom to marry is not one whit greater in England 
and America than in France or Germany. 
The position is no better with regard to the legal equality of 
man and woman in marriage. The inequality of the two before the 
law, which is a legacy of previous social conditions, is not the cause 
but the effect of the economic oppression of women. In the old 
communistic household, which embraced numerous couples and 
their children, the administration of the household, entrusted to 
the women, was just as much a public, a socially necessary industry 
as the procurement of food by the men. This situation changed 
with the patriarchal family, and even more with the monogamian 
individual family. The administration of the household lost its 
public character. It was no longer the concern of society. It 
became a private service. The wife became the first domestic 
servant, pushed out of participation in social production. Only the 
large-scale industry of our time has again thrown open to 
her—and only to the proletarian woman at that—the avenue to 
social production; but in such a way that, if she fulfils her duties 
in the private service of her family, she remains excluded from 
public production and cannot earn anything; and if she wishes to 
take part in public industry and earn her living independently, she 
is not in a position to fulfil her family duties. What applies to the 
woman in the factory applies to her in all branches of business, 
right up to medicine and law. The modern individual family is 
based on the overt or covert domestic slavery of the woman; and 
modern society is a mass composed solely of individual families as 
its molecules. Today, in the great majority of cases, the man has to 
be the earner, the bread-winner of the family, at least among the 
propertied classes, and this gives him a dominating position which 
requires no special legal privileges. In the family, he is the 
bourgeois; the wife represents the proletariat. In the industrial 
world, however, the specific character of the economic oppression 
weighing down on the proletariat emerges in its full vividness only 
after all the special legal privileges of the capitalist class have been 
eliminated and the complete juridical equality of both classes 
established. The democratic republic does not abolish the antago­
nism between the two classes; on the contrary, it provides the field 
on which it is fought out. And, similarly, the peculiar character of 
man's domination over woman in the modern family, and the 
necessity, as well as the manner, of establishing real social equality 
between the two, will be brought out in full relief only when both 
14* 

=====第210页=====
182 Frederick Engels 
are completely equal before the law. It will then become evident 
that the first precondition for the emancipation of women is the 
reintroduction of the entire female sex into public industry; and 
that this again demands that the quality possessed by the 
individual family of being the economic unit of society be 
eliminated. 
* * * 
We have, then, three chief forms of marriage, which, by and 
large, conform to the three main stages of human development. 
For savagery—group marriage; for barbarism—pairing marriage; 
for civilisation—monogamy, supplemented by adultery and pros­
titution. In the upper stage of barbarism, between pairing 
marriage and monogamy, are wedged in the dominion exercised 
by men over female slaves, and polygamy. 
As our whole exposition has shown, the advance which 
manifests itself in this sequence is linked with the peculiar fact 
that, while women are more and more deprived of the sexual 
freedom of group marriage, the men are not. Actually, for men, 
group marriage exists to this day. What for a woman is a crime 
entailing dire legal and social consequences, is regarded in the case 
of a man as being honourable or, at most, as a slight moral stigma 
that one bears with pleasure. But the more the old traditional 
hetaerism is changed in our day by capitalist commodity produc­
tion and adapted to it, and the more it is transformed into 
unconcealed prostitution, the more demoralising are its effects. 
And it demoralises the men far more than it does the women. 
Among women, prostitution degrades only those unfortunates 
who fall into its clutches; and even these are not degraded to the 
degree that is generally believed. On the other hand, it degrades 
the character of the entire male world. Thus, in nine cases out of 
ten, a long engagement is positively a preparatory school for 
conjugal infidelity. 
We are now approaching a social revolution in which the 
hitherto existing economic foundations of monogamy will disap­
pear just as certainly as those of its complement—prostitution. 
Monogamy arose out of the concentration of considerable wealth 
in the hands of one person—in those of a man—and out of the 
desire to bequeath this wealth to this man's children and to no one 
else's.  For this purpose monogamy was essential on the woman's 
part, but not on the man's; so that this monogamy of the woman 
in no way hindered the overt or covert polygamy of the man. The 

=====第211页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 183 
impending social revolution, however, by transforming at least by 
far the greater part of durable inheritable wealth—the means of 
production—into social property, will reduce all this anxiety about 
inheritance to a minimum. Since, however, monogamy arose from 
economic causes, will it disappear when these causes disappear? 
One would not be wrong to reply: far from disappearing, it will 
only begin to be completely realised. For with the conversion of 
the means of production into social property, wage labour, the 
proletariat, also disappears, and therewith, also the necessity for a 
certain—statistically calculable—number of women to surrender 
themselves for money. Prostitution disappears; monogamy, instead 
of meeting its demise, finally becomes a reality—for the men as 
well. 
At all events, the position of the men is thus greatly altered. But 
that of the women, of all women, also undergoes considerable 
change. With the passage of the means of production into 
common property, the individual family ceases to be the economic 
unit of society. Private housekeeping is transformed into a social 
industry. The care and upbringing of the children becomes a public 
affair. Society takes care of all children equally, irrespective of 
whether they are born in wedlock or not. Thus, the anxiety about 
the "consequences", which is today the most important social 
factor—both moral and economic—that hinders a girl from 
giving herself freely to the man she loves, disappears. Will this not 
be cause enough for a gradual rise of more unrestrained sexual 
intercourse, and along with it, a laxer public opinion regarding 
virginal honour and female shame? And finally, have we not seen 
that monogamy and prostitution in the modern world, although 
opposites, are nevertheless inseparable opposites, poles of the 
same social conditions? Can prostitution disappear without drag­
ging monogamy with it into the abyss? 
Here a new factor comes into operation, a factor that, at most, 
existed in embryonic form at the time when monogamy emerged, 
namely, individual sex love. 
No such thing as individual sex love existed before the Middle 
Ages.  That personal beauty, intimate association, similarity in 
inclinations, etc., aroused desire for sexual intercourse among 
people of opposite sexes, that men as well as women were not 
totally indifferent to the question of with whom they entered into 
this most intimate relation is obvious. But this is still a far cry from 
the sex love of our day. Throughout antiquity marriages were 
arranged by the parents; the parties quietly acquiesced. The little 
conjugal love that was known to antiquity was not in any way a 

=====第212页=====
184 Frederick Engels 
subjective inclination, but an objective duty; not a reason for, but 
a correlate of, marriage. In antiquity, love affairs in the modern 
sense occur only outside official society. The shepherds, whose 
joys and sorrows in love are sung by Theocritus and Moschus, or 
by Longus' Daphnis and Chloe, 96 are mere slaves, who have no 
share in the state, the sphere of life of the free citizen. Except 
among slaves, however, we find love affairs only as disintegration 
products of the declining ancient world; and with women who are 
also beyond the pale of official society, with hetaerae, that is, with 
alien or freed women: in Athens beginning with the eve of its 
decline, in Rome at the time of the emperors. If love affairs really 
occurred between free male and female citizens, it was only in the 
form of adultery. And sex love in our sense of the term was so 
immaterial to that classical love poet of antiquity, old Anacreon, 
that even the sex of the beloved one was a matter of complete 
indifference to him. 
Our sex love differs essentially from the simple sexual desire, 
the eros,  of the ancients. First, it presupposes reciprocal love on the 
part of the loved one; in this respect, the woman stands on a par 
with the man; whereas in the ancient eros, the woman was by no 
means always consulted. Secondly, sex love attains a degree of 
intensity and permanency where the two parties regard non-
possession or separation as a great, if not the greatest, misfortune; 
in order to possess each other they confront great hazards, even 
risking life itself—which in antiquity happened, at best, only in 
cases of adultery. And finally, a new moral standard arises for 
judging sexual contact. The question asked is not only whether 
such contact was in or out of wedlock, but also whether it arose 
from mutual love or not. It goes without saying that in feudal or 
bourgeois practice this new standard fares no better than all the 
other moral standards—it is simply ignored. But it fares no worse 
either. It is recognised in theory, on paper, like all the rest. And 
more than this cannot be expected for the present. 
Where antiquity broke off with its start towards sex love, the 
Middle Ages began, namely, with adultery. We have already 
described chivalrous love, which gave rise to the Tagelieder. It is 
still a long way from this kind of love, which aimed at breaking up 
matrimony, to the love which was meant to establish it, a way 
never completely covered by the age of chivalry. Even when 
we pass from the frivolous Romance peoples to the virtuous Ger­
mans,  we find, in the Nibelungenlied, that Kriemhild—although 
secretly in love with Siegfried every bit as much as he is 
with her—nevertheless, in reply to Gunther's intimation that he 

=====第213页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 185 
has plighted her to a knight whom he does not name, answers 
simply: 
"You have no need to ask; as you command, so will I be for ever. He whom 
you, my lord, choose for my husband, to him will I gladly plight my troth."3 
It never even occurs to her that her love could possibly be 
considered in this matter. Günther seeks the hand of Brunhild 
without ever having seen her, and Etzel does the same with 
Kriemhild. The same occurs in the Gutrun? 7 where Siegebant of 
Ireland seeks the hand of Ute the Norwegian, Hettel of 
Hegelingen that of Hilde of Ireland; and lastly, Siegfried of 
Morland, Hartmut of Ormany and Herwig of Seeland seek the 
hand of Gutrun; and here for the first time it happens that 
Gutrun, of her own free will, decides in favour of the last named. 
As a rule, the bride of a young prince is selected by his parents if 
they are still alive; otherwise he chooses her himself with the 
counsel of his highest vassal chiefs, whose word carries great 
weight in all cases. Nor can it be otherwise. For the knight, or 
baron, just as for the prince  himself,  marriage is a political act, an 
opportunity for the enhancement of power through new alliances; 
the interest of the House and not individual discretion is the 
decisive factor. How can love here hope to have the last word 
regarding marriage? 
It was the same for the guildsman of the medieval towns. The 
very privileges which protected him—the guild charters with their 
special stipulations, the artificial lines of demarcation which legally 
separated him from other guilds, from his own fellow guildsmen 
and from his journeymen and apprentices—considerably re­
stricted the circle in which he could hope to secure a suitable 
spouse. And the question as to who was the most suitable was 
definitely decided under this complicated system, not by his 
discretion, but by family interest. 
Up to the end of the Middle Ages, therefore, marriage, in the 
overwhelming majority of cases, remained what it had been right 
from the beginning, an affair that was not decided by the parties 
concerned. In the beginning one came into the world married, 
married to a whole group of the opposite sex. A similar relation 
probably existed in the later forms of group marriage, only with 
an ever increasing narrowing of the group. In pairing 
marriage it is the rule that the mothers arrange their children's 
marriages; and here also, considerations of new ties of relationship 
that are to strengthen the young couple's position in the gens and 
a See Nibelungenlied, Song X.— Ed. 

=====第214页=====
186 Frederick- Engels 
tribe are the decisive factor. And when, with the predominance of 
private property over common property, and with the interest in 
bequeathing, father right and monogamy came to dominate, 
marriage became more than ever dependent on economic 
considerations. The form of marriage by purchase disappears, the 
transaction itself is to an ever increasing degree carried out in 
such a way that not only the woman but the man also is appraised, 
not by his personal qualities but by his possessions. The idea that 
the mutual affection of the parties concerned should be the 
overriding reason for matrimony had been unheard of in the 
practice of the ruling classes from the very beginning. Such things 
took place, at best, in romance, or—among the oppressed classes, 
which did not count. 
This was the situation encountered by capitalist production 
when, following the era of geographical discoveries, it set out to 
conquer the world through international trade and manufacture. 
One would think that this mode of matrimony should have suited 
it down to the ground, and such was indeed the case. And 
yet—the irony of world history is unfathomable—it was capitalist 
production that was to make the decisive breach in it. By 
transforming all things into commodities, it abolished all ancient 
traditional relations, and for inherited customs and historical 
rights it substituted purchase and sale, "free" contract. And 
H. S. Maine, the English legal scholar, believed he had made a 
colossal discovery when he said that our entire progress in 
comparison with previous epochs consisted in our having evolved 
FROM STATUS TO CONTRACT, from an inherited state of affairs to one 
voluntary contracted 3—a statement which, insofar as it is correct, 
was contained long ago in the Communist Manifesto? 
But the conclusion of contracts presupposes people who can 
freely dispose of their persons, actions and possessions, and who 
meet each other on equal terms. To create such "free" and "equal" 
people was precisely one of the main achievements of capitalist 
production. Although in the beginning this took place only in a 
semi-conscious manner, and in religious guise to boot, neverthe­
less, from the time of the Lutheran and Calvinistic Reformation it 
became a firm principle that a person was completely responsible 
for his actions only if he possessed full freedom of the will when 
performing them, and that it was a moral duty to resist all 
a H. S. Maine, Ancient Law: its connection with the early history of  society,  and its 
relation to modern ideas, p. 170.— Ed 
b See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 485-89.— Ed 

=====第215页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 187 
compulsion to commit immoral acts. But how did this fit in with 
the previous practice of matrimony? According to bourgeois 
conceptions, matrimony was a contract, a legal transaction, indeed 
the most important of all, since it disposed of the body and mind 
of two persons for life. True enough, formally the bargain was 
struck voluntarily; it could not be concluded without the consent 
of the parties; but how this consent was obtained, and who really 
arranged the marriage was known only too well. But if real 
freedom to decide was demanded for all other contracts, why not 
for this one? Had not the two young people about to be paired the 
right freely to dispose of themselves, their bodies and organs? Had 
not sex love become the fashion as a consequence of chivalry, and 
was not the love of the spouses its correct bourgeois form, as 
against the adulterous love of the knights? But if it was the duty of 
married people to love each other, was it not just as much the 
duty of lovers to marry each other and nobody else? And did not 
the right of these lovers stand higher than that of parents, 
relatives and other traditional marriage brokers and matchmakers? 
If the right of free personal examination unceremoniously forced 
its way into church and religion, how could it halt at the 
intolerable claim of the older generation to dispose of body and 
soul, the property, the happiness and unhappiness of the younger 
generation? 
These questions were bound to arise in a period which loosened 
all the old social ties and which shook the foundations of all 
inherited conceptions. At one stroke the size of the world had 
increased nearly tenfold. Instead of only a quadrant of a 
hemisphere the whole globe was now open to the gaze of the West 
Europeans, who hastened to take possession of the other seven 
quadrants. And the thousand-year-old barriers set up by the 
medieval prescribed mode of thought vanished in the same way as 
did the old, narrow barriers of the homeland. An infinitely wider 
horizon opened up both to man's outer and inner eye. Of what 
avail were the good intentions of respectability, the honoured 
guild privileges handed down through the generations, to the 
young man who was allured by India's riches, by the gold and 
silver mines of Mexico and Potosi? It was the knight-errant period 
of the bourgeoisie; it had its romance also, and its love dreams, 
but on a bourgeois basis and, in the last analysis, with bourgeois 
ends in mind. 
Thus it happened that the rising bourgeoisie, particularly in the 
Protestant countries, where the existing order was shaken up most 
of all, increasingly recognised freedom of contract for marriage as 

=====第216页=====
188 Frederick Engels 
well and carried it through in the manner described above. 
Marriage remained class marriage, but, within the confines of the 
class,  the parties were accorded a certain degree of freedom to 
choose. And on paper, in moral theory as in poetic description, 
nothing was more unshakably established than that every marriage 
not based on mutual sex love and on the really free agreement of 
the spouses was immoral. In short, love marriage was proclaimed a 
human right; not only as droit de l'homme 3 but also, by way of 
exception, as droit de la femme. h 
But in one respect this human right differed from all other 
so-called human rights. While, in practice, the latter remained 
limited to the ruling class, the bourgeoisie—the oppressed class, 
the proletariat, being directly or indirectly deprived of them—the 
irony of history asserts itself here once again. The ruling class 
continues to be dominated by well-known economic influences 
and, therefore, only in exceptional cases does it bear witness to 
really voluntary marriages; whereas, as we have seen, these are the 
rule among the dominated class. 
Thus,  full freedom of marriage can become generally operative 
only when the abolition of capitalist production, and of the 
property relations created by it, has removed all those secondary 
economic considerations which still exert so powerful an influence 
on the choice of a partner. Then, no other motive remains than 
mutual affection. 
Since sex love is by its very nature exclusive—although this 
exclusiveness is fully realised today only in the woman—then 
marriage based on sex love is by its very nature monogamy. We 
have seen how right Bachofen was when he regarded the advance 
from group marriage to individual marriage chiefly as the work of 
women; only the advance from pairing marriage to monogamy 
can be placed to the men's account, and, historically, this consisted 
essentially in a worsening of the position of women and in the 
facilitation of infidelity on the part of the men. With the 
disappearance of the economic considerations which compelled 
women to tolerate the customary infidelity of the men—the 
anxiety about their own livelihood and even more about the future 
of their children—the equality of woman thus achieved will, 
judging from all previous experience, be infinitely more effective 
in making the men really monogamous than in making the women 
polyandrous. 
a Man's right.— Ed 
b Woman's right.— Ed. 

=====第217页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 189 
What will most definitely disappear from monogamy, however, 
are all the characteristics stamped on it in consequence of its 
having arisen out of property relationships. These are, first, the 
predominance of the man, and secondly, the indissolubility of 
marriage. The predominance of the man in marriage is simply a 
consequence of his economic predominance and will vanish 
automatically with it. The indissolubility of marriage is partly the 
result of the economic conditions under which monogamy arose, 
and partly a tradition from the time when the connection between 
these economic conditions and monogamy was not yet correctly 
understood and was exaggerated by religion. Already today it has 
been breached a thousandfold. If only marriages that are based on 
love are moral, then, also, only those are moral in which love 
continues. The duration of the urge of individual sex love' differs 
very much according to the individual, particularly among men; 
and a definite cessation of affection, or its displacement by a new 
passionate love, makes separation a blessing for both parties as 
well as for society. People will only be spared the experience of 
wading through the useless mire of divorce proceedings. 
Thus,  what we can conjecture at present about the regulation of 
sex relationships after the impending effacement of capitalist 
production is, in the main, of a negative character, limited mostly 
to what will vanish. But what will be added? That will be settled 
after a new generation has grown up: a generation of men who 
never in their lives have had occasion to purchase a woman's 
surrender either with money or with any other social means of 
power, and of women who have never had occasion to surrender 
to any man out of any consideration other than that of real love, 
or to refrain from giving themselves to their beloved for fear of 
the economic consequences. Once such people appear, they will 
not care a damn about what we today think they should do. They 
will establish their own practice and their own public opinion, 
conforming therewith, on the practice of each individual—and 
that's the end of it. 
In the meantime, let us return to Morgan, from whom we have 
strayed quite considerably. The historical investigation of the social 
institutions which developed during the period of civilisation lies 
outside the scope of his book. Consequently, he concerns himself 
only briefly with the fate of monogamy during this period. He, 
too, regards the development of the monogamian family as an 
advance, as an approximation to the complete equality of the 
sexes,  without, however, considering that this goal has been 
reached. But, he says, 

=====第218页=====
190 Frederick Engels 
"when the fact is accepted that the family has passed through four successive 
forms,  and is now in a fifth, the question at once arises whether this form can be 
permanent in the future. The only answer that can be given is that it must advance 
as society advances, and change as society changes, even as it has done in the past. 
It is the creature of the social system, and will reflect its culture. As the 
monogamian family has improved greatly since the commencement of civilisation, 
and very sensibly in modern times, it is at least supposable that it is capable of still 
farther improvement until the equality of the sexes is attained. Should the 
monogamian family in the distant future fail to answer the requirements of 
society [...] it is impossible to predict the nature of its successor".3 
Ill 
THE IROQUOIS GENS 
We now come to a further discovery of Morgan's, which is at 
least as important as the reconstruction of the primitive form of 
the family out of the systems of consanguinity. The demonstration 
of the fact that the bodies of consanguinei within the American 
Indian tribe, designated by the names of animals, are in essence 
identical with the genea of the Greeks and the gentes of the 
Romans; that the American form was the original and the Greek 
and Roman the later, derivative; that the entire social organisation 
of the Greeks and Romans of primitive times in gens, phratry and 
tribe finds its faithful parallel in that of the American Indians; 
that (as far as our present sources of information go) the gens is 
an institution common to all barbarians up to their entry into 
civilisation, and even afterwards—this demonstration cleared up at 
one stroke the most difficult parts of the earliest Greek and 
Roman history. At the same time it has thrown unexpected light 
on the fundamental features of the social constitution of primitive 
times—before the introduction of the state. Simple as this may 
seem when one knows it—nevertheless, Morgan discovered it only 
very recently. In his previous work, published in 187l,b he had not 
yet hit upon the secret, the discovery of which since reduced for a 
time c the otherwise so confident English prehistorians to a 
mouse-like silence. 
The Latin word gens, which Morgan employs as a general 
designation for this body of consanguinei, is, like its Greek 
equivalent, genos, derived from the common Aryan root gan (in 
a L. H. Morgan, Ancient  Society,  pp. 491-92. See also "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., 
p. 124.—  Ed 
b L. H. Morgan, Systems of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family.—Ed 
c The words "for a time" were added in the 1891 edition.— Ed 

=====第219页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 191 
German, where the Aryan g is, according to rule, replaced by k, it 
is kan), which means to beget. Gens, genos, the Sanscrit ganas, the 
Gothic kuni (in accordance with the above-mentioned rule), the 
Old Norse and Anglo-Saxon kyn, the English kin, the Middle 
High German kiinne, all equally signify kinship, descent. However, 
gens in the Latin and genos in the Greek are specially used for 
a body of consanguinei which boasts a common descent (in 
this case from a common male ancestor) and which, owing to certain 
social and religious institutions, forms a separate community, whose 
origin and nature have hitherto, nevertheless, remained obscure to 
all our historians. 
We have already seen above, in connection with the punaluan 
family, how a gens in its original form is constituted. It consists of 
all persons who, by virtue of punaluan marriage and in 
accordance with the conceptions necessarily predominating there­
in, constitute the recognised descendants of a definite individual 
ancestress, the founder of the gens. Since paternity is uncertain in 
this form of the family, female lineage alone is valid. Since the 
brothers may not marry their sisters, but only women of different 
descent, the children born of such alien women fall, according to 
mother right, outside the gens. Thus, only the offspring of the 
daughters of each generation remain in the body of consanguinei, 
while the offspring of the sons go over into the gentes of their 
mothers. What, then, becomes of this consanguine group once it 
constitutes itself as a separate group as against similar groups 
within the tribe? 
Morgan takes the gens of the Iroquois, in particular that of the 
Seneca tribe, as the classical form of the original gens. They have 
eight gentes, named after the following animals: 1)  Wolf;  2) Bear; 
3) Turtle; 4) Beaver; 5) Deer; 6) Snipe; 7) Heron; 8) Hawk. The 
following usages prevail in each gens: 
1. It elects its sachem (headman in times of peace) and its chief 
(leader in war). The sachem had to be elected from within the 
gens itself and his office was hereditary in the gens, in the sense 
that it had to be immediately filled whenever a vacancy occurred. 
The war chief could also be elected outside the gens and could at 
times be completely non-existent. The son of the previous sachem 
was never elected as his successor, since mother right prevailed 
among the Iroquois, and the son, therefore, belonged to a 
different gens. The brother or the sister's son, however, was often 
elected. All voted at the election—men and women alike. The 
choice, however, had to be endorsed by the remaining seven 
gentes and only then was the elected person ceremonially installed, 

=====第220页=====
192 Frederick Engels 
this being carried out by the general council of the entire Iroquois 
Confederacy. The significance of this will be seen later. The 
sachem's authority within the gens was of a paternal and purely 
moral character. He had no means of coercion at his command. 
He was by virtue of his office a member also of the tribal council 
of the Senecas, as well as of the Council of the Confederacy of all 
the Iroquois. The war chief could give orders only in military 
expeditions. 
2. The gens can depose the sachem and war chief at will. This 
again is carried out jointly by the men and women. Thereafter, 
the deposed rank as simple warriors and private persons like the 
rest. The council of the tribe can also depose the sachems, even 
against the wishes of the gens. 
3. No member is permitted to marry within the gens. This is the 
fundamental rule of the gens, the bond which keeps it together; it 
is the negative expression of the very positive blood relationship 
by virtue of which the individuals included in it become a gens at 
all. By the discovery of this simple fact Morgan, for the first time, 
revealed the nature of the gens. How little the gens had been 
understood until then is proved by the earlier reports concerning 
savages and barbarians, in which the various bodies constituting 
the gentile organisation are ignorantly and indiscriminately 
referred to as tribe, clan, thum, etc.; and regarding these it is 
sometimes asserted that marriage within any such body is 
prohibited. This gave rise to the hopeless confusion in which 
Mr. McLennan was able to intervene as a Napoleon, creating 
order by his fiat: All tribes are divided into those within which 
marriage is forbidden (exogamous) and those within which it is 
permitted (endogamous). And having thus thoroughly muddled 
matters, he was able to indulge in most profound investigations as 
to which of his two fatuous classes was the older, exogamy or 
endogamy. This nonsense ceased automatically with the discovery 
of the gens based oh blood relationship and the consequent 
impossibility of marriage between its members.— Obviously, at the 
stage at which we find the Iroquois, the prohibition of marriage 
within the gens is strictly observed. 
4. The property of deceased persons was distributed among the 
remaining members of the gens—it had to remain in the gens. In 
view of the insignificance of the effects which an Iroquois could 
leave, the heritage was divided among the nearest relatives in the 
gens;  when a man died, among his natural brothers and sisters 
and his maternal uncle; when a woman died, then among her 
children and natural sisters, but not her brothers. That is precisely 

=====第221页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 193 
the reason why it was impossible for man and wife to inherit from 
each other, and why children could not inherit from their father. 
5. The members of the gens were bound to give one another 
assistance, protection and particularly support in avenging injuries 
inflicted by outsiders. The individual depended, and could 
depend, for his security on the protection of the gens. Whoever 
injured him injured the whole gens. From this—the blood ties of 
the gens—arose the obligation of blood revenge, which was 
recognised unconditionally by the Iroquois. If a non-member of a 
gens slew a member of the gens the whole gens to which the slain 
person belonged was bound to take blood revenge. First mediation 
was tried. A council of the slayer's gens was held and propositions 
were made to the council of the victim's gens for a settlement of 
the matter—mostly in the form of expressions of regret and 
presents of considerable value. If these were accepted, the affair 
was closed. If not, the injured gens appointed one or more 
avengers, whose duty it was to pursue and slay the murderer. If 
this happened the gens of the latter had no right to complain; the 
matter was regarded as even. 
6. The gens has definite names or series of names which it 
alone, in the whole tribe, is entitled to use, so that an individual's 
name also indicates the gens to which he belongs. A gentile name 
carries gentile rights with it as a matter of course. 
7. The gens can adopt strangers and thereby admit them into 
the tribe as a whole. Prisoners of war that were not slain became 
members of the Seneca tribe by adoption into a gens and thereby 
obtained full tribal and gentile rights. The adoption took place at 
the request of individual members of the gens—men placed the 
stranger in the relation of a brother or sister, women in that of a 
child. For confirmation of this, ceremonial acceptance into the 
gens was necessary. Individual, exceptionally depleted gentes were 
often replenished by mass adoption from another gens, with the 
latter's consent. Among the Iroquois, the ceremony of adoption 
into the gens was performed at a public meeting of the council of 
the tribe, which turned it practically into a religious rite. 
8. It would be difficult to prove special religious rites among the 
Indian gentes—and yet the religious ceremonies of the Indians 
are more or less connected with the gentes. Among the Iroquois, 
at their six annual religious festivals, the sachems and war chiefs 
of the individual gentes were included among the "Keepers of the 
Faith" ex officio and exercised priestly functions. 
9. The gens has a common burial place. That of the Iroquois of 
New York State, who have been hemmed in by the whites, has 

=====第222页=====
194 Frederick Engels 
now disappeared, but it did use to exist. It still survives amongst 
other Indian tribes, as, for instance, amongst the Tuscaroras, a 
tribe closely related to the Iroquois, who, although Christian, still 
retain in their cemetery a special row for each gens, so that the 
mother is buried in the same row as her children, but not the 
father. And also among the Iroquois, all the members of the gens 
are mourners at the funeral, prepare the grave, deliver funeral 
orations, etc. 
10. The gens has a council, the democratic assembly of all adult 
male and female members of the gens, all with equal voice. This 
council elected and deposed the sachems and war chiefs and, 
likewise, the remaining "Keepers of the Faith". It decided about 
penance gifts (wergeld) or blood revenge, for murdered gentiles. 
It adopted strangers into the gens. In short, it was the sovereign 
power in the gens. 
These are the powers of a typical Indian gens. 
"All its members were personally free, and they were bound to defend each 
other's freedom; they were equal [...] in personal rights, the sachems and chiefs 
claiming no superiority; and they were a brotherhood bound together by the ties of 
kin. Liberty, equality, and fraternity, though never formulated, were cardinal 
principles of the gens. [...] The gens was the unit for a social system, the 
foundation upon which Indian society was organised. [...] [This] serves to explain 
that sense of independence and personal dignity universally an attribute of Indian 
character."3 
At the time of their discovery the Indians throughout North 
America were organised in gentes in accordance with mother 
right. Only in a few tribes, as amongst the Dakotas, had the gentes 
fallen into decay, while in some others, such as the Ojibwas and 
Omahas, they were organised in accordance with father right. 
Among numerous Indian tribes having more than five or six 
gentes, we find three, four and more gentes united in a special 
group which Morgan—faithfully translating the Indian term by its 
Greek counterpart—calls the phratry (brotherhood). Thus, the 
Senecas have two phratries, the first embracing gentes 1 to 4, and 
the second gentes 5 to 8. Closer investigation shows that these 
phratries, in the main, represent those original gentes into which 
the tribe split at the outset; for with the prohibition of marriage 
within the gens, each tribe had necessarily to consist of at least two 
gentes in order to be capable of surviving on its own. As the tribe 
multiplied, each gens again subdivided into two or more gentes, 
each of which now appears as a separate gens, while the original 
3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 85-86. The quotation is somewhat abridged 
and slightly changed according to "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 150.— Ed. 

=====第223页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 195 
gens,  which embraces all the daughter gentes, lives on as the 
phratry. Among the Senecas and most other Indians, the gentes in 
one phratry are brother gentes, while those in another are their 
cousin gentes—designations which, as we have seen, have a very 
real and expressive significance in the American system of 
consanguinity. Originally, indeed, no Seneca could marry within 
his phratry; but this prohibition has long since lapsed and is 
limited only to the gens. The Senecas had a tradition that the Bear 
and the Deer were the two original gentes, of which the others 
were offshoots. Once this new institution had become firmly 
rooted, it was modified according to need. In order to maintain 
equilibrium, whole gentes out of other phratries were occasionally 
transferred to those in which gentes had died out. This explains 
why we find in different tribes gentes of the same name variously 
grouped among the phratries. 
Among the Iroquois the functions of the phratry are partly 
social and partly religious. 1) The ball game is played by phratries, 
one against the other; each phratry puts forward its best players, 
the remaining members of the phratry being spectators arranged 
according to phratry, who bet against each other on the success of 
their respective sides. 2) At the council of the tribe the sachems 
and war chiefs of each phratry sit together, the two groups facing 
each other, and each speaker addresses the representatives of each 
phratry as a separate body. 3) If a murder had been committed in 
the tribe and the slayer and the victim did not belong to the same 
phratry, the aggrieved gens often appealed to its brother gentes; 
these held a phratry council and addressed themselves to the other 
phratry as a whole, asking it also to summon a council for the 
adjustment of the matter. Here again the phratry appears as the 
original gens and with greater prospects of success than the 
weaker individual gens, its offspring. 4) On the death of persons 
of consequence, the opposite phratry undertook the arrangement 
of the funeral and the burial rites, while the phratry of the 
deceased went along as mourners. When a sachem died, the 
opposite phratry notified the federal council of the Iroquois of the 
vacant office. 5) The council of the phratry again appeared on the 
scene at the election of a sachem. Confirmation by the brother 
gentes was regarded as rather a matter of course, but the gentes 
of the other phratry might oppose. In such a case the council of 
this phratry met and, if it upheld the opposition, the election was 
null and void. 6) Previously, the Iroquois has special religious 
mysteries, which white men called "MEDICINE LODGES". Among the 
Senecas they were celebrated by two religious fraternities, one for 
15-1243 

=====第224页=====
196 Frederick Engels 
each phratry, with a regular initiation ritual for new members. 
7) If, as is almost certain, the four LINEAGES (kinship groups) that 
occupied the four quarters of Tlascala at the time of the 
Conquest98  were four phratries, this proves that the phratries, as 
among the Greeks, and similar bodies of consanguinei among the 
Germans, also served as military units. These four LINEAGES went 
into battle, each one as a separate division, with its own uniform 
and standard, and a leader of its own. 
Just as several gentes constitute a phratry, so, in the classical 
form, several phratries constitute a tribe. In many cases the middle 
link, the phratry, is missing among greatly depleted tribes. 
What are the distinctive features of the Indian tribe in Amer­
ica? 
1. Its own territory and its own name. In addition to the area of 
actual settlement, each tribe possessed considerable territory for 
hunting and fishing. Beyond this there was a wide stretch of 
neutral land reaching to the territory of the next tribe; the extent 
of this neutral territory was less where the two tribes were related 
linguistically, and greater where not. Such neutral ground was the 
border forest of the Germans, the wasteland which Caesar's Suebi 
created around their territory, the îsarnholt (Danish jarnved, limes 
Danicus) between the Danes and the Germans, the Saxon forest 
and the branibor (protective forest in Slavic)—from which 
Brandenburg derives its name—between Germans and Slavs. The 
territory thus marked out by imperfectly defined boundaries was 
the common land of the tribe, recognised as such by neighbouring 
tribes,  and defended by the tribe against any encroachment. In 
most cases, the uncertainty of the boundaries became a practical 
inconvenience only when the population had greatly increased.— 
The tribal names appear to have been the result more of accident 
than of deliberate choice. As time passed it frequently happened 
that neighbouring tribes designated a tribe by a name different 
from that which it itself used, like the case of the Germans, whose 
first all-embracing historical name—Teutons—was bestowed on 
them by the Celts. 
2. A separate dialect peculiar to this tribe only. In fact, tribe and 
dialect are substantially co-extensive. The establishment of new 
tribes and dialects through subdivision was in progress in America 
until quite recently, and can hardly have ceased altogether even 
now. Where two depleted tribes have amalgamated into one, it 
happens, by way of exception, that two closely related dialects are 
spoken in the same tribe. The average strength of American tribes 
is under 2,000. The Cherokees, however, are nearly 26,000 

=====第225页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 197 
strong—being the largest number of Indians in the United States 
that speak the same dialect. 
3. The right of investing the sachems and war chiefs elected by 
the gentes, and 
4. The right to depose them again, even against the wishes of 
their gens. As these sachems and war chiefs are members of the 
tribal council, these rights of the tribe in relation to them are 
self-explanatory. Wherever a confederacy of tribes was established 
and all the tribes were represented in a federal council, the above 
rights were transferred to this latter body. 
5. The possession of common religious ideas (mythology) and 
rites of worship. 
"After the fashion of barbarians the [...] Indians were a religious people."3 
Their mythology has not yet been critically investigated at all. 
They already personified their religious ideas—spirits of all 
kinds—but in the lower stage of barbarism in which they lived 
there was as yet no graphic depictions, no so-called idols. It was a 
nature and element worship evolving towards polytheism. The 
various tribes had their regular festivals with definite forms of 
worship, particularly, dancing and games. Dances especially were 
an essential part of all religious ceremonies, each tribe performing 
its own separately. 
6. A tribal council for common affairs. It consisted of all the 
sachems and war chiefs of the separate gentes—the real represent­
atives of the latter, because they could always be deposed. The 
council sat in public, surrounded by the other members of the 
tribe,  who had the right to join in the discussion and to secure a 
hearing for their opinions, and the council took the decisions. As a 
rule it was open to everyone present who desired to address it; 
even the women could express their views through a spokesman of 
their own choice. Among the Iroquois the final decisions had to be 
adopted unanimously, as was also the case with many of the 
decisions of the German Mark communities.* In particular, the 
* In Germany the "Mark" constitution is the name given to the old system of 
land ownership, handed down by custom and usufruct, in which vestiges of the old 
Germanic common ownership of land have been preserved to this day. The area of 
land belonging to a community, called the "Mark", was divided into three parts: (1) 
the actual village, where every member of the community received a plot of equal 
size for house, farmyard and garden; (2) the divided "Mark", that is the area 
designated for arable land and meadowland; (3) the communal or undivided 
a L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 115. See also "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., 
p. 162.—  Ed. 
15* 

=====第226页=====
198 Frederick Engels 
regulation of relations with other tribes devolved upon the tribal 
council. It received and sent embassies, it declared war and made 
peace. When war broke out it was carried on mainly by volunteers. 
In principle each tribe was in a state of war with every other tribe 
"Mark", that is all the remaining land—woods, grassland, heath, bog, waters, 
paths,  etc. 
The divided Mark was first divided into a number of plots according to location 
and fertility, called "gewänne". Each "gewänne" was, in turn, divided into as 
many plots of equal size as there were members of the community, i.e. heads of 
families. These plots were then distributed by lot in such a way that each member 
of the community received his share of each "gewänne", in other words, as much 
land—and as good—as everyone else. House and yard became each member's 
personal property at an early stage; the communal lands, on the other hand, were 
redistributed, annually to begin with, and later on every four, six or twelve years. 
But they, too, soon became the owner's hereditary and disposable property. Only 
around the Rhine did the constant cycle of redistribution persist—into this century, 
in the Palatinate and the now Prussian districts south of the Mosel —and may still 
exist in a few villages under the name of "gehöferschaften". But even where arable 
land and grassland had become private property it had to be tilled according to a 
communal plan laid down by the community (arable land was generally divided 
into winter fields, summer fields and fallow fields), and after harvest and when 
lying fallow it was open to all the members of the community as communal grazing. 
The undivided or common "Mark" was the communal property of all members 
and was used equally by all for grazing, pannage, timber felling, hay-making, 
hunting, fishing, etc. 
How it should be used, the rights of each individual, the cultivation and 
common use of the divided "Mark" and all other land matters, were discussed at 
the members' public assembly and decided by voting, as were all disputes and 
breaches of the land law. Here all members were equal, no matter if one man was a 
serf and the other his liege lord, as was often the case in the later Middle Ages; at 
the Mark assembly no man was more worth than the next: it was democracy in its 
most perfect form. 
The original Mark communities embraced large districts (entire Gaus, or 
hundreds), with each village owning its own common land, while alongside it there 
still existed a large amount of common land that belonged to them all. In the 
Rheingau this existed right up into the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. This 
was also the case in Scandinavia. The old Swedish law knew village commons, 
district commons, provincial commons and finally the King's (that is, properly 
speaking, the people's) commons; in other words, apart from village common land, 
common land belonging to the hundred, the province and ultimately land 
belonging to the King as the whole nation's representative. In Germany as late as 
the fourteenth century there were six to twelve villages to a "Mark"; later as a rule 
each village had only its own "Mark", that is to say, the large common "Mark" of 
earlier times had been stolen by the feudal lords. 
Out of the "Mark" system developed the village system, and, where the villages 
were reorganised as towns, the town system. In such towns the former "Mark" 
members naturally had sole right, initially, to participate in the management of the 
town's business, that is, matters relating to their own land, while outsiders who had 
migrated to the towns and had no entitlement to the "Mark" were, and remained, 
without legal rights. In this way the original democracy practised in the Mark 

=====第227页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 199 
with which it had not expressly concluded a treaty of peace. Military 
expeditions against such enemies were for the most part organised 
by a few outstanding warriors. They gave a war dance; whoever 
joined in the dance thereby declared his intention to participate in 
the expedition. A detachment was immediately formed and set out 
forthwith. When the tribal territory was attacked, its defence was 
likewise conducted mainly by volunteers. The departure and 
return of such detachments always provided an occasion for public 
festivities. The sanction of the tribal council for such expeditions 
was not necessary. It was neither sought nor given. They were 
exactly like the private war expeditions of the German retainers, 
as Tacitus has described them,3  except that among the Germans 
the body of retainers had assumed a more permanent character, 
and constituted a strong nucleus, already organised in times of 
peace, around which the remaining volunteers grouped in the 
event of war. Such military detachments were seldom numerically 
strong. The most important expeditions of the Indians, even those 
covering great distances, were carried out by insignificant fighting 
forces. When several such retinues gathered for an important 
engagement, each group obeyed its own leader only. The cohesion 
of the plan of campaign was ensured, more or less, by a council of 
these leaders. It was the method of war adopted by the Alamanni 
of the Upper Rhine in the fourth century, as described by 
Ammianus Marcellinus. 
7. In some tribes we find a head  chief,  whose powers, however, 
are very slight. He is one of the sachems, who in cases demanding 
community became a closed aristocracy of the town's "families", the patricians. 
Newly arrived outsiders, artisans, etc. comprised the town's plebs, whose struggle 
for equal rights with the privileged families fills the history of whole towns all 
through the Middle Ages. 
Where the "Mark" came under the control of a feudal lord, it was, initially, 
only transformed into a manorial system in so far as the lord became the 
permanent head of the Mark assembly and received a larger share of the 
cultivation of the common "Mark"; legislative, executive and judicial powers 
remained with the members as a whole. But early on the feudal lords encroached 
on the members' rights, undermining them until in the end there was little or 
nothing left of them. 
The Mark system was the original system of all the Germanic tribes; it was at its 
strongest in Germany, Scandinavia, England and northern France; in all these 
countries remains of it are still to be found. But only in Germany has its history 
been studied in detail, namely by G. L. Maurer. [Engels' note to the 1888 Danish 
edition.] 
a Tacitus, Germania, Vol. II.— Ed. 

=====第228页=====
200 Frederick Engels 
speedy action has to take provisional measures until such time as 
the council can assemble and take the final decision. This is a 
feeble but, subsequently, generally fruitless attempt to create an 
official with executive authority; actually, as will be seen, it was the 
supreme military commander who, in most cases, if not in all, 
developed into such an official. 
The great majority of American Indians never got beyond the 
stage of tribal integration. Constituting numerically small tribes, 
separated from one another by wide border-lands, and enfeebled 
by perpetual warfare, they occupied an enormous territory with 
but few people. Alliances arising out of temporary emergencies 
were concluded here and there between kindred tribes and 
dissolved when they passed. But in certain areas originally kindred 
but subsequently disunited tribes reunited in lasting confederacies, 
and so took the first step towards the formation of nations. In the 
United States we find the most advanced form of such a 
confederacy among the Iroquois. Emigrating from their original 
home west of the Mississippi, where they probably constituted a 
branch of the great Dakota family, they settled down after 
protracted wanderings in what is today the State of New York. 
They were divided into five tribes: Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, 
Oneidas and Mohawks. Subsisting on fish, game and the produce 
of crude horticulture, they lived in villages protected mostly by 
palisades. Never more than 20,000 strong, they had a number of 
gentes common to all five tribes; they spoke closely related dialects 
of the same language and occupied a continuous tract of territory 
that was divided among the five tribes. Since this area had been 
newly conquered, habitual cooperation among these tribes against 
those they displaced was only natural. No later than the beginning 
of the fifteenth century, this developed into a regular "permanent 
league", a confederacy, which, conscious of its new-found 
strength, immediately assumed an offensive character and at the 
height of its power—about 1675—had conquered large stretches 
of the surrounding country, expelling some of the inhabitants and 
forcing others to pay tributes. The Iroquois Confederacy was the 
most advanced social organisation attained by the Indians who had 
not gone beyond the lower stage of barbarism (that is, excepting 
the Mexicans, New Mexicans" and Peruvians). The main rules of 
the Confederacy were as follows: 
1. Perpetual alliance of the five consanguine tribes on the basis 
of complete equality and independence in all internal tribal affairs. 
This blood relationship constituted the true basis of the Confeder­
acy. Of the five tribes, three were called the father tribes and were 

=====第229页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 201 
brothers one to another; the other two were called son tribes and 
were likewise brother tribes to each other. Three gen tes—the 
oldest—still had living representatives in all the five tribes, while 
another three had in three tribes. The members of each of these 
gentes were all brothers throughout the five tribes. The common 
language, with mere dialectal differences, was the expression and 
the proof of common descent. 
2. The organ of the Confederacy was a Federal Council 
comprised of fifty sachems, all of equal rank and dignity; this 
council passed final decisions on all matters pertaining to the 
Confederacy. 
3. At the time the Confederacy was constituted these fifty 
sachems were distributed among the tribes and gentes as the 
bearers of new offices especially created to suit the aims of the 
Confederacy. They were elected anew by the gentes concerned 
whenever a vacancy arose, and could always be removed by them. 
The right to invest them with office belonged, however, to the 
Federal Council. 
4. These federal sachems were also sachems in their own 
respective tribes, and each had a seat and a vote in the tribal 
council. 
5. All decisions of the Federal Council had to be unanimous. 
6. Voting was by tribes, so that each tribe and all the council 
members in each tribe had to agree before a binding decision 
could be made. 
7. Each of the five tribal councils could convene the Federal 
Council, but the latter had no power to convene  itself. 
8. Its meetings took place before the assembled people. Every 
Iroquois had the right to speak; the council alone decided. 
9. The Confederacy had no official head, no chief executive. 
10. It did, however, have two supreme war chiefs, enjoying 
equal authority and equal power (the two "kings" of the Spartans, 
the two consuls in Rome). 
This was the entire social constitution under which the Iroquois 
lived for over four hundred years, and still do live. I have 
described it in some detail after Morgan because it gives us the 
opportunity of studying the organisation of a society which as yet 
knows no state. The state presupposes a special public authority 
separated from the totality of those respectively concerned; 
and Maurer's instinct is correct in recognising the German 
Mark constitution as a purely social institution, differing 
essentially from the state, although it largely served as its 
foundation later on. In all his writings, therefore, Maurer 

=====第230页=====
202 Frederick Engels 
investigates the gradual rise of public authority out of and side by 
side with the original constitutions of the Marks, villages, manors 
and towns.100  The North American Indians show how an originally 
united tribe gradually spread over an immense continent; how 
tribes,  by breaking up, became peoples, whole groups of tribes; 
how the languages changed not only until they became mutually 
unintelligible, but until nearly every trace of original unity 
disappeared; and how at the same time individual gentes within 
the tribes broke up to become several; how the old mother gentes 
persisted as phratries, and yet the names of these oldest gentes still 
remain the same among very remote and long-separated tribes— 
the Wolf and the Bear are still gentile names among a majority of 
Indian tribes. Generally speaking, the constitution described above 
can be applied to them all—except that many of them did not get 
as far as a confederation of kindred tribes. 
But we also see that once the gens existed as a social unit, the 
entire system of gentes, phratries and tribe developed with almost 
compelling necessity—because naturally—out of this unit. All 
three are groups of various degrees of consanguinity, each 
complete in itself and managing its own affairs, but each also 
complementing the rest. And the sphere of affairs devolving on 
them comprised the totality of the public affairs of the barbarians 
in the lower stage. Wherever, therefore, we find among a people 
the gens as the social unit, we may look for an organisation of the 
tribe similar to that described here; and where sufficient sources 
are available, as, for example, amongst the Greeks and the 
Romans, we shall not only find it, but also convince ourselves that, 
where the sources fail us, a comparison with the American social 
constitution will help us out of the most difficult doubts and 
enigmas. 
And this gentile constitution is wonderful in all its childlike 
simplicity! Everything runs smoothly without soldiers, gendarmes 
or police; without nobles, kings, governors, prefects or judges; 
without prisons; without trials. All quarrels and disputes are 
settled by the whole body of those concerned—the gens or the 
tribe or the individual gentes among themselves. Blood revenge is 
threatened only as an extreme, rarely applied measure, of which 
our capital punishment is only the civilised form, possessed of all 
the advantages and drawbacks of civilisation. Although there are 
many more affairs in common than at present—the household is 
run in common and communistically by a number of families, the 
land is tribal property, only the small gardens being temporarily 
assigned to the households—still, not a bit of our extensive and 

=====第231页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 203 
complicated machinery of administration is required. Those 
concerned decide, and in most cases centuries-old custom has 
already settled everything. There can be no poor and needy—the 
communistic household and gens know their obligations towards 
the aged, the sick and those disabled in war. All are free and 
equal—including the women. There is as yet no room for slaves, 
nor, as a rule, for the subjugation of alien tribes. When the 
Iroquois conquered the Eries and the "Neutral Nations" 101 about 
the year 1651, they invited them to join the Confederacy as equal 
members; only when the vanquished refused were they driven out 
of their territory. And the kind of the men and women that are 
produced by such a society is indicated by the admiration felt by 
all white men who came into contact with uncorrupted Indians, 
admiration of the personal dignity, rectitude, strength of character 
and bravery of these barbarians. 
We have witnessed quite recently examples of this bravery in 
Africa. The Zulu Kaffirs a few years ago, like the Nubians a 
couple of months ago—both tribes in which gentile institutions 
have not yet died out—did what no European army can do.102 
Armed only with pikes and spears and without firearms, they 
advanced, under a hail of bullets from the breech loaders, right 
up to the bayonets of the English infantry—acknowledged as the 
best in the world for fighting at close formation—throwing them 
into disorder more than once and even beating them back; and 
this, despite the colossal disparity in arms and despite the fact that 
they have no such thing as military service, and do not know what 
military exercises are. Their capacity and endurance are proved by 
the complaint of the English that a Kaffir can move faster and 
cover a longer distance in twenty-four hours than a horse. As an 
English painter says, their smallest muscle stands out, hard and 
steely, like whipcord. 
This is what mankind and human society were like before class 
divisions arose. And if we compare their condition with that of the 
overwhelming majority of civilised people today, we will find an 
enormous gulf between the present-day proletarian and small 
peasant and the ancient free member of a gens. 
This is one side of the matter. Let us not forget, however, that 
this organisation was doomed to extinction. It never developed 
beyond the tribe; the confederacy of tribes already signified the 
commencement of its downfall, as we shall see later, and as the 
attempts of the Iroquois to subjugate others have shown. What 
was outside the tribe was outside the law. Where no express treaty 
of peace existed, war raged between tribe and tribe; and war was 

=====第232页=====
204 Frederick Engels 
waged with the cruelty that distinguishes man from all other 
animals and which was abated only later in self-interest. The 
gentile constitution in full bloom, as we have seen it in America, 
presupposed extremely undeveloped production, thus an extreme­
ly sparse population spread over a wide territory, and therefore 
the almost complete domination of man confronted by an 
alien and incomprehensible external nature, a domination 
reflected in his childish religious ideas. The tribe remained the 
boundary for man, in relation to outsider as well as  himself:  the 
tribe,  the gens and their institutions were sacred and inviolable, a 
superior power, instituted by nature, to which the individual 
remained absolutely subject in feeling, thought and deed. Impres­
sive as the people of this epoch may appear to us, they differ in 
no way one from another, they are still bound, as Marx says, to 
the umbilical cord of naturally evolved community. The power 
of these naturally evolved communities had to be broken, and it 
was broken. But it was broken by influences which from the outset 
appear to us as a degradation, a fall from the simple moral 
grandeur of the old gentile society. The lowest interests—base 
greed, brutal sensuality, sordid avarice, selfish plunder of common 
possessions—usher in the new, civilised society, class society; the 
most outrageous means—theft, rape, deceit and treachery— 
undermine and topple the old, classless, gentile society. And the 
new society, during all the 2,500 years of its existence, has never 
been anything but the development of the small minority at the 
expense of the exploited and oppressed great majority; and it is so 
today more than ever before. 
IV 
THE GRECIAN GENS 
Greeks, as well as Pelasgians and other peoples of the same 
tribal origin, were constituted since prehistoric times in the same 
organic series as the Americans: gens, phratry, tribe, confederacy 
of tribes. The phratry might be missing, as among the Dorians; 
the confederacy of tribes might not yet be developed everywhere, 
but in every case the gens was the unit. At the time the Greeks 
entered history, they were on the threshold of civilisation. Almost 
two entire great periods of development lie between the Greeks 
and the above-mentioned American tribes, the Greeks of the 
Heroic Age being by this much ahead of the Iroquois. For this 
reason the Grecian gens no longer bore the archaic character of 

=====第233页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 205 
the Iroquois gens; the stamp of group marriage3 was becoming 
considerably blurred. Mother right had given way to father right; 
thereby rising private wealth made its first breach in the gentile 
constitution. A second breach naturally followed the first: after the 
introduction of father right, the fortune of a wealthy heiress 
would, by virtue of her marriage, fall to her husband, that is to 
say, to another gens; and so the foundation of all gentile law was 
broken, and in such cases the girl was not only permitted, but 
obliged to marry within the gens, in order that the latter might 
retain the fortune. 
According to Grote's history of Greece,b the Athenian gens in 
particular was held together by: 
1. Common religious. ceremonies, and exclusive right of the 
priesthood in honour of a definite god, supposed to be the 
forefather of the gens, and characterised in this capacity by a 
special surname. 
2. A common burial place (cf. Demosthenes' Eubulides 103). 
3. Mutual rights of inheritance. 
4. Reciprocal obligation to afford help, defence and support 
against the use of force. 
5. Mutual right and obligation to intermarry within the gens in 
certain cases, especially for orphaned daughters or heiresses. 
6. Possession, in some cases at least, of common property, and 
of an archon (magistrate) and treasurer of its own. 
The phratry, binding together several gentes, was less intimate, 
but here too we find mutual rights and duties of similar character, 
especially a communion of particular religious rites and the right 
of prosecution in the event of a phrator being slain. Again, all 
the phratries of a tribe performed periodically certain common 
sacred ceremonies under the presidency of a phylobasileus 
(tribal magistrate), selected from among the nobles (eupatrides). 
Thus Grote. And Marx adds: "In the Grecian gens the savage 
(for example, the Iroquois) is unmistakably discerned."0 He 
becomes still more unmistakable when we investigate somewhat 
further. 
For the Grecian gens has also the following attributes: 
7. Descent according to father right. 
8. Prohibition of intermarriage within the gens except in the 
case of heiresses. This exception, and its formulation as an 
a The 1884 edition has "punaluan family" instead of "group marriage".— Ed. 
b G. Grote, A History of Greece, Vol. Ill, pp. 54-55.— Ed. 
c "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 198.— Ed. 

=====第234页=====
206 Frederick Engels 
injunction, proves the validity of the old rule. This follows also 
from the universally accepted rule that when a woman married 
she renounced the religious rites of her gens and acquired those 
of her husband, in whose phratry she was enrolled. This, and a 
famous passage in Dicaearchus,a go to prove that marriage outside 
the gens was the rule. Becker in Charikles directly assumes that 
nobody was permitted to marry in his or her own gens.b 
9. The right of adoption into the gens; it was practised by 
adoption into the family, but with public formalities, and only in 
exceptional cases. 
10. The right to elect and depose the chiefs. We know that 
every gens had its archon; but nowhere is it stated that this office 
was hereditary in certain families. Until the end of barbarism, the 
probability is always against strict0 heredity, which would be totally 
incompatible with conditions where rich and poor had absolutely 
equal rights in the gens. 
Not only Grote, but also Niebuhr, Mommsen and all other 
previous historians of classical antiquity, failed with the gens. 
Although they correctly noted many of its distinguishing features, 
they always regarded it as a group of families and thus made it 
impossible for themselves to understand the nature and origin of 
the gens. Under the gentile constitution, the family was never a 
unit of organisation, nor could it be, for man and wife necessarily 
belonged to two different gentes. The gens as a whole belonged to 
the phratry, the phratry to the tribe; but in the case of the family, 
half of it belonged to the gens of the husband and half to that of 
the wife. The state, too, does not recognise the family in public 
law; to this day it exists only in civil law. Nevertheless, all our 
historiography so far takes as its point of departure the absurd 
assumption, which became inviolable particularly in the eighteenth 
century, that the monogamian individual family, which is scarcely 
older than civilisation, is the nucleus around which society and the 
state gradually crystallised. 
"Mr. Grote will also please note," adds Marx,104 "that although 
the Greeks traced their gentes to mythology, the gentes are older 
than mythology with its gods and demigods, which they themselves 
had created." d 
Grote is quoted with preference by Morgan as a respected 
a Cited in W. Wachsmuth's Hellenische Alterthumskunde aus dem Gesichtspunkte des 
Staates, Part 1, Section 1, p. 312.— Ed. 
b W. A. Becker, Charikles, Bilder altgriechischer Sitte, Part 2, p. 447.— Ed. 
c The word "strict" was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
d "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 200.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 207 
witness beyond suspicion. He further relates that every Athenian 
gens had a name derived from its supposed forefather; that 
before Solon's time as a general rule, and afterwards if a man died 
intestate, his gentiles (gennêtes) inherited his property; and that if a 
man was murdered, first his relatives, next his gentiles, and finally 
the phrators of the slain had the right and duty to prosecute the 
criminal in the courts: 
"All that we hear of the most ancient Athenian laws is based upon the gentile 
and phratrie divisions." 3 
The descent of the gentes from common ancestors has been a 
brain-racking puzzle to the "school-taught Philistines" (Marx).b 
Naturally, since they claim that these ancestors are purely 
mythical, they are at a loss to explain how the gentes developed 
out of separate and distinct, originally totally unrelated families; 
yet they must accomplish this somehow, if only to explain the 
existence of the gentes. So they circle round in a whirlpool of 
words and do not get beyond the phrase: the genealogy is indeed 
mythical, but the gens is real. And finally, Grote says—the 
bracketed remarks being by Marx—: 
"We hear of this genealogy but rarely, because it is only brought before the 
public in certain cases pre-eminent and venerable. But the humbler gentes had 
their common rites" (rather peculiar, Mr. Grote!) "and common superhuman 
ancestor and genealogy, as well as the more celebrated" (how very strange this on 
the part of humbler gentes!); "the scheme and ideal (my dear Sir! Not ideal, but 
carnal—germanice0 fleischlichl) basis was the same in all."d 
Marx sums up Morgan's reply to this as follows: "The system of 
consanguinity which pertained to the gens in its archaic form— 
and which the Greeks once possessed like other mortals— 
preserved a knowledge of the relationships of all the members of a 
gens to each other. They learned this for them decisively 
important fact by practice from early childhood. This fell into 
desuetude with the rise of the monogamian family. The gentile 
name created a pedigree beside which that of the individual family 
was insignificant. This name was now to preserve the fact of the 
common descent of those who bore it; but the lineage of the gens 
went so far back that its members could no longer prove the actual 
relationship existing between them, except in a limited number of 
a G. Grote, A History of Greece, Vol. Ill, p. 66. See also "Marx's Excerpts...", 
op. cit., p. 230.— Ed. 
b "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 201.—  Ed. 
c In plain German.— Ed. 
d Here and below see "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 202, and also G. Grote, 
A History of Greece, Vol. Ill, p. 60.— Ed. 

=====第236页=====
208 Frederick Engels 
cases through recent common ancestors. The name itself was the 
evidence of a common descent, and conclusive  proof,  except in 
cases of adoption. The actual denial of all kinship between gentiles 
à la Grote a and Niebuhr, which transforms the gens into a purely 
fictitious, fanciful creation of the brain, is, on the other hand, 
worthy of 'ideal' scientists, that is, of cloistered bookworms. 
Because the concatenation of the generations, especially with the 
incipience of monogamy, is removed into the distance, and the 
reality of the past seems reflected in mythological fantasy, the 
good old Philistines concluded, and still conclude, that the fancied 
genealogy created real gentes!"105 
As among the Americans, the phratry was a mother gens, split 
up into several daughter gentes, and uniting them, often tracing 
them all to a common ancestor. Thus, according to Grote, 
"all the contemporary members of the phratry of Hekataeus had a common 
god for their ancestor at the sixteenth degree".b 
Hence, all the gentes of this phratry were literally brother 
gentes. The phratry still occurs in Homer as a military unit in that 
famous passage where Nestor advises Agamemnon: Draw up 
people by tribes and by phratries so that phratry may support 
phratry, and tribe tribe. 0 Moreover, the phratry has the right and 
the duty to prosecute the murderer of a phrator, indicating that at 
an earlier stage it had the duty of blood revenge. Furthermore, it 
has common shrines and festivals; for the development of all 
Greek mythology from the traditional old Aryan cult of nature 
was essentially due to the gentes and phratries and took place 
within them. The phratry also had a chief (phratriarchos) and, 
according to de Coulanges, assemblies and binding decisions, a 
tribunal and an administration. 0 Even the state of a later period, 
while ignoring the gens, left certain public functions to the 
phratry. 
A number of kindred phratries constituted a tribe. In Attica 
there were four tribes of three phratries each, each phratry 
consisting of thirty gentes. Such a meticulous demarcation of the 
groups presupposes a conscious and planned interference with the 
naturally evolved order of things. On how, when and why this 
happened Grecian history keeps silent, for the Greeks themselves 
a Like Morgan, Marx has "Pollux", a 2nd-century Greek scholar, to whom Grote 
has frequent references.— Ed. 
b G. Grote, op. cit., Vol. Ill, pp. 58-59. See also "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., 
p. 202.— Ed 
c Homer,  Iliad,  Canto II.— Ed. 
d Fustel de Coulanges, La cité antique, p. 146.— Ed. 

=====第237页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 209 
preserved memories reaching back no further than the Heroic 
Age. 
Closely packed in a comparatively small territory as the Greeks 
were, their dialectal differences were less developed than those in 
the extensive American forests. Nevertheless, even here we find 
only tribes of the same main dialect united in a larger whole; and 
even little Attica had its own dialect, which was later to become 
dominant as the universal language of prose. 
In the epics of Homer we mostly find the Grecian tribes already 
combined into small peoples, within which, however, the gentes, 
phratries and tribes still retained their full independence. They 
already lived in walled cities. The population increased with the 
growth of the herds, with field agriculture and the beginnings of 
the handicrafts. With this came increased differences in wealth, 
which gave rise to an aristocratic element within the old naturally 
evolved democracy. The separate small peoples engaged in 
constant warfare for the possession of the best land and also for 
the sake of loot. The enslavement of prisoners of war was already 
a recognised institution. 
The constitution of these tribes and small peoples was as 
follows: 
1. The permanent authority was the council (boulé), originally 
composed, most likely, of the chiefs of the gentes, but later on, 
when their number became too large, of a selection, which created 
the opportunity to develop and strengthen the aristocratic 
element. Dionysius definitely speaks of the council of the Heroic 
Age as being composed of notables (kratistoi). a The council had the 
final decision in important matters. In Aeschylus, the council of 
Thebes passes a decision definitive in the given case that the body of 
Eteocles be buried with full honours, and the body of Polynices be 
thrown out to be devoured by the dogs.b Later, with the rise of the 
state,  this council was transformed into a senate. 
2. The popular  assembly  (agora). Among the Iroquois we saw that 
the people, men and women, stood in a circle around the council 
meetings, taking an orderly part in the discussions and thus 
influencing its decisions. Among the Homeric Greeks, this 
Umstand? to use an old German legal expression, had already 
developed into a plenary assembly of the people, as was also the 
case with the ancient Germans. The assembly was convened by the 
a Dionysius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, II, 12.— Ed. 
b Aeschylus, The Seven Against Thebes, III, 2.— Ed. 
c Umstand: Those standing around.— Ed. 

=====第238页=====
210 Frederick Engels 
council to decide important matters; every man had the right to 
speak. Decisions were taken by a show of hands (Aeschylus in The 
Suppliants), or by acclamation. They were sovereign and final, for, 
as Schoemann says in his Griechische Alterthümer [Vol. I, p. 27], 
"whenever a matter is discussed that requires the co-operation of the people for 
its execution, Homer gives us no indication of any means by which the people 
could be forced into it against their will". 
At this time, when every adult male member of the tribe was a 
warrior, there was as yet no public authority separated from the 
people that could have been set against it. Naturally evolved 
democracy was still in full bloom, and this must remain the point 
of departure in judging the power and status of the council and of 
the basileus. 
3. The military commander (basileus). On this point, Marx makes 
the following comment: "The European savants, most of them 
born servants of princes, represent the basileus as a monarch in 
the modern sense. The Yankee republican Morgan objects to this. 
Very ironically, but, truthfully, he says of the oily Gladstone and 
his Juventus Mundi: 
" 'Mr. Gladstone, who presents to his readers the Grecian chiefs of the Heroic 
Age as kings and princes, with the superadded qualities of gentlemen, is forced to 
admit that on the whole we seem to have the custom or law of primogeniture 
sufficiently, but not oversharply defined.' " a 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Gladstone himself must realise that such 
a contingent system of primogeniture, sufficiently but not over­
sharply defined, is as good as none at all. 
What the position as regards heredity was in the case of the 
offices of chiefs among the Iroquois and other Indians we have 
already seen. All officials were elected, mostly within the gens, and 
were, to that extent, hereditary in the gens. Gradually, vacancies 
came to be filled preferably by the next gentile relative—the 
brother or the sister's son—unless good reasons existed for 
passing him over. The fact that in Greece, under father right, the 
office of basileus was generally transmitted to the son, or one of 
the sons, only indicates that the probability of succession by public 
election was in favour of the sons; but it by no means implies 
legally binding succession without public election. What we have 
here,  among the Iroquois and Greeks, are the first rudiments of 
special aristocratic families within the gentes and, among the 
Greeks, also the first rudiments of a future hereditary chieftain-
a L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, p. 248; "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., 
p. 206.— Ed. 

=====第239页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 211 
ship or monarchy. Hence it is to be supposed that among the 
Greeks the basileus was either elected by the people or, at least, 
had to be confirmed by its recognised organs—the council or the 
agora—as was the case with the Roman "king" (rex). 
In the Iliad the ruler of men, Agamemnon, appears, not as the 
supreme king of the Greeks, but as supreme commander of a 
federal army before a besieged city. And when dissension broke 
out among the Greeks, it is to this quality of his that Odysseus 
points in the famous passage: the rule of many is not a good 
thing; let us have one commander, etc. (to which the popular 
verse about the sceptre was added later).3 "Odysseus is not here 
lecturing on the form of government, but is demanding obedience 
to the supreme commander of the army in the field. For the 
Greeks, who appear before Troy only as an army, the proceedings 
in the agora are sufficiently democratic. When speaking of gifts, 
that is, the division of the spoils, Achilles never makes Agamem­
non or some other basileus the divider, but always the 'sons of the 
Achaeans', i.e. the people. The attributes 'begotten of Zeus', 
'nourished by Zeus', do not prove anything because every gens is 
descended from some god, and the gens of the tribal chief from a 
'prominent' god, in this case Zeus. Even personally unfree, such as 
the swineherd Eumaeus and others, are 'divine' (dioi or theioi), 
and this in the Odyssey, and hence in a much later period than the 
Iliad.  Likewise in the Odyssey, we find the name of heros given to 
the herald Mulios as well as to the blind bard Demodocus.b In 
short, the word basileia, which the Greek writers apply to Homer's 
so-called kingship (because military leadership is its chief distin­
guishing mark), with the council and popular assembly alongside of 
it, means merely—military democracy." (Marx.)c 
Besides military functions, the basileus also had priestly and 
judicial functions; the latter were not clearly specified, but the 
former he exercised in his capacity of supreme representative of 
the tribe, or of the confederacy of tribes. There is no reference 
anywhere to civil, administrative functions; but it seems that he 
was ex officio a member of the council. Etymologically, it is quite 
correct to translate basileus as König (king), because König (kuning) 
a Homer,  Iliad,  Canto II.— Ed. 
b In "Marx's Excerpts..." here follows the sentence omitted by Engels: "the 
term kairanos used by Odysseus along with basileus, in regard to Agamemnon, also 
means merely 'commander in the field'".— Ed. 
c "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 207. Marx quotes Morgan (Ancient Society, 
pp. 248-49) with some additions. Engels also makes some abridgements and changes 
here.—  Ed. 
16-1243 

=====第240页=====
212 Frederick Engels 
is derived from kuni, kiinne, and signifies chief of a gens. But the 
ancient Greek basileus in no way corresponds to the modern 
meaning of the word König. Thucydides expressly refers to the old 
basileia as patrikê, that is, derived from gentes, and states that it 
had specified, hence restricted, functions. 3 And Aristotle says 
that the basileia of the Heroic Age was a leadership over freemen, 
and that the basileus was a military  chief,  judge and high priest.b 
Hence, the basileus had no governmental power in the later 
sense.* 
Thus,  in the Grecian constitution of the Heroic Age, we still 
find the old gentile system full of vigour; but we also see the 
beginning of its decay: father right and the inheritance of 
property by the children, which favoured the accumulation of 
wealth in the family and gave the latter power as against the gens; 
differentiation in wealth affecting in turn the social constitution by 
creating the first rudiments of a hereditary nobility and monarchy; 
slavery, first limited to prisoners of war, but already opening up 
the prospect of the enslavement of fellow members of the tribe 
and even of the gens; the degeneration of the old intertribal 
warfare into systematic robbery on land and sea for the purpose 
of capturing cattle, slaves and treasure, into a regular source of 
income. In short, wealth is praised and respected as the highest 
treasure, and the old gentile systems are abused in order to 
justify forcible robbery of wealth. Only one thing was missing: an 
institution that would not only safeguard the newly acquired 
wealth of individuals against the communistic traditions of the 
gentile system, would not only sanctify private property, formerly 
held in such low esteem, and pronounce this sanctification the 
supreme purpose of every human society, but would also stamp 
the successively developing new forms of acquiring property, and 
consequently, of constantly accelerating the increase in wealth, 
* Like the Grecian basileus, the Aztec military chief has been wrongly presented 
as a prince in the modern sense. Morgan was the first to subject to historical 
criticism the reports of the Spaniards, who at first misunderstood and exaggerated, 
and later deliberately misrepresented things; he showed that the Mexicans were in 
the middle stage of barbarism, but on a higher plane than the New Mexican Pueblo 
Indians,106  and that their constitution, so far as the garbled accounts enable us to 
judge, corresponded to the following: a confederacy of three tribes, which had 
made a number of others tributary, and which was governed by a Federal Council 
and a federal military  chief,  whom the Spaniards had made into an "emperor". 
[See L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 186-214.— Ed.] 
a Thucydides, The History of the Peloponnesian War, Book I, Ch.  13.—  Ed 
b Aristotle, Politics, Book III, Ch. 10.— Ed 

=====第241页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 213 
with the seal of general public recognition; an institution that 
would perpetuate, not only the arising class division of society, but 
also the right of the possessing class to exploit the non-possessing 
classes and the rule of the former over the latter. 
And this institution arrived. The state was invented. 
V 
THE EMERGENCE OF THE ATHENIAN STATE 
How the state developed, with some of the organs of the gentile 
constitution being transformed, some displaced, by the intrusion 
of new organs, and, finally, all superseded by real state au­
thorities—while the place of the actual "people in arms" 
defending themselves through their gentes, phratries and tribes 
was taken by an armed "public power" at the service of these state 
authorities and, therefore, also usable against the people—all this 
can nowhere be better traced, at least in its initial stage, than in 
ancient Athens. The changes in form are, in the main, described 
by Morgan; the economic content which gave rise to them I had 
largely to add  myself. 
In the Heroic Age, the four tribes of the Athenians were still 
installed in separate parts of Attica. Even the twelve phratries 
comprising them seem still to have had separate seats in the twelve 
towns of Cecrops. The constitution was that of the Heroic Age: a 
popular assembly, a popular Council, a basileus. As far back as 
written history goes we find the land already divided up and 
transformed into private property, which corresponds with the 
relatively developed commodity production and the commodity 
trade that went with it towards the end of the higher stage of 
barbarism. In addition to cereals, wine and oil were produced. 
Maritime commerce on the Aegean Sea passed more and more 
from Phoenician into Attic hands. As a result of the purchase and 
sale of landed property and the advancing division of labour 
between agriculture and handicrafts, trade and navigation, the 
members of gentes, phratries and tribes very soon intermingled. 
The districts of the phratry and the tribe received inhabitants who, 
although they were fellow countrymen, did not belong to these 
bodies and, therefore, were outsiders in their own place of abode. 
For in times of calm every phratry and every tribe administered its 
own affairs without consulting the popular council or the basileus 
in Athens. But inhabitants of the area of the phratry or tribe not 
16* 

=====第242页=====
214 Frederick Engels 
belonging to either naturally could not take part in this 
administration. 
This disturbed the normal functioning of the organs of the gen­
tile constitution so much that a remedy was needed as far back as the 
Heroic Age. A constitution, attributed to Theseus, was introduced. 
The main feature of this change was the institution of a central 
administration in Athens, i.e., some of the affairs that hitherto had 
been administered independently by the tribes were declared to be 
common affairs and transferred to a general council sitting in 
Athens. Thereby, the Athenians went a step further than any 
indigenous people in America had ever gone: the simple confeder­
acy of neighbouring tribes was now supplanted by their coales­
cence into one single people. This gave rise to a general Athenian 
popular law, which stood above the legal customs of the tribes and 
gentes. It bestowed on the citizens of Athens, as such, certain 
rights and additional legal protection even in territory where they 
were aliens. This, however, was the first step towards undermining 
the gentile constitution; for it was the first step towards the 
subsequent admission of citizens who were alien to all the Attic 
tribes and were and remained entirely outside the pale of the 
Athenian gentile constitution. A second institution attributed to 
Theseus was the division of the entire people, irrespective of 
gentes, phratries and tribes, into three classes: eupatrides, or 
nobles; geomoroi, or tillers of the land; and demiurgi, or artisans, 
and the granting to the nobles of the exclusive right to public 
office. True, apart from reserving for the nobles the right to hold 
public office, this division had no effect, as it created no other 
legal distinctions between the classes. 3 It is important, however, 
because it reveals to us the new social elements that had quietly 
developed. It shows that the customary holding of office in the 
gens by certain families had already developed into an entitlement 
of these families that was little contested; that these families, 
already powerful owing to their wealth, began to unite outside of 
their gentes into a privileged class of their own; and that the 
nascent state sanctified this presumptuousness. It shows, further­
more, that the division of labour between husbandmen and 
artisans had already become strong enough to call into question, in 
the social sense, the supremacy of the old division into gentes and 
tribes.  And finally, it proclaimed the irreconcilable antagonism 
between gentile society and the state. The first attempt to form a 
state consisted in breaking up the gentes by dividing the members 
a In the 1884 edition the end of the sentence reads: "as the two other classes 
got no special rights".— Ed. 

=====第243页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 215 
of each into a privileged and an inferior class, and the latter again 
into two vocational classes, thus setting one against the other. 
The ensuing political history of Athens up to the time of Solon 
is only incompletely known. The office of basileus fell into disuse; 
archons, elected from among the nobility, became the heads of the 
state.  The rule of the nobility steadily increased until, round about 
600 B.C., it became unbearable. The principal means for stifling 
common liberty were—money and usury. The nobility lived 
mainly in and around Athens, where maritime commerce, with 
occasional piracy still as a sideline, enriched it and concentrated 
monetary wealth in its hands. From this point the developing 
money system penetrated like corroding nitric acid into the 
traditional life of the rural communities founded on the natural 
economy. The gentile constitution is absolutely incompatible with 
the money system. The ruin of the Attic small-holding peasants 
coincided with the loosening of the old gentile bonds that 
protected them. Creditor's bills and mortgage bonds—for by then 
the Athenians had also invented the mortgage—respected neither 
the gens nor the phratry. But the old gentile constitution knew 
nothing of money, credit and monetary debt. Hence the constantly 
expanding money rule of the nobility gave rise to a new body of 
common law to protect the creditor against the debtor and 
sanction the exploitation of the small peasant by the money owner. 
All the fields of Attica bristled with mortgage posts bearing the 
legend that the lot on which they stood was mortgaged to so and 
so for so and so much. The fields that were not so designated had 
for the most part been sold on account of overdue mortgages or 
non-payment of interest and had become the property of the 
noble-born usurers; the peasant was glad if he was permitted to 
remain as a tenant and live on one-sixth of the product of his 
labour while paying five-sixths to his new master as rent. More 
than that: if the sum obtained from the sale of the lot did not 
cover the debt, or if such a debt was not secured by a pledge, the 
debtor had to sell his children into slavery abroad in order to 
satisfy the creditor's claim. The sale of his children by the 
father—such was the first fruit of father right and monogamy! 
And if the blood-sucker was still unsatisfied, he could sell the 
debtor himself into slavery. Such was the pleasant dawn of 
civilisation among the Athenian people. 
Previously, when the conditions of life of the people were still in 
keeping with the gentile constitution, such a revolution would have 
been impossible; but here it had come about nobody knew how. 
Let us return for a moment to our Iroquois. Among them a state 

=====第244页=====
216 Frederick Engels 
of affairs like that which had now imposed itself on the Athenians 
without their own doing, so to say, and certainly against their will, 
was inconceivable. There the mode of production of the means of 
subsistence, which, year in and year out, remained unchanged, 
could never give rise to such conflicts, imposed from without, as it 
were; to antagonism between rich and poor, between exploiters 
and exploited. The Iroquois were still far from controlling the 
forces of nature but within the limits set for them by nature they 
were masters of their production. Apart from poor harvests in 
their little gardens, the exhaustion of the fish stocks in their lakes 
and rivers, or of game in their forests, they knew what the out­
come would be of their mode of gaining a livelihood. The outcome 
would be: means of sustenance, meagre or abundant; but it could 
never be unpremeditated social upheavals, the severing of gentile 
bonds, or the splitting of the members of gentes and tribes into 
antagonistic classes fighting each other. Production was carried on 
within the most restricted limits, but—the producers exercised 
control over their own product. This was the immense advantage 
of barbarian production that was lost with the advent of 
civilisation; and to win it back on the basis of the enormous 
control man now exercises over the forces of nature, and of the 
free association that is now possible, will be the task of the next 
generations. 
Not so among the Greeks. The appearance of private property 
in herds and articles of luxury led to exchange between 
individuals, to the transformation of products into commodities. 
Here lies the root of the entire revolution that followed. As soon 
as producers no longer directly consumed their product, but 
surrendered it in the course of exchange, they lost control over it. 
They no longer knew what became of it, and the possibility arose 
that the product might some day be turned against the producer, 
used as a means of exploiting and oppressing him. Hence, no society 
can for long remain master of its own production and continue to 
control the social effects of its production process, unless it abolishes 
exchange between individuals. 
The Athenians were to learn, however, how quickly after 
individual exchange is established and products are converted into 
commodities, the product brings to bear its rule over the 
producer. With the production of commodities came the tilling of 
the soil by individual cultivators for their own account, soon 
followed by individual ownership of the land. There also came 
money, that universal commodity for which all others could be 
exchanged. But when men invented money they little suspected 

=====第245页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 217 
that they were creating a new social power, the one universal 
power to which the whole of society must bow. It was this new 
power, suddenly sprung into existence without the knowledge or 
will of its own creators, which, in all the brutality of its youth, 
exposed the Athenians to its rule. 
What was to be done? The old gentile organisation had not only 
proved impotent against the triumphant march of money; it was 
also absolutely incapable of even providing a place within its 
framework for such things as money, creditors, debtors and the 
forcible collection of debts. But the new social power was there, 
and neither pious wishes nor a longing for the return of the good 
old times could drive money and usury out of existence. 
Moreover, a number of other, minor breaches had been made in 
the gentile constitution. The indiscriminate mingling of the 
gentiles and phrators throughout the whole of Attica, and 
especially in the city of Athens  itself,  had increased from 
generation to generation, in spite of the fact that an Athenian, 
while allowed to sell plots of land out of his gens, was still 
prohibited from thus selling his dwelling. The division of labour 
between the different branches of production—agriculture, hand­
icrafts, numerous skills within the various crafts, trade, navigation, 
etc.—had developed more and more fully with the progress of 
industry and commerce. The population was now divided accord­
ing to occupation into rather well-established groups, each of 
which had a number of new, common interests that found no 
place in the gens or phratry and, therefore, necessitated the 
creation of new offices to attend to them. The number of slaves 
had increased considerably and must have far exceeded that of the 
free Athenians even then. The gentile constitution originally knew 
no slavery and, therefore, no means of holding this mass of 
bondsmen in check. And finally, commerce had attracted a great 
many outsiders to Athens who settled there because it was easier 
to make money there, and according to the old constitution these 
outsiders enjoyed neither rights nor the protection of the law. In 
spite of traditional toleration, they remained a disturbingly alien 
element among the people. 
In short, the gentile constitution was coming to an end. Society 
was outgrowing it by the day; it was powerless to allay or check 
even the worst evils that were arising under its very eyes. In the 
meantime, however, the state had developed. The new groups 
formed by division of labour, first between town and country, then 
between the various branches of urban industry, had created new 
organs to protect their interests. Public offices of every description 

=====第246页=====
218 Frederick Engels 
had been instituted. And then the young state needed, above all, 
its own fighting forces, which among the seafaring Athenians 
could at first be only naval forces, to be used for occasional minor 
wars and to protect merchant vessels. At some uncertain time 
before Solon, the naucraries were instituted, small territorial 
districts, twelve in each tribe. Every naucrary had to supply, equip 
and man a war vessel and, in addition, provided two horsemen. 
This arrangement was a twofold attack on the gentile constitution. 
First, it created a public power which was no longer simply 
identical with the armed people in their totality; secondly, for the 
first time it divided the people for public purposes, not according 
to kinship groups, but according to common domicile. We shall see 
what this signified. 
As the gentile constitution could not come to the assistance of 
the exploited people, they could look only to the emerging state. 
And the state brought help in the form of the constitution of 
Solon, while at the same time strengthening itself anew at the 
expense of the old constitution. Solon—the manner in which his 
reform of 594 B.C. was carried out does not concern us 
here—started the series of so-called political revolutions by an 
encroachment on property. All revolutions to date have been 
revolutions for the protection of one kind of property against 
another kind of property. They cannot protect one kind without 
violating another. In the Great French Revolution feudal property 
was sacrificed in order to save bourgeois property; in Solon's 
revolution, creditors' property had to suffer for the benefit of 
debtors' property. The debts were simply annulled. We are not 
acquainted with the exact details, but Solon boasts in his poems 
that he removed the mortgage posts from the encumbered lands 
and enabled all who had been sold or had fled abroad because of 
debt to return home. This could have been done only by openly 
violating property rights. And indeed, the object of all so-called 
political revolutions, from first to last, was to protect one kind of 
property by confiscating—also called stealing—another kind of 
property. This is so true that for 2,500 years it has been possible 
to maintain private property only by violating property rights. 
But now a way had to be found to prevent such re-enslavement 
of the free Athenians. This was first achieved by general 
measures; for example, the prohibition of contracts which involved 
the mortgaging of the debtor's person. Furthermore, a maximum 
was fixed for the amount of landed property any one individual 
could own, in order to put some curb, at least, on the voracious 
craving of the nobility for the peasants' land. Then followed 

=====第247页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 219 
constitutional amendments, of which the most important for us 
are the following: 
The council was increased to four hundred members, one 
hundred from each tribe. Here, then, the tribe was still the basis. 
But this was the only side of the old constitution that was 
incorporated in the new body politic. For the rest, Solon divided 
the citizens into four classes, according to the amount of land 
owned and its yield. Five hundred, three hundred and one 
hundred and fifty medimni of grain (1 medimnus=appr. 41 litres) 
were the minimum yields for the first three classes; whoever had 
less land or none at all belonged to the fourth class. Only 
members of the first three classes could hold office; the highest 
offices were filled exclusively by the first class. The fourth class 
had only the right to speak and vote in the popular assembly. But 
it was here that all officials were elected, here that they had to give 
account of their actions, here that all the laws were made, and 
here that the fourth class was in the majority. The aristocratic 
privileges were partly renewed in the form of privileges of wealth, 
but the people retained the decisive power. The four classes also 
formed the basis for the reorganisation of the fighting forces. The 
first two classes furnished the cavalry; the third had to serve as 
heavy infantry; the fourth served as light infantry, without 
armour, or in the navy, in which case they probably were paid. 
Thus,  an entirely new element was introduced into the 
constitution: private ownership. The rights and duties of the 
citizens of the state were graded according to the amount of land 
they owned; and as the propertied classes gained influence the old 
consanguine groups were displaced. The gentile constitution 
suffered another defeat. 
The gradation of political rights according to property, however, 
was not an indispensable institution for the state. Important as it 
may have been in the constitutional history of states, nevertheless, 
a good many states, and the most developed at that, did with­
out it. Even in Athens it played only a transient role. From the 
time of Aristides, all offices were open to all the citizens.107 
During the next eighty years Athenian society gradually found 
its way to the path along which it continued to develop in 
subsequent centuries. Usurious land operations, rampant in the 
pre-Solon period, were checked, as was the excessive concentration 
of landed property. Commerce and the arts and crafts conducted 
on an ever-increasing scale with slave labour became the predom­
inant branches of industry. People became more enlightened. 
Instead of exploiting their own fellow-citizens in the old brutal 

=====第248页=====
220 Frederick Engels 
manner,  the  Athenians  now  exploited mainly  the  slaves  and 
non-Athenian clients. Movable property, wealth  in money, slaves 
and ships, increased more  and  more;  but  instead  of being simply  a 
means  for  acquiring landed property,  as in the  initial, bigoted 
period, they became  an end in  themselves. This,  on the one  hand, 
gave rise  to the  successful competition  of the new,  wealthy 
industrial  and  commercial class against  the old  power  of the 
nobility,  but, on the  other hand,  it deprived  the  remnants  of the 
old gentile constitution  of their last foothold.  The  gentes, phratries 
and tribes, whose members were  now  scattered  all over Attica  and 
lived completely intermingled, thus became quite unsuitable  for 
political bodies.  A large number  of Athenian citizens  did not 
belong  to any  gens; they were immigrants  who had  been adopted 
into citizenship sure enough  but not  into  any of the old  bodies  of 
consanguinei. Besides, there  was a  steadily increasing number  of 
foreign immigrants  who  only enjoyed protection. 108 
Meanwhile,  the  struggles  of the  parties proceeded.  The  nobility 
tried  to regain  its former privileges  and for a  short time  got the 
upper hand again, until  the  revolution  of Cleisthenes  (509 B.C.) 
brought about  its  ultimate downfall;  and  with  it fell  the  last 
remnants  of the  gentile constitution.109 
In his new  constitution, Cleisthenes ignored  the  four  old  tribes 
based  on the  gentes  and  phratries. Their place  was  taken  by an 
entirely  new  organisation based exclusively  on the  division  of the 
citizens according  to place  of abode, already attempted  in the 
naucraries.  Not  membership  of a  body  of consanguinei,  but  place 
of abode  was now the  deciding factor.  Not  people,  but  territory 
was now  divided; politically,  the  inhabitants became mere adjuncts 
of the  territory. 
The whole  of Attica  was  divided into  one  hundred  self-
governing districts,  or denies.  The  citizens  of a  deme (demots) 
elected their head (demarch),  a treasurer  and  thirty judges with 
jurisdiction  in minor cases. They also received their  own  temple 
and a tutelary  god, or  heros, whose priests they elected.  The 
supreme power  in the  deme  was the  assembly  of the  demots. This, 
as Morgan correctly remarks,  is the  prototype  of the self-
governing American township.3  The  modern state  in its  highest 
form ends with  the  very unit with which  the  rising state  in Athens 
began. 
Ten of these units (demes) formed  a tribe, which, however,  as 
distinct from  the old  kinship tribe,  was now  called  a territorial 
a L. H.  Morgan, Ancient Society,  p. 271.—  Ed. 

=====第249页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 221 
tribe.  The territorial tribe was not only a self-governing political 
body, but also a military body. It elected a phylarch or tribal head, 
who commanded the cavalry, a taxiarch, who commanded the 
infantry, and a strategos, who was in command of the entire 
contingent levied in the tribal territory. Furthermore, it furnished 
five war vessels with crews and commander; and it received an 
Attic heros, by whose name it was called, as its patron saint. Finally, 
it elected fifty councillors to the council of Athens. 
The consummation was the Athenian state, governed by a 
council of five hundred—elected by the ten tribes—and, in the 
last instance, by the popular assembly, which every Athenian 
citizen could attend and vote in. Moreover, archons and other 
officials attended to the different departments of administration 
and the courts. In Athens there was no official possessing supreme 
executive authority. 
By this new constitution, and by the admission of a very large 
number of wards, partly immigrants and partly freed slaves, the 
organs of the gentile constitution were ousted from public affairs. 
They sank to the position of private societies and religious 
associations. But their moral influence, the traditional concep­
tions and views of the old gentile period, were passed on for a 
long time and expired only gradually. This manifested itself in 
another state institution. 
We have seen that an essential feature of the state is a public 
power distinct from the mass of the people. At that time Athens 
possessed only a militia and a navy manned directly by the people. 
These afforded protection against external enemies and held in 
check the slaves who at that time already constituted the great 
majority of the population. For the citizens, this public power at 
first existed only in the shape of the police force, which is as old as 
the state, and that is why the naive Frenchmen of the eighteenth 
century spoke, not of civilised, but of policed nations (nations 
policées).  Thus, simultaneously with their state, the Athenians 
established a police force, a veritable gendarmerie of bowmen on 
foot and horseback— Landjäger, as they say in South Germany and 
Switzerland. But this gendarmerie consisted—of slaves. The free 
Athenian regarded this dirty work as being so degrading that he 
preferred being arrested by an armed slave rather than perform 
such ignominious acts  himself.  This was still an expression of the 
old gentile mentality. The state could not exist without a police 
force, but it was still young and did not yet command sufficient 
moral respect to give prestige to an occupation that was bound to 
appear infamous to the old gentiles. 

=====第250页=====
222 Frederick Engels 
How well this state, now complete in its main features, suited 
the new social condition of the Athenians was apparent from the 
rapid flourishing of wealth, commerce and industry. The class 
antagonism on which the social and political institutions rested was 
no longer that between the nobles and the common people, but 
that between slaves and freemen, wards and citizens. When Athens 
was in its heyday the total number of free Athenian citizens, 
women and children included, amounted to about 90,000; the 
slaves of both sexes numbered 365,000, and the wards— 
immigrants and freed men—45,000. Thus, for every adult male 
citizen there were at least eighteen slaves and more than two 
wards. The large number of slaves is explained by the fact that 
many of them worked together in manufactories, large rooms, 
under overseers. But with the development of commerce and 
industry came the accumulation and concentration of wealth in 
few hands; the mass of the free citizens were impoverished and 
had to choose between competing with slave labour by going into 
handicrafts themselves, which was considered ignoble and base and, 
moreover, promised little success — and complete pauperisation. 
Under the prevailing circumstances what inevitably happened was 
the latter, and, being in the majority, they dragged the whole 
Athenian state down with them. It was not democracy that caused 
the downfall of Athens, as the European schoolmasters who fawn 
upon royalty would have us believe, but slavery, which brought the 
labour of the free citizen into contempt. 
The emergence of the state among the Athenians represents a 
very typical model of state building in general; because, on the 
one hand, it took place in an entirely pure form, without the 
interference of violence, external or internal (the short period of 
usurpation by Pisistratus left no trace behind  it110);  because, on the 
other hand, it gave rise to a highly developed form of state, the 
democratic republic, directly from gentile society; and lastly, 
because we are sufficiently acquainted with all the essential details. 
VI 
THE GENS AND THE STATE IN ROME 
According to the legend about the foundation of Rome, the first 
settlement was undertaken by a number of Latin gentes (one 
hundred, the legend says) united into one tribe. A Sabellian tribe, 
also said to consist of one hundred gentes, soon followed, and 
finally a third tribe of various elements, again allegedly of one 

=====第251页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 223 
hundred gentes, joined them. The whole story reveals at the very 
first glance that there was hardly anything naturally evolved 
except the gens, and that the gens  itself,  in some cases, was only 
an offshoot of a mother gens still existing in the old habitat. The 
tribes bear the mark of having been artificially constituted; 
nevertheless, they consisted mostly of kindred elements and were 
formed on the model of the old, naturally grown, not artificially 
constituted, tribe; and it is not impossible that an actual old tribe 
formed the nucleus of each of these three tribes. The middle link, 
the phratry, contained ten gentes and was called the curia. Hence, 
there were thirty of them. 
That the Roman gens was an institution identical with the 
Grecian gens is a recognised fact; if the Grecian gens was a more 
advanced form of the social unit the primitive form of which is 
presented by the American Redskins, then the same, naturally, 
holds good for the Roman gens. Hence, we can be briefer in its 
treatment. 
At least during the earliest times of the city, the Roman gens 
had the following constitution: 
1. Mutual right of inheritance of the gentiles; the property 
remained in the gens. Since father right was already in force in 
the Roman gens, as it was in the Grecian gens, the offspring of 
female lineage were excluded. According to the law of the Twelve 
Tables, the oldest written Roman law known to  us, 111 the natural 
children had the first title to the estate; in case no natural children 
existed, the agnates (kin of male lineage) took their place; and in 
their absence came the gentiles. In all cases the property remained 
in the gens. Here we observe the gradual infiltration into gentile 
practice of new legal provisions born of increased wealth and 
monogamy: the originally equal right of inheritance of the gentiles 
was first limited in practice to the agnates — probably at an early 
stage, as mentioned above—and eventually to the children and 
their offspring in the male line. Of course, in the Twelve Tables 
this appears in reverse order. 
2. Possession of a common burial place. The patrician gens 
Claudia, on immigrating to Rome from Regili, was allocated a plot, 
and also a common burial place in the city. Even under Augustus, 
the head of Varus, who had fallen in the Teutoburg Forest,112 was 
brought to Rome and interred in the gentilitius tumulus*; hence, 
the gens (Quinctilia) still had a separate burial mound.b 
a Burial mound of the gens.— Ed. 
b The end of the sentence from the words "hence, the gens" was added in the 
1891 edition.— Ed. 

=====第252页=====
224 Frederick Engels 
3. Common religious celebrations. These, the sacra gentilitia, are 
well known. 
4. Obligation not to marry within the gens. In Rome this does 
not appear to have ever become a written law, but the custom 
remained. Of the innumerable names of Roman married couples 
that have come down to our day there is not a single case where 
husband and wife have the same gentile name. The law of 
inheritance also proves this rule. A woman by her marriage 
forfeited her agnatic rights, left her gens, and neither she nor her 
children could inherit from her father, or his brothers, for 
otherwise the father's gens would lose part of the inheritance. This 
rule has a meaning only on the assumption that the woman was 
not permitted to marry a member of her own gens. 
5. Possession of land in common. In primeval times this always 
existed since the tribal territory was first divided. Among the 
Latin tribes we find the land partly in the possession of the tribe, 
partly of the gens, and partly of households that at that time 
hardly3  represented single families. Romulus is credited with 
having been the first to assign land to individuals, about a hectare 
(two jugera) to each. Nevertheless, even later we still find land in 
the hands of the gentes, not to mention state lands, around which 
turned the whole internal history of the republic. 
6. Obligation of gentiles to protect and assist one another. 
Written history records only paltry remnants of this; from the 
outset the Roman state manifested such superior power that the 
right to redress injury was transferred to it. When Appius 
Claudius was arrested, his whole gens, even his personal enemies, 
went into mourning. At the time of the second Punic War113 the 
gentes united to ransom their fellow gentiles who were in 
captivity; the senate forbade them to do this. 
7. Right to bear the gentile name. This was in force until the 
time of the emperors. Freed men were permitted to assume the 
gentile names of their former masters, but without gentile rights. 
8. Right of adopting outsiders into the gens. This was done by 
adoption into a family (as among the American Indians), which 
brought with it adoption into the gens. 
9. The right to elect and depose chiefs is nowhere mentioned. 
Inasmuch, however, as during the initial period of Rome's 
existence all offices, from the elective king downward, were filled 
by election or appointment, and as the curiae elected also their 
own priests, we may assume that the same existed in regard to the 
a The 1884 edition has "not necessarily" instead of "at that time hardly".— Ed. 

=====第253页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 225 
gentile chiefs (principes) —no matter how well-established the rule 
of election from one and the same family in the gens may have 
already been. 
Such were the powers of a Roman gens. With the exception of 
the already completed transition to father right, they are the 
faithful image of the rights and duties of an Iroquois gens. Here, 
too, "the Iroquois is unmistakably discerned".3 
Of the confusion 0 that still reigns even among our most 
authoritative historians on the question of the Roman gentile 
order here only one example: In his treatise on Roman proper 
names of the Republican and Augustinian eras (Römische 
Forschungen, Berlin, 1864,* Vol. I), Mommsen writes: 
"The gentile name is not only borne by all male gentiles, including adopted 
persons and wards, except, of course, the slaves, but also by the women.... The 
tribe [Stamm]" (as Mommsen here translates gens) "is ... a community derived from 
a common—actual, assumed or even invented—ancestor and united by common 
rites,  burial places and inheritance. All personally free individuals, hence women 
also,  may and must be allocated to it. But determining the gentile name of a 
married woman presents some difficulty. This indeed did not exist as long as 
women were prohibited from marrying anyone but members of their own gens; 
and evidently for a long time the women found it much more difficult to marry 
outside the gens than within it. This right, the gentis enuptio, c was still bestowed as a 
personal privilege and reward during the sixth century.... But wherever such 
outside marriages occurred the woman in primeval times must have been 
transferred to the tribe of her husband. Nothing is more certain than that by the 
old religious marriage the woman fully joined the legal and sacral community of 
her husband and left her own. Who does not know that the married woman 
forfeits her active and passive right of inheritance in respect to her gentiles, but 
enters the inheritance group of her husband, her children and his gentiles? And if 
her husband adopts her as his child and brings her into his family, how can she 
remain separated from his gens?" (pp. 8-11). 
Thus,  Mommsen asserts that Roman women belonging to a 
certain gens were originally free to marry only within their gens; 
the Roman gens, therefore, was endogamous, not exogamous. 
This opinion, which contradicts all experience among other 
peoples, is principally, if not exclusively, based on a single, much 
disputed passage in Livy (Book XXXIX, Ch. 19) according to 
which the senate decreed in the year of the City 568, that is, 
186 B.C., 
uti Feceniae Hispalae datio, deminutio, gentis enuptio, tutoris optio item esset quasi ei 
vir testamento dedisset; utique ei ingenuo nubere liceret, neu quid ei qui earn duxisset, ob id 
fraudi ignominiaeve esset —that Fecenia Hispala shall have the right to dispose of her 
a "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 198. The quotation is abridged.— Ed. 
b The text from here to the words "Almost three hundred years after the 
foundation of Rome" (see p. 228) was added in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
c Of marrying outside the gens.— Ed. 

=====第254页=====
226 Frederick Engels 
property, to diminish it, to marry outside of the gens, to choose a guardian, just as 
if her (deceased) husband had conferred this right on her by testament; that she 
shall be permitted to marry a freeman and that for the man who marries her this 
shall not constitute a misdemeanour or disgrace.3 
Undoubtedly, Fecenia, a freed woman, here obtained permission 
to marry outside of the gens. And it is equally doubtless, according 
to this, that the husband had the right to confer on his wife by 
testament the right to marry outside the gens after his death. But 
outside which gens? 
If a woman had to marry within her gens, as Mommsen 
assumes, then she remained in this gens after her marriage. In the 
first place, however, this assertion that the gens was endogamous 
is the very thing to be proved. In the second place, if the woman 
had to marry in the gens, then naturally the man had to do the 
same, otherwise he could never get a wife. Then we arrive at a 
state where a man could by testament confer on his wife a right 
which he did not possess himself for his own enjoyment; we arrive 
at a legal absurdity. Mommsen realises this, and therefore 
conjectures: 
"Marriage outside of the gens most probably required in law not only the 
consent of the person authorised, but of all members of the gens" (p. 10, note). 
First, this is a very bold assumption; and second, it contradicts 
the clear wording of the passage. The senate gives her this right as 
her husband's proxy; it expressly gives her no more and no less than 
her husband could have given her; but what it does give is an 
absolute right, not dependent on any other restriction, so that, if 
she should make use of it, her new husband shall not suffer in 
consequence. The senate even instructs the present and future 
consuls and praetors to see that she suffers no hardship from the 
use of this right. Mommsen's supposition, therefore, appears to be 
absolutely inadmissible. 
Then again: suppose a woman married a man from another 
gens,  but remained in the gens into which she was born. 
According to the passage quoted above, her husband would then 
have the right to permit his wife to marry out of her own gens. 
That is, he would have the right to make provisions in regard to 
the affairs of a gens to which he did not belong at all. The thing is 
so utterly absurd that we need say no more about it. 
Nothing remains but to assume that in her first marriage the 
woman wedded a man from another gens and thereby became 
without more ado a member of her husband's gens, which 
a [Titus Livius] Titi Livi ab urbe condita libri, pp. 36-37.— Ed. 

=====第255页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 227 
Mommsen actually admits for such cases. Then the whole matter 
at once explains  itself.  The woman, torn from her old gens by her 
marriage, and adopted into the new gentile group of her husband 
occupies a quite special position there. She is now a gentile, but 
not akin by blood; the manner in which she was adopted excludes 
from the outset all prohibition of her marrying within the gens 
into which she has entered by marriage. She has, moreover, been 
adopted into the marriage group of the gens and on her 
husband's death inherits some of his property, that is to say, the 
property of a fellow member of the gens. What is more natural 
than that this property should remain in the gens and that she 
should be obliged to marry a member of her first husband's gens 
and no other? If, however, an exception is to be made, who is 
more competent to authorise this than the man who bequeathed 
this property to her, her first husband? At the time he bequeathed 
a part of his property to her and simultaneously gave her 
permission to transfer this part of property to another gens by 
marriage, or as a result of marriage, this property still belonged to 
him; hence he was literally only disposing of his own property. As 
for the woman and her relation to her husband's gens, it was the 
husband who, by an act of his own free will—the marriage— 
introduced her into his gens. Thus, it appears quite natural, too, 
that he should be the proper person to authorise her to leave this 
gens by another marriage. In short, the matter appears simple and 
obvious as soon as we discard the strange conception of an 
endogamous Roman gens and, with Morgan, regard it as having 
originally been exogamous. 
Finally, there is still another assumption, which has also found 
its advocates, and probably the most numerous, namely, that the 
passage only means 
"that freed slave girls (libertae) cannot, without special permission, e gente 
enubere" (marry outside the gens) "or take any step which, being connected with 
capitis deminutio minima? would result in the liberta leaving the gentile group." 
(Lange, Römische Alterthiimer, Berlin, 1856, I, p. 195, where the passage we have 
taken from Livy is commented on in a reference to Huschke. b) 
If this assumption is correct, the passage proves still less as 
regards the status of free-born Roman women, and there is so 
much less ground for speaking of their obligation to marry within 
the gens. 
a Restriction of civil rights.— Ed. 
b Lange refers to Ph. Huschke's De Privilegiis Feceniae Hispalae senatusconsulto 
concessis (XXXIX, 19).— Ed 
17-1243 

=====第256页=====
228 Frederick Engels 
The expression enuptio gentis occurs only in this single passage 
and is not found anywhere else in the whole of Roman literature. 
The word enubere, to marry outside, is found only three times, also 
in Livy, and not in reference to the gens. The fantastic idea that 
Roman women were permitted to marry only within their gens 
owes its existence solely to this single passage. But it cannot be 
sustained in the least; for either the passage refers to special 
restrictions for freed women, in which case it proves nothing for 
free-born women (ingenuae); or it applies also to free-born 
women, in which case it rather proves that the women as a rule 
married outside their gens and were by their marriage transferred 
to their husbands' gentes. Hence it speaks against Mommsen and 
for Morgan. 
Almost three hundred years after the foundation of Rome the 
gentile bonds were still so strong that a patrician gens, the Fabians, 
with permission from the senate, was able to undertake off its own 
back an expedition against the neighbouring town of Veji. Three 
hundred and six Fabians are said to have set out and to have been 
killed in an ambush. A single boy, left behind, propagated the 
gens. 
As we have said, ten gentes formed a phratry, which here was 
called a curia, and was endowed with more important social 
functions than the Grecian phratry. Every curia had its own 
religious practices, sacred relics and priests. The latter in a body 
formed one of the Roman colleges of priests. Ten curiae formed a 
tribe,  which probably had originally its own elected chief—military 
chief and high priest—like the rest of the Latin tribes. The three 
tribes together formed the Roman people, the populus Romanus. 
Thus,  only those could belong to the Roman people who were 
members of a gens, and hence of a curia and tribe. The first 
constitution of this people was as follows. Public affairs were 
conducted at first by the senate composed, as Niebuhr was the 
first to state correctly, of the chiefs of the three hundred gentes3 ; 
precisely for this reason, as the elders of the gentes, they were 
called fathers, patres, and, as a body, senate (council of elders, 
from senex, old). Here too the customary choice of men always 
from the same family in each gens brought into being the first 
hereditary nobility. These families called themselves patricians and 
claimed the exclusive right to the seats in the senate and to all 
other offices. The fact that in the course of time the people 
acquiesced this claim so that it became an actual right is expressed 
a B. G. Niebuhr, Römische Geschichte, Part 1, p. 352.— Ed. 

=====第257页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 229 
in the legend that Romulus bestowed the rank of patrician and its 
privileges on the first senators and their descendants. The senate, 
like the Athenian boulé, had power to decide in many affairs 
and to undertake the preliminary discussion of more important 
matters, especially of new laws. These were decided by the popular 
assembly, called comitia curiata (assembly of curiae). The assem­
bled people were grouped by curiae, in each curia probably by 
gentes, and in decision-making each of the thirty curiae had one 
vote.  The assembly of curiae adopted or rejected all laws, elected 
all higher officials including the rex (so-called king), declared war 
(but the senate concluded peace), and decided as a supreme court, 
on appeal of the parties, all cases involving capital punishment for 
Roman citizens.— Finally, by the side of the senate and the 
popular assembly stood the rex, corresponding exactly to the 
Grecian basileus, and by no means such an almost absolute 
monarch as Mommsen 3 depicts him.* The rex also was military 
commander, high priest and presiding officer of certain courts. 
He had no civil functions, or any power over life, liberty and 
property of the citizens whatever, except such as resulted from his 
disciplinary power as military commander or from his power to 
execute sentence as presiding officer of the court. The office of 
rex was not hereditary; on the contrary, he was first elected, 
probably on the nomination of his predecessor, by the assembly of 
curiae and then solemnly invested by a second assembly. That he 
could also be deposed is proved by the fate of Tarquinius 
Superbus. 
Like the Greeks in the Heroic Age, the Romans at the time of 
the so-called kings lived in a military democracy based on gentes, 
phratries and tribes, from which it developed. Even though the 
curiae and tribes may have been partly artificial formations, they 
were moulded after the genuine and naturally evolved models of 
the society from which they emerged and which still surrounded 
them on all sides. And though the naturally evolved patrician 
* The Latin rex is equivalent to the Celtic-Irish righ (tribal chief) and the 
Gothic reiks. That this, like our Fürst (English first and Danish forste), originally 
signified gentile or tribal chief is evident from the fact that the Goths in the fourth 
century already had a special term for the king of later times, the military chief of 
a whole people, namely, thiudans. In Ulfila's translation of the Bible Artaxerxes and 
Herod are never called reiks but thiudans, and the realm of the Emperor Tiberius 
not reiki, but thiudinassus. In the name of the Gothic thiudans, or, as we inaccurately 
translate it, king Thiudareiks, Theodorich, that is, Dietrich, the two names merge 
together. 
a Th. Mommsen, Römische Geschichte, Vol. I, Book 1, Ch. 6.— Ed 
17* 

=====第258页=====
230 Frederick Engels 
nobility had already gained ground, though the reges attempted 
gradually to extend their powers—this does not change the 
original fundamental character of the constitution, and this alone 
matters. 
Meanwhile, the population of the city of Rome and of the 
Roman territory, enlarged by conquest, increased, partly by 
immigration, partly through the inhabitants of the subjugated, 
mostly Latin, districts. All these new subjects of the state (we leave 
out the question of the clients) were outside of the old gentes, 
curiae and tribes, and so were not part of the populus Romanus, the 
Roman people proper. They were personally free, could own 
landed property, had to pay taxes and were liable to military 
service. But they were not eligible for office and could neither 
participate in the assembly of curiae nor in the distribution of 
conquered state lands. They constituted the plebs, excluded from 
all public rights. Owing to their continually increasing numbers, 
their military training and armament, they became a menace to 
the old populus who had now firmly closed their ranks against any 
growth from the outside. The landed property, moreover, seems 
to have been fairly evenly divided between populus and plebs, 
while the mercantile and industrial wealth, though as yet not very 
developed, may have been mainly in the hands of the plebs. 
In view of the large measure of obscurity that enshrouds the 
whole legendary primeval history of Rome—an obscurity consid­
erably further intensified by the rationalistic-pragmatic attempts at 
interpretation and reports of later legally trained authors whose 
works serve us as source material—it is impossible to make any 
definite statements about the time, the course and the cause of the 
revolution that put an end to the old gentile constitution. The only 
thing we are certain of is that its cause lay in the conflicts between 
the plebs and the populus. 
The new constitution, attributed to rex Servius Tullius and 
based on the Grecian model, more especially that of Solon, created 
a new popular assembly including or excluding all, populus and 
plebeians without distinction, according to whether they rendered 
military service or not. The whole male population liable to 
military service was divided into six classes, according to wealth. 
The minimum property qualifications for each of the first five 
classes were, respectively: I, 100,000 asses; II, 75,000 asses; III, 
50,000 asses; IV, 25,000 asses; V, 11,000 asses; which, according 
to Dureau de la Malle, is equal to about 14,000, 10,500, 7,000, 
3,600 and 1,570 marks, respectively. 114 The sixth class, the 
proletarians, consisted of those who possessed less and were 

=====第259页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 231 
exempt from military service and taxation. In the new popular 
assembly of centuriae (comitia centuriata) the citizens formed ranks 
after the manner of soldiers, in companies of one hundred 
(centuria),  and each centuria had one vote. The first class placed 
80 centuriae in the field; the second 22, the third 20, the fourth 
22, the fifth 30 and the sixth, for propriety's sake, one. To these 
one must add 18 centuriae of horsemen composed of the wealthiest 
of all; altogether 193. For a majority 97 votes were required. But 
the horsemen and the first class alone had together 98 votes, thus 
being in the majority; when they were agreed, valid decisions were 
made without even asking the other classes. 
Upon this new assembly of centuriae there now devolved all the 
political rights of the former assembly of curiae (a few nominal 
ones excepted); the curiae and the gentes composing them were 
thereby, as was the case in Athens, degraded to the position of 
mere private societies and religious associations, and as such they 
continued to vegetate for a long time, while the assembly of curiae 
soon ceased to exist. In order to displace also the three old gentile 
tribes from the state, four territorial tribes were introduced, each 
tribe inhabiting one quarter of the city and receiving certain political 
rights. 
Thus,  in Rome too, the old social order based on personal blood 
ties was destroyed even before the abolition of the so-called 
kingdom, and a new constitution, based on territorial division and 
differences in wealth, a real state constitution, took its place. Public 
power here was vested in the citizenry liable to military service, 
and was directed not only against the slaves, but also against the 
so-called proletarians, who were excluded from military service 
and the right to carry arms. 
The new constitution was merely further developed upon the ex­
pulsion of Tarquinius Superbus, the last rex, who had usurped real 
royal power, and the replacement of the rex with two military 
commanders (consuls) having equal authority (as among the 
Iroquois). Within this constitution moved the whole history of the 
Roman republic with all its struggles between patricians and 
plebeians for access to office and a share in the state lands and the 
final dissolution of the patrician nobility in the new class of big 
land and money owners, who gradually absorbed all the land of 
the peasants ruined by military service, cultivated with the aid of 
slaves the enormous tracts thus created, depopulated Italy, and 
thus opened the gates not only to imperial rule, but also to its 
successors, the German barbarians. 

=====第260页=====
232 Frederick Engels 
VII 
THE GENS AMONG THE CELTS AND GERMANS1^ 
Space prevents us from going into the gentile institutions still 
found, in purer or more adulterated form, among the most diverse 
savage and barbarian peoples of the present day; or into the traces 
of such institutions found in the ancient history of civilised nations 
in Asia.3 One or the other is encountered everywhere. A few 
illustrations may suffice: Even before the gens had been recog­
nised its existence was proved and it was described more or less 
correctly by the man who took the greatest pains to misinterpret 
it, McLennan, who wrote of this institution among the Kalmucks, 
the Circassians, the Samoyedsb  and three peoples in India: the 
Waralis, the Magars and the Munniporees. c Recently it was 
described by Maxim Kovalevsky, who discovered it among the 
Pshavs, Khevsurs, Svanetians and other Caucasian tribes.d Here we 
shall confine ourselves to a few brief notes on the occurrence of 
the gens among Celts and Teutons. 
The oldest Celtic laws that have come down to our day show the 
gens still in full vitality. In Ireland it is alive, at least instinctively in 
the national consciousness, to this day, now that the English have 
forcibly torn it apart. It was still in full bloom in Scotland in the 
middle of the last century, and here, too, it succumbed only to the 
arms,  laws and courts of the English. 
The old Welsh laws, written several centuries before the English 
conquest,116 not later than the eleventh century, still show 
communal field agriculture for whole villages, be it only as an 
exceptional remnant of a former universal custom. Every family 
had five acres for its own cultivation; another plot was at the same 
time cultivated in common and its yield divided. Judging by the 
Irish and Scottish analogies there cannot be any doubt that these 
village communities represent gentes or subdivisions of gentes, 
even if a reinvestigation of the Welsh laws, which I cannot 
undertake for lack of time (my notes are from 1869  117), may not 
directly corroborate this. What, however, the Welsh sources, and 
the Irish with them, do prove directly is that among the Celts 
a The text below, up to the words "Here we shall confine ourselves...", is added 
in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
b Nentsi.— Ed 
c See J. F. McLennan, Primitive Marriage.— Ed. 
d M. Kovalevsky, Tableau des origines et de l'évolution de la famille et de la 
propriété. —Ed 

=====第261页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 233 
pairing marriage had not yet given way by any means to 
monogamy in the eleventh century. In Wales, marriage did not 
become indissoluble, or rather did not cease to be subject to notice 
of dissolution, until after seven years. Even if only three nights 
were lacking to make up the seven years, a married couple could 
still separate. Then their property was divided between them; the 
woman divided, the man made his choice. The furniture was 
divided according to certain very funny rules. If the marriage was 
dissolved by the man, he had to return the woman's dowry and a 
few other articles; if the woman initiated the dissolution, she 
received less. Of the children the man was given two, the woman 
one, namely, the middle child. If the woman married again after 
her divorce, and her first husband fetched her back, she was 
obliged to follow him, even if she already had one foot in the new 
conjugal bed. But if two people had lived together for seven years, 
they were considered man and wife, even if they had not 
previously been formally married. Chastity among girls before 
marriage was by no means strictly observed, nor was it demanded; 
the regulations governing this subject are of an extremely 
frivolous nature and in no way conform to bourgeois morals. If a 
woman committed adultery, her husband had a right to beat 
her—this was one of three cases when he could do so without 
incurring a penalty—but after that he could not demand any 
other redress, for 
"the same offence shall either be atoned for or avenged, but not both".3 
The reasons that entitled a woman to a divorce without 
detriment to her rights at the settlement were of a very diverse 
nature: the man's foul breath was sufficient. The redemption 
money to be paid to the tribal chief or king for the right of the 
first night (gobr merch, hence the medieval name marcheta, French 
marquette) plays a conspicuous part in the legal code. The women 
had the right to vote at the popular assemblies. Add to this that 
similar conditions are shown to have existed in Ireland; that 
temporary marriages were also quite the custom there, and that 
the women were assured of well-defined generous privileges in 
case of separation, even to the point of remuneration for domestic 
services; that a "first wife" existed by the side of others, and in 
dividing an inheritance no distinction was made between children 
born in or out of wedlock—and we have a picture of the pairing 
marriage compared with which the form of marriage valid in 
a Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales, Vol. 1, p.  93.—  Ed. 

=====第262页=====
234 Frederick Engels 
North America seems strict; but this is not surprising in the 
eleventh century for a people which in Caesar's time were still 
living in group marriage. 
The Irish gens (sept; the tribe was called clainne, clan) is 
confirmed and described not only by the ancient law-books, but 
also by the English jurists of the seventeenth century who were 
sent across for the purpose of transforming the clan lands into 
domains of the King of England. Up to this time, the land had 
been the common property of the clan or gens, except where the 
chiefs had already converted it into their private domains. When a 
gentile died, and a household thus ceased to exist, the gentile chief 
(called caput cognationis by the English jurists) redistributed the 
whole land among the remaining households. This distribution 
must in general have taken place according to rules such as were 
observed in Germany. We still find a few villages—very numerous 
forty or fifty years ago—with fields held in so-called rundale. 
Each of the peasants, individual tenants on the soil that once was 
the common property of the gens but had been seized by the 
English conquerors, pays rent for his plot, but all the arable and 
meadow land is combined and shared out, according to situation 
and quality, in strips, or "Gewanne", as they are called on the 
Mosel, and each one receives a share of each Gewann. Moorland 
and pastures are used in common. As recently as fifty years ago, 
redivision was still practised occasionally, sometimes annually. The 
map of such a rundale village looks exactly like that of a German 
community of farming households on the Mosel or in the Hoch­
wald. The gens also survives in the "FACTIONS". The Irish 
peasants often divide into parties that seem to be founded on 
absolutely absurd and senseless distinctions and are quite incom­
prehensible to Englishmen and appear to have no other purpose 
than to rally for the popular sport of solemnly beating the life out 
of one another. They are artificial reincarnations, later substitutes 
for the broken-up gentes that in their own peculiar way 
demonstrate the continuation of the inherited gentile instinct. 
Incidentally, in some areas members of the same gens still live 
together on what is practically their old territory. During the 
thirties, for instance, the great majority of the inhabitants of the 
county of Monaghan had only four surnames, that is, were 
descended from four gentes, or clans.* 
* During a few days that I spent in Ireland,118 I again realised to what extent 
the rural population there is still living in the conceptions of the gentile period. 
The landlord, whose tenant the peasant is, is still considered by the latter as a sort 
of clan chief who has to supervise the cultivation of the soil in the interest of 

=====第263页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 235 
The downfall of the gentile order in Scotland dates from the 
suppression of the rebellion of  1-745. n9 Precisely what link in this 
order the Scottish clan represents remains to be investigated; no 
doubt it is a link. Walter Scott's novels bring the clan in the 
Highlands of Scotland vividly before our eyes. It is, as Morgan 
says, 
"an excellent type of the gens in organisation and in spirit, and an 
extraordinary illustration of the power of the gentile life over its members.... We 
find in their feuds and blood revenge, in their localisation by gentes, in their use of 
lands in common, in the fidelity of the clansman to his chief and of the members 
of the clan to each other, the usual and persistent features of gentile society.... 
Descent was in the male line, the children of the males remaining members of the 
clan, while the children of its female members belonged to the clans of their 
respective fathers".3 
That mother right used to be in force in Scotland is proved by 
the fact that in the royal family of the Picts, according to Beda,b 
inheritance in the female line prevailed. We even see evidence of 
the punaluan family preserved among the Scots as well as the 
Welsh until the Middle Ages in the right of the first night, which 
the chief of the clan or the king, as the last representative of the 
former common husbands, could claim with every bride, unless 
redeemed.0 
all, is entitled to tribute from the peasant in the form of rent, but also has to as­
sist the peasant in emergencies. Likewise, everyone in more comfortable circum­
stances is considered under obligation to help his poorer neighbours whenever 
they are in distress. Such assistance is not charity; it is what the poor clansman is 
entitled to by right from his rich fellow clansman or clan  chief.  This explains 
why political economists and jurists complain of the impossibility of inculcating 
the idea of modern bourgeois property into the minds of the Irish peasants. Pro­
perty that has only rights, but no duties, is absolutely beyond the ken of the Irish­
man. No wonder that Irishmen with such naive gentile conceptions, who are sud­
denly cast into the great cities of England and America, among a population with 
entirely different moral and legal standards, easily become utterly confused in 
their views of morals and justice, lose all hold and often are bound to suc­
cumb en masse to demoralisation. [Note to the 1891 edition.] 
3 L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 357 and  358.—  Ed 
b [Beda Venerabilis] De Venerabilis Baedae Historia  ecclesiastica  gentis Anglorum, I, 
1.— Ed. 
c The 1884 edition has here the following passage omitted by Engels in the 
1891 edition: "The same right — in North America it occurs frequently in the 
extreme North-West—also applied among the Russians, where Grand Princess Olga 
abolished it in the tenth century. 
The communistic households which existed up to the time of the revolution 
among serf families in France, particularly in Nivernais and Franche-Comté, similar 
to Slavic family communities in Serbo-Croat areas, are likewise remnants of earlier 
gentile organisations. They have not yet died out completely; in the vicinity of 

=====第264页=====
236 Frederick Engels 
* * * 
That the Germans were organised in gentes up to the time of 
the migration of peoples 12° is indisputable. Evidently they settled 
in the area between the Danube, Rhine, Vistula and the northern 
seas only a few centuries before our era; the Cimbri and 
Teutons were still in full migration, and the Suebi did not settle 
down until Caesar's time. Caesar expressly states that they settled 
down in gentes and kinships (gentibus cognationibusque),* and in the 
mouth of a Roman of the Julia gens the word gentibus has a 
definite meaning that cannot possibly be misconstrued. This holds 
good for all Germans; even the settling of the conquered Roman 
provinces0 appears still to have proceeded in gentes. The 
Alamannian Law confirms that the people settled on the 
conquered land south of the Danube in gentes (genealogiae); 
genealogia is used in exactly the same sense as Mark or village 
community* was used later. Recently Kovalevsky has expressed 
* Mark in German means land originally belonging in common to the 
inhabitants of a village or district. The fields and meadows were divided among 
heads of families, but in early times they were subject to further periodic division 
(this still exists in several villages on the Mosel); each person's portion soon became 
his own property, but it was still subject to the rules of cultivation for the 
community. The pastures, woodland and the other uncultivated land remained, 
and in many cases are still today, common property. The collectivity of the 
interested parties determines the method of field cultivation and the use of 
common land. The constitution of the Mark is the oldest constitution among the 
German people and it is the foundation on which all their medieval institutions 
were built. [Engels' note to the 1885 Italian edition.] 
Louhans (Saône-et-Loire), for example, one can still find a great deal of strangely 
built peasant houses with a communal central hall and sleeping rooms all around, 
which are inhabited by several generations of the same family."—Ed 
a Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico, VI, 22.— Ed. 
b The text below, up to the words "Among the Germans..." (p. 237), was 
included by Engels in the 1891 edition instead of the following passage in the 1884 
edition: "still proceeded in gentes. In the Alamannian law 121 of the eighth century, 
genealogia is used in exactly the same sense as Mark community; so that here we 
see a German people, once again the Suebi, settled in gentes and each allocated a 
particular district. Among the Burgundians and the Langobards the gens was 
called fara, and the term for members of a gens (faramanni) is used in Burgundian 
law122 in exactly the same sense as Burgundian, in contrast to the Roman 
inhabitants, who are not of course included in the Burgundian gentes. The division 
of land in Burgundy was thus effected according to gentes. It settled the issue of 
the faramanni about which Germanic jurists had in vain been racking their brains 
for a hundred years. This name, fara, for gens, can hardly have been generally 
valid among the Germans, although we find it here applied both to a people of 
Gothic descent and to another of Herminonic (High German) descent. The linguis­
tic roots used in German to denote relationships are extremely numerous and are 
likewise used for expressions which we may assume refer to the  gens."—Ed. 

=====第265页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 237 
the view that these genealogiae were large household communities 
among which the land was divided, and from which the village 
communities developed only later. The same may be true of the 
jar a, the term which the Burgundians and Langobards—a Gothic 
and a Herminonian, or High German, tribe—applied to nearly, if 
not exactly, the same thing that in the Alamannian book of laws is 
called genealogia. Whether this really represents the gens or the 
household community is a matter that must be further investi­
gated. 
Linguistic records leave us in doubt as to whether all the 
Germans had a common term for gens, and if so, what term. 
Etymologically, the Greek genos, the Latin gens, corresponds to the 
Gothic kuni, Middle High Gerrrian künne, and is used in the same 
sense. We are led back to the time of mother right by the fact that 
the terms for "woman" are derived from the same root: Greek 
gynê, Slav zena, Gothic qvino, Old Norse kona, kuna.—Among 
Langobards and Burgundians we find, as stated, the term fara, 
which Grimm derives from the hypothetical root fisan, to beget. I 
should prefer to trace it to the more obvious root faran [fahren], 
to wander, return, a term which designates a certain well-defined 
section of the nomadic train, composed, it almost goes without 
saying, of relatives; a term, which, in the course of centuries of 
wandering, first to the East and then to the West, was gradually 
applied to the gentile community  itself.—  Further, there is the 
Gothic sibja, Anglo-Saxon sib, Old High German sippia, sippa, 
[Sippe], kinsfolk. Old Norse has only the plural sifjar, relatives; 
the singular occurs only as the name of a goddess,  Sif.—  Finally, 
another expression occurs in the Hildebrand Song 123 where 
Hildebrand asks Hadubrand, 
"who is your father among the men of the people ... or what is your kin?" (eddo 
huêlîhhes cnuosles du sîs). 
If there was a common German term for gens, it might well 
have been the Gothic kuni; this is not only indicated by its identity 
with the corresponding term in kindred languages, but also by the 
fact that the word kuning, König, which originally signified chief of 
gens or tribe, is derived from it. Sibja, kinsfolk, does not appear 
worthy of consideration; in Old Norse, at least, sifjar signified not 
only relatives by blood, but also by marriage; hence it comprises 
the members of at least two gentes; thus sif cannot have been the 
term for gens. 
Among the Germans, as among the Mexicans and Greeks, the 
horsemen as well as the wedge-like columns of infantry were 

=====第266页=====
238 Frederick Engels 
grouped in battle array by gentes. If Tacitus says: by families and 
kinships,3 the indefinite expression he uses is explained by the fact 
that in his time the gens had long ceased to be a living association 
in Rome. 
Of decisive significance is a passage in Tacitus where he says: 
The mother's brother regards his nephew as his son; some even 
hold that the blood tie between the maternal uncle and the 
nephew is more sacred and close than that between father and 
son, so that when hostages are demanded the sister's son is 
considered a better pledge than the natural son of the man whom 
they desire to place under bond. Here we have a living survival of 
the mother-right, and hence original, gens, and it is described as 
something which particularly distinguishes the Germans.* If a 
member of such a gens gave his own son as a pledge for a solemn 
obligation he had undertaken, and if this son became the victim of 
his father's breach of contract, that was for the father to settle with 
himself.  If the son of a sister was sacrificed, however, then the 
most sacred gentile law was violated. The next of kin, who was 
bound above all others to protect the boy or young man, was 
responsible for his death; he should either have refrained from 
giving the boy as a pledge, or have kept the contract. If we had no 
other trace of gentile organisation among the Germans, this one 
passage would be sufficient  proof.c 
Still more decisive, as it comes about eight hundred years later, 
is a passage in the Old Norse song about the twilight of the gods 
and the end of the world, the Völuspa. 124 In this "Vision of the 
Seeress", in which, as Bang and Bugge have now shown, also 
* The Greeks know only in the mythology of the Heroic Age the special 
intimacy of the bond between the maternal uncle and his nephew, originating from 
the time of mother right and found among many peoples. According to Diodorus 
(IV, 34), Meleager kills the sons of Thestius, the brothers of his mother Althaea. 
The latter regards this deed as such a heinous crime that she curses the murderer, 
her own son, and prays for his death. It is related that "the gods fulfilled her wish 
and ended Meleager's life". According to the same Diodorus (IV, 44), the 
Argonauts under Heracles landed in Thracia and there found that Phineus, at the 
instigation of his second wife, shamefully maltreats his two sons by his first, 
deserted wife, Cleopatra, the Boreade. But among the Argonauts there are also 
some Boreadi, the brothers of Cleopatra, the maternal uncles, therefore, of the 
maltreated boys. They at once come to their nephews' aid, set them free and kill 
their guards.b 
a Tacitus, Germania, 7.— Ed, 
b Diodorus Siculus, Bibliothecae historicae quae supersunt.—Ed. 
c The text below, up to the words "For the rest, in Tacitus' time..." (p. 239), was 
added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 

=====第267页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 239 
elements of Christianity are interwoven, the description of the 
period of universal depravity and corruption preceding the 
cataclysm contains this passage: 
Broedhr munu berjask ok at bönum verdask, munu systrungar sifjum spilla. 
"Brothers will wage war against one another and become each other's slayers, 
and sisters' children will break the bonds of kinship." 
Systrungar means son of the mother's sister, and in the poet's 
eyes,  the repudiation by such of blood relationship caps the climax 
of the crime of fratricide. The climax lies in systrungar, which 
emphasises the kinship on the maternal side. If the term 
syskina-börn, brother's and sister's children, or syskina-synir, 
brother's and sister's sons, had been used, the second line would 
not have been a crescendo as against the first but a weakening 
diminuendo. Thus, even in the time of the Vikings, when the 
Völuspa was composed, the memory of mother right was not yet 
obliterated in Scandinavia. 
For the rest, in Tacitus' time, at least among the Germans with 
whom he was more familiar,3  mother right had already given way 
to father right: the children were the heirs of the father; in the 
absence of children, the brothers and the paternal and maternal 
uncles were the heirs. The admission of the mother's brother to 
inheritance is connected with the preservation of the above-
mentioned custom, and also proves how recent father right was 
among the Germans at that time. We find traces of mother right 
even well into the Middle Ages. In this period fatherhood seems 
to have been open to some suspicion, especially among serfs, and 
when a feudal lord demanded the return of a fugitive serf from a 
city, it was required, for instance, in Augsburg, Basle and 
Kaiserslautern, that the fact of his serfdom should be established 
by the oaths of six of his immediate blood relatives, exclusively on 
his mother's side (Maurer, Städteverfassung, I, p. 381). 
Another relic of mother right, then only in its initial stage of 
decay, was the respect the Germans had for the female sex, from 
the Roman standpoint almost inexplicable. Virgins of noble family 
were regarded as the best hostages guaranteeing the keeping of 
contracts with Germans. In battle, nothing spurred their courage 
so much as the horrible thought that their wives and daughters 
might be captured and carried into slavery. They regarded the 
woman as being holy and a prophetess, and they heeded her 
advice even in the most important matters. Veleda, the Bructerian 
a The words "at least" and "with whom he was more familiar" were added by 
Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed, 

=====第268页=====
240 Frederick Engels 
priestess on the Lippe River, was the moving spirit of the whole 
Batavian insurrection, in which Civilis, at the head of Germans 
and Belgians, shook the foundations of Roman rule in Gaul. 125 
The women appear to have held undisputed sway in the house. 
They, with the old men and children, had, of course, to do all the 
work, for the men went hunting, drank or loafed around. So 
Tacitus reports; but he does not say who cultivated the fields, and 
explicitly states that the slaves only paid dues and performed no 
statute labour, so it would appear that what little agricultural work 
was required had to be performed by the bulk of the adult men. 
As was stated above, the form of marriage was pairing mar­
riage gradually approximating to monogamy. It was not yet strict 
monogamy, for polygamy was permitted among high society. 
On the whole (unlike the Celts) they insisted on strict chastity 
among girls. Tacitus likewise speaks with particular warmth of the 
inviolability of the matrimonial bond among the Germans. He 
gives adultery on the part of the woman as the sole reason for 
divorce. But his report contains many gaps here, and in any case, 
it excessively holds up the mirror of virtue to the loose Romans. 
So much is certain: if the Germans in their forests were such 
exceptional models of virtue, only slight contact with the outer 
world was required to bring them down to the level of the other, 
average, Europeans. In the whirl of Roman life the last trace of 
strict morality disappeared even faster than the German language. 
It is enough to read Gregory of Tours.3 It goes without saying that 
the refined opulence of sensuality could not exist in the primeval 
forests of Germany as it did in Rome, and so in this respect also 
the Germans were superior enough to the Roman world, without 
ascribing to them a continence in carnal matters that has never 
prevailed among any people as a whole. 
From the gentile system arose the obligation to inherit the feuds 
as well as the friendships of one's father and relatives; and also 
wergeld, the fine paid in atonement for murder or injury, in place 
of blood revenge. A generation ago this wergeld was regarded as a 
specifically German institution, but it has since been proved that 
hundreds of peoples practised this milder form of blood revenge 
which had its origin in the gentile system. Like the obligation to 
render hospitality, it is found, for instance, among the American 
Indians. Tacitus' description of the manner in which hospitality 
was exercised {Germania, 21) is almost identical, down to details, 
with Morgan's relating to his Indians. 
a Gregorius Turonensis, Historia Francorum.— Ed. 

=====第269页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 241 
The heated and ceaseless controversy as to whether or not the 
Germans in Tacitus' time had definitively divided up the cultivated 
land and how the pertinent passages should be interpreted is now 
a thing of the past. Now it has been established that the cultivated 
land of nearly all peoples was tilled in common by the gens and 
later on by communistic family communities, which Caesar still 
found among the Suebia; that later the land was allotted and 
periodically re-allotted to the individual families; and that this 
periodical re-allotment of the cultivated land has been preserved 
in parts of Germany down to this day, no more need be said on 
the subject. If the Germans in one hundred and fifty years passed 
from common cultivation, such as Caesar expressly attributes to 
the Suebi—they have no divided or private tillage whatsoever, he 
says—to individual cultivation with the annual redistribution of 
the land in Tacitus' time, it is surely progress enough; a transition 
from that stage to the complete private ownership of land in such 
a short period and without any outside intervention was an utter 
impossibility. Hence I read in Tacitus only what he states in so 
many words: They change (or redivide) the cultivated land every 
year, and enough common land is left over in the process.b It is 
the stage of agriculture and appropriation of the soil which exactly 
tallies with the gentile constitution of the Germans of that time.0 
I leave the preceding paragraph unchanged, just as it stood in 
former editions. Meantime the question has assumed another 
aspect. Since Kovalevsky has demonstrated (see above, p. 44d ) that 
the patriarchal household community was widespread, if not 
universal, as the intermediate stage between the mother-right 
communistic family and the modern isolated family, the question 
is no longer whether the land was common or private property, as 
was still discussed between Maurer and Waitz, but what form 
common property assumed. There is no doubt whatever that in 
Caesar's time the Suebi not only owned their land in common, but 
also tilled it in common for common account. The questions 
whether their economic unit was the gens or the household 
community or an intermediate communistic kinship group, or 
whether all three of these groups existed depending on land 
conditions will remain subjects of controversy for a long time yet. 
But Kovalevsky maintains that the conditions described by Tacitus 
a Caesar, Commentarii de bello Gallico, IV, 1.— Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania, 26.— Ed, 
c The text below, up to the words "While in Caesar..." (p. 242), was added by 
Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 
d See this volume, p. 167.— Ed. 

=====第270页=====
242 Frederick Engels 
presuppose not the Mark or village community, but the household 
community; only this latter developed, much later into the village 
community, owing to the growth of the population. 
Hence, it is claimed, the German settlements on the territory 
they occupied in the time of the Romans, and on the territory they 
later took from the Romans, must have been not villages, but large 
family communities comprising several generations, which culti­
vated a corresponding tract of land and used the surrounding 
waste land as a common Mark with their neighbours. The passage 
in Tacitus concerning the change of the cultivated land would 
then actually have an agronomic sense, namely, that the communi­
ty cultivated a different tract of land every year, and the land 
cultivated during the previous year was left fallow or allowed to 
grow quite wild again. The sparsity of the population would have 
left enough spare waste land to make all disputes about land 
unnecessary. Only after the lapse of centuries, when the members 
of the household had increased in number to such an extent that 
common housekeeping became no longer possible under prevail­
ing conditions of production, did the household communities 
dissolve. The former common fields and meadows were then 
divided in the familiar manner among the individual households 
now forming, at first for a time, and later once and for all, while 
forests, pastures and bodies of water remained common property. 
As far as Russia is concerned, this course of development 
appears to have been fully proved historically. As for Germany, 
and, to a lesser extent, for other Germanic countries, it cannot be 
denied that, in many respects, this view affords a better 
interpretation of the sources and an easier solution of difficulties 
than the former idea of tracing the village community back to the 
time of Tacitus. The oldest documents, for instance, the Codex 
Laureshamensis,126 are on the whole more easily explained with the 
help of the household community than of the village Mark 
community. On the other hand, it presents new difficulties and 
new problems that need solution. Here, only further investigation 
can decide. I cannot deny, however, that it is highly probable the 
household community was also the intermediate stage in Germany, 
Scandinavia and England. 
While in Caesar the Germans had partly just taken up settled 
abodes, and partly were still seeking such, they had been settled 
for a full century in Tacitus' time; correspondingly, the progress 
in the production of means of subsistence was unmistakable. They 
lived in log houses; their clothing was still of the primitive forest 
type,  consisting of rough woollen cloaks and animal skins, and 

=====第271页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 243 
linen underclothing for the women and high society. They lived 
on milk, meat, wild fruit and, as Pliny adds, oatmeal porridge3 
(the Celtic national dish in Ireland and Scotland to this day). Their 
wealth consisted of livestock, of an inferior breed, however, the 
animals being small, unsightly and hornless; the horses were small 
ponies and no racers. Money, Roman only, was little and rarely 
used. They made no gold- or silverware, nor did they attach any 
value to them. Iron was scarce and, at least among the tribes on 
the Rhine and the Danube, was apparently almost wholly 
imported, not mined by themselves. The runic script (imitations of 
Greek and Latin letters) was only known as a secret code and used 
exclusively for religious sorcery. Human sacrifices were still in 
vogue. In short, they were a people just risen from the middle 
stage of barbarism to the upper stage. While, however, the tribes 
immediately bordering on the Romans were prevented by the easy 
import of Roman industrial products from developing a metal and 
textile industry of their own, there is not the least doubt that the 
tribes of the North-East, on the Baltic, did develop these 
industries. The pieces of armour found in the bogs of Schleswig — 
a long iron sword, a coat of mail, a silver helmet, etc., together 
with Roman coins from the close of the second century—and the 
German metalware spread by the migration of peoples represent a 
peculiar type of fine workmanship, even where they are modelled 
on Roman originals. With the exception of England, emigration to 
the civilised Roman Empire everywhere put an end to this native 
industry. How uniformly this industry arose and developed is 
shown, for instance, by the bronze spangles. The specimens found 
in Burgundy, in Romania and along the Sea of Azov might have 
been produced in the very same workshop as the English and the 
Swedish ones, and are likewise of undoubtedly Germanic origin. 
Their constitution was also in keeping with the upper stage of 
barbarism. According to Tacitus,*5  there was commonly a council of 
chiefs (principes) which decided matters of minor importance and 
prepared more important matters for the decision of the popular 
assembly. The latter, in the lower stage of barbarism, at least in 
places where we know it, among the Americans, existed only for 
the gens, not yet for the tribe or the confederacy of tribes. The 
chiefs (principes) were still sharply distinguished from the war 
chiefs (duces), just as among the Iroquois. The former were 
already living, in part, on honorary gifts, such as livestock, grain, 
a Plini Secundi Naturalis historiae libri 37, XVIII, 17.— Ed. 
b Tacitus, Germania,  11.—  Ed. 
18-1243 

=====第272页=====
244 Frederick Engels 
etc., from their fellow tribesmen. As in America, they were mostly 
elected from the same family. The transition to father right 
favoured, as in Greece and Rome, the gradual transformation of 
elective office into hereditary office, thus giving rise to a noble 
family in each gens. Most of this ancient, so-called tribal nobility 
perished during the migration of peoples,127 or shortly after. The 
military leaders were elected solely on their efficiency, irrespective 
of descent. They had little power and had to rely on force of 
example. As Tacitus explicitly states, actual disciplinary power in 
the army was held by the priests.3 The popular assembly was the 
real power. The king or tribal chief presided; the people decided: 
a murmur signified "nay", acclamation and clanging of weapons 
meant "aye". The popular assembly was also the court of justice. 
Complaints were brought up here and decided; and death 
sentences were pronounced, the latter only in cases of cowardice, 
treason or unnatural lasciviousness. The gentes and other subdivi­
sions also judged in a body, presided over by the  chief,  who, as in 
all original German courts, could be only director of the 
proceedings and questioner. Among the Germans, always and 
everywhere, sentence was pronounced by the entire community. 
Confederacies of tribes came into existence from Caesar's time. 
Some of them already had kings. The supreme military command­
er already aspired to tyrannic power, as among the Greeks and 
Romans, and sometimes succeeded in achieving it. Such successful 
usurpers were by no means absolute rulers; nevertheless, they 
began to break the fetters of the gentile constitution. While freed 
slaves generally occupied an inferior position, because they could 
not belong to any gens, they often gained rank, wealth and 
honours as favourites of the new kings. The same occurred after 
the conquest of the Roman Empire in the case of the military 
leaders who had now become kings of large lands. Among the 
Franks, the king's slaves and freedmen played a major role first at 
court and then in the state; a large part of the new nobility was 
descended from them. 
There was one institution that especially favoured the rise of 
royalty: the retinue. We have already seen how among the 
American Redskins private associations were formed alongside the 
gentile system for the purpose of waging war off their own back. 
Among the Germans, these private associations had already 
developed into standing bodies. The military commander, who 
had earned himself a reputation, gathered around his person a 
a Tacitus, op. cit., 7.— Ed. 

=====第273页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 245 
host of young people, who were eager for booty and pledged 
personal loyalty to him, as he did to them. He fed them, gave 
them gifts and organised them on hierarchical principles: a 
bodyguard and a troop poised for immediate action in short 
expeditions, a corps of officers ready for larger campaigns. Weak 
as these retinues must have been, as indeed they proved to be 
later, for example, under Odoacer in Italy,128 they, nevertheless, 
served as the germ of decay of the old popular liberties, and stood 
the test as such during and after the migration of peoples. 
Because, first, they created favourable ground for the rise of royal 
power. Secondly, as Tacitus already observed,3  they could be held 
together only by continuous warfare and plundering expeditions. 
Looting became the main object. If the chieftain found nothing to 
do in his neighbourhood, he marched his troops to other peoples 
among whom there was war and the prospect of booty. The 
German auxiliaries, who under the Roman standard even fought 
Germans in large numbers, partly consisted of such retinues. They 
were the first germs of the Landsknecht 0 system, the shame and 
curse of the Germans. After the conquest of the Roman Empire, 
these kings' retainers, together with the bonded and the Roman 
court attendants, formed the second main constituent part of the 
subsequent nobility. 
In general, then, the German tribes, combined into peoples, had 
the same constitution that had developed among the Greeks of the 
Heroic Age and among the Romans at the time of the so-called 
kings:  a popular assembly, council of gentile chiefs and military 
commander who was already aspiring to real royal power. It was 
the most highly developed constitution the gentile order could 
actually produce; it was the model constitution of the higher stage 
of barbarism. As soon as society passed beyond the limits for 
which this constitution sufficed, the gentile order was finished. It 
burst asunder and the state took its place. 
VIII 
THE FORMATION OF THE STATE 
AMONG THE GERMANS 
According to Tacitus the Germans were a very numerous 
people. An approximate idea of the strength of individual German 
a Ibid., 14.— Ed. 
h Mercenary.— Ed. 
18* 

=====第274页=====
246 Frederick Engels 
peoples we get from Caesar3; he puts the number of Usipetes and 
Tencteri who appeared on the left bank of the Rhine at 180,000, 
including women and children. Thus, about 100,000 to a single 
people,* considerably more than, say, the entire number of 
Iroquois in their heyday, when they, not quite 20,000 strong, 
became the terror of the whole country, from the Great Lakes to 
the Ohio and Potomac. If we were to attempt to group on a map 
the individual peoples settled near the Rhine who are better 
known to us from reports, we would find that such a people 
would occupy on the average approximately the area of a Prussian 
administrative district, about 10,000 square kilometres, or 182 
geographical square miles.b  The Germania Magna of the Romans, 
reaching to the Vistula, comprised, however, roundly 500,000 
square kilometres. Counting an average of 100,000 for any single 
people, the total population of Germania Magna would have 
amounted to five million—a respectable figure for a barbarian 
group of peoples; by our standards—10 inhabitants to the square 
kilometre, or 550 to the geographical square mile—very little. But 
this does not by any means include all the Germans living at that 
time.  We know that German peoples of Gothic origin, Bastarnae, 
Peucini and others, lived along the Carpathian Mountains all the 
way down to the mouth of the Danube. They were so numerous 
that Pliny designated them as the fifth main tribe of the 
Germans 0; in 180 B.C. they were already serving as mercenaries 
of the Macedonian King Perseus, and even in the first years of the 
reign of Augustus they were pushing their way as far as the 
vicinity of Adrianople. If we assume that they numbered only one 
million, then, at the beginning of the Christian era, the Germans 
numbered probably six million at the least. 
After settling in Germany, the population must have grown with 
increasing rapidity. The industrial progress mentioned above 
would suffice to prove this. The finds in the bogs of Schleswig, to 
judge by the Roman coins uncovered with them, date from the 
third century. Hence at that time the metal and textile industry 
* The number taken here is confirmed by a passage in Diodorus on the Celts of 
Gaul: "In Gaul live numerous peoples of unequal strength. The biggest of them 
number about 200,000, the smallest 50,000." (Diodorus Siculus, V, 25.) That gives 
an average of 125,000. The individual Gallic peoples, being more highly developed, 
must certainly have been more numerous than the German ones. 
a Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico, IV, 15.—  Ed. 
b The German geographical mile is equal to 7.42 km.— Ed. 
c Plini Secundi Naturalis historiae libri 37, IV, 14.— Ed. 

=====第275页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 247 
was already well developed on the Baltic, lively trade was carried 
on with the Roman Empire, and the wealthier class enjoyed a 
certain luxury—all evidence of a greater population density. At 
this time, however, the Germans started their general assault along 
the whole line of the Rhine, the Roman frontier rampart and the 
Danube, a line stretching from the North Sea to the Black 
Sea—direct proof of the ever-growing population striving out­
wards. During the three centuries of battle, the whole main body 
of the Gothic peoples (with the exception of the Scandinavian 
Goths and the Burgundians) moved towards the South-East and 
formed the left wing of the long line of attack; the High Germans 
(Herminones) pushed forward in the centre of this line, on the 
Upper Danube, and the Iscaevones, now called Franks, on the 
right wing, along the Rhine. The conquest of Britain fell to the lot 
of the Ingaevones. At the end of the fifth century the Roman 
Empire, exhausted, bloodless and helpless, lay open to the 
invading Germans. 
In preceding chapters we stood at the cradle of ancient Greek 
and Roman civilisation. Now we are standing at its grave. The 
levelling plane of Roman world domination had been passing over 
all countries of the Mediterranean basin, and this for centuries. 
Where the Greek language offered no resistance all national 
languages had had to give way to a corrupt Latin. There were no 
longer any distinctions of nationality, no more Gauls, Iberians, 
Ligurians, Noricans; all had become Romans. Roman administra­
tion and Roman law had everywhere dissolved the old bodies of 
consanguinei and thus crushed the last remnants of local and 
national self-expression. The new-fangled Romanism offered no 
compensation; it expressed no nationality, but only lack of 
nationality. The elements of new nations existed everywhere. The 
Latin dialects of the different provinces diverged more and more; 
the natural boundaries that had once made Italy, Gaul, Spain, 
Africa129 independent territories still existed and still made 
themselves felt. Yet nowhere was there a force capable of 
combining these elements into new nations; nowhere was there the 
least trace of any capacity for development or any power of 
resistance, much less of creative capacity. The immense human 
mass of that enormous territory was held together by one bond 
alone—the Roman state; and this, in the course of time, had 
become its worst enemy and oppressor. The provinces had ruined 
Rome; Rome itself had become a provincial town like all the 
others, privileged, but no longer ruling, no longer the centre of 
the world empire, no longer even the seat of the emperors and 

=====第276页=====
248 Frederick Engels 
vice-emperors, who lived in Constantinople, Trier and Milan. The 
Roman state had become an immense complicated machine, 
designed exclusively for draining dry its subjects. Taxes, services 
for the state and levies of all kinds drove the mass of the people 
deeper and deeper into poverty. The extortionate practices of the 
governors, tax collectors and soldiers caused the pressure to 
become intolerable. This is what the Roman state with its world 
domination had brought things to: it had based its right to 
existence on the preservation of order within and protection 
against the barbarians without. But its order was worse than the 
worst disorder, and the barbarians, against whom the state 
pretended to protect its citizens, were longed for by them as 
saviours. 
Social conditions were no less desperate. Right from the last 
period of the republic, Roman rule had been intent on the ruthless 
exploitation of the conquered provinces. The emperors had not 
abolished this exploitation; on the contrary, they had regularised 
it. The more the empire fell into decay, the higher rose the taxes 
and compulsory services, and the more shamelessly the officials 
robbed and blackmailed the people. Commerce and industry were 
never the business of the Romans, who dominated other peoples. 
Only in usury did they excel all others, before and after them. 
The commerce that existed and managed to maintain itself for a 
time was reduced to ruin by official extortion; what survived was 
carried on in the eastern, Grecian, part of the empire, but this is 
beyond the scope of our study. Universal impoverishment; decline 
of commerce, handicrafts, the arts, and of the population; decay 
of the towns; retrogression of agriculture to a lower stage—this 
was the ultimate outcome of Roman world domination. 
Agriculture, the decisive branch of production in the whole 
ancient world, now became so more than ever. In Italy, the 
immense aggregations of estates (latifundia) which had covered 
nearly the whole territory since the end of the republic, had been 
utilised in two ways: either as pastures, on which the population 
had been replaced by sheep and oxen, the care of which required 
only a few slaves; or as villas, on which large-scale horticulture had 
been pursued with masses of slaves, partly to serve the luxurious 
needs of the owners and partly for sale at the urban markets. The 
great pastures had been preserved and even enlarged. But the 
villa estates and their horticulture had fallen into ruin with the 
impoverishment of their owners and the decay of the towns. 
Latifundian economy based on slave labour was no longer 
profitable; but at that time it was the only possible form of 

=====第277页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 249 
large-scale agriculture. Small-scale farming again became the only 
profitable form. Villa after villa was parcelled out and leased in 
small lots to hereditary tenants, who paid a fixed sum, or to 
partiarii,* farm managers rather than tenants, who received 
one-sixth or even only one-ninth of the year's product for their 
work. Mainly, however, these small plots were distributed to 
colons, who paid a fixed amount annually, were tied to the land 
and could be sold together with the plots. Admittedly, they were 
not slaves, but neither were they free; they could not marry free 
citizens, and marriages among themselves were not regarded as 
fully valid marriages, but as mere concubinage (contubernium), as 
in the case of the slaves. They were the forerunners of the 
medieval serfs. 
The slavery of antiquity had outlived  itself.  Neither in large-
scale agriculture in the country, nor in the manufactories of the 
towns did it any longer bring in a worthwhile return—the market 
for its products had disappeared. Small-scale agriculture, however, 
and small handicrafts, to which the gigantic production of the 
flourishing times of the empire was now reduced, had no room 
for numerous slaves. Society found room only for the domestic 
and luxury slaves of the rich. But moribund slavery was still 
sufficiently virile to make all productive work appear as slave 
labour, unworthy of a free Roman—and everybody was now a 
free Roman. On this account, on the one hand, there was an 
increase in the number of superfluous slaves who, having become 
a drag, were emancipated; on the other hand, there was an 
increase in the number of colons and of ruined freemen (similar 
to the POOR WHITES in the ex-slave states of America). Christianity is 
perfectly innocent of this gradual dying out of ancient slavery. It 
had partaken in slavery in the Roman Empire for centuries, and 
later did nothing to prevent the slave trade of Christians, either of 
the Germans in the North, or of the Venetians on the 
Mediterranean, or the Negro slave trade of later years.* Slavery 
no longer paid, and so it died out; but dying slavery left behind its 
poisonous sting by outlawing the productive work of the free. This 
was the blind alley in which the Roman world was caught: slavery 
* According to Bishop Liutprand of Cremona, the principal industry of Verdun 
in the tenth century, that is, in the Holy German Empire, was the manufacture of 
eunuchs, who were exported with great profit to Spain for the harems of the 
Moors.b 
a Sharecroppers.— Ed. 
b Liutprand, Antapodosis, VI, 6.— Ed. 

=====第278页=====
250 Frederick Engels 
was economically impossible, while the labour of the free was 
morally proscribed. The one could no longer, the other could not 
yet, be the basic form of social production. Only a complete 
revolution could be of help here. 
Things were no better in the provinces. Most of the reports we 
have concern Gaul. By the side of the colons, free small peasants 
still existed there. In order to protect themselves against the brutal 
extortions of the officials, judges and usurers, they frequently 
placed themselves under the protection, the patronage, of a man 
possessed of power; and they did this not only singly, but in whole 
communities, so much so that the emperors of the fourth century 
often issued decrees prohibiting this practice. But what use was it 
to those who sought this protection? The patron imposed the 
condition that they transfer the title of their lands to him, and in 
return he ensured them usufruct of their land for life—a trick 
which the Holy Church remembered and freely imitated during 
the ninth and tenth centuries, for the greater glory of God and 
the enlargement of its own landed possessions. At that time, to be 
sure,  about the year 475, Bishop Salvianus of Marseilles still 
vehemently denounced such robbery and related that the oppres­
sion of the Roman officials and great landlords had become so 
intolerable that many "Romans" fled to the districts already 
occupied by the barbarians, and the Roman citizens who had 
settled there feared nothing so much as coming under Roman rule 
again.3 That poor parents frequently sold their children into 
slavery in those days is proved by a law issued against it. 
In return for liberating the Romans from their own state, the 
German barbarians appropriated two-thirds of the entire land and 
divided it among themselves. The division was made in accordance 
with the gentile system; as the conquerors were relatively small in 
number, large tracts remained undivided, in the possession partly 
of the whole people and partly of individual tribes or gentes. 
In each gens fields and pastures were distributed among the 
individual households in equal shares by lot. We do not know 
whether repeated redivisions took place at that time; at all events, 
this practice was soon discarded in the Roman provinces, and the 
individual allotment became alienable private property, allodium. 
Forests and pastures remained undivided for common use; this 
use and the mode of cultivating the divided land were regulated 
by ancient custom and the decision of the entire community. The 
longer the gens existed in its village, and the more Germans and 
a Salvianus, De Gubernatione Dei, V, 8.— Ed. 

=====第279页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 251 
Romans merged in the course of time, the more the consanguine­
ous character of the ties retreated before territorial ties. The gens 
disappeared in the Mark community, in which, however, traces of 
the original kinship of the members were visible still often enough. 
Thus,  the gentile constitution, at least in those countries where 
Mark communities were preserved—in the North of France, in 
England, Germany and Scandinavia—was imperceptibly trans­
formed into a territorial constitution, and thus became capable of 
being fitted into the state. Nevertheless, it retained the naturally 
evolved democratic character which distinguishes the whole gentile 
order, and thus preserved a piece of the gentile constitution even 
in its degeneration, forced upon it in later times, thereby leaving a 
weapon in the hands of the oppressed, ready to be wielded even 
in modern times. 
The rapid disappearance of the blood tie in the gens was due to 
the fact that its organs in the tribe and the whole people had also 
degenerated as a result of the conquest. We know that rule over 
subjugated people is incompatible with the gentile constitution. 
Here we see it on a large scale. The German peoples, masters of 
the Roman provinces, had to organise their conquest; but the mass 
of the Romans could neither be absorbed into the gentile bodies 
nor ruled by means of the latter. A substitute for the Roman state 
had to be placed at the head of the Roman local administrative 
bodies, which at first largely continued to function, and this 
substitute could only be another state. Thus, the organs of the 
gentile constitution had to be transformed into organs of state, 
and owing to the pressure of circumstances, this had to be done 
very quickly. The first representative of the conquering people 
was, however, the military commander. The securing of the 
conquered territory internally and externally demanded that his 
power be increased. The moment had arrived for transforming 
military leadership into kingship. This was done. 
Let us take the kingdom of the Franks. Here, not only the wide 
dominions of the Roman state, but also all the very large tracts of 
land that had not been assigned to the large and small Gau and 
Mark communities, especially all the large forests, fell into the 
hands of the victorious Salian people as their unrestricted 
possession. The first thing the king of the Franks, transformed 
from an ordinary supreme military commander into a real 
monarch, did was to convert this property of the people into a 
royal estate, to steal it from the people and to donate or grant it to 
his retainers. This retinue, originally composed of his personal 
military retainers and the rest of the subcommanders of the army, 

=====第280页=====
252 Frederick Engels 
was soon augmented not only by Romans, that is, Romanised 
Gauls,  who quickly became indispensable to him owing to their 
knowledge of writing, their education and familiarity with the 
Romance vernacular and literary Latin as well as with the laws of 
the land, but also by slaves, serfs and freedmen, who constituted 
his Court and from among whom he chose his favourites. All 
these were granted tracts of public land, first mostly as gifts and 
later in the form of benefices—originally in most cases for the 
period of the life of the king130—and so the basis was laid for a 
new nobility at the expense of the people. 
But this was not all. The far-flung empire could not be 
governed by means of the old gentile constitution. The council of 
chiefs, even if it had not long died out, could not have assembled 
and was soon replaced by the king's permanent retinue. The old 
popular assembly was still ostensibly preserved, but more and 
more as an assembly of the subcommanders of the army and the 
newly-rising magnates. The free landowning peasants, the mass of 
the Frankish people, were exhausted and reduced to penury by 
continuous civil war and wars of conquest, the latter particularly 
under Charlemagne, just as the Roman peasants had been during 
the last period of the republic. These peasants, who originally had 
formed the whole army, and after the conquest of the Frankish 
lands had been its core, were so impoverished at the beginning of 
the ninth century that scarcely one out of five could provide the 
accoutrements of war. The army of free peasants, called up 
directly by the king, was replaced by an army composed of the 
servitors of the newly arisen magnates. Among these servitors 
were also villeins, the descendants of the peasants who previously 
had known no master but the king, and still earlier had known no 
master at all, not even a king. Under Charlemagne's successors the 
ruin of the Frankish peasantry was completed by internal wars, the 
weakness of royal authority and corresponding encroachments of 
the magnates, whose ranks were augmented by the Gau counts, 131 
established by Charlemagne and eager to make their office 
hereditary, and finally by the incursions of the Normans. Fifty 
years after the death of Charlemagne, the Frankish Empire lay as 
helpless at the feet of the Normans as four hundred years 
previously the Roman Empire had lain at the feet of the Franks. 
Not only the external impotence, but the internal order, or 
rather disorder, of society, was almost the same. The free Frankish 
peasants found themselves in a position similar to that of their 
predecessors, the Roman colons. 32 Ruined by war and plunder, 
they had to seek the protection of the newly arisen magnates or 

=====第281页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 253 
the Church, for royal authority was too weak to protect them; but 
they had to pay dear for this protection. Like the Gallic peasants 
before them, they had to transfer the ownership of their land to 
their patrons, and received it back from them as tenants in 
different and varying forms, but always on condition of perform­
ing services and paying dues. Once driven into this form of 
dependence, they gradually lost their personal freedom; after a 
few generations most of them became serfs. How rapidly the free 
peasants were degraded is shown by Irminon's land records of the 
Abbey Saint-Germain-des-Prés, then near, now in, Paris. 3 Even 
during the life of Charlemagne, on the vast estates of this abbey, 
stretching into the surrounding country, there were 2,788 
households, almost exclusively Franks with German names; 2,080 
of them were colons, 35 lites,133 220 slaves and only 8 freeholders! 
The custom by which the patron had the land of the peasants 
transferred to  himself,  giving to them only the usufruct of it for 
life, the custom denounced as ungodly by Salvianus, was now 
universally practised by the Church in its dealings with the 
peasants. Feudal servitude, now coming more and more into 
vogue, was modelled as much on the lines of the Roman 
angariae,134 compulsory services for the state, as on the services 
rendered by the members of the German Mark in bridge and road 
building and other work for common purposes. Thus, it looked as 
if, after four hundred years, the mass of the population had come 
back to the point it had started from. 
This proved only two things, however: First, that the social 
stratification and the distribution of property in the declining 
Roman Empire had corresponded entirely to the then prevailing 
level of production in agriculture and industry, and hence had 
been inevitable; second, that this level of production had not sunk 
or risen to any material extent in the course of the ensuing four 
hundred years, and, therefore, had just as necessarily produced 
the same distribution of property and the same class division of 
the population. During the last centuries of the Roman Empire, 
the town had lost its earlier supremacy over the country, and did 
not regain it during the first centuries of German rule. This 
presupposes a low level of development in agriculture, and in 
industry as well. Such an overall situation necessarily gives rise to 
big ruling landowners and dependent small peasants. How scarcely 
a Data from Irminon's land records are presumably quoted from P. Roth's 
Geschichte des Beneficialwesens von den ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert, 
p. 378.—  Ed. 

=====第282页=====
254 Frederick Engels 
possible it was to superimpose either the Roman latifundian 
economy run with slave labour or the newer large-scale farming 
run with serf labour onto such a society, is proved by Char­
lemagne's massive experiments with his famous imperial villas,135 
which passed away leaving hardly a trace. These experiments were 
continued only by the monasteries and were fruitful only for 
them; but the monasteries were abnormal social bodies founded 
on celibacy. They could do the exceptional, and for that very 
reason were bound to remain exceptions. 
Nevertheless, progress was made during these four hundred 
years.  Even if in the end we find almost the same main classes as 
in the beginning, still, the people who constituted these classes had 
changed. Ancient slavery had disappeared; gone were also the 
ruined poor freemen, who had despised work as slavish. Between 
the Roman colonus and the new villein there had been the free 
Frankish peasant. The "useless reminiscences and vain strife" of 
decaying Romanism were dead and buried. The social classes of 
the ninth century had taken shape not in the bog of a declining 
civilisation, but in the travail of a new one. The new race, masters 
as well as servants, was a race of men compared with its Roman 
predecessors. The relation of powerful landlords and serving 
peasants, which for the latter had been the hopeless form of the 
decline of the world of antiquity, was now for the former the 
starting-point of a new development. Moreover, unproductive as 
these four hundred years appear to have been, they, nevertheless, 
left one great product behind them: the modern nationalities, the 
refashioning and regrouping of West European humanity for 
impending history. The Germans, in fact, had infused new life 
into Europe; and that is why the dissolution of the states in the 
German period ended, not in Norman-Saracen subjugation, but in 
the development from the benefices and patronage (commenda­
tion 136) to feudalism, and in such a tremendous increase in the 
population that the profuse bloodshed caused by the Crusades 
barely two centuries later could be borne without injury.3 
But what was the mysterious magic potion with which the 
Germans infused new vitality into dying Europe? Was it in the 
innate miraculous power of the German race, as our chauvinistic 
historians would have it? By no means. The Germans were a 
highly gifted Aryan tribe, especially at that time, in the process of 
all-out vigorous development. It was not their specific national 
a The end of the sentence, from the words "and in such a tremendous 
increase..." was added by Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed. 

=====第283页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 255 
qualities that rejuvenated Europe, however, but simply—their 
barbarism, their gentile constitution. 
Their personal competence and bravery, their love of liberty, 
and their democratic instinct, which regarded all public affairs as 
its own affairs, in short, all those qualities which the Romans had 
lost and which were alone capable of forming new states and of 
raising new nationalities out of the muck of the Roman 
world—what were they but the characteristic features of bar­
barians in the upper stage, fruits of their gentile constitution? 
If they transformed the ancient form of monogamy, moderated 
male rule in the family and gave a higher status to women than 
the classical world had ever known, what enabled them to do so if 
not their barbarism, their gentile customs, their still vital heritage 
from the time of mother right? 
If they were able in at least three of the most important 
countries—Germany, Northern France and England—to preserve 
and carry over to the feudal state a piece of the genuine gentile 
constitution in the form of the Mark communities, and thus give 
to the oppressed class, the peasants, even under the hardest 
conditions of medieval serfdom, local cohesion and the means of 
resistance which neither the slaves of antiquity nor the modern 
proletarians found ready at hand—to what did they owe this if 
not to their barbarism, their exclusively barbarian mode of settling 
in gentes? 
And lastly, if they were able to develop and raise to universality 
the milder form of servitude which they had been practising at 
home, into which also slavery in the Roman Empire was more and 
more converted—a form which, as Fourier first emphasised, gave 
to those subjected to servitude the means of gradual emancipation 
as a class (fournit aux cultivateurs des moyens d'affranchissement 
collectif et progressif 3) and is therefore far superior to slavery, 
which permits only of the immediate manumission of the 
individual without any transitory stage (antiquity did not know any 
abolition of slavery by a victorious rebellion), whereas in fact the 
serfs of the Middle Ages, step by step, achieved their emancipation 
as a class—to what was this due if not their barbarism, thanks to 
which they had not yet arrived at complete slavery, either in the 
form of the ancient labour slavery or in that of the Oriental 
domestic slavery? 
All that was vital and life-bringing in what the Germans infused 
into the Roman world was barbarism. In fact, only barbarians are 
a Furnishes for the cultivators means of collective and gradual emancipation (see 
Ch. Fourier, Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées générales, p. 220).— Ed. 

=====第284页=====
256 Frederick Engels 
capable of rejuvenating a world labouring in the throes of a dying 
civilisation. And the highest stage of barbarism, to which and in 
which the Germans worked their way up previous to the migration 
of peoples, was precisely the most favourable one for this process. 
This explains everything. 
IX 
BARBARISM AND CIVILISATION 
We have now traced the dissolution of the gentile order in the 
three great individual examples: Greek, Roman, and German. We 
shall investigate, in conclusion, the general economic conditions 
that had already undermined the gentile organisation of society in 
the upper stage of barbarism and completely abolished it with the 
advent of civilisation. For this, Marx's Capital will be as necessary 
as Morgan's book. 
Having germinated in the middle stage and developed further 
in the upper stage of savagery, the gens reached its prime, as far 
as our sources enable us to judge, in the lower stage of barbarism. 
With this stage of development, then, we shall begin our 
investigation. 
We find here, where the American Redskins must serve as our 
example, the gentile system fully developed. A tribe was divided 
up into several, in most cases two,a gentes; with the increase in the 
population, each of these original gentes again divided into several 
daughter gentes, in relation to which the mother gens appeared as 
the phratry; the tribe itself split up into several tribes, in each of 
which, in most cases, we again find the old gentes. In some cases, 
at least, a confederacy embraced the kindred tribes. This simple 
organisation was fully adequate for the social conditions from 
which it sprang. It was nothing more than a peculiar naturally 
evolved grouping, capable of smoothing out all internal conflicts 
that might arise in a society organised on these lines. Externally, 
conflicts were settled by war, which could end in the annihilation 
of a tribe, but never in its subjugation. The magnificence, and at 
the same time the limitation, of the gentile order was that it left no 
room for domination and servitude. Internally, there was as yet no 
distinction between rights and duties; the question of whether 
participation in public affairs, blood revenge or atonement for 
a The words "in most cases two" were added by Engels in the 1891 
edition.— Ed. 

=====第285页=====
bei* 
faillie.  tos ^mnifnijnitliiiiii'j 
u»b 
&e0 Staate 
3m Sliifcfjluji  an Setoio  £. SDiorßun'» $orfd)u»tgen 
00« 
Jmfcritfï (Engeln 
Sterte Stuflage, 
Secpteâ unb ficbentes ïaufenb. 
©erlag 'ami J, % W. Bißfi 
1892. 
Title page of the fourth edition 
of The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State 

=====第286页=====

=====第287页=====
Origin  of the  Family, Private Property  and  State 259 
injuries  was a  right  or a  duty never confronted  the  Indian;  it 
would have appeared  as absurd  to him as the  question  of whether 
eating, sleeping  or hunting  was a  right  or a  duty.  Nor  could  any 
tribe  or gens split  up into different classes. This leads  us to the 
investigation  of the  economic basis  of those conditions. 
The population  was  very sparse.  It was  dense only  in the  habitat 
of the  tribe, surrounded  by its  extensive hunting grounds  and 
beyond these  the  neutral protective forest which separated  it from 
other tribes. Division  of labour  was  purely  and  simply that which 
had naturally evolved;  it existed only between  the two  sexes.  The 
men went  to war,  hunted, fished, provided  the raw  material  for 
food and the  implements necessary  for these pursuits.  The  women 
c'ared  for the  house,  and  prepared food  and  clothing; they 
cooked, wove,  and  sewed. Each  of them  was  master  in his or her 
own field  of activity:  the men in the  forest,  the  women  in the 
house. Each owned  the  implements  he or she  made  and  used:  the 
men,  the  weapons  and the  hunting  and  fishing tackle,  the women, 
the household utensils.  The  household  was  communistic, compris­
ing several,  and  often many, families.* Whatever  was  produced 
and used  in common  was  common property;  the  house,  the 
garden,  the  longboat. Here,  and  only here, then, does  the "earned 
property" exist which jurists  and  economists have attributed  to 
civilised society—the last mendacious legal pretext  on  which 
modern capitalist property still rests. 
But man did not  remain  in this stage everywhere.  In Asia  he 
found animals that could  be domesticated  and  bred  in captivity. 
The wild buffalo  cow had to be  hunted down;  the  domesticated 
one gave birth  to a  calf once  a year,  and  provided milk into  the 
bargain.  A number  of the  most advanced tribes—Aryans, Semites, 
perhaps also  the  Turanians—made first  the  domestication,  and 
later  the  breeding  and  tending,  of cattle, their principal occupa­
tion. Pastoral tribes separated themselves from  the  remaining mass 
of the  barbarians:  the  first great social division  of labour.  The  pas­
toral tribes  not only produced more means  of subsistence,  but also  a 
greater variety than  the  rest  of the  barbarians. They  not  only  had 
milk, milk products  and  meat  in greater abundance than  the 
others,  but  also skins, wool, goat's hair,  and  more spun  and  woven 
fabrics with  the  increasing quantities  of raw  material. This,  for the 
first time, made regular exchange possible.  In the  preceding 
* Especially  on the  north-west coast  of America;  see  Bancroft. Among  the 
Haidas  of the  Queen Charlotte Islands some households gathered  as many  as seven 
hundred members under  one roof.  Among  the  Nootkas, whole tribes lived under 
one roof. 
19-1243 

=====第288页=====
260 Frederick Engels 
stages, exchange could only take place occasionally; exceptional 
ability in the making of weapons and implements may have led to 
a temporary division of labour. Thus, unquestionable remains of 
workshops for stone implements of the Neolithic period have been 
found in many places. The artificers who developed their skills in 
those workshops most probably worked for the community, as 
the permanent handicraftsmen of the gentile communities in India 
still do. No other exchange than that within the tribe could 
arise in that stage, and even that was an exception. After the 
separation of the pastoral tribes, however, we find here all the 
conditions ready for exchange between members of different 
tribes,  and for its further development and consolidation as a 
regular institution. Originally, tribe exchanged with tribe through 
their respective gentile chiefs. When, however, the herds began to 
be converted into separate property,3 exchange between individu­
als predominated more and more, until eventually it became the 
sole form. The principal article which the pastoral tribes offered 
their neighbours for exchange was livestock; livestock became the 
commodity by which all other commodities were appraised, and 
was everywhere readily taken in exchange for other com­
modities—in short, livestock assumed the function of money and 
served as money already at this stage. Such was the necessity and 
rapidity with which the demand for a money commodity 
developed right at the very beginning of commodity exchange. 
Horticulture, probably unknown to the Asiatic barbarians of the 
lower stage, arose, among them, no later than at the middle stage, 
as the forerunner of field agriculture. The climate of the 
Turanian plateau does not admit of a pastoral life without a 
supply of fodder for the long and severe winter. Hence, the 
sowing of meadows and cultivation of grain was indispensable 
here.  The same is true of the steppes north of the Black Sea. Once 
grown for livestock, grain soon became human food. The 
cultivated land still remained tribal property and was assigned first 
to the gens, which, later, in its turn distributed it for use to the 
household communities, and finally15 to individuals; these may 
have had certain rights of possession, but no more. 
Of the industrial achievements of this stage two are particularly 
important. The first is the weaving loom, the second, the smelting 
of metal ores and metalworking. Copper, tin, and their alloy, 
a The 1884 edition has "private property" instead of "separate property".— Ed. 
b The words "to the household communities, and finally" were added by 
Engels in the 1891 edition.— Ed 

=====第289页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 261 
bronze, were by far the most important; bronze provided useful 
implements and weapons, but could not oust stone implements. 
Only iron could do that, but its production was as yet unknown. 
Gold and silver began to be used for ornaments and decorations, 
and must already have been of far higher value than copper and 
bronze. 
The increase of production in all branches—livestock breeding, 
agriculture, domestic handicrafts—enabled human labour power 
to produce more than was necessary for its maintenance. It 
simultaneously increased the amount of work that daily fell to 
every member of the gens or household community or single 
family. The attraction of more labour power became desirable. 
This was provided by war; captives were made slaves. Under the 
given overall historical conditions, the first great social division of 
labour, by increasing the productivity of labour, that is, wealth, 
and enlarging the field of production, necessarily carried slavery 
in its wake. Out of the first great social division of labour arose the 
first great division of society into two classes: masters and slaves, 
exploiters and exploited. 
How and when the herds were converted from the com­
mon property of the tribe or gens into the property of the in­
dividual heads of families we do not know to this day; but it 
must have occurred, in the main, at this stage. The herds and the 
other new objects of wealth brought about a revolution in the 
family. Gaining a livelihood had always been the business of the 
man; he produced and owned the means to that end. The herds 
were the new means of gaining a livelihood, and their initial 
domestication and subsequent tending were his work. Hence, he 
owned the livestock, and the commodities and slaves obtained in 
exchange for them. All the surplus now resulting from the task of 
gaining a livelihood fell to the man; the woman shared in 
consuming it, but she had no share in owning it. The "savage" 
warrior and hunter had been content to occupy second place in 
the house, after the woman. The "gentler" shepherd, insisting on 
his wealth, pushed forward to first place and forced the woman 
into second place. And she could not complain. Division of labour 
in the family had regulated the distribution of property between 
man and wife. This division of labour remained unchanged, and 
yet it now turned the former domestic relationship upside down 
simply because the division of labour outside the family had 
changed. The very cause that had formerly ensured the woman 
supremacy in the house, namely, her being confined to domestic 
work, now ensured supremacy in the house for the man: the 
19* 

=====第290页=====
262 Frederick Engels 
woman's housework lost its significance compared with the man's 
work in obtaining a livelihood; the latter was everything, the 
former an insignificant addition. Here we see already that the 
emancipation of women and their equality with men are impossi­
ble and must remain so as long as women are excluded from 
socially productive work and remain restricted to private domestic 
duties. The emancipation of women becomes possible only when 
women are enabled to take part in production on a large, social 
scale, and when domestic duties require their attention only to a 
minor degree. And this has become possible only as a result of 
modern large-scale industry, which not only permits of the 
participation of women in production in large numbers, but 
actually calls for it and, moreover, strives more and more to 
reduce private domestic duties to a public industry. 
His achievement of actual supremacy in the house threw down 
the last barrier to the man's autocracy. This autocracy was 
confirmed and perpetuated by the overthrow of mother right, the 
introduction of father right and the gradual transition from 
pairing marriage to monogamy. But this made a breach in the old 
gentile order: the individual family became a power and rose 
threateningly against the gens. 
The next step brings us to the upper stage of barbarism, the 
period in which all civilised peoples passed through their Heroic 
Age:  it is the period of the iron sword, but also of the iron 
ploughshare and axe. Iron came to be utilised by man, the last 
and most important of all raw materials to play a revolutionary 
role in history, the last—if we exclude the potato. Iron made 
possible field agriculture on a larger area and the clearing of 
extensive forest tracts for cultivation; it gave the craftsman 
implements of hardness and sharpness that no stone, no other 
known metal, could withstand. All this came about grad­
ually; the first iron produced was often softer than bronze. 
Thus,  stone weapons disappeared but slowly; stone axes were still 
used in battle not only in the Hildebrand Song, but also in the 
Battle of Hastings, in 1066. 137 But progress was now irresistible, 
less interrupted and more rapid. The town, enclosing houses of 
stone or brick within its turreted and crenellated stone walls, 
became the headquarters of the tribe or confederacy of tribes. It 
marked an enormous advance in the art of building; but it was 
also a sign of increased danger and need for protection. Wealth 
increased rapidly, but it was the wealth of single individuals. 
Weaving, metalworking and the other crafts that were becoming 
more and more specialised displayed growing diversity and skill in 

=====第291页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 263 
their products; agriculture now provided not only cereals, pulse 
and fruit, but also oil and wine, which people had now learned to 
make. Such diverse activities could no longer be conducted by any 
single individual; the second great division of labour took place: 
handicrafts separated from agriculture. The continuing increase in 
production, and with it the increased productivity of labour, raised 
the value of human labour power. Slavery, which had been 
nascent and sporadic in the preceding stage, now became an 
essential part of the social system. The slaves ceased to be simple 
assistants; they were now driven in scores to work in the fields and 
workshops. The division of production into two large main 
branches, agriculture and handicrafts, gave rise to production 
directly for exchange, the production of commodities; and with it 
came trade, not only in the interior and on the tribal boundaries, 
but also overseas. But all this was still very undeveloped; the 
precious metals started to become the predominant and universal 
money commodity, but they were not yet minted and were 
exchanged merely by bare weight. 
The distinction between rich and poor was added to that 
between freemen and slaves—with the new division of labour 
came a new division of society into classes. The differences in the 
property of the individual heads of families caused the old 
communistic household communities to break up wherever they 
had survived until then; and this put an end to the common 
cultivation of the soil for the account of this community. The 
arable land was assigned for use to the separate families, first 
for a limited time and later in perpetuity; the transition to 
complete private ownership took place gradually and parallel to 
the transition from pairing marriage to monogamy. The 
individual family started to become the economic unit of society. 
The increased population density necessitated firmer cohesion 
internally and externally. Everywhere the confederacy of kindred 
tribes became a necessity, and soon after, their amalgamation, and 
thus the amalgamation of the separate tribal territories into a 
single territory of the people. The military commander of the 
people—rex, basileus, thiudans—became an indispensable and 
permanent official. The popular assembly was instituted wherever 
it did not yet exist. The military commander, the council and the 
popular assembly formed the organs of the gentile society which 
had developed into a military democracy. Military—because war 
and organisation for war were now regular functions of the life of 
the people. The wealth of their neighbours excited the greed of 
the peoples to whom the acquisition of wealth appeared one of the 

=====第292页=====
264 Frederick Engels 
main purposes in life. They were barbarians: plunder appeared to 
them easier and even more honourable than productive work. 
War, previously waged simply to avenge aggression or as a means 
of enlarging territory that had become inadequate, was now waged 
for the sake of plunder alone, and became a regular source of 
living. It was not for nothing that formidable walls were reared 
around the new fortified towns: their yawning moats were the 
graves of the gentile constitution, and their turrets already 
reached up into civilisation. Internal affairs underwent a similar 
change. The predatory wars increased the power of the supreme 
military commander as well as the subcommanders. The custom­
ary election of successors from the same families, especially after 
the introduction of father right, was gradually transformed into 
hereditary succession, first tolerated, then claimed and finally 
usurped; the foundation of hereditary royalty and hereditary 
nobility was laid. In this manner the organs of the gentile 
constitution were gradually torn away from their roots in the 
people, in gens, phratry and tribe, and the whole gentile order 
was transformed into its opposite: from being an organisation of 
tribes for the free administration of their own affairs, it became an 
organisation for plundering and oppressing their neighbours; and 
correspondingly its organs were transformed from instruments of 
the will of the people into independent organs for ruling and 
oppressing their own people. But this could not have happened 
had not the greed for wealth divided the members of the gentes 
into rich and poor; had not "property differences in the same 
gens changed the community of interests into antagonism between 
its members" (Marx) 3; and had not the growth of slavery already 
begun to brand working for a living as an activity worthy only of 
slaves and more ignominious than engaging in plunder. 
* * * 
This brings us to the threshold of civilisation. This stage is 
inaugurated by another advance in the division of labour. In the 
lowest stage men produced only for their own immediate needs; any 
possible exchange was confined to sporadic cases when a surplus 
was obtained by chance. In the middle stage of barbarism we find 
that the pastoral peoples had in their livestock a form of property 
which, if herds and flocks were of a certain size, regularly 
a "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 213.— Ed. 

=====第293页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 265 
provided a surplus over and above their needs; and we also find a 
division of labour between the pastoral peoples and backward 
tribes without herds, so that there were two different stages of 
production side by side, and therefore the conditions for regular 
exchange. The upper stage of barbarism introduced a further 
division of labour between agriculture and handicrafts, resulting in 
the production of a continually increasing portion of products of 
labour directly for exchange, so that exchange between in­
dividual producers reached the point where it became a vital 
necessity for society. Civilisation consolidated and magnified all 
these established divisions of labour, particularly by intensifying 
the contrast between town and country (either the town exercising 
economic supremacy over the country, as in antiquity, or the 
country over the town, as in the Middle Ages) and added a third 
division of labour, peculiar to itself and of decisive importance: it 
created a class that was no longer engaged in production, but 
exclusively in exchanging products—the merchants. All previous 
inchoative class formations were exclusively connected with 
production; they divided those engaged in production into 
managers and executors, or else into producers on a large scale 
and producers on a small scale. Here a class appears for the first 
time which, without taking any part in production, captures the 
management of production as a whole and economically subordi­
nates the producers to  itself;  a class that makes itself the 
indispensable intermediary between any two producers and 
exploits them both. On the pretext of saving the producers the 
trouble and risk of exchange, of extending the sale of their 
products to distant markets, and of thus becoming the most useful 
class among the population, a class of parasites arises, of genuine 
social bloodsuckers, which, as a reward for very insignificant real 
services, skims the cream off production both at home and abroad, 
rapidly acquires enormous wealth and corresponding social 
influence, and for this very reason is destined to reap ever new 
honours and gain increasing control over production during the 
period of civilisation, until it at last creates a product of its 
own—periodic commercial crises. 
At the stage of development we are discussing, the young 
merchant class, however, had no inkling as yet of the big things 
that were in store for it. But it took shape and made itself 
indispensable, and that was sufficient. With it, however, metal 
money, minted coins, emerged, and with this a new means by which 
the non-producer could rule the producer and his production. 
The commodity of commodities, which conceals within itself all 

=====第294页=====
266 Frederick Engels 
other commodities, was discovered; the magic potion that can 
transform itself at will into anything desirable and desired. 
Whoever possessed it ruled the world of production; and who had 
it above all others? The merchant. In his hands the cult of money 
was safe. He took care to make it plain that all commodities, and 
hence all commodity producers, must grovel in the dust before 
money. He proved in practice that all other forms of wealth were 
mere semblances compared with this incarnation of wealth as such. 
Never again has the power of money revealed itself with such 
primitive crudity and violence as it did in this period, its youth. 
After the purchase of commodities for money came the lending of 
money, entailing interest and usury. And no legislation of any 
later period throws the debtor so pitilessly and helplessly at the 
feet of the usurious creditor as that of ancient Athens and 
Rome—both sets of law arose spontaneously, as common law, 
without other than economic compulsion. 
Besides wealth in commodities and slaves, besides money wealth, 
there now came into being wealth in landed property. The 
entitlement of individuals to own parcels of land originally 
assigned to them by the gens or tribe had now become so well 
established that these parcels became their hereditary property. 
What they had most aspired to just before that time was liberation 
from the claim of the gentile community to their parcels of land, a 
claim which had become a fetter for them. They were freed from 
this fetter—but soon after also from their new landed property. 
The full, free ownership of land implied not only the possibility of 
unrestricted and uncurtailed possession, but also the possibility of 
alienating it. As long as the land belonged to the gens there was 
no such possibility. But when the new landowner definitively shook 
off the chains of the paramount title of the gens and tribe, he also 
tore the bond that had until then tied him inseverably to the soil. 
What that meant was made plain to him by the money invented 
simultaneously with the advent of private property. Land could 
now become a commodity to be sold and mortgaged. Hardly had 
the private ownership of land been introduced when mortgage 
was discovered (see Athens). Just as hetaerism and prostitution 
clung to the heels of monogamy, so from now on mortgage clung 
to the ownership of land. You wanted full, free, alienable 
ownership of land. Well, here you have it— tu l'as voulu, 3 George 
Dandin! 
a "You wanted it." This expression is taken from Moliere's comedy George 
Dandin, ou le mari confondu, I, 9.— Ed 

=====第295页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 267 
Commercial expansion, money and usury, landed property and 
mortgage were thus accompanied by the rapid concentration and 
centralisation of wealth in the hands of a small class, on the one 
hand, and by the increasing impoverishment of the masses and a 
growing mass of paupers, on the other. The new aristocracy of 
wealth, unless it coincided from the outset with the old tribal nobility, 
forced the latter definitively into the background (in Athens, in 
Rome, among the Germans). And this division of freemen into 
classes according to their wealth was accompanied, especially in 
Greece, by an enormous increase in the number of slaves,* whose 
forced labour formed the basis on which the superstructure of the 
entire society was reared. 
Let us now see what became of the gentile constitution as a 
result of this social revolution. It stood powerless in the face of 
the new elements that had grown up without its aid. Its 
precondition was that the members of a gens, or else of a tribe, 
should live together in the same territory, be its sole inhabitants. 
This had long ceased to be the case. Gentes and tribes were 
everywhere intermingled; everywhere slaves, wards and outsiders 
lived among the citizens. The sedentary state, which had been 
acquired only towards the end of the middle stage of barbarism, 
was time and again interrupted by the mobility and changes of 
abode brought about by commerce, changes of occupation and the 
transfer of land. The members of the gentile bodies could no 
longer meet for the purpose of attending to their own common 
affairs; only matters of minor importance, such as religious 
ceremonies, were still observed in a rough-and-ready way. Beside 
the requirements and interests which the gentile bodies were 
appointed and empowered to take care of, new requirements and 
interests had arisen from the revolution in the conditions of 
earning a livelihood and the resulting change in social structure. 
These new requirements and interests were not only alien to the 
old gentile order, but thwarted it in every way. The interests of 
the groups of craftsmen which arose through division of labour, 
and the special needs of the town as opposed to the country, 
required new organs; but each of these groups was composed of 
people from different gentes, phratries and tribes; they even 
included outsiders. Hence, the new organs necessarily had to take 
shape outside the gentile constitution, alongside it, and that meant 
* For the number of slaves in Athens, see above, p. 117 [this volume, p. 222]. In 
Corinth, at the city's zenith, it was 460,000, and in Aegina 470,000; in both., ten 
times the number of free citizens. 

=====第296页=====
268 Frederick Engels 
against it.—And again, in every gentile body the conflict of 
interests made itself felt and reached its apex by combining rich 
and poor, usurers and debtors, in the same gens and tribe.—Then 
there was the mass of new inhabitants, strangers to the gentile 
associations, which, as in Rome, became a power in the land, and 
was too numerous to be gradually absorbed by the consanguine 
gentes and tribes. The gentile associations confronted these masses 
as exclusive, privileged bodies; what had originally been a 
naturally evolved democracy was transformed into a hateful 
aristocracy. Lastly, the gentile constitution had grown out of a 
society that knew no internal antagonisms, and was suited only to 
such a society. It had no means of coercion except public opinion. 
But now a society had come into being that by virtue of all its 
economic conditions of existence had to split up into freemen and 
slaves, into exploiting rich and exploited poor; a society that was 
not only incapable of reconciling these antagonisms, but had to 
carry them to extremes. Such a society could only exist either in a 
state of continuous, open struggle of these classes against one 
another or under the rule of a third power which, while ostensibly 
standing above the conflicting classes, suppressed their open 
conflict and permitted a class struggle at most in the economic 
field, in a so-called legal form. The gentile constitution had 
outlived  itself.  It was burst asunder by the division of labour and 
by its result, the division of society into classes. Its place was taken 
by the state. 
Above we discussed in detail each of the three main forms in 
which the state raised itself up on the ruins of the gentile 
constitution. Athens represented the purest, most classical form. 
Here the state derived directly and mainly from the class 
antagonisms that developed within gentile society. In Rome gentile 
society became an exclusive aristocracy amidst numerous plebs, 
standing outside of it, having no rights but only duties. The 
victory of the plebs burst the old gentile constitution asunder and 
erected on its ruins the state, into which both the gentile 
aristocracy and the plebs were soon wholly absorbed. Finally, 
among the German vanquishers of the Roman Empire, the state 
derived directly from the conquest of large foreign territories, 
which the gentile constitution had no means of ruling. As this 
conquest did not entail either a serious struggle with the old 
population or a more advanced division of labour, and as 

=====第297页=====
• 
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 269 
conquered and conquerors were almost at the same stage of 
economic development and thus the economic basis of society 
remained the same as before, the gentile constitution was able to 
continue for many centuries in a changed, territorial shape as a 
Mark constitution, and even rejuvenate itself for a time in 
enfeebled form in the noble and patrician families of later years, 
and even in peasant families, as in Dithmarschen.* 
The state is, therefore, by no means a power forced on society 
from without; just as little is it "the reality of the ethical idea", 
"the image and reality of reason", as Hegel maintains.3 Rather, it 
is a product of society at a certain stage of development; it is the 
admission that this society has become entangled in an insoluble 
contradiction with  itself,  that it has split into irreconcilable 
opposites which it is powerless to dispel. But in order that these 
opposites, classes with conflicting economic interests, might not 
consume themselves and society in fruitless struggle, it became 
necessary to have a power seemingly standing above society which 
would alleviate the conflict and keep it within the bounds of 
"order"; and this power, having arisen out of society but placing 
itself above it, and alienating itself more and more from it, is the 
state. 
As distinct from the old gentile order, the state, first, divides its 
subjects according to territory. As we have seen, the old gentile 
associations, built upon and held together by ties of blood, became 
inadequate, largely because they were conditional on the members 
being bound to a given territory, a bond which had long ceased to 
exist. The territory remained, but the people had become mobile. 
Hence, division according to territory was taken as the point of 
departure, and citizens were allowed to exercise their public rights 
and duties wherever they settled, irrespective of gens and tribe. 
This organisation ' of citizens according to locality is a feature 
common to all states. That is why it seems natural to us; but we 
have seen what long and arduous struggles were needed before it 
replaced, in Athens and Rome, the old organisation according to 
gentes. 
The second distinguishing feature is the establishment of a 
public authority which no longer directly coincides with the 
population organising itself as an armed force. This special public 
* The first historian to have at least an approximate idea of the nature of the 
gens was Niebuhr, thanks to his knowledge of the Dithmarschen families— 
to which, however, he also owes the errors he mechanically copied from there.138 
a G. W. F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, §§ 257, 360.— Ed 

=====第298页=====
* 
270 Frederick Engels 
authority is necessary because a self-acting armed organisation of 
the population has become impossible since the split into classes. 
The slaves also belong to the population; the 90,000 citizens of 
Athens formed only a privileged class as against the 365,000 
slaves. The people's army of the Athenian democracy was an 
aristocratic public authority vis-à-vis the slaves, whom it kept in 
check; however, a gendarmerie also became necessary to keep the 
citizens in check, as we related above. This public authority exists 
in every state; it consists not merely of armed men but also of 
material adjuncts, prisons and institutions of coercion of all kinds, 
of which gentile society knew nothing. It may be very insignificant, 
almost infinitesimal, in societies where class antagonisms are still 
undeveloped and in remote territories as was the case at certain 
times and in certain regions in the United States of America. It 
[the public authority] grows stronger, however, to the extent that 
class antagonisms within the state become exacerbated and 
adjacent states become larger and more populous. We have only 
to look at our present-day Europe, where class struggle and 
competition for conquests have raised the public power to such a 
level that it threatens to swallow the whole of society and even the 
state. 
In order to maintain this public power, contributions from the 
citizens are necessary—taxes. These were absolutely unknown in 
gentile society; but we know enough about them today. As 
civilisation advances, these taxes become inadequate too; the state 
makes drafts on the future, contracts loans, public debts. Old 
Europe can tell a tale about these, too. 
Having public authority and the right to levy taxes, the officials 
now stand, as organs of society, above society. The free, voluntary 
respect that was accorded to the organs of the gentile constitution 
does not satisfy them, even if they could gain it; being the vehicles 
of a power that is becoming alien to society, respect for them must 
be enforced by means of exceptional laws by virtue of which they 
enjoy special sanctity and inviolability. The shabbiest police servant 
in the civilised state has more "authority" than all the organs of 
gentile society put together; but the most powerful prince and the 
greatest statesman, or commander, of civilisation may well envy 
the humblest gentile chief for the unforced and undisputed respect 
that is paid to him. The one stands in the midst of society, the 
other is forced to attempt to represent something outside and 
above it. 
Because the state arose from the need to hold class antagonisms 
in check, but because it arose, at the same time, in the midst of the 

=====第299页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 271 
conflict of these classes, it is, as a rule, the state of the most 
powerful, economically dominant class, which, .through the 
medium of the state, becomes also the politically dominant class, 
and thus acquires new means of keeping down and exploiting the 
oppressed class. Thus, the state of antiquity was above all the state 
of the slave owners for keeping down the slaves, as the feudal 
state was the organ of the nobility for keeping down the peasant 
serfs and villeins, and the modern representative state is an 
instrument for the exploitation of wage labour by capital. By way 
of exception, however, periods occur in which the warring classes 
balance each other so closely that the state authority, as ostensible 
mediator, acquires, for the moment, a certain degree of independ­
ence of both. Such was the absolute monarchy of the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries, which held the balance between the 
nobility and burghers; such was the Bonapartism of the First, and 
especially of the Second French Empire, which played off the 
proletariat against the bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie against the 
proletariat. The latest performance of this kind, in which ruler 
and ruled appear equally ridiculous, is the new German Empire of 
the Bismarck nation: here capitalists and workers are balanced 
against each other and equally cheated for the benefit of the 
impoverished Prussian backwoods Junkers. 
In most historical states, the rights granted to citizens are, 
besides, apportioned according to their wealth, thus directly 
expressing the fact that the state is an organisation of the 
possessing class for its protection against the non-possessing class. 
It was so already in the Athenian and Roman classification 
according to property. It was so in the medieval feudal state, in 
which political power was in conformity with the amount of land 
owned. It is seen in the electoral qualifications of the modern 
representative states. Yet this political recognition of property 
distinctions is by no means inherent. On the contrary, it marks a 
low stage of state development. The highest form of the state, the 
democratic republic, which under our modern conditions of 
society is more and more becoming an inevitable necessity, and is 
the only form of state in which the last decisive struggle between 
proletariat and bourgeoisie can be fought out—the democratic 
republic officially knows no more of property distinctions. In it 
wealth exercises its power indirectly, but all the more surely. On 
the one hand, in the form of the direct corruption of officials, of 
which America provides the classical example; on the other hand, 
in the form of an alliance between government and stock 
exchange, which becomes the easier to achieve the more the 

=====第300页=====
272 Frederick Engels 
national debt increases  and the  more joint-stock companies 
concentrate  in their hands  not  only transport  but  also production 
itself,  using  the  stock exchange  as their centre. Besides America, 
the latest French republic  is a  striking example  of this;  and  even 
good  old  Switzerland  has  contributed  its share  in this field.  But 
that a democratic republic  is not  essential  for this fraternal alliance 
between government  and  stock exchange  is proved  by England 
and also  by the new  German Empire, where  one  cannot tell  who 
was elevated more  by universal suffrage, Bismarck  or Bleichröder. 
And lastly,  the  possessing class rules directly through  the  medium 
of universal suffrage.  As long  as the  oppressed class,  in our  case, 
therefore,  the  proletariat,  is not yet  ripe  to emancipate  itself, it  will 
in its majority regard  the  existing order  of society  as the  only  one 
possible  and,  politically, will form  the  tail of the  capitalist class,  its 
extreme Left wing.  To the  extent, however, that this class matures 
for its self-emancipation,  it constitutes itself  as a  party  of its own 
and elects  its own  representatives,  not  those  of the  capitalists. 
Thus,  universal suffrage  is the  gauge  of the  maturity  of the 
working class.  It cannot  and  never will  be anything more  in the 
present-day state;  but  that  is sufficient.  On the day the  thermome­
ter of universal suffrage registers boiling point among  the  work­
ers, both they  and the  capitalists will know where they stand. 
The state, then,  has not  existed from eternity. There have been 
societies that managed without  it, that  had no  idea  of the  state  and 
state authority.  At a  certain stage  of economic development, which 
was necessarily bound  up with  the  split  of society into classes,  the 
state became  a necessity owing  to this split.  We are now  rapidly 
approaching  a stage  in the  development  of production  at which 
the existence  of these classes  not  only will have ceased  to be a 
necessity,  but  will become  a positive hindrance  to production. 
They will fall  as inevitably  as they arose  at an  earlier stage. Along 
with them  the  state will inevitably fall. Society, which will 
reorganise production  on the  basis  of a  free  and  equal association 
of the  producers, will  put the  whole machinery  of state where  it 
will then belong: into  the museum  of antiquities,  by the  side  of the 
spinning-wheel  and the  bronze  axe. 
* * * 
Thus,  from  the  foregoing, civilisation  is that stage  of develop­
ment  of society  at which division  of labour,  the  resulting exchange 
between individuals,  and  commodity production, which combines 
the two,  reach their full development  and  revolutionise  the  whole 
of hitherto existing society. 

=====第301页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 273 
Production at all previous stages of society was essentially 
common production and, likewise, consumption took place by the 
direct distribution of the products within larger or smaller 
communistic communities. This production in common was 
carried on within the narrowest limits, but concomitantly the 
producers were masters of their process of production and of 
their product. They knew what became of the product: they 
consumed it, it did not leave their hands; and as long as 
production was carried on on this basis, it could not grow beyond 
the control of the producers, and it could not conjure up any 
alien, phantom powers against them, as is the case regularly and 
inevitably under civilisation. 
But, slowly, division of labour crept into this process of 
production. It undermined the communality of production and 
appropriation, it made appropriation by individuals the predomi­
nant rule, and thus gave rise to exchange between individuals— 
how, we examined above. Gradually, the production of com­
modities became the dominant form. 
With the production of commodities, production no longer for 
one's own consumption but for exchange, the products necessarily 
change hands. The producer parts with his product in the course 
of exchange; he no longer knows what becomes of it. As soon as 
money, and with it the merchant, steps in as a mediator between 
the producers, the process of exchange becomes still more 
complicated, the ultimate fate of the products still more uncertain. 
The merchants are numerous and none of them knows what the 
other is doing. Commodities now pass not only from hand to 
hand, but also from market to market. The producers have lost 
control of the total production of their life cycle, and the mer­
chants have not acquired it. Products and production fall victim to 
chance. 
But chance is only one pole of an interrelation, the other pole of 
which is called necessity. In nature, where chance, too, seems to 
reign, we have long since demonstrated in each particular field the 
inherent necessity and regularity that asserts itself in this chance. 
What is true of nature holds good also for society. The more a 
social activity, a series of social processes, becomes too powerful 
for conscious human control, grows beyond human reach, the 
more it seems to have been left to pure chance, the more do its 
peculiar and innate laws assert themselves in this chance, as if by 
natural necessity. Such laws also control the fortuities of the 
production and exchange of commodities; these laws confront the 
individual producer and exchanger as strange and, in the 

=====第302页=====
274 Frederick Engels 
beginning, even as unknown powers, the nature of which must 
first be laboriously investigated and ascertained. These economic 
laws of commodity production are modified at the different stages 
of development of this form of production; on the whole, 
however, the entire period of civilisation has been dominated by 
these laws. To this day, the product is master of the producer; to 
this day, the total production of society is regulated, not by a plan 
thought out in common, but by blind laws, which operate with 
elemental force, in the last resort in the storms of periodic 
commercial crises. 
We saw above how human labour power became able, at a 
rather early stage of development of production, to deliver 
considerably more products than were needed for the producer's 
maintenance, and how this stage, in the main, coincided with that 
where the division of labour and exchange appeared between 
individuals. Now, it was not long before the great "truth" was 
discovered that man, too, may be a commodity; that human 
power3 may be exchanged and utilised by converting man into a 
slave. Men had barely started to engage in exchange when they 
themselves were exchanged. The active became a passive, whether 
man wanted it or not. 
With slavery, which reached its fullest development under 
civilisation, came the first great split of society into an exploiting 
and an exploited class. This split has continued during the whole 
period of civilisation. Slavery was the first form of exploitation, 
peculiar to the world of antiquity; it was followed by serfdom in 
the Middle Ages, and by wage labour in modern times. These are 
the three great forms of servitude, characteristic of the three great 
epochs of civilisation; overt, and, latterly, covert slavery, are its 
constant companions. 
The stage of commodity production, with which civilisation 
began, is marked economically by the introduction of 1) metal 
money and, thus, of money capital, interest and usury; 2) the 
merchants acting as mediating class between producers; 3) private 
ownership of land and mortgage; 4) slave labour as the prevailing 
form of production. The form of the family corresponding to 
civilisation and under it becoming the definitively prevailing form is 
monogamy, the supremacy of the man over the woman, and the 
individual family as the economic unit of society. The cohesive 
force of civilised society is the state, which in all typical periods is 
exclusively the state of the ruling class, and in all cases remains 
a The 1884 edition has "human labour power".— Ed. 

=====第303页=====
Origin of the Family, Private Property and State 275 
essentially a machine for keeping down the oppressed, exploited 
class.  Other marks of civilisation are: on the one hand, fixation of 
the antithesis between town and country as the basis of the entire 
social division of labour; on the other hand, the introduction of 
testaments, by which the property holder is able to dispose of his 
property even after his death. This institution, which was a direct 
blow in the face of the old gentile constitution, was unknown in 
Athens until the time of Solon; in Rome it was introduced very 
early, but we do not know when.* Among the Germans it was 
introduced by the priests in order that the good honest German 
might without hindrance bequeath his property to the Church. 
With this constitution as its foundation civilisation has accom­
plished things of which the old gentile society was not remotely 
capable. But it accomplished them by setting in motion the most 
sordid instincts and passions of man, and by developing them at 
the expense of all his other faculties. Naked greed has been the 
moving spirit of civilisation from its first day to the present time; 
wealth, wealth and wealth again; wealth, not of society, but of this 
shabby individual was its sole determining aim. If, in the pursuit 
of this aim, the increasing development of science and repeated 
periods of the fullest blooming of art fell into its lap, it was only 
because without them the ample present-day achievements in the 
accumulation of wealth would have been impossible. 
Since the exploitation of one class by another is the basis of 
civilisation, its whole development moves in a continuous con­
tradiction. Every advance in production is at the same time a 
retrogression in the condition of the oppressed class, that is, of the 
great majority. What is a boon for the one is necessarily a bane for 
the other; each new emancipation of one class means a new 
oppression of another class. The most striking proof of this is 
furnished by the introduction of machinery, the effects of which 
are today known throughout the world. And while among 
barbarians, as we have seen, hardly any distinction could be made 
* Lassalle's Das System der erworbenen Rechte turns, in its second part, mainly on 
the proposition that the Roman testament is as old as Rome  itself,  that in Roman 
history there was never "a time when testaments did not exist"; that the testament 
arose rather in pre-Roman times out of the cult of the dead. As a confirmed 
Hegelian of the old school, Lassalle derived the provisions of the Roman law not 
from the social relations of the Romans, but from the "speculative conception" of 
the will, and thus arrived at this totally unhistoric assertion. This is not to be 
wondered at in a book which from the same speculative conception draws the 
conclusion that the transfer of property was purely a secondary matter in Roman 
inheritance. Lassalle not only believes in the illusions of Roman jurists, especially of 
the earlier period, but he even excels them. 
20-1243 

=====第304页=====
276 Frederick Engels 
between rights and duties, civilisation makes the difference and 
antithesis between these two plain even to the dullest mind by 
assigning to one class pretty nearly all the rights, and to the other 
class pretty nearly all the duties. 
But this is not as it ought to be. What is good for the ruling 
class should be good for the whole of the society with which the 
ruling class identifies  itself.  Therefore, the more civilisation 
advances, the more it is compelled to cover the ills it necessarily 
creates with the cloak of love, to embellish them, or to deny their 
existence; in short, to introduce conventional hypocrisy— 
unknown either in previous forms of society or even in the earliest 
stages of civilisation—that eventually culminates in the declara­
tion: The exploiting class exploits the oppressed class solely and 
exclusively in the interest of the exploited class  itself;  and if the 
latter fails to appreciate this, and even becomes rebellious, it 
thereby shows the basest ingratitude to its benefactors, the 
exploiters.* 
And now, in conclusion, Morgan's verdict on civilisation: 
"Since the advent of civilisation, the outgrowth of property has been so 
immense, its forms so diversified, its uses so expanding and its management so 
intelligent in the interests of its owners that it has  become,  on the part of the people, 
an unmanageable power. The human mind stands bewildered in the presence of its own 
creation. The time will come, nevertheless, when human intelligence will rise to the 
mastery over property, and define the relations of the state to the property it 
protects, as well as [...] the limits of the rights of its owners. The interests of society 
are paramount to individual interests, and the two must be brought into just and 
harmonious relation. A mere property career is not the final destiny of mankind, if 
progress is to be the law of the future as it has been of the past. The time which 
has passed away since civilisation began is but a fragment of the past duration of 
man's existence; and but a fragment of the ages yet to come. The dissolution of 
society bids fair to become the termination of a career of which property is the end 
and aim, because such a career contains the elements of self-destruction. 
Democracy in government, brotherhood in society, equality in rights [...], and 
universal education, foreshadow the next higher plane of society to which 
experience, intelligence and knowledge are steadily tending. It will be a revival, in a 
higher form, of the liberty, equality and fraternity of the ancient gentes." (Morgan, Ancient 
Society, p. 552.)a 
* I had intended at the outset to place the brilliant critique of civilisation, 
scattered through the works of Charles Fourier, by the side of Morgan's and my own. 
Unfortunately, I cannot spare the time. I only wish to remark that Fourier already 
considered monogamy and property in land as the main distinguishing features of 
civilisation, and that he described it as a war of the rich against the poor. We also 
find already in his works the deep appreciation of the fact that in all imperfect 
societies, those torn by antagonisms, the individual families (les familles incohérentes) 
are the economic units. 
a Italics by Engels. See also "Marx's Excerpts...", op. cit., p. 139.— Ed. 

=====第305页=====
277 
[INTRODUCTORY NOTE 
TO THE SEPARATE 1884 EDITION 
OF MARX'S WAGE LABOUR AND CAPITAL] 1: 
The following work appeared as a series of leading articles in 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung from April 4, 1849 onwards. It is 
based on the lectures delivered by Marx in 1847 at the German 
Workers' Society in Brussels. 140 The work as printed remained a 
fragment; the words at the end of No. 269: "To be continued," 
remained unfulfilled in consequence of the events which just then 
came crowding one after another: the invasion of Hungary by the 
Russians, the insurrections in Dresden, Iserlohn, Elberfeld, the 
Palatinate and Baden, which led to the suppression of the 
newspaper itself (May 19, 1849). 
Written in June 1884 
First published in K. Marx, Lohnarbeit Printed according to the 1891 
und Kapital, Hottingen-Zurich, 1884 edition 

=====第306页=====
278 
MARX AND RODBERTUS 
PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION 
OF THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY BY KARL MARX 141 
The present work was produced in the winter of 1846-47, at a 
time when Marx had cleared up for himself the basic features of 
his new historical and economic outlook. Proudhon's Système des 
contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère, which had just 
appeared, gave him the opportunity to develop these basic 
features, setting them against the views of a man who, from then 
on, was to occupy the most important place among living French 
socialists. Since the time in Paris when the two of them had often 
spent whole nights discussing economic questions, their paths had 
increasingly diverged: Proudhon's book proved that there was 
already an unbridgeable gulf between them. To ignore it was at 
that time impossible, and so Marx put on record the irreparable 
rupture in this reply of his. 
Marx's general opinion of Proudhon is to be found in the 
article, which is appended to this preface and appeared in the 
Berlin Social-Demokrat Nos 16, 17 and 18 for 1865. a It was the 
only article Marx wrote for that paper; Herr von Schweitzer's 
attempts to guide it along feudal and government lines, which 
became evident soon afterwards, compelled us to publicly termi­
nate our collaboration after only a few weeks. 142 
For Germany, the present work has at this precise moment a 
significance which Marx himself never imagined. How could he 
have known that, in trouncing Proudhon, he was hitting Rodber-
tus, the idol of the careerists of today, who was unknown to him 
even by name at that time? 
a K. Marx, "On Proudhon (Letter to J. B. Schweitzer)."—Ed. 

=====第307页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 279 
This is not the place to deal with relations between Marx and 
Rodbertus; an opportunity for that is sure to present itself to me 
very soon.143 Suffice it to note here that when Rodbertus accuses 
Marx of having "plundered" him and of having "freely used in 
his Capital without quoting him"a  his work Zur Erkenntniß, he 
allows himself to indulge in an act of slander which is only 
explicable by the irksomeness of unrecognised genius and by his 
remarkable ignorance of things taking place outside Prussia, and 
especially of socialist and economic literature. Neither these 
charges, nor the above-mentioned work by Rodbertus ever came 
to Marx's sight; all he knew of Rodbertus was the three Sociale 
Briefe and even these certainly not before 1858 or 1859. 
With greater reason Rodbertus asserts in these letters that he 
had already discovered "Proudhon's constituted value" before 
Proudhonb ; but here again it is true he erroneously flatters 
himself with being the first discoverer. In any case, he is thus one 
of the targets of criticism in the present work, and this compels 
me to deal briefly with his "fundamental" piece: Zur Erkenntniß 
unsrer staatswirthschaftlichen Zustände, 1842, insofar as this brings 
forth anticipations of Proudhon as well as the communism of 
Weitling likewise (again unconsciously) contained in it. 
Insofar as modern socialism, no matter of what tendency, starts 
out from bourgeois political economy, it almost without exception 
takes up the Ricardian theory of value. The two propositions 
which Ricardo proclaimed in 1817 right at the beginning of his 
Principles, 1) that the value of any commodity is purely and solely 
determined by the quantity of labour required for its production, 
and 2) that the product of the entire social labour is divided 
among the three classes: landowners (rent), capitalists (profit) and 
workers (wages)—these two propositions had ever since 1821 been 
utilised in England for socialist conclusions, 144 and in part with 
such pointedness and resolution that this literature, which had 
then almost been forgotten and was to a large extent only 
rediscovered by Marx, remained unsurpassed until the appearance 
of Capital. About this another time. If, therefore, in 1842, 
Rodbertus for his part drew socialist conclusions from the above 
propositions, that was certainly a very considerable step forward 
a See Rodbertus' letters to R. Meyers dated November 29, 1871 (Briefe und 
Socialpolitische Aufsätze von Dr. Rodbertus Jagetzow, Vol. 1, Berlin, p. 134) and to 
J. Zeller dated March 14, 1875 (Zeitschrift für die gesammte Staatswissenschaft, Vol. 35, 
Tübingen, 1879, p. 219).— Ed. 
b [J. K.] Rodbertus, Sociale Briefe an von Kirchmann, Zweiter  Brief,  p. 54 
(Note).—  Ed. 

=====第308页=====
280 Frederick Engels 
for a German at that time, but it could rank as a new discovery 
only for Germany at best. That such an application of the 
Ricardian theory was far from new was proved by Marx against 
Proudhon, who suffered from a similar conceit. 
"Anyone who is in any way familiar with the trend of political 
economy in England cannot fail to know that almost all the 
socialists in that country have, at different periods, proposed the 
equalitarian (i.e. socialist)3  application of Ricardian theory. We 
could quote for M. Proudhon: Hodgskin, Political Economy, 1827; 
William Thompson, An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution 
of Wealth Most Conducive to Human Happiness, 1824; T. R. Ed­
monds, Practical Moral and Political Economy, 1828, etc., etc., and 
four pages more of etc. We shall content ourselves with listening to 
an English Communist, Mr. Bray ... in his remarkable work, 
Labour's Wrongs and Labour's Remedy, Leeds, 1839." b And the 
quotations given here from Bray on their own put an end to a 
good part of the priority claimed by Rodbertus. 
At that time Marx had never yet entered the reading room of 
the British Museum. Apart from the libraries of Paris and 
Brussels, apart from my books and extracts, he had only examined 
such books as were obtainable in Manchester during a six-week 
journey to England we made together in the summer of 1845. 
The literature in question was, therefore, by no means so 
inaccesible in the forties as it may be now. If, all the same, it 
always remained unknown to Rodbertus, that is to be ascribed 
solely to his Prussian local bigotry. He is the actual founder of 
specifically Prussian socialism and is now at last recognised as such. 
However, even in his beloved Prussia, Rodbertus was not to 
remain undisturbed. In 1859, Marx's A Contribution to the Critique 
of Political Economy, Part I, was published in Berlin. Therein, 
among the economists' objections to Ricardo, the following was 
put forward as the second objection (p. 40): 
"If the exchange value of a product equals the labour time 
contained in the product, then the exchange value of a working 
day is equal to the product it yields, in other words, wages must be 
equal to the product of labour. But in fact the opposite is true." 
On this there was the following note: "This objection, which was 
advanced against Ricardo by economists, c was later taken up by 
socialists. Assuming that the formula was theoretically sound, they 
a Italics and words in parentheses by Engels. — Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 138.— Ed. 
c Marx has "bourgeois economists".— Ed. 

=====第309页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 281 
alleged that practice stood in conflict with the theory and 
demanded that bourgeois society should draw the practical 
conclusions supposedly arising from its theoretical principles. In 
this way at least English socialists turned Ricardo's formula of 
exchange value against political economy." 3 In the same note 
there was a reference to Marx's Misère de la philosophie, which was 
then obtainable in all the bookshops. 
Rodbertus, therefore, had sufficient opportunity of convincing 
himself whether his discoveries of 1842 were really new. Instead, 
he proclaims them again and again and regards them as so 
incomparable that it never occurs to him that Marx might have 
drawn his conclusions from Ricardo independently, just as well as 
Rodbertus  himself.  Absolutely impossible! Marx had "plundered" 
him—the man whom the same Marx had offered every opportu­
nity to convince himself how long before both of them these 
conclusions, at least in the crude form which they still have in the 
case of Rodbertus, had previously been enunciated in England! 
The simplest socialist application of the Ricardian theory is 
indeed that given above. It has led in many cases to insights into 
the origin and nature of surplus value which go far beyond 
Ricardo, as in the case of Rodbertus among others. Quite apart 
from the fact that on this matter he nowhere presents anything 
which has not already been said at least as well, before him, his 
presentation suffers like those of his predecessors from the fact 
that he adopts, uncritically and without examining their content, 
economic categories—labour, capital, value, etc.—in the crude 
form, clinging to their external appearance, in which they were 
handed down to him by the economists. He thereby not only cuts 
himself off from all further development—in contrast to Marx, 
who was the first to make something of these propositions so often 
repeated for the last sixty-four years—but, as will be shown, he 
opens for himself the road leading straight to Utopia. 
The above application of the Ricardian theory that the entire 
social product belongs to the workers as their product, because 
they are the sole real producers, leads directly to communism. 
But, as Marx indeed indicates in the above-quoted passage, it is 
incorrect in formal economic terms, for it is simply an 
application of morality to economics. According to the laws of 
bourgeois economics, the greatest part of the product does not 
belong to the workers who have produced it. If we now say: that 
is unjust, that ought not to be so, then that has nothing 
a See present edition, Vol. 29, p.  301.—  Ed. 

=====第310页=====
282 Frederick Engels 
immediately to do with economics. We are merely saying that this 
economic fact is in contradiction to our sense of morality. Marx, 
therefore, never based his communist demands upon this, but 
upon the inevitable collapse of the capitalist mode of production 
which is daily taking place before our eyes to an ever growing 
degree; he says only that surplus value consists of unpaid labour, 
which is a simple fact. But what in economic terms may be 
formally incorrect, may all the same be correct from the point of 
view of world history. If mass moral consciousness declares an 
economic fact to be unjust, as it did at one time in the case of 
slavery and statute labour, that is proof that the fact itself has 
outlived its day, that other economic facts have made their 
appearance due to which the former has become unbearable and 
untenable. Therefore, a very true economic content may be 
concealed behind the formal economic incorrectness. This is not 
the place to deal more closely with the significance and history of 
the theory of surplus value. 
At the same time other conclusions can be drawn, and have 
been drawn, from the Ricardian theory of value. The value of 
commodities is determined by the labour required for their 
production. But now it turns out that in this imperfect world 
commodities are sold sometimes above, sometimes below their 
value, and indeed not only as a result of ups and downs in 
competition. The rate of profit tends just as much to balance out 
at the same level for all capitalists as the price of commodities does 
to become reduced to the labour value by agency of supply and 
demand. But the rate of profit is calculated on the total capital 
invested in an industrial business. Since now the annual products 
in two different branches of industry may incorporate equal 
quantities of labour, and, consequently, may represent equal 
values and also wages may be at an equal level in both, while the 
capital advanced in one branch may be, and often is, twice or 
three times as great as in the other, consequently the Ricardian 
law of value, as Ricardo himself discovered, comes into contradic­
tion here with the law of the equal rate of profit. If the products 
of both .branches of industry are sold at their values, the rates of 
profit cannot be equal; if, however, the rates of profit are equal, 
then the products of the two branches of industry cannot always 
be sold at their values. Thus, we have here a contradiction, the 
antinomy of two economic laws, the practical resolution of which 
takes place according to Ricardo (Chapter I, Section 4 and 5 145) 
as a rule in favour of the rate of profit at the cost of value. 
But the Ricardian definition of value, in spite of its ominous 

=====第311页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 283 
characteristics, has a feature which makes it dear to the heart of 
the honest bourgeois. It appeals with irresistible force to his sense 
of justice. Justice and equality of rights are the cornerstones on 
which the bourgeois of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
would like to erect his social edifice over the ruins of feudal 
injustice, inequality and privilege. And the determination of value 
of commodities by labour and the free exchange of the products 
of labour, taking place according to this measure of value between 
commodity owners with equal rights, these are, as Marx has 
already proved, the real foundations on which the whole political, 
juridical and philosophical ideology of the modern bourgeoisie has 
been built. Once it is recognised that labour is the measure of 
value of a commodity, the better feelings of the honest bourgeois 
cannot but be deeply wounded by the wickedness of a world 
which, while recognising the basic law of justice in name, still in 
fact appears at every moment to set it aside without compunction. 
And the petty bourgeois especially, whose honest labour—even if 
it is only that of his workmen and apprentices—is daily more and 
more depreciated in value by the competition of large-scale 
production and machinery, this small-scale producer especially 
must long for a society in which the exchange of products 
according to their labour value is at last a complete and invariable 
truth. In other words, he must long for a society in which a single 
law of commodity production prevails exclusively and in full, but 
in which the conditions are abolished in which it can prevail at all, 
viz., the other laws of commodity production and, later, of 
capitalist production. 
How deeply this Utopia has struck roots in the way of thinking 
of the modern petty bourgeois—real or ideal—is proved by the 
fact that it was systematically developed by John Gray back in 
1831,a  that it was tried in practice and theoretically propagated in 
England in the thirties, that it was proclaimed as the latest truth by 
Rodbertus in Germany in 1842 and by Proudhon in France in 
1846,  that it was again proclaimed by Rodbertus as late as 1871 as 
the solution to the social question and, as, so to say, his social 
testament,b and that in 1884 it again finds adherents among the 
horde of careerists who in the name of Rodbertus set out to 
exploit Prussian state socialism.146 
The critique of this Utopia has been so exhaustively furnished by 
Marx both against Proudhon and against Grayc (see the appendix 
a J. Gray, The Social System: A Treatise on the Principle of Exchange.—Ed. 
b See J. K. Rodbertus, Der Normal-Arbeitstag. —Ed. 
c See present edition, Vol. 29, pp. 320-23.— Ed. 

=====第312页=====
284 Frederick Engels 
to this worka) that I can confine myself here to a few remarks 
on the form of substantiating and depicting it peculiar to Rod-
bertus. 
As already noted, Rodbertus adopts the traditional definitions of 
economic concepts entirely in the form in which they have come 
down to him from the economists. He does not make the slightest 
attempt to investigate them. Value is for him 
"the valuation of one thing against others according to quantity, this valuation 
being conceived as measure".b 
This,  to put it mildly, extremely slovenly definition gives us at 
the best an idea of what value approximately looks like, but says 
absolutely nothing of what it is. Since this, however, is all that 
Rodbertus is able to tell us about value, it is understandable that 
he looks for a measure of value located outside value. After thirty 
pages in which he mixes up use value and exchange value in 
higgledypiggledy fashion with that power of abstract thought so 
infinitely admired by Herr Adolf Wagner, 147 he arrives at the 
conclusion that there is no real measure of value and that one has 
to make do with a substitute measure. Labour could serve as such, 
but only if products of an equal quantity of labour were always 
exchanged against products of an equal quantity of labour; 
whether this "is already the case of  itself,  or whether precaution­
ary measures are adopted" to ensure that it is.c Consequently, 
value and labour remain without any sort of material connection, 
in spite of the fact that the whole first chapter is taken up to 
expound to us that commodities "cost labour" and nothing but 
labour, and why this is so. 
Labour, again, is taken uncritically in the form in which it 
occurs among the economists. And not even that. For, although 
there is a reference in a couple of words to differences in intensity 
of labour, labour is still put forward quite generally as something 
which "costs", hence as something which measures value, quite 
irrespective of whether it is expended under normal average social 
conditions or not. Whether the producers take ten days, or only 
one, to make products which could be made in one day; whether 
they employ the best or the worst tools; whether they expend their 
labour time in the production of socially necessary articles and in 
a See this volume, p.  291.—  Ed. 
b [J. K.] Rodbertus, Zur Erkenntniß unsrer staatswirthschaftlichen Zustände, 
p. 61.—  Ed 
c Ibid., p. 62.— Ed 

=====第313页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 285 
the socially required quantity, or whether they make quite 
undesired articles or desired articles in quantities above or below 
demand—about all this there is not a word: labour is labour, the 
product of equal labour must be exchanged against the product of 
equal labour. Rodbertus, who is otherwise always ready, whether 
rightly or not, to adopt the national standpoint and to survey the 
relations of individual producers from the high watchtower of 
general social considerations, is anxious to avoid doing so here. 
And this, indeed, solely because from the very first line of his 
book he makes directly for the Utopia of labour money, and 
because any investigation of labour seen from its property of 
creating value would be bound to put insuperable obstacles in his 
way. His instinct was here considerably stronger than his power of 
abstract thought which, by the by, is revealed in Rodbertus only by 
the most concrete absence of ideas. 
The transition to Utopia is now made in the turn of a hand. The 
"measures", which ensure exchange of commodities according to 
labour value as the invariable rule, cause no difficulty. The other 
Utopians of this tendency, from Gray to Proudhon, rack their 
brains to invent social institutions which would achieve this aim. 
They attempt at least to solve the economic question in an 
economic way through the action of the owners themselves who 
exchange the commodities. For Rodbertus it is much easier. As a 
good Prussian he appeals to the state: a decree of the state 
authority orders the reform. 
In this way then, value is happily "constituted", but by no 
means the priority in this constitution as claimed by Rodbertus. 
On the contrary, Gray as well as Bray—among many others— 
before Rodbertus, at length and frequently ad nauseam, repeated 
this idea, viz., the pious desire for measures by means of which 
products would always and under all circumstances be exchanged 
only at their labour value. 
After the state has thus constituted value—at least for a part of 
the products, for Rodbertus is also modest—it issues its labour 
paper money, and gives advances therefrom to the industrial 
capitalists, with which the latter pay the workers, whereupon the 
workers buy the products with the labour paper money they have 
received, and so cause the paper money to flow back to its starting 
point. How very beautifully this is effected, one must hear from 
Rodbertus  himself: 
"In regard to the second condition, the necessary measure that the value 
certified in the note should be actually present in circulation is realised in that only 
the person who actually delivers a product receives a note, on which is accurately 

=====第314页=====
286 Frederick Engels 
recorded the quantity of labour by which the product was produced. Whoever 
delivers a product of two days' labour receives a note marked 'two days'. By the 
strict observance of this rule in the issue of notes, the second condition too would 
necessarily be fulfilled. For according to our supposition the real value of the goods 
always coincides with the quantity of labour which their production has cost and 
this quantity of labour is measured by the usual units of time, and therefore 
someone who hands in a product on which two days' labour has been expended 
and receives a certificate for two days, has received, certified or assigned to him 
neither more nor less value than that which he has in fact supplied. Further, since 
only the person who has actually put a product into circulation receives such a 
certificate, it is also certain that the value marked on the note is available for the 
satisfaction of society. However extensive we imagine the circle of division of labour 
to be, if this rule is strictly followed the sum total of available value must be exactly 
equal to the sum total of certified value.3 Since, however, the sum total of certified 
value is exactly equal to the sum total of value assigned, the latter must necessarily 
coincide with the available value, all claims will be satisfied ~and the liquidation correctly 
brought about" (pp. 166-67). 
If Rodbertus has hitherto always had the misfortune to arrive 
too late with his new discoveries, this time at least he has the merit 
of one sort of originality: none of his rivals has dared to express 
the stupidity of the labour money Utopia in this childishly naïve, 
transparent, I might say truly Pomeranian, form. Since for every 
paper certificate a corresponding object of value has been 
delivered, and no object of value is supplied except in return for a 
corresponding paper certificate, the sum total of paper certificates 
must always be covered by the sum total of objects of value. The 
calculation works out without the smallest remainder, it is correct 
down to a second of labour time, and no governmental chief 
revenue office accountant, however many years of faithful service 
he may have behind him, could prove the slightest error in 
calculation. What more could one want? 
In present-day capitalist society each industrial capitalist pro­
duces off his own bat what, how and as much as he likes. The 
social demand, however, remains an unknown magnitude to him, 
both in regard to quality, the kind of objects required, and in 
regard to quantity. That which today cannot be supplied quickly 
enough, may" tomorrow be offered far in excess of the demand. 
Nevertheless, demand is finally satisfied in one way or another, 
good or bad, and, taken as a whole, production is ultimately 
geared towards the objects required. How is this evening-out of 
the contradiction effected? By competition. And how does 
competition bring about this solution? Simply by depreciating 
below their labour value those commodities which by their kind or 
a Here and below italics by Engels. — Ed. 

=====第315页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 287 
amount are useless for immediate social requirements, and by 
making the producers feel, through this roundabout means, that 
they have produced either absolutely useless articles or ostensibly 
useful articles in unusable, superfluous quantity. Two things 
follow from this: 
First, continual deviations of the prices of commodities from 
their values are the necessary condition in and through which the 
value of the commodities as such can come into existence. Only 
through the fluctuations of competition, and consequently of 
commodity prices, does the law of value of commodity production 
assert itself and the determination of the value of the commodity 
by the socially necessary labour time become a reality. That 
thereby the form of manifestation of value, the price, as a rule 
looks somewhat different from the value which it manifests, is a 
fate which value shares with most social relations. A king usually 
looks quite different from the monarchy which he represents. To 
desire, in a society of producers who exchange their commodities, 
to establish the determination of value by labour time, by 
forbidding competition to establish this determination of value 
through pressure on prices in the only way it can be established, is 
therefore merely to prove that, at least in this sphere, one has 
adopted the usual Utopian disdain of economic laws. 
Secondly, competition, by bringing into operation the law of 
value of commodity production in a society of producers who 
exchange their commodities, precisely thereby brings about the 
only organisation and arrangement of social production which is 
possible in the circumstances. Only through the undervaluation or 
overvaluation of products is it forcibly brought home to the 
individual commodity producers what society requires or does not 
require and in what amounts. But it is precisely this sole regulator 
that the Utopia advocated by Rodbertus among others wishes to 
abolish. And if we then ask what guarantee we have that necessary 
quantity and not more of each product will be produced, that we 
shall not go hungry in regard to corn and meat while we are 
choked in beet sugar and drowned in potato spirit, that we shall 
not lack trousers to cover our nakedness while trouser buttons 
flood us by the million—Rodbertus triumphantly shows us his 
splendid calculation, according to which the correct certificate has 
been handed out for every superfluous pound of sugar, for every 
unsold barrel of spirit, for every unusable trouser button, a 
calculation which "works out" exactly, and according to which "all 
claims will be satisfied and the liquidation correctly brought 
about". And anyone who does not believe this can apply to 

=====第316页=====
288 Frederick Engels 
governmental chief revenue office accountant X in Pomerania, 
who has checked the calculation and found it correct, and who, as 
one who has never yet been caught lacking with the accounts, is 
thoroughly trustworthy. 
And now consider the naïveté with which Rodbertus would 
abolish industrial and commercial crises by means of his Utopia. As 
soon as the production of commodities has assumed world market 
dimensions, the evening-out between the individual producers who 
produce for private account and the market for which they 
produce, which in respect of quantity and quality of demand is 
more or less unknown to them, is established by means of a storm 
on the world market, by a commercial crisis.* If now competition 
is to be forbidden to make the individual producers aware, by a 
rise or fall in prices, how the world market stands, then they are 
completely blindfolded. To institute the production of com­
modities in such a fashion that the producers can no longer learn 
anything about the state of the market for which they are 
producing—that indeed is a cure for the crisis disease which could 
make Dr. Eisenbart envious of Rodbertus. 
It is now comprehensible why Rodbertus determines the value 
of commodities simply by "labour" and at most allows for 
different degrees of intensity of labour. If he had investigated by 
what means and how labour creates value and therefore also 
determines and measures it, he would have arrived at socially 
necessary labour, necessary for the individual product, both in 
relation to other products of the same kind and also in relation to 
society's total demand. He would thereby have been confronted 
with the question as to how the adjustment of the production of 
separate commodity producers to the total social demand takes 
place, and his whole Utopia would thereby have been made 
impossible. This time he preferred in fact to "make an abstrac­
tion", namely of precisely that which mattered. 
Now at last we come to the point where Rodbertus really offers 
us something new; something which distinguishes him from all his 
numerous fellow supporters of the labour money exchange 
economy. They all demand this exchange organisation for the 
* At least this was the case until recently. Since England's monopoly of the 
world market is being increasingly shattered by the participation of France, 
Germany and, above all, of America in world trade, a new form of evening-out 
appears to come into operation. The period of general prosperity preceding the 
crisis still fails to appear. If it should remain absent altogether, then chronic 
stagnation must necessarily become the normal condition of modern industry, with 
only insignificant fluctuations. 

=====第317页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 289 
purpose of abolishing the exploitation of wage labour by capital. 
Every producer is to receive the full labour value of his product. 
On this they all agree, from Gray to Proudhon. Not at all, says 
Rodbertus. Wage labour and its exploitation remain. 
In the first place, in no conceivable condition of society can the 
worker receive the full value of his product for consumption. A 
series of economically unproductive but necessary functions have 
to be met from the fund produced, and consequently also the 
persons connected with them maintained. This is only correct so 
long as the present-day division of labour applies. In a society in 
which general productive labour is obligatory, which is also 
"conceivable" after all, this ceases to apply. But the need for a 
social reserve and accumulation fund would remain and conse­
quently even in that case, the workers, i.e., all, would remain in 
possession and enjoyment of their total product, but each separate 
worker would not enjoy the "full returns of his labour". Nor has 
the maintenance of economically unproductive functions at the 
expense of the labour product been overlooked by the other 
labour money Utopians. But they leave the workers to tax 
themselves for this purpose in the usual democratic way, while 
Rodbertus, whose whole social reform of 1842 is geared to the 
Prussian state of that time, refers the whole matter to the decision 
of the bureaucracy, which determines from above the share of 
the worker in his own product and graciously permits him to 
have it. 
In the second place, however, rent and profit are also to 
continue undiminished. For the landowners and industrial capital­
ists also exercise certain socially useful or even necessary functions, 
even if economically unproductive ones, and they receive in the 
shape of rent and profit a sort of pay on that account—-a 
conception which was, it will be recalled, not new even in 1842. 
Actually they get at present far too much for the little that they 
do, and badly at that, but Rodbertus has need, at least for the next 
five hundred years, of a privileged class, and so the present rate of 
surplus value, to express myself correctly, is to remain in existence 
but is not to be allowed to be increased. This present rate of 
surplus value Rodbertus takes to be 200 per cent, that is to say, for 
twelve hours of labour daily the worker is to receive a certificate 
not for twelve hours but only for four, and the value produced in 
the remaining eight hours is to be divided between landowner and 
capitalist. Rodbertus' labour certificates, therefore, are a direct lie. 
Again, one must be a Pomeranian manor owner in order to 
imagine that a working class would put up with working twelve 

=====第318页=====
290 Frederick Engels 
hours in order to receive a certificate for four hours of labour. If 
the hocus-pocus of capitalist production is translated into this 
naïve language, in which it appears as naked robbery, it is made 
impossible. Every certificate given to a worker would be a direct 
instigation to rebellion and would come under § 110 of the 
German Imperial Criminal Code. 148 One need never have seen any 
other proletariat than the day-labourer proletariat, still actually in 
semi-serfdom, of a Pomeranian manor where the rod and the 
whip reign supreme, and where all the beautiful women in the 
village belong to his lordship's harem, in order to imagine one can 
treat the workers in such a shamefaced manner. But, after all, our 
conservatives are our greatest revolutionaries. 
If, however, our workers are sufficiently docile to be taken in 
that they have in reality only worked four hours during a whole 
twelve hours of hard work, they are, as a reward, to be guaranteed 
that for all eternity their share in their own product will never fall 
below a third. That is indeed pie in the sky of the most infantile 
kind and not worth wasting a word over. Insofar, therefore, as 
there is anything novel in the labour money exchange Utopia of 
Rodbertus, this novelty is simply childish and far below the 
achievements of his numerous comrades both before and after 
him. 
For the time when Rodbertus' Zur Erkenntniß, etc., appeared, it 
was certainly an important book. His development of Ricardo's 
theory of value in that one direction was a very promising 
beginning. Even if it was new only for him and for Germany, still 
as a whole, it stands on a par with the achievements of the better 
ones among his English predecessors. But it was only a beginning, 
from which a real gain for theory could be achieved only by 
further thorough and critical work. But he cut himself off from 
further development by also tackling the development of Ricardo's 
theory from the very beginning in the second direction, in the 
direction of Utopia. Thereby he surrendered the first condition of 
all criticism—freedom from bias. He worked on towards a goal 
fixed in advance, he became a Tendenzökonom. Once imprisoned by 
his Utopia, he cut himself off from all possibility of scientific 
advance. From 1842 up to his death, he went round in circles, 
always repeating the same ideas which he had already expressed 
or suggested in his first work, feeling himself unappreciated, 
finding himself plundered, where there was nothing to plunder, 
and finally refusing, not without intention, to recognise that in 
essence he had only rediscovered what had already been 
discovered long before. 

=====第319页=====
Marx and Rodbertus 291 
In a few places the translation departs from the printed French 
original. This is due to handwritten alterations by Marx, which will 
also be inserted in the new French edition that is now being 
prepared. 149 
It is hardly necessary to point out that the terminology used in 
this work does not entirely coincide with that in Capital. Thus this 
work still speaks of labour as a commodity, of the purchase and 
sale of labour, instead of labour power. 
Also added as a supplement to this edition are: 
1) a passage from Marx's work A Contribution to the Critique of 
Political Economy, Berlin, 1859, dealing with the first labour money 
exchange Utopia of John Gray, and 2) a translation of Marx's 
speech on free trade in Brussels (1848),a  which belongs to the 
same period of the author's development as the Misère. 
London, October 23, 1884 Frederick Engels 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, No. 1, Printed according to the 1892 
1885 and K. Marx, Das Elend der German edition 
Philosophie, Stuttgart, 1885 
K. Marx, "Speech on the Question of Free Trade".— Ed. 
21-1243 

=====第320页=====
292 
REAL IMPERIAL RUSSIAN 
PRIVY DYNAMITERS150 
Everybody knows that the Russian government is using every 
means at its disposal to arrive at treaties with the West European 
states for the extradition of Russian revolutionaries who have fled 
the country. 
Everybody also knows that its overriding concern is to obtain 
such a treaty from England. 
And the final thing that everybody knows is that Russian 
officialdom will shrink at nothing if only it leads to the desired 
end. 
Very well then. On January 13, 1885 Bismarck concludes an 
agreement with Russia, which provides for the extradition of every 
Russian political refugee the moment Russia sees fit to accuse him 
of being a prospective regicide, or prospective dynamiter.151 
On January 15 Mrs Olga Novikov issued an appeal to England 
in the Pall Mall Gazette, the selfsame Mrs Novikov who in 1877 
and 1878, before and during the war against the Turks, so 
magnificently duped the noble Mr Gladstone in the interests of 
Russia. 152 In it England is exhorted no longer to tolerate people 
such as Hartmann, Kropotkin and Stepniak conspiring on English 
soil "to murder us in Russia", especially now that dynamite has 
become such a burning issue for the English themselves. And, she 
remarks, is Russia asking any more of England with respect to 
Russian revolutionaries than England itself is now obliged to ask 
of America with respect to Irish dynamiters? 
On the morning of January 24 the Prusso-Russian treaty is 
published in London.3 
a See "Extradition by Russia and Prussia", The Times, No. 31352, January 24, 
1885.—  Ed. 

=====第321页=====
Real Imperial Russian Privy Dynamiters 293 
And on January 24 at 2 o'clock in the afternoon, three dynamite 
explosions go off in London within the space of a quarter hour, 
and they cause more damage than all the earlier ones taken 
together, wounding at least seven people, and according to other 
sources eighteen. 
The timing of these explosions is too opportune not to raise the 
question—Whose interests do they serve? Who has most to gain 
from these otherwise pointless shots of terror aimed at nobody in 
particular, to which not only lower-ranking policemen and 
bourgeois fall victim but also workers and their wives and 
children? Who? The few Irishmen who were driven to desperation 
partially because of the brutality of the English government 
during their imprisonment, and who are assumed to have planted 
the dynamite? Or, on the other hand, the Russian government 
which cannot achieve its end—the extradition treaty—without 
putting the government and people of England under the most 
extreme pressure, pressure so great that it whips up public 
opinion in England into a blind rabid rage against the dynamiters? 
When the Polish refugees with very few exceptions, would not 
lower themselves, at the behest of the Russian diplomatic service 
and the police, to forge Russian banknotes, the Russian govern­
ment sent agents abroad, including privy councillor Kamensky, to 
goad them into doing it, and when this too failed Messrs 
Kamensky and associates were obliged to forge Russian banknotes 
themselves. For a further detailed account see the pamphlet The 
Counterfeiters or the Agents of the Russian Government, Geneva, 
H. Georg, 1875. a—The police forces of Switzerland and London, 
and probably of Paris as well, can tell a tale or two about how, in 
tracking down the Russian forgers, their inquiries finally led them 
to people whom the Russian embassies would steadfastly refuse to 
have prosecuted. 
The history of the Balkan peninsula during the past one 
hundred years sheds enough light on the abilities of Russian 
officialdom in removing troublesome individuals by means of 
poison, the dagger, etc. I need refer only to the well-known 
Histoire des principautés danubiennes by Elias Regnault, Paris, 1855. 
The Russian diplomatic service constantly has at its disposal agents 
of all kinds, including the kind that are used to commit infamous 
deeds and then disowned. 
I do not hesitate, for the time being to lay the blame for the 
explosions in London on January 24, 1885 at the door of the 
Published in Russian.— Ed. 
21* 

=====第322页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
Russians. Irish hands may have laid the dynamite, but it is more 
than probable that a Russian brain and Russian money were 
behind it. 
The means of struggle employed by the Russian revolutionaries 
are dictated to them by necessity, by the actions of their opponents 
themselves. They must answer to their people and to history for 
the means they employ. But the gentlemen who are needlessly 
parodying this struggle in Western Europe in schoolboy fashion, 
who are attempting to bring the revolution down to the level of 
Schinderhannes, who do not even direct their weapons against real 
enemies but against the public in general, these gentlemen are in 
no way successors or allies of the Russian revolutionaries, but 
rather their worst enemies. Since it has become clear that nobody 
apart from Russian officialdom has any interest in the success of 
these heroic deeds, the only question that remains to be asked is 
which of them were coerced and which of them volunteered to 
become the paid agents of Russian tsarism. 
London, January 25, 1885 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the news-
No. 5, January 29, 1885 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第323页=====
The Official Journal of the Socialist League. 
Vot. 1.—No.  2. MABCH, 1885. 0» Raarr. 
ENGLAND IN 1845 AND IN 1885 ! 
Forty years ago England stood face to face with a crisis, solvable 
to all appearances by force only. The immense and rapid 
development of manufactures had outstripped the extension of 
foreign markets and the increase of demand. Every ten years the 
march of industry was violently interrupted by a general 
commercial crash, followed, after a long period of chronic 
depression, by a few short years of prosperity, and always ending 
in feverish over-production and consequent renewed collapse. The 
capitalist class clamored for Free Trade in corn,154 and threatened 
to enforce it by sending the starving population of the towns back 
to the country districts, whence they came: to invade them, as 
John Bright said, not as paupers begging for bread, but as an 
army quartered upon the enemy.155 The working masses of the 
towns demanded their share of political power—the People's 
Charter156; they were supported by the majority of the small 
trading class, and the only difference between the two was 
whether the Charter should be carried by physical or by moral 
force.3 Then came the commercial crash of 1847 and the Irish 
famine, and with both the prospect of revolution. 
The French Revolution of 1848 saved the English middle class. 
The Socialistic pronunciamentoes of the victorious French work­
men frightened the small middle class of England and disorganised 
the narrower, but more matter-of-fact, movement of the English 
working class. At the very moment Chartism was bound to assert 
itself in its full strength, it collapsed internally, before even it 
a Instead of "by physical or by moral force" the German translation has 
"forcibly or lawfully".— Ed. 

=====第324页=====
296 Frederick Engels 
collapsed externally on the 10th of April, 1848.157 The action3 of 
the working class was thrust into the background. The capitalist 
class triumphed along the whole line. 
The Reform Bill of 1831 158 had been the victory of the whole 
capitalist class over the landed aristocracy. The repeal of the Corn 
Laws 159 was the victory of the manufacturing capitalists not only 
over the landed aristocracy, but over those sections of capitalists 
too whose interests were more or lessb bound up with the landed 
interest: bankers, stock-jobbers, fundholders, etc. Free Trade 
meant the re-adjustment of the whole home and foreign 
commercial and financial policy of England in accordance with the 
interests of the manufacturing capitalists—the class which now 
represented the nation. And they set about this task with a will. 
Every obstacle to industrial production was mercilessly removed. 
The tariff and the whole system of taxation were revolutionised. 
Everything was made subordinate to one end, but that end of the 
utmost importance to the manufacturing capitalist: the cheapening 
of all raw produce, and especially of the means of living of the 
working class; the reduction of the cost of raw material, and the 
keeping down—if not as yet the bringing down—of wages. 
England was to become the "workshop of the world" 160; all other 
countries were to become for England what Ireland already 
was — markets for her manufactured goods, supplying her in 
return with raw materials and food. England the great manufac­
turing centre of an agricultural world, with an ever-increasing 
number of corn and cotton-growing Irelands,0 revolving around 
her, the industrial sun. What a glorious prospect! 
The manufacturing capitalists set about the realisation of this 
their great object with that strong common sense and that 
contempt for traditional principles which has ever distinguished 
them from their more narrow-mindedd compeers on the Conti­
nent. Chartism was dying out. The revival of commercial 
prosperity, natural6 after the revulsion of 1847 had spent  itself, 
was put down altogether to the credit of Free Trade. Both these 
circumstances had turned the English working class, politically, 
into the tail of the great Liberal party/ the party led by the 
a The German translation has "The political action".— Ed. 
b The German translation has "identical or" instead of "more or less".— Ed. 
c The German translation has "satellites" instead of "Irelands".—Ed. 
d The German translation has "more philistine" instead of "more narrow-
minded".— Ed. 
e The German translation further has "and almost self-evident".— Ed. 
f In the German translation the expression "great Liberal party" is given in 
inverted commas.— Ed. 

=====第325页=====
England in 1845 and in 1885 297 
manufacturers. This advantage, once gained, had to be per­
petuated. And the manufacturing capitalists, from the Chartist 
opposition3 not to Free Trade, but to the transformation of Free 
Trade into the one vital national question, had learnt and were 
learning more and more that the middle class can never obtain 
full social and political power over the nation except by the help 
of the working class. Thus a gradual change came over the 
relations between both classes. The Factory Acts,161 once the 
bugbear of all manufacturers, were not only willingly submitted to, 
but their expansion into acts regulating almost all trades, was 
tolerated. Trades' Unions, lately considered inventions of the devil 
himself,  were now petted and patronised as perfectly legitimate 
institutions and as useful means of spreading sound economical 
doctrines amongst the workers. Even strikes, than which nothing 
had been more nefarious up to 1848, were now gradually found 
out to be occassionally very useful, especially when provoked by 
the masters themselves, at their own time. Of the legal enactments, 
placing the workman at a lower level or at a disadvantage with 
regard to the master, at least the most revolting were repealed. 
And, practically, that horrid "People's Charter" actually became 
the political programme of the very manufacturers who had 
opposed it to the last. "The Abolition of the Property Qualifica­
tion"0 and "Vote by Ballot" are now the law of the land. The 
Reform Acts of 1867 and 1884162 make a near approach to 
"universal suffrage," at least such as it now exists in Germany; the 
Redistribution Bill now before Parliament creates "equal electoral 
districts"—on the whole not more unequal than those of France 
or Germany; "payment of members" and shorter, if not actually 
"annual parliaments" are visibly looming in the distance—and yet 
there are people who say that Chartism is dead. 
The Revolution of 1848, not less than many of its predecessors, 
has had strange bed-fellows and successors.0 The very people who 
put it down, have become, as Karl Marx used to say, its 
testamentary executors. Louis Napoleon had to create an independ­
ent and united Italy, Bismarck had to revolutionise Germany and 
to restore*1 Hungarian independence and the English manufactur­
ers hade to enact the People's Charter. 
a The German translation has here "strong Chartist opposition".— Ed. 
b Here and below the words in quotes relate the contents of the People's 
Charter.—Ed. 
c The German translation has "a strange fate" instead of "strange bed fellows 
and successors".— Ed. 
d In the German translation here follow the words "a certain".— Ed. 
e The German translation has "had nothing better to do than".— Ed. 

=====第326页=====
298 Frederick Engels 
For England, the effects of this domination of the manufactur­
ing capitalists were at first startling. Trade revived and extended 
to a degree unheard of even in this cradle of modern industry; 
the previous astounding creations of steam and machinery 
dwindled into nothing compared with the immense mass of 
productions of the twenty years from 1850 to 1870, with the 
overwhelming figures of exports and imports, of wealth accumu­
lated in the hands of capitalists and of human working power 
concentrated in the large towns. The progress was indeed 
interrupted, as before, by a crisis every ten years, in 1857 as well 
as in 1866; but these revulsions were now considered as natural, 
inevitable events, which must be fatalistically submitted to, and 
which always set themselves right in the end. 
And the condition of the working class during this period? 
There was temporary improvement even for the great mass. But 
this improvement always was reduced to the old level by the influx 
of the great body of the unemployed reserve, by the constant 
superseding of hands by new machinery, by the immigration of 
the agricultural population,3 now, too, more and more superseded 
by machines. 
A permanent improvement can be recognised for two "pro­
tected" sections only of the working class. Firstly, the factory 
hands.  The fixing by Act of Parliament of their working day 
within relatively rational limits,b has restoredc their physical 
constitution and endowed them with a moral superiority, en­
hanced by their local concentration. They are undoubtedly better 
off than before 1848. The best proof is that out of ten strikes they 
make, nine are provoked by the manufacturers in their own 
interests, as the only means of securing a reduced production. You 
can never get the masters to agree to work "short time," let 
manufactured goods be ever so unsaleable; but get the workpeople 
to strike, and the masters shut their factories to a man. 
Secondly, the great Trades' Unions. They are the organisations 
of those trades in which the labor of grown-up men predominates, 
or is alone applicable. Here the competition neither of women and 
children nor of machinery has so far weakened their organised 
strength. The engineers, the carpenters and joiners, the brick­
layers, are each of them a power, to that extent that, as in the case 
of the bricklayers and bricklayers' labourers, they can even 
a The German translation has "workers" instead of "population".— Ed. 
b The German translation has "a normal working day in their favour" instead 
of "their working day within relatively rational limits".— Ed. 
c The German translation has "restored to a certain extent".— Ed. 

=====第327页=====
England in 1845 and in 1885 299 
successfully resist the introduction of machinery. That their 
condition has remarkably improved since 1848 there can be no 
doubt and the best proof of this is in the fact that for more than 
fifteen years not only have their employers been with them, but 
they with their employers, upon exceedingly good terms. They 
form an aristocracy among the working class; they have succeeded 
in enforcing for themselves a relatively comfortable position, and 
they accept it as final. They are the model working men of Messrs. 
Leone Levi and Giffen,3 and they are very nice people indeed 
nowadays to deal with, for any sensible capitalist in particular and 
for the whole capitalist class in general. 
But as to the great mass of the working people, the state of 
misery and insecurity in which they live now is as low as ever, if 
not lower. The East-end of London is an ever-spreading pool of 
stagnant misery and desolation, of starvation when out of work, 
and degradation, physical and moral, when in work. And so in all 
other large towns—abstraction made of the privileged minority of 
the workers; and so in the smaller towns and in the agricultural 
districts. The law which reduces the value of labor-power to the 
value of the necessary means of subsistence, and the other law 
which reduces its average price as a rule to the minimum of those 
means of subsistence: these laws act upon them with the irresistible 
force of an automatic engine, which crushes them between its 
wheels. 
This,  then, was the position created by the Free Trade policy of 
1847,  and by twenty years of the rule of the manufacturing 
capitalists. But then a change came. The crash of 1866 was, 
indeed, followed by a slight and short revival about 1873; but that 
did not last. We did not, indeed, pass through the full crisis at the 
time it was due, in 1877 or 1878; but we have had, ever since 
1876,  a chronic state of stagnation in all dominant branches of 
industry. Neither will the full crash come; nor will the period of 
longed-for prosperity to which we used to be entitled before and 
after it. A dull depression, a chronic glut of all markets for all 
trades, that is what we have been living in for nearly ten years. 
How is this? 
The Free Trade theory was based upon one assumption: that 
England was to be the one great manufacturing centre of an 
agricultural world. And the actual fact is that this assumption has 
turned out to be a pure delusion. The conditions of modern 
a The German translation adds here: "(as well as venerable Lujo Bren­
tano)". — Ed. 

=====第328页=====
300 Frederick Engels 
industry, steam-power and machinery, can be established where-
ever there is fuel, especially coals. And other countries beside 
England: France, Belgium, Germany, America, even Russia, have 
coals.  And the people over there did not see the advantage of 
being turned into Irish pauper farmers merely for the greater 
wealth and glory of English capitalists. They set resolutely about 
manufacturing, not only for themselves but for the rest of the 
world; and the consequence is, that the manufacturing monopoly 
enjoyed by England for nearly a century is irretrievably broken 
up. 
But the manufacturing monopoly of England is the pivot of the 
present social system of England. Even while that monopoly lasted 
the markets could not keep pace with the increasing productivity 
of English manufacturers; the decennial crises were the conse­
quence. And new markets are getting scarcer every day, so much so 
that even the negroes of the Congo are now to be forced into the 
civilisation attendant upon Manchester calicoes, Staffordshire 
pottery, and Birmingham hardware. How will it be when 
Continental, and especially American goods, flow in in ever 
increasing quantities—when the predominating share, still held by 
British manufactures, will become reduced from year to year? 
Answer, Free Trade, thou universal panacea? 
I am not the first to point this out. Already, in 1883, at the 
Southport meeting of the British Association,163 Mr. Inglis 
Palgrave, the President of the Economical section, stated plainly 
that 
"the days of great trade profits in England were over, and there was a pause in 
the progress of several great branches of industrial labour. The country might almost 
be said to be entering the non-progressive state."a 
But what is to be the consequence? Capitalist production cannot 
stop.  It must go on increasing and expanding, or it must die. Even 
now, the mere reduction of England's lion's share in the supply of 
the world's markets means stagnation, distress, excess of capital 
here,  excess of unemployed work-people there. What will it be 
when the increase of yearly production is brought to a complete 
stop? 
Here is the vulnerable place, the heel of Achilles, for capitalist 
production. Its very basis is the necessity of constant expansion, 
and this constant expansion now becomes impossible. It ends in a 
a "Address by R. H. Inglis Palgrave, F.R.S., F.S.S., President of the Section" in 
Report of the Fifty-Third Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science; 
held at Southport in September 1883, pp. 608-09.— Ed. 

=====第329页=====
England in 1845 and in 1885 301 
deadlock. Every year England is brought nearer face to face with 
the question: either the country must go to pieces, or capitalist 
production must. Which is it to be? 
And the working class? If even under the unparalleled 
commercial and industrial expansion, from 1848 to 1868, they 
have had to undergo such misery; if even then the great bulk of 
them experienced at best a temporary improvement of their 
condition, while only a small, privileged, "protected" minority was 
permanently benefited, what will it be when this dazzling period is 
brought finally to a close; when the present dreary stagnation shall 
not only become intensified, but this its intensified condition shall 
become the permanent and normal state of English trade? 
The truth is this: during the period of England's industrial 
monopoly the English working class have to a certain extent 
shared in the benefits of the monopoly. These benefits were very 
unequally parcelled out amongst them; the privileged minority 
pocketed most, but even the great mass had at least a temporary 
share now and then. And that is the reason why since the 
dying-out of Owenism there has been no Socialism in England. 
With the breakdown of that monopoly the English working class 
will lose that privileged position; it will find itself generally—the 
privileged and leading minority not excepted — on a level with its 
fellow-workers abroad. And that is the reason why there will be 
Socialism again in England. 
Frederick Engels 
Written in mid-February 1885 Reproduced from the magazine 
collated with the German transla-First published in The Commonweal, .• 
No. 2, March 1885 

=====第330页=====
302 
PREFACE TO THE THIRD GERMAN EDITION 
OF THE EIGHTEENTH BRUMAIRE 
OF LOUIS BONAPARTE BY MARX 
The fact that a new edition of the Eighteenth Brumaire* has 
become necessary, thirty-three years after its first appearance, 
proves that even today this little book has lost none of its value. 
It was indeed a work of genius. Immediately after the event that 
struck the whole political world like a thunderbolt from the blue, 
that was condemned by some with loud cries of moral indignation 
and accepted by others as a salvation from the revolution and a 
punishment for its errors, but was only wondered at by all and 
understood by none—immediately after this event Marx appeared 
with a concise, epigrammatic exposition that laid bare the whole 
course of French history since those February days in its inner 
connection, reduced the miracle of December 2 164  to a natural, 
necessary result of this connection and, in so doing, did not even 
need to treat the hero of the coup d'état otherwise than with the 
contempt he so well deserved. And the picture was drawn with 
such a masterly hand that every fresh disclosure since made has 
only provided fresh proof of how faithfully it reflects reality. This 
eminent understanding of the living history of the day, this 
clear-sighted appreciation of events at the moment they occur, is 
indeed without parallel. 
But this also called for Marx's thorough knowledge of French 
history. France is the land where, more than anywhere else, 
historical class struggles were each time fought out to a decision 
and where, consequently, the changing political forms within 
which they move and in which their results are condensed have 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 99-197.— Ed. 

=====第331页=====
Preface to 3rd German Ed. of The 18th Brumaire 303 
been stamped in the sharpest outlines. The focus of feudalism in 
the Middle Ages, the model country of unified estate monarchy 
since the Renaissance, France demolished feudalism in the Great 
Revolution and established the unalloyed rule of the bourgeoisie 
in a classical purity unequalled by any other European land. And 
the struggle of the rising proletariat against the ruling bourgeoisie 
manifested itself here in an acute form unknown elsewhere. This 
was the reason why Marx not only studied the past history of 
France with particular predilection, but also followed her current 
history in every detail, collected material for future use and was 
consequently never surprised by events. 
But there was yet another circumstance. It was the very same 
Marx who had first discovered the great law of motion of history, 
the law according to which all historical struggles, whether they 
proceed in the political, religious, philosophical or some other 
ideological domain, are in fact only the more or less clear 
expression of struggles between social classes, and that the 
existence and thereby the collisions, too, of these classes are in 
turn conditioned by the degree of development of their economic 
position, by the nature and mode of their production and of their 
exchange as determined by it. This law, which has the same 
significance for history as the law of the transformation of energy 
has for natural science—this law gave him here, too, the key to 
understanding the history of the Second French Republic. He put 
his law to the test on these historical events, and even after 
thirty-three years we must still say that it has stood the test 
brilliantly. 
F. E. 
Written in the first half of 1885 Printed according to the text of 
the book First published in Karl Marx, 
Der Achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis 
Bonaparte, Hamburg, 1885 

=====第332页=====
304 
PREFACE [TO THE PAMPHLET 
KARL MARX BEFORE THE COLOGNE JURY] h 
For a better understanding of the proceedings presented here it 
will suffice to summarise the chief events leading up to them. 
The cowardice of the German bourgeoisie had given the feudal, 
bureaucratic, absolutist reaction a breathing space in which to 
recover from the shattering blows of March 1848 to such an 
extent that a second decisive struggle became imminent as early as 
the end of October. The fall of Vienna,3  after a long, heroic 
resistance, emboldened the Prussian camarilla to attempt a coup 
d'état. The tame Berlin "National Assembly" was still too wild for 
it. It would have to be dissolved and an end put to the revolution. 
On November 8, 1848 the Brandenburg-Manteuffel Ministry 
was formed. On the 9th it transferred the seat of the Assembly 
from Berlin to Brandenburg so that it might "freely" deliberate 
under the protection of bayonets, undisturbed by the revolution­
ary influences of Berlin. The Assembly refused to leave: the civic 
militia refused to take action against the Assembly. The Ministry 
dissolved the civic militia, disarmed it without encountering any 
resistance and declared Berlin in a state of siege. The Assembly 
replied on November 13, indicting the Ministry for high treason. 
The Ministry chased the Assembly from one meeting place in 
Berlin to the next. On the 15th the Assembly resolved that the 
Brandenburg Ministry had no right to dispose of government 
money and to levy taxes as long as it, the Assembly, could not 
freely continue meeting in Berlin. 
This resolution to block taxation could only become effective if 
the people resisted the collecting of taxes by force of arms. And at 
that time there was no shortage of arms in the hands of the civic 
a On October 31, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第333页=====
Preface to Karl Marx Before the Cologne Jury 305 
militia. Nevertheless, hardly anyone ventured beyond passive 
resistance. Only in few places were any preparations made to meet 
force with force. The boldest call to do just that came from the 
Committee of the democratic associations of the Rhine Province 
which had its seat in Cologne and consisted of Marx, Schapper and 
Schneider. 
The Committee did not delude itself by imagining that the 
victorious coup d'état in Berlin could be successfully reversed by 
any campaign on the Rhine. The Rhine Province had five 
fortresses; about a third of the entire Prussian army including a 
large number of regiments from the Eastern provinces was 
stationed in it, in Westphalia, Mainz, Frankfurt and Luxemburg 
alone. In Cologne and other cities the civic militia had already 
been disbanded and disarmed. But the intention was not to 
achieve an immediate victory in Cologne where a state of siege 
had only been lifted a few weeks before. The point was to set the 
other provinces an example and thus to rescue the revolutionary 
honour of the Rhine Province. And that had been done. 
The Prussian bourgeoisie had surrendered one stronghold after 
another to the government for fear of what were at that time the 
still half-dreaming convulsions of the proletariat. It already long 
regretted its earlier hankerings for power and ever since March it 
had been so crazed with fear that it did not know which way to 
turn, confronted as it was by the double threat of the forces of the 
old society grouped around the absolute power, on the one side, 
and the fledgling proletariat with its dawning consciousness of its 
class position, on the other. The Prussian bourgeoisie did what it 
always did in moments of decision—it backed down. And the 
workers were not so stupid as to fight for the bourgeoisie without 
the aid of the bourgeoisie. Moreover, in their eyes—particularly 
on the Rhine—Prussian issues were purely local issues; if they 
were ever to go into the firing line on behalf of the bourgeoisie, 
then it would have to be in and for Germany as a whole. It was a 
significant portent that even at that time, the idea of "Prussian 
leadership" 166 had absolutely no attraction for the workers. 
In short, the government was victorious. One month later, on 
December 5, it was in a position to dissolve once and for all the 
Berlin Assembly, which had managed to prolong a rather shabby 
existence until then and to impose a new constitution, which 
however only became effective once it had been reduced to a mere 
constitutional farce. 
On November 20, the day after the Committee launched its 
appeal, the three signatories were summoned to appear before the 

=====第334页=====
306 Frederick Engels 
examining magistrate and proceedings for rebellion were insti­
tuted against them. At the time there was no mention of arrests, 
even in Cologne. On February 7, the Neue Rheinische Zeitung had 
to submit to its first press trial; Marx, myself and  Korff,  the 
responsible publisher, appeared before a jury and were acquit­
ted. 167 On the following day the case against the Committee was 
heard. The people had already reached its own verdict, having 
two weeks previously elected one of the defendants, Schneider, 
deputy for Cologne. 
Marx's speech for the defence was obviously the highpoint of 
the proceedings. It is especially interesting in two respects: 
Firstly, because it needed a communist to make clear to the 
bourgeois jury that the actions he had taken and for the sake of 
which he was now standing accused before them, were of a kind 
which in reality it was the duty and obligation of their class, of the 
bourgeoisie, not simply to perform, but to carry through to their 
uttermost implications. This fact alone suffices to throw light on 
the attitude of the German, and above all the Prussian, 
bourgeoisie during the revolutionary period. At stake was the 
question: who was to rule—the forces of society and the state that 
rallied around the absolute monarchy: the big feudal landowners, 
the army, the bureaucracy, the clergy, or the bourgeoisie? The 
only interest of the still emerging proletariat in these struggles lay 
in the extent to which the victory of the bourgeoisie would provide 
it with enough light and air to further its own development, with 
elbow-room on the battlefield where one day it will triumph over 
all other classes. But the bourgeoisie, and the petty bourgeoisie 
along with it, refused to make a move when the hostile 
government attacked the seat of their power, dispersed their 
parliament, disarmed their civic militia and even placed them 
under a state of siege. It was then that the communists stepped 
into the breach and called on them to do their damned duty. Both 
of them, the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, constituted the new 
society and stood together in one camp against the old feudal 
society. Of course, the appeal went unheeded and by an irony of 
history this self-same bourgeoisie was now to sit in judgment over 
the revolutionary proletarian Communists, on the one hand, and 
over the counter-revolutionary government, on the other. 
Secondly, however—and this gives the speech its specific 
significance, even for our time—in the face of the government's 
hypocritical legality it preserves a revolutionary standpoint from 
which many could take an example even today.—Did we call on 
the people to take up arms against the government? Indeed we 

=====第335页=====
Preface to Karl Marx Before the  Cologne  Jury 307 
did, and it was our duty to do so. Did we break the law and depart 
from the foundations of law? Very well, but the laws we broke had 
already been torn up by the government and trampled upon 
before the eyes of the people. As for legal foundations, they no 
longer exist. As vanquished enemies we can be eliminated, but no 
one has the right to condemn us. 
The official parties, from the Kreuz-Zeitung 168 to the Frankfurter, 
reproach the Social Democratic Workers' Party with being a 
revolutionary party, with refusing to recognise the legal founda­
tions established in 1866 and  1871, 169 and thereby—at least this is 
the refrain of everyone right down to the National Liberals  17°— 
with putting itself beyond the limits of common law. I shall ignore 
the monstrous insinuation here that anyone can place himself 
beyond the bounds of common law simply by expressing an 
opinion. That is the police state pure and simple, which one 
should better practise on the quiet, while preaching the constitu­
tional state out loud. But what are then the legal foundations of 
1866,  if not revolutionary? The Federal Constitution is violated 
and war declared on the confederates.171 Not at all, says Bismarck, 
it was the others who violated the treaty. The answer to which is 
that a revolutionary party would have to be simple-minded in the 
extreme if it proved unable to find at least as convincing grounds 
for any uprising as those put forward by Bismarck for his in 
1866.—  So a civil war is provoked for that was what the war of 
1866 amounted to. But every civil war is a revolutionary war. The 
war is conducted by revolutionary means. Alliances are concluded 
with foreign powers against Germans. Italian troops and ships are 
brought into the battle, Bonaparte is enticed with prospects of 
acquiring German territory on the Rhine. A Hungarian legion is 
formed to fight against its hereditary sovereign for revolutionary 
goals.  Reliance is placed on Klapka in Hungary, and Garibaldi in 
Italy. Victory is won and—three crowns existing by divine right 
are swallowed up: Hanover, the Electorate of Hesse and Nassau — 
each of which was just as legitimate, just as "hereditary" and 
existed just as much "by divine right" as did the crown of 
Prussia.1  2 Finally, a constitution is imposed on the remaining 
confederates, which in Saxony, for example, was accepted just as 
freely as Prussia had accepted the Peace of Tilsit at one time.173 
Do I complain about all this? Not at all. There is no point in 
complaining about historical events. On the contrary, the problem 
is to comprehend their causes and hence also their effects, which 
are by no means exhausted. But we do have the right to demand that 
people who have done all these things should refrain from 
22-1243 

=====第336页=====
308 Frederick Engels 
accusing others of being revolutionaries. The German Empire was 
created by revolution—admittedly, a revolution of a particular 
kind, but no less a revolution for all that. What is sauce for the 
goose is sauce for the gander. A revolution is a revolution, 
regardless of whether it was made by the Prussian crown or a 
tinker. If the government of the day makes use of the existing 
laws to rid itself of its opponents, then it acts like every 
government. But if it imagines that it can strike them an even 
more violent blow by thundering the expletive "Revolutionary!" at 
them—then at best only the philistines will take fright. "Revolution­
ary yourself!"  will be the cry that echoes back from every corner 
of Europe. 
But the preposterous demand that anyone should cast aside his 
revolutionary nature, a thing which arises inevitably from histori­
cal circumstances, becomes utterly comic when it is applied to a 
party which is first placed outside the confines of common law, i.e. 
beyond the law  itself,  and which is then confronted with the 
demand that it should recognise the foundations of that very law 
which has been specifically abolished for  it.174 
The fact that people have to waste time even discussing such a 
matter provides yet further evidence of the politically backward 
state of Germany. In the rest of the world everyone knows that all 
existing political systems are the product of nothing but revolu­
tions.  France, Spain, Switzerland and Italy—there are as many 
governments existing by right of revolution as there are countries. 
In England even the Whig Macaulay acknowledges that the 
present legal order is based on one revolution after another 
(REVOLUTIONS HEAPED UPON REVOLUTIONS). For the last hundred years 
America has celebrated its revolution on every 4th of July.175 In 
the majority of these countries there are parties which will only 
continue to abide by the existing legal order as long as the latter 
can force them to do so. But if anyone in France, for example, 
were to accuse the Royalists or Bonapartists of being revolution­
ary, he would simply be laughed to scorn. 
Only in Germany, where politically nothing is ever dealt with 
thoroughly (for otherwise it would not be torn into two parts, 
Austria and Germany so-called) and where for that very reason 
the memories of past, but only half digested ages continue to 
vegetate eternally in people's minds (which is why the Germans 
call themselves a nation of thinkers)—only in Germany can 
anyone possibly require a party to be bound by the existing 
so-called legal order not only in fact but also morally. A party 
must promise in advance that, come what may, it will not 

=====第337页=====
Preface to Karl Marx Before the Cologne Jury 309 
overthrow the legal order it is fighting against, even if it is able to 
do so. In other words, it must commit itself to upholding the 
existing political order for all eternity. This and this alone is what 
is meant when people demand that German Social Democracy 
should cease to be "revolutionary". 
But the German philistine—and his opinion is still German 
public opinion—is a special sort of person. He has never made a 
revolution. The revolution of 1848 was made for him by the 
workers—to his horror. But all the more has he had to suffer 
revolutions. For the people who have made revolutions in the last 
three hundred years in Germany—and they showed it—were 
the princes. Their very rank, and ultimately their sovereignty, was 
the fruit of rebellions against the Emperor. Prussia set an example 
to them all. Prussia was only able to become a kingdom after the 
"Great Elector" a had conducted a successful uprising against his 
feudal overlord, the crown of Poland, thus securing the independ­
ence of the Duchy of Prussia from Poland.176  Ever since 
Frederick II, Prussia's rebellion against the German Empire had 
been made into a system; Frederick "spat" upon the Imperial 
constitution in quite a different manner than our worthy Bracke 
upon the Anti-Socialist Law. Then came the French Revolution b 
and both the princes and the philistines suffered it with tears and 
sighs.  In 1803, by decision of the Imperial Deputation, the 
German Empire was distributed among the German princes by the 
French and the Russians in a highly revolutionary manner, 
because the princes could not agree on how to divide it up 
themselves.177  Then came Napoleon and permitted his very special 
protégés, the rulers of Baden, Bavaria and Württemberg^ to take 
possession of all counties, baronies and cities which had been 
subject only to the Emperor, and which lay in or between their 
territories. Immediately after this the same three traitors carried 
out the last successful rebellion against their Emperor, d and, with 
Napoleon's assistance, they established their own sovereignty and 
thereby finally tore apart the old German Empire.178  After that, 
Napoleon, the de facto German Emperor, redistributed Germany 
about every three years among his loyal retainers, the German 
princes and others. Finally, there came the glorious liberation 
from foreign domination and as a reward Germany was treated as 
a Frederick William, Elector of Brandenburg.— Ed. 
b Of 1789.— Ed. 
c Charles Frederick, Maximilian Joseph, Frederick.— Ed. 
d Franz I.— Ed. 
22* 

=====第338页=====
310 Frederick Engels 
a universal source of compensation for princes down on their luck 
and was divided up and sold off by the Congress of Vienna, i.e. by 
Russia, France and England. And the German philistines, scat­
tered like so many sheep in around 2,000 separate scraps of 
territory, were shared out among the various 36 sovereigns, for 
the majority of whom they would even today "most humbly lay 
down their lives", as if for their hereditary sovereigns. And none 
of this is supposed to have been revolutionary—how right 
Schnapphahnski-Lichnowski was when he exclaimed in the Frank­
furt Parliament, "With regard to historical right there does not 
exist no date!"179 The fact is that it never had one! 
Thus what the German philistine shamefacedly demands from 
the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party can only have one 
meaning: that this party should become as philistine as he. It 
should on no account take part in revolutions, but should suffer 
them instead. And if the government which has come to power by 
counter-revolution and revolution puts the same preposterous 
demand, this only means that revolution is good as long as it is 
made by Bismarck for Bismarck & Co., but reprehensible when it 
is made against Bismarck & Co. 
London, July 1, 1885 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Karl Marx vor den Printed according to the pamphlet 
Kölner Geschwornen, Hottingen-Zurich, 
1885 

=====第339页=====
311 
[TO THE EDITORS OF THE SEVERNY VESTNIK]1 
Jersey, August 25, 1885 
Sir, 
Among the papers of my late friend Karl Marx I have found a 
reply to an article by Mr. Mikhailovsky: "Karl Marx Before the 
Tribunal of Mr. Zhukovsky". Since this reply, which was not 
published at the time for reasons unknown to me, may still be of 
interest to the Russian public, I am putting it at your disposal. 
Yours, etc. 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the original 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 
Moscow, 1946 Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第340页=====
312 
ON THE HISTORY OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE1 
With the sentence of the Cologne Communists in 1852, the 
curtain falls on the first period of the independent German 
workers' movement. Today this period is almost forgotten. Yet it 
lasted from 1836 to 1852 and, with the spread of German workers 
abroad, the movement developed in almost all civilised countries. 
Nor is that all. The present-day international workers' movement 
is in substance a direct continuation of the German movement of 
that time, which was the first international workers' movement ever, 
and which brought forth many of those who took on the leading 
role in the International Working Men's Association. And the 
theoretical principles that the Communist League had inscribed on 
its banner in the Communist Manifesto of 1847 constitute today the 
strongest international bond of the entire proletarian movement in 
both Europe and America. 
Up to now there has been only one main source for a coherent 
history of that movement. This is the so-called Black Book, Die 
Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, by Wer-
muth and Stieber, Berlin, two parts, 1853 and 1854. 182 This sorry 
effort fabricated by two of the most contemptible police scoundrels 
of our century, which bristles with deliberate falsifications, still 
today serves as the final source for all non-communist writings 
about that period.183 
What I am able to give here is only a sketch, and even this only 
in so far as the League itself is concerned; only what is absolutely 
necessary to understand the Revelations. I hope that some day I 
shall have the opportunity to work on the rich material collected 
by Marx and myself on the history of that glorious period of the 
youth of the international workers' movement. 

=====第341页=====
On the History of the Communist League 313 
* * * 
In 1836 the most extreme, chiefly proletarian elements of the 
secret democratic-republican Outlaws' League, which had been 
founded by German refugees in Paris in 1834, split off and 
formed the new secret League of the Just. The parent League, in 
which only the most sleepy-headed elements à la Jakob Venedey 
remained soon fell asleep altogether: when in 1840 the police 
scented out a few sections in Germany, it was hardly a shadow of 
its former  self.  The new League, on the contrary, developed 
comparatively rapidly. Originally it was a German offshoot of the 
French worker-communism reminiscent of Babouvism 184 that was 
taking shape in Paris at about the same time; community of goods 
was demanded as the necessary consequence of "equality". The 
aims were those of the Parisian secret societies of the time: half 
propaganda association, half conspiracy, Paris, however, always 
being regarded as the focus of revolutionary action, although 
preparation for occasional putsches in Germany was by no means 
excluded. But as Paris remained the decisive battleground, the 
League was at that time actually not much more than the German 
branch of the French secret societies, notably the Société des saisons 
led by Blanqui and Barbes, with which close links were main­
tained. The French went into action on May 12, 1839; the sections 
of the League marched with them and were thus embroiled in the 
common defeat. 185 
Of the Germans, Karl Schapper and Heinrich Bauer were 
arrested; Louis Philippe's government contented itself with deport­
ing them after a fairly long term of imprisonment. 186 Both went to 
London. Schapper came from Weilburg in Nassau and while a 
student of forestry at Giessen in 1832 had joined in the conspiracy 
organised by Georg Büchner; he had taken part in the storming 
of the Frankfurt constable station on April 3,  1833, 187 had escaped 
abroad and in February 1834 joined Mazzini's march on Savoy.188 
Of gigantic stature, resolute and energetic, always ready to risk 
civil existence and life, he was a model of the professional 
revolutionary with the role he played in the thirties. In spite of a 
certain sluggishness of thought, he was by no means incapable of 
superior theoretical understanding, as is proved by his develop­
ment from "demagogue" 189 to Communist, and he then held all 
the more rigidly to what he had once come to recognise. Precisely 
on that account his revolutionary passion sometimes got the better 
of his understanding, but he always realised his mistake in 
hindsight and openly acknowledged it. He was a true man and 

=====第342页=====
314 Frederick Engels 
what he did for the founding of the German workers' movement 
will not be forgotten. 
Heinrich Bauer, from Franconia, was a shoemaker; a lively, 
alert, witty little fellow, in whose little body, however, also lay 
hidden much shrewdness and determination. 
Having arrived in London, where Schapper, who had been a 
compositor in Paris, now tried to earn his living as a language 
teacher, the two of them again joined together the broken threads 
of alliance and made London the centre of the League. They were 
joined here, if not already earlier in Paris, by Joseph Moll, a 
watchmaker from Cologne, a medium-sized Hercules—how often 
did Schapper and he victoriously defend the entrance to a hall 
against hundreds of onrushing opponents—a man who was at 
least the equal of his two comrades in energy and determination, 
and intellectually superior to both of them. Not only was he a 
born diplomat, as the success of his numerous trips on various 
missions proved; he was also more capable of theoretical insight. 
I came to know all three of them in London in 1843. They were 
the first revolutionary proletarians whom I had seen, and however 
far apart our views were at that time in details—for I still bore, as 
against their narrow-minded egalitarian communism,* a goodly 
dose of just as narrow-minded philosophical arrogance—I shall 
never forget the deep impression that these three real men made 
upon me, who was still to become a man at that time. 
In London, as to a lesser degree in Switzerland, they had the 
benefit of freedom of association and assembly. The legally 
functioning German Workers' Educational Society, which still 
exists,  was founded as early as February 7, 1840.190 The Society 
served the League as a recruiting ground for new members, and 
since, as always, the Communists were the most active and 
intelligent members of the Society, it was a matter of course that 
its leadership lay entirely in the hands of the League. The League 
soon had several communities, or, as they were then still called, 
"lodges", in London. The same obvious tactics were followed in 
Switzerland and elsewhere. Where workers' associations could be 
founded, they were utilised in like manner. Where this was 
forbidden by law, one joined choral societies, gymnastics societies 
and the like. Contacts were to a large extent maintained by 
members who were continually travelling back and forth; they 
also,  when required, served as emissaries. In both respects the 
* By egalitarian communism I understand, as stated, only that communism 
which bases itself exclusively or predominantly on the demand for equality. 

=====第343页=====
On the History of the Communist League 315 
League obtained lively support through the wisdom of the 
governments which, by resorting to deportation, converted any 
objectionable worker—and in nine cases out of ten he was a 
member of the League—into an emissary. 
The spread of the restored League was considerable. Notably in 
Switzerland, Weitling, August Becker (a highly gifted man who, 
however, like so many Germans, came to grief through his innate 
instability of character) and others created a strong organisation 
more or less pledged to Weitling's communist system. This is not 
the place to criticise the communism of Weitling. But as regards its 
significance as the first independent theoretical stirring of the 
German proletariat, I still today subscribe to Marx's words in the 
Paris Vorwärts] of 1844: "Where among the" (German) 
"bourgeoisie—including its philosophers and learned writers—is 
to be found a book about the emancipation of the bourgeoisie— 
political emancipation—similar to Weitling's work: Garantien der 
Harmonie und Freiheit? It is enough to compare the petty, 
faint-hearted mediocrity of German political literature with this 
vehement and brilliant literary début of the German workers, it is 
enough to compare these gigantic infant shoes of the proletariat with 
the dwarfish, worn-out political shoes of the bourgeoisie, and one 
is bound to prophesy that the German Cinderella will one day have 
the figure of an athlete." 3 This athlete's figure confronts us today, 
although still far from being fully grown. 
Numerous sections existed in Germany too; by the nature of 
things they were of a transient character, but those coming into 
existence more than made up for those folding up. Only after 
seven years, in late 1846, did the police discover traces of the 
League in Berlin (Mentel) and Magdeburg (Beck), without being 
in a position to follow them further. 
In Paris, Weitling, still there in 1840, likewise gathered the 
scattered elements together again before he left for Switzerland. 191 
The tailors formed the central force of the League. German 
tailors were everywhere: in Switzerland, in London, in Paris. In 
the last-named city, German was so much the prevailing tongue in 
this trade that I was acquainted there in 1846 with a Norwegian 
tailor who had travelled directly by sea from Drontheim to France 
and in the space of eighteen months had learned hardly a word of 
French but had acquired an excellent knowledge of German. Two 
a K. Marx, "Critical Marginal Notes on the Article 'The King of Prussia and 
Social Reform. By a Prussian'" (see present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 189-206).— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
316 Frederick Engels 
of the Paris communities in 1847 consisted predominantly of 
tailors, one of cabinet makers. 
After the centre of gravity had shifted from Paris to London, a 
new feature came to the fore: from being German, the League 
gradually became international. In the Workers' Society there were, 
besides Germans and Swiss, also members of all those nationalities 
for whom German served as the chief means of communication 
with foreigners, notably, therefore, Scandinavians, Dutch, Hun­
garians, Czechs, Southern Slavs, also Russians and Alsatians. In 
1847 the regular attendants even included an English grenadier of 
the Guards in uniform. The Society soon called itself the 
Communist Workers' Educational Society, and the membership 
cards bore the inscription "All Men are Brothers", in at least 
twenty languages, though not without mistakes here and there. 
Like the open Society, so also the secret League soon took on a 
more international character; at first in a restricted sense, 
practically through the varied nationalities of its members, 
theoretically through the realisation that any revolution, to be 
victorious, must be a European one. It did not go any further as 
yet; but the foundations were there. 
Close contact was maintained with the French revolutionaries 
through the London refugees, comrades-in-arms of May 12, 1839. 
Similarly with the more radical Poles. The official Polish émigrés, as 
also Mazzini, were, of course, opponents rather than allies. The 
English Chartists, on account of the specific English character of 
their movement, were disregarded as not revolutionary. The 
London leaders of the League came into contact with them only 
later, through me. 
In other ways, too, the character of the League had altered with 
events. Although the League still looked upon Paris—and at that 
time quite rightly—as the mother city of the revolution, it had 
nevertheless cast off the dependence of the Paris conspirators. 
The spread of the League raised its self-confidence. There was a 
feeling that more and more roots were being struck in the 
German working class and that these German workers were 
historically destined to be the standard-bearers of the workers of 
the North and East of Europe. In Weitling there was to be found 
a communist theoretician who could be boldly placed at the side of 
his contemporary French rivals. Finally, the experience of May 12 
had taught them that for the time being there was nothing more 
to be gained by attempted putsches. And if every event was still 
explained as a sign of the approaching storm, if the old, 
semi-conspiratorial rules were still preserved intact, that was 

=====第345页=====
On the History of the Communist League 317 
mainly the fault of the old revolutionary defiance, which was 
already beginning to collide with the sounder views that were 
gaining headway. 
However, the social doctrine of the League, no matter how 
poorly defined it was, contained a very great defect, but one that 
had its roots in the conditions themselves. The members, insofar 
as they were workers at all, were almost exclusively real artisans. 
Even in the big metropolises, the man who exploited them was 
usually only a small master. The exploitation of tailoring on a 
large scale, of what is now called the manufacture of off-the-peg 
clothing, by the conversion of handicraft tailoring into a domestic 
industry working for a big capitalist, was at that time only just 
making its appearance even in London. On the one hand, the 
exploiter of these artisans was a small master; on the other hand, 
they all hoped ultimately to become small masters themselves. And 
besides, a host of inherited guild notions still clung to the German 
artisan at that time. The greatest honour is due to them, in that 
they, who were themselves not yet full proletarians but only an 
appendage of the petty bourgeoisie, an appendage which was in 
the transition to becoming the modern proletariat and which did 
not yet stand in direct conflict with the bourgeoisie, that is, with 
big capital—in that these artisans were capable of instinctively 
anticipating their future development and of constituting them­
selves, even if not yet with full consciousness, as the party of the 
proletariat. But it was also inevitable that their old handicraft 
prejudices were a stumbling block to them at every moment, 
whenever it was a question of criticising existing society in detail, 
that is, of investigating economic facts. And I do not believe there 
was a single man in the whole League at that time who had ever 
read a book on political economy. But that mattered little; for the 
time being "equality", "brotherhood" and "justice" helped them 
to surmount every theoretical obstacle. 
Meanwhile a second, essentially different communism had 
developed alongside that of the League and of Weitling. In 
Manchester it had been tangibly brought home to me that the 
economic facts which have so far played no role or only a 
contemptible one in historiography are, at least in the modern 
world, a decisive historical force; that they form the basis for the 
emergence of the present-day class antagonisms; that these class 
antagonisms, in the countries where they have become fully 
developed by dint of large-scale industry, hence especially in 
England, are in their turn the basis for the formation of political 
parties, party struggles, and thus of all political history. Marx 

=====第346页=====
318 Frederick Engels 
had not only arrived at the same view, but had already, in the 
Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (1844), generalised it to the effect 
that it is not the state which conditions and regulates civil society 
at all, but civil society which conditions and regulates the state, 
and, consequently, that policy and its history are to be explained 
from the economic relations and their development, and not the 
other way round. When I visited Marx in Paris in the summer of 
1844, a our complete agreement in all theoretical fields became 
evident and our joint work dates from that time. When, in the 
spring of 1845, we met again in Brussels, Marx had already fully 
developed his materialist theory of history in its main features 
from the above-mentioned foundations, and we now applied 
ourselves to the detailed elaboration of the newly won outlook in 
the most varied directions. 
This discovery, which revolutionised the science of history and, 
as we have seen, is essentially the work of Marx—a discovery in 
which I can claim for myself only a very small share—was, 
however, of immediate importance for the workers' movement of 
the time. Communism among the French and Germans, Chartism 
among the English, now no longer appeared as something 
accidental which could just as well not have occurred. These 
movements now presented themselves as a movement of the 
modern oppressed class, the proletariat, as more or less developed 
forms of its historically necessary struggle against the ruling class, 
the bourgeoisie; as forms of class struggle, but distinguished from 
all earlier class struggles by this one thing: that the present-day 
oppressed class, the proletariat, cannot achieve its emancipation 
without at the same time emancipating society as a whole from 
division into classes and, therefore, from class struggles. And 
communism now no longer meant the concoction, by means of the 
imagination, of a social ideal as perfect as possible, but insight into 
the nature, the conditions and the consequent general aims of the 
struggle waged by the proletariat. 
Now, we were by no means of the opinion that the new scientific 
results should be confided in large tomes exclusively to the 
"learned" world. Quite the contrary. We were both of us already 
deeply involved in the political movement and possessed a certain 
following in the educated world, especially of Western Germany, 
and abundant contact with the organised proletariat. It was our 
duty to provide a scientific substantiation for our view, but it was 
equally important for us to win over the European, and in the first 
a Late August-early September.— Ed. 

=====第347页=====
On the History of the Communist League 319 
place the German, proletariat to our conviction. As soon as we had 
become clear in our own minds, we set to work. We founded a 
German Workers' Society in Brussels192  and took over the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, which served us as an organ up to the 
February Revolution. We kept in touch with the revolutionary 
section of the English Chartists through Julian Harney, the editor 
of the movement's central organ, The Northern Star, to which I was 
a contributor. We entered likewise into a sort of cartel with the 
Brussels democrats (Marx was vice-president of the Democratic 
Association 193) and with the French Social-Democrats of the 
Réforme, which I supplied with news of the English and German 
movements. In short, our connections with the radical and 
proletarian organisations and press organs were quite what one 
could wish. 
Our relations with the League of the Just were as follows: The 
existence of the League was, of course, known to us; in 1843 
Schapper had suggested that I join it, which I at that time 
naturally refused to do. However, we not only kept up our 
continuous correspondence with the Londoners, but remained on 
still closer terms with Dr. Ewerbeck, the then leader of the Paris 
communities. Without occupying ourselves with the League's 
internal affairs, we nevertheless learnt of every important happen­
ing. On the other hand, we influenced the theoretical views of the 
most important members of the League by word of mouth, by 
letter and through the press. For this purpose we also made use of 
various lithographed circulars, which we dispatched to our friends 
and correspondents throughout the world on particular occasions 
when we were concerned with the internal affairs of the 
Communist Party that was in the process of formation. In these, 
the League itself was sometimes involved. Thus, a young 
Westphalian student, Hermann Kriege, who went to America, 
posed there as an emissary of the League and associated himself 
with the crazy Harro Harring for the purpose of using the League 
to turn South America upside down. He founded a paper 3 in 
which, in the name of the League, he preached an effusive 
communism of starry-eyed love, based on "love" and overflowing 
with love. Against this we let fly with a circular5  that did not fail to 
have its effect. Kriege vanished from the League scene. 
Later, Weitling came to Brussels. But he was no longer the naïve 
young journeyman-tailor who, astonished at his own talents, was 
a Der Volks-Tribun. —Ed. 
b See K. Marx and F. Engels, "Circular Against Kriege". — Ed. 

=====第348页=====
320 Frederick Engels 
trying to clarify in his own mind just what a communist society 
would look like. He was now the great man, persecuted by the 
envious on account of his superiority, who scented rivals, secret 
enemies and traps everywhere—the prophet, driven from country 
to country, who carried a prescription for the realisation of heaven 
on earth ready-made in his pocket, and who imagined that 
everybody was out to steal it from him. He had already fallen out 
with the members of the League in London; and even in Brussels, 
where particularly Marx and his wife treated him with almost 
superhuman forbearance, he could get along with nobody. So he 
soon afterwards went to America to try out his role of prophet 
there. 
All these circumstances contributed to the quiet revolution that 
was taking place in the League, and especially among the leaders 
in London. The inadequacy of the conception of communism held 
hitherto, both the simplistic French egalitarian communism and 
that of Weitling, became more and more clear to them. The 
tracing of communism back to early Christianity introduced by 
Weitling —no matter how brilliant certain details to be found in 
his Evangelium eines armen Sünders —had resulted in the movement 
in Switzerland being delivered to a large extent into the hands, 
first of fools like Albrecht, and then of exploiting fake prophets 
like Kuhlmann. The "true socialism" dealt in by a few writers of 
fiction — a translation of French socialist phraseology into corrupt 
Hegelian German, and sentimental starry-eyed love (see the 
section on German or "true", socialism in the Communist 
Manifesto*)—that Kriege and the study of the said literature 
introduced in the League was bound to disgust the old rev­
olutionaries of the League, if only because of its slobbering 
feebleness. In contrast to the untenability of the previous 
theoretical views, and in contrast to the practical aberrations 
resulting therefrom, it was realised more and more in London that 
Marx and I were right in our new theory. This understanding was 
undoubtedly promoted by the fact that among the London leaders 
there were now two men who were considerably superior in their 
capacity for theoretical perception to those previously mentioned: 
the miniature painter Karl Pfänder from Heilbronn and the tailor 
Georg Eccarius from Thuringia.* 
* Pfänder died about eight years ago in London. He was a man of peculiarly 
fine intelligence, witty, ironical and dialectical. Eccarius, as we know, was later for 
many years General Secretary of the International Working Men's Association, in 
a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 510-13.— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
On the History of the Communist League 321 
Suffice it to say that in the spring of 1847 Moll visited Marx in 
Brussels and immediately afterwards myself in Paris, and invited 
us repeatedly, in the name of his comrades, to join the League. 
He reported that they were as much convinced of the general 
correctness of our views as of the need to free the League from 
the old conspiratorial traditions and forms. Should we join, we 
would be given an opportunity of expounding our critical 
communism before a congress of the League in a manifesto, which 
would then be published as the manifesto of the League; we 
would likewise be able to contribute our quota towards the 
replacement of the obsolete League organisation by one in 
keeping with the new times and aims. 
We entertained no doubt that an organisation within the 
German working class was necessary, if only for propaganda 
purposes, and that this organisation, in so far as it were not 
merely local in character, could only be a secret one, even outside 
Germany. Now, there already existed exactly such an organisation 
in the shape of the League. What we previously objected to in this 
League was now relinquished as erroneous by the representatives 
of the League themselves; we were even invited to cooperate in 
the work of reorganisation. Could we say no? Certainly not. 
Therefore, we joined the League; Marx founded a League 
community in Brussels from among our close friends, while I 
attended the three Paris communities. 
In the summer of 1847, the first League congress took place in 
London, at which W. Wolff represented the Brussels and I the 
Paris communities. First of all the congress carried out the 
reorganisation of the League. Whatever remained of the old 
mystical names dating back to the conspiratorial period was now 
also abolished; the League now consisted of communities, circles, 
leading circles, a Central Authority and a Congress, and hence­
forth called itself the "Communist League". "The aim of the 
League is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the rule of the 
proletariat, the abolition of the old bourgeois society which rests 
on the antagonism of classes, and the foundation of a new society 
without classes and without private property"—thus ran the first 
article.3 The organisation itself was thoroughly democratic, with 
the General Council of which the following old League members were to be found, 
among others: Eccarius, Pfänder, Lessner, Lochner, Marx and  myself.  Eccarius 
subsequently devoted himself exclusively to the English trade-union movement. 
a Rules of the Communist League. Art. 1 (see present edition, Vol. 6, 
p. 633).— Ed. 

=====第350页=====
322 Frederick Engels 
elective and removable authorities. This alone barred all hanker­
ing after conspiracy, which requires dictatorship, and the League 
was converted—for ordinary peacetime at least—into a pure 
propaganda society. These new Rules were submitted to the 
communities for discussion—so democratic was the procedure 
now followed—then once again debated at the Second Congress 
and finally adopted by the latter on December 8, 1847. They are 
to be found printed in Wermuth and Stieber, Part I, p. 239, 
Appendix X. 
The Second Congress took place in late November and early 
December of the same year. Marx too attended this time and 
expounded the new theory in a lengthy debate—the congress 
lasted at least ten days. All contradiction and doubt were finally 
over and done with, the new basic principles were adopted 
unanimously, and Marx and I were commissioned to draw up the 
Manifesto. This was done immediately afterwards. A few weeks 
before the February Revolution it was sent to London to be 
printed. Since then it has travelled round the world, has been 
translated into almost all languages and still today serves in 
numerous countries as a guide for the proletarian movement. In 
place of the old League motto, "All Men Are Brothers", appeared 
the new battle cry, "Working Men of All Countries, Unite!"194 
which openly proclaimed the international character of the 
struggle. Seventeen years later this battle cry resounded through­
out the world as the motto of the International Working Men's 
Association, and today the valiant proletariat of all countries has 
inscribed it on its banner. 
The February Revolution broke out. The London Central 
Authority functioning hitherto immediately transferred its powers 
to the Brussels leading circle. But this decision came at a time 
when an actual state of siege already existed in Brussels, and the 
Germans in particular could no longer assemble anywhere. We 
were all of us just on the point of going to Paris, and so the new 
Central Authority decided likewise to dissolve, to hand over all its 
powers to Marx and to empower him immediately to constitute a 
new Central Authority in Paris. Hardly had the five persons who 
adopted this decision (March 3, 1848) separated, when the police 
forced their way into Marx's home, arrested him and compelled 
him to leave for France the following day, which was just where 
he wanted to go. 
In Paris we all soon came together again. It was there that the 
following document was drawn up and signed by the members of 
the new Central Authority. It was distributed throughout 

=====第351页=====
On the History of the Communist League 323 
Germany and quite a few can still learn something from it even 
today: 
DEMANDS OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY IN GERMANY  ™$ 
I. The whole of Germany shall be declared a single and 
indivisible republic. 
3. Representatives of the people shall receive payment so that 
workers, too, shall be able to become members of the German 
parliament. 
4. Universal arming of the people. 
7. Princely and other feudal estates, together with mines, pits, 
and so forth, shall become the property of the state. The estates 
shall be cultivated on a large scale and with the most up-to-date 
scientific devices in the interests of the whole of society. 
8. Mortgages on peasant lands shall be declared the property of 
the state. Interest on such mortgages shall be paid by the peasants 
to the state. 
9. In localities where the tenant system is developed, the land 
rent or the quit-rent shall be paid to the state as a tax. 
II. All the means of transport, railways, canals, steamships, 
roads,  the posts etc. shall be taken over by the state. They shall 
become the property of the state and shall be placed free at the 
disposal of the impecunious classes. 
14. The right of inheritance to be curtailed. 
15. The introduction of steeply graduated taxes, and the 
abolition of taxes on articles of consumption. 
16. Inauguration of national workshops. The state guarantees a 
livelihood to all workers and provides for those who are 
incapacitated for work. 
17. Universal and free education of the people. 
It is to the interest of the German proletariat, the petty 
bourgeoisie and the small peasants to support these demands with 
all possible energy. Only by the realisation of these demands will 
the millions in Germany, who have hitherto been exploited by a 
handful of persons and whom the exploiters would like to keep in 
further subjection, win the rights and attain to that power to 
which they are entitled as the producers of all wealth. 
The Committee: 
Karl Marx, Karl Schapper, H. Bauer, 
F. Engels, J. Moll, W. Wolff 
23-1243 

=====第352页=====
324 Frederick Engels 
At that time the craze for revolutionary legions prevailed in 
Paris.  Spaniards, Italians, Belgians, Dutchmen, Poles and Germans 
flocked together in crowds to liberate their respective fatherlands. 
The German legion was led by Herwegh, Bornstedt, Börnstein. 
Since immediately after the revolution all foreign workers not only 
lost their jobs but in addition were harassed by the public, the 
influx into these legions was very great. The new government saw 
in them a means of getting rid of foreign workers and granted 
them l'étape du soldat, that is, quarters along their line of march 
and a marching allowance of fifty centimes per day up to the 
frontier, wherupon the eloquent Lamartine, the Foreign Minister 
who was so readily moved to tears, found an opportunity of 
betraying them to their respective governments. 
We opposed this playing with revolution most decisively. To 
carry an invasion, which was to import the revolution forcibly 
from outside, into the midst of the ferment then going on in 
Germany, meant to undermine the revolution in Germany  itself, 
to strengthen the governments and to deliver the legionaries— 
Lamartine stood as guarantor for that—defenceless into the hands 
of the German troops. When subsequently the revolution was 
victorious in Vienna and Berlin, the legion became all the more 
pointless; but once begun, the game was continued. 
We founded a German communist club196  in which we advised 
the workers to keep away from the legion and to return instead to 
their homelands singly and work there for the movement. Our old 
friend Flocon, who had a seat in the Provisional Government, 
obtained for the workers sent by us the same travel concessions as 
had been granted to the legionaries. In this way we returned three 
or four hundred workers to Germany, including the great 
majority of the League members. 
As could easily be foreseen, the League proved to be much too 
weak a lever by comparison with the popular mass movement that 
had now broken out. Three quarters of the League members who 
had previously lived abroad had changed their domicile by 
returning to their homeland; their previous communities were 
thus to a great extent dissolved and they lost all contact with the 
League. Some of the more ambitious among them did not even try 
to resume this contact, but each one began a small separate 
movement on his own account in his own locality. Finally, the 
conditions in each separate small state, each province and each 
town were so different that the League would have been incapable 
of giving more than the most general directives; such directives 
were, however, much better disseminated through the press. In 

=====第353页=====
On the History of the Communist League 325 
short, from the moment when the causes which had made the 
secret League necessary ceased to exist, the secret League lost all 
significance as such. But this could least of all surprise the persons 
who had just stripped this same secret League of the last vestige of 
its conspiratorial character. 
That, however, the League had been an excellent school for 
revolutionary activity was now demonstrated. On the Rhine, where 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung provided a firm centre, in Nassau, in 
Rheinish Hesse, etc., everywhere members of the League stood at 
the head of the extreme democratic movement. The same was the 
case in Hamburg. In Southern Germany the predominance of 
petty-bourgeois democracy stood in the way. In Breslau, Wilhelm 
Wolff was active with great success until the summer of 1848; in 
addition he received a Silesian mandate as an alternate deputy to 
the Frankfurt parliament. Finally, the compositor Stephan Born, 
who had worked in Brussels and Paris as an active member of the 
League, founded a Workers' Fraternity in Berlin which became 
fairly widespread and existed until 1850. Born, a very talented 
young man, who, however, was a bit too much in a hurry to 
become a political figure, "fraternised" with the most motley 
Cherethites and Pelethites 3 just to get a crowd together, and was 
not at all the man who could bring unity into the conflicting 
tendencies, light into the chaos. Consequently, in the official 
publications of the association the views represented in the 
Communist Manifesto were mingled hodge-podge with guild 
recollections and guild aspirations, fragments of Louis Blanc and 
Proudhon, protectionism, etc.; in short, they wanted to please 
everybody. In particular, strikes, trade unions and producers' 
co-operatives were set going and it was forgotten that above all it 
was a question of first conquering, by means of political victories, 
the field in which alone such things could be realised on a lasting 
basis.  When, afterwards, the victories of the reactionaries made the 
leaders of the Fraternity realise the necessity of taking a direct 
part in the revolutionary struggle, they were naturally left in the 
lurch by the confused mass which they had grouped around 
themselves. Born took part in the Dresden uprising of May 
1849 197 and had a lucky escape. But, in contrast to the great 
political movement of the proletariat, the Workers' Fraternity 
proved to be a pure Sonderbund,198 which to a large extent existed 
only on paper and played such a subordinate role that the 
reactionaries did not find it necessary to suppress it until 1850, 
a 2 Samuel 8:18, 15:18, 20:7,  23.—  Ed. 
2 3* 

=====第354页=====
326 Frederick Engels 
and its surviving offshoots until several years later.199  Born, whose 
real name was Buttermilch, has become not a big political figure 
but an insignificant Swiss professor, who no longer translates Marx 
into guild language but the meek Renan into his own fulsome 
German. 
With June 13, 1849, in Paris,200 the defeat of the May 
insurrections in Germany and the suppression of the Hungarian 
revolution by the Russians, a great period of the 1848 Revolution 
came to a close. But the victory of the reactionaries was as yet by 
no means final. A reorganisation of the scattered revolutionary 
forces was required, and hence also of the League. The situation 
again forbade, as in 1848, any open organisation of the 
proletariat; hence one had to organise again in secret. 
In the autumn of 1849 most of the members of the former 
central authorities and congresses gathered again in London. The 
only ones still missing were Schapper, who was imprisoned in 
Wiesbaden but came after his acquittal in the spring of 1850,a  and 
Moll, who, after he had accomplished a series of most dangerous 
missions and agitational journeys—eventually he recruited 
mounted gunners for the Palatinate artillery right under the noses 
of the Prussian army in the Rhine Province—joined the Besançon 
workers' company of Willich's corps and was killed by a shot in the 
head during the battle at the Murg in front of the Rothenfels 
Bridge. 201 On the other hand Willich now entered upon the scene. 
Willich was one of those sentimental Communists so common in 
Western Germany since 1845, who on that account alone was 
instinctively, furtively antagonistic to our critical tendency. More 
than that, he was entirely the prophet, convinced of his personal 
mission as the predestined liberator of the German proletariat and 
as such a direct claimant as much to political as to military 
dictatorship. Thus, to the early Christian communism previously 
preached by Weitling was added a kind of communist Islam. 
However, propaganda for this new religion was for the time being 
restricted to the refugee barracks under Willich's command. 
Hence, the League was organised afresh; the Address of March 
1850,  published in an appendix (IX, No. 1), was put into effect 
and Heinrich Bauer sent as an emissary to Germany. The 
Address, edited by Marx and  myself,  is still of interest today, 
because petty-bourgeois democracy is even now the party which 
must certainly be the first to take the helm in Germany as the 
saviour of society from the communist workers on the occasion of 
a February 15, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第355页=====
On the History of the Communist League 327 
the next European upheaval now soon due (the European 
revolutions, 1815, 1830, 1848-52, 1870, have occurred at intervals 
of fifteen to eighteen years in our century). Much of what is said 
there is, therefore, still applicable today. Heinrich Bauer's mission 
was crowned with complete success. The jolly little shoemaker was 
a born diplomat. He brought the former members of the League, 
some who had become laggards and some who were acting on 
their own account, back into the active organisation, particularly 
the then leaders of the Workers' Fraternity. The League began to 
play the dominant role in the workers', peasants' and gymnastic 
associations to a far greater extent than before 1848, so that the 
next quarterly address to the communities, in June 1850, could 
already report that the student Schurz from Bonn (later on 
American ex-minister), who was touring Germany in the interest 
of petty-bourgeois democracy, had "found that the League already 
controlled all useful forces" (see Appendix IX, No. 2). a The 
League was undoubtedly the only revolutionary organisation that 
had any significance in Germany. 
But what purpose this organisation should serve depended very 
substantially on whether the prospects of a renewed upsurge of 
the revolution materialised. And in the course of the year 1850 
this became more and more improbable, indeed impossible. The 
industrial crisis of 1847, which had paved the way for the 
Revolution of 1848, had been overcome; a new, unprecedented 
period of industrial prosperity had set in; whoever had eyes to see 
and used them must have clearly perceived that the revolutionary 
storm of 1848 was gradually declining. 
"With this general prosperity, in which the productive forces of 
bourgeois society develop as luxuriantly as is at all possible within 
bourgeois relationships, there can be no talk of a real revolution. Such 
a revolution is only possible in the periods when both these 
factors, the modern productive forces and the bourgeois forms of 
production, come in collision with each other. The various 
quarrels in which the representatives of the individual factions of 
the Continental Party of Order202 now indulge and mutually 
compromise themselves, far from providing the occasion for new 
revolutions, are, on the contrary, possible only because the basis of 
the relationships is momentarily so secure and, what the reaction 
does not know, so bourgeois. All reactionary attempts to hold up 
bourgeois development will rebound off it just as certainly as all moral 
indignation and all enthusiastic proclamations of the democrats." Thus 
a See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 372.— Ed. 

=====第356页=====
328 Frederick Engels 
Marx and I wrote in the "Review. May to October 1850" in the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, No. V-VI, 
Hamburg, 1850, p. 153. a 
This cool estimation of the situation, however, was regarded as 
heresy by many persons, at a time when Ledru-Rollin, Louis 
Blanc, Mazzini, Kossuth and, among the lesser German lights, 
Rüge, Kinkel, Goegg and the rest of them were flocking together 
in London to form provisional governments of the future not only 
for their respective fatherlands but for the whole of Europe, and 
when it only remained a matter of obtaining the requisite money 
from America as a revolutionary loan to consummate at a 
moment's notice the European revolution and the various repub­
lics which went with it as a matter of course. Can anyone be 
surprised that a man like Willich was taken in by this, that 
Schapper, acting on his old revolutionary impulse, also allowed 
himself to be fooled, and that the majority of the London workers, 
to a large extent refugees themselves, followed them into the camp 
of the bourgeois-democratic artificers of revolution? Suffice it to 
say that the reserve maintained by us was not to the liking of these 
people; one was to enter into the game of making revolutions. We 
most decisively refused to do so. A split ensued; more about this is 
to be read in the Revelations. h Then came the arrest of 
Nothjung,203  followed by that of Haupt, in Hamburg. The latter 
turned traitor by divulging the names of the Cologne Central 
Authority and being envisaged as the chief witness in the trial; but 
his relatives had no desire to be thus disgraced and bundled him 
off to Rio de Janeiro, where he later established himself as a 
merchant and in recognition of his services was appointed first 
Prussian and then German Consul General. He is now back in 
Europe.* 
For a better understanding of what follows, I give the list of the 
Cologne accused: 1) P. G. Röser, cigarmaker; 2) Heinrich 
Bürgers, who later died, a Party of Progress deputy to the provin­
cial Diet; 3) Peter Nothjung, tailor, who died a few years ago as a 
* Schapper died in London at the end of the sixties.c  Willich took part in the 
American Civil War with distinction; he became Brigadier-General and was shot in 
the chest during the battle of Murfreesboro (Tennessee) 204 but recovered and died 
about ten years ago in America.— Of the other persons mentioned above, I shall 
only remark that all trace was lost of Heinrich Bauer in Australia, and that 
Weitling and Ewerbeck died in America. 
a Ibid., p. 510. Italics by Engels. — Ed. 
b K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in  Cologne.—  Ed. 
c April 29, 1870.—Ed. 

=====第357页=====
On the  History  of the  Communist League 329 
photographer  in Breslau;  4) W. J. Reiff; 5) Dr.  Hermann Becker, 
now chief burgomaster  of Cologne  and  member  of the  Upper 
Chamber;  6) Dr.  Roland Daniels, medical practitioner,  who  died  a 
few years after  the  trial  of tuberculosis contracted  in prison; 
7) Karl Otto, chemist;  8) Dr.  Abraham Jacobi,  now  medical 
practitioner  in New  York;  9) Dr. J. J.  Klein,  now  medical prac­
titioner  and  town councillor  in Cologne;  10)  Ferdinand Freilig-
rath,  who,  however,  was at  that time already  in London; 
11) J. L.  Erhard, clerk;  12)  Friedrich Lessner, tailor,  now in 
London.  Of these, after  a public trial before  a jury lasting from 
October  4 to  November  12, 1852, the  following were sentenced 
for attempted high treason: Röser, Bürgers  and Nothjung  to six, 
Reiff,  Otto  and  Becker  to five  and  Lessner  to three years' 
confinement  in a  fortress; Daniels, Klein, Jacobi  and  Erhard were 
acquitted. 
With  the  Cologne trial this first period  of the  German 
communist workers' movement comes  to an end.  Immediately 
after  the  sentence  we dissolved  our  League;  a few  months later  the 
Willich-Schapper Sonderbund 205 was  also laid  to eternal rest. 
* * * 
A whole generation lies between then  and now. At  that time 
Germany  was a  country  of handicraft  and of  domestic industry 
based  on manual labour;  now it is a big  industrial country still 
undergoing continual industrial transformation.  At that time  one 
had to seek  out one by one the  workers  who had an  understand­
ing of their position  as workers  and of  their historico-economic 
antagonism  to capital, because this antagonism  was  itself  in the 
process  of taking shape. Today  the  entire German proletariat  has 
to be placed under exceptional laws,206 merely  in order  to slow 
down  a little  the  process  of its  development  to full consciousness 
of its position  as an  oppressed class.  At that time  the few  persons 
who reached  an  understanding  of the  historical role  of the 
proletariat  had to  gather  in secret,  to assemble clandestinely  in 
small communities  of 3 to 20  persons. Today  the  German 
proletariat  no longer needs  any  official organisation, either public 
or secret.  The  simple self-evident interconnection  of like-minded 
class comrades suffices, without  any  rules, authorities, resolutions 
or other tangible forms,  to shake  the  whole German Empire. 
Bismarck  is the  arbiter  of Europe beyond  the  frontiers  of 
Germany,  but  within them there grows daily more threateningly 

=====第358页=====
330 Frederick Engels 
the athletic figure of the German proletariat that Marx foresaw 
back in 1844, the giant for whom the cramped imperial edifice 
designed to fit the philistine is already becoming too small and 
whose mighty stature and broad shoulders grow until the moment 
comes when by merely rising from his seat he will blast the whole 
structure of the imperial constitution to rubble. And still more. 
The international movement of the European and American 
proletariat has so grown in strength that not only its first narrow 
form—the secret League—but even its second, infinitely broader 
form—the open International Working Men's Association—has 
become a fetter for it, and that the simple feeling of solidarity 
based on the understanding of the identity of class position 
suffices to create and to hold together one and the same great 
party of the proletariat among the workers of all countries and 
tongues. The doctrine which the League represented from 1847 to 
1852,  and which at that time was treated by the wise philistines 
with a shrug of the shoulders as the hallucinations of utter 
madcaps, as the secret doctrine of a few scattered sectarians, has 
now innumerable adherents in all civilised countries of the world, 
among those condemned to the Siberan mines as much as among 
the gold diggers of California; and the founder of this doctrine, 
the most hated, most slandered man of his time, Karl Marx, was 
when he died, the ever-sought-after and ever-willing counsellor of 
the proletariat of the old and the new world. 
London, October 8, 1885 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Karl Marx, Enthüllungen Printed according to the book 
über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln, 
Hottingen-Zurich, 1885, and in the news­
paper Der Sozialdemokrat, Nos. 46-48, 
November 12, 19 and 26, 1885 

=====第359页=====
Vnattn auto-M'  « 8»m«dHT Octobw I «as. 
LE SOCIALISTE 
Ox*grcua&  diu  X*«urti ©trvrriox» 
t* NUMÉRO  : M» onnuuBs MMIMMTJJI  MHMi I KÉOKTIO»  ET «MMKTMTIM : 
.»*mu,%.T*M,l.<Mm-.r.U»xtm.K.I*ruuMm.\  *•"• : «u '«• *•  *»"»! 
THE SITUATION 
London,  12 October  1885 
...I cannot  see  that the 4  October was  a defeat, unless you have 
been prey  to all  sorts  of illusions.  It was a matter  of crushing  the 
opportunists208; they have been crushed.  But in  order  to crush 
them pressure from  two  opposing sides  was  needed, from  the 
right  and  from  the  left. That  the  pressure from  the  right  was 
stronger than  one  might have thought  is obvious.  But  that makes 
the situation much more revolutionary. 
Rather than Orleanists  and  Bonapartists  in  disguise,  the 
bourgeois, both  big and  small, opted  for  Orleanists  and  Bona­
partists who were open about  it; rather than men who seek  to get 
rich at the  expense  of the  nation they opted  for  those who have 
already become rich  by robbing it; rather than the conservatives  of 
tomorrow,  the  conservatives  of yesterday. That  is all. 
Monarchy  is impossible  in  France,  if only because  of the 
multitude  of pretenders.  If it  were possible,  it would  be a  sign that 
the Bismarckians  are  right  to speak  of the degeneration  of France. 
But this degeneration affects only  the  bourgeoisie,  in Germany 
and in England  as well  as in  France. 
The Republic still remains  the  government which divides  the 
three monarchist sects209  the  least, permitting them  to unite  as a 
conservative party.  The  moment  the  possibility  of a  monarchist 
restoration becomes  a matter  for  discussion, the conservative party 
splits  up into three sects; whereas the republicans will  be forced  to 
group around  the  only government possible; and,  at the  moment, 
it is probably  the  Clemenceau administration. 
Clemenceau  is still an advance  on Ferry  and  Wilson.  It is  most 
important that  he comes  to power,  not as  the bulwark  of property 
against  the  communists,  but as the  saviour  of the  Republic against 

=====第360页=====
332 Frederick Engels 
the monarchy. In this case he will be more or less forced to keep 
his promises; otherwise he would be behaving like the others who 
thought, like Louis Philippe, that they were "the best of the 
republics"210: we are in power, the Republic can sleep peacefully; 
our takeover of the ministries is enough, so do not speak to us any 
more of the promised reforms. 
I believe that the men who voted for the monarchists on the 4th 
are already frightened by their own success and that the 18th will 
yield results that are more or less in favour of Clemenceau's 
supporters,211 with some success, not of esteem but of scorn, for 
the opportunists. The philistine will say to  himself:  "After all, with 
so many Royalists and Bonapartists, I need a few opportunists." 
Anyway, the 18th will decide the situation; France is the country 
of the unexpected, and I am wary of expressing a definitive 
opinion. 
But, come what may, there will be radicals212 and monarchists 
present. The Republic will run the necessary danger in order to 
force the petty bourgeois to lean a little more to the extreme left, 
which he would never have done otherwise. It is precisely the 
situation we communists  need.  Up till now, I see no reason to believe 
that there has been any deviation in the exceptionally logical 
course of political development in France: it is still the logic of 
1792-94; only the danger which was caused by the coalition then, 
is today caused by the coalition of monarchist parties at home. If 
one examines it closely, it is less dangerous than the other one 
was... 
F. Engels 
First published in Le Socialiste, No. 8, Printed according to the news-
October 17, 1885 paper 
Translated from the French 

=====第361页=====
333 
TO THE EDITORIAL COMMITTEE OF LE SOCIALISTE 
Citizens, 
In your issue of the 17th you publish an extract from a private 
letter3 which I had addressed to one of you.b This letter was 
written in haste, so much so that in order to catch the post I did 
not even have time to read through it. Allow me, therefore, to 
qualify a passage which does not express my thoughts very clearly. 
While speaking of M. Clemenceau as the flag-bearer of French 
radicalism I said: "It is most important that he comes to power, 
not as the bulwark of property against the communists, but as the 
saviour of the Republic against the monarchy. In this case he will 
be more or less forced to keep his promises; otherwise he would be 
behaving (here it is necessary to insert 'perhaps') like the others 
who thought, like Louis Philippe, that they were 'the best of the 
republics' 13: we are in power, the Republic can sleep peacefully; 
our takeover of the ministries is enough, so do not speak to us any 
more of the promised reforms." 
First of all, I have no right to assert that M. Clemenceau, if he 
came to power in the routine way of parliamentary governments, 
would inevitably act "like the others". Secondly, I am not the one 
who explains the actions of governments as a matter of pure will, 
whether good or bad; this will itself is determined by independent 
causes, by the general situation. Thus it is not M. Clemenceau's 
will, good or bad, which concerns us here. What does concern us, 
in the interests of the workers' party, is that the radicals come to 
power in such a situation that the implementation of their 
a See this volume, pp. 331-32.—Ed. 
b Paul Lafargue.— Ed. 

=====第362页=====
334 Frederick Engels 
programme is imposed on them as the sole means of holding on. 
Let us hope that the two hundred monarchists of the Chamber 
will be sufficient to create this situation. 
London, 21 October 1885 
F. Engels 
First published in Le Socialiste, No. 10, Printed according to the news-
October 31, 1885 paper 
Translated from the French 

=====第363页=====
335 
HOW NOT TO TRANSLATE MARX2 
The first volume of "Das Kapital" is public property, as far as 
translation into foreign languages are concerned. Therefore, 
although it is pretty well known in English Socialist circles that a 
translation is being prepared and will be published under the 
responsibility of Marx's literary executors, nobody would have a 
right to grumble if that translation were anticipated by another, so 
long as the text was faithfully and equally well rendered. 
The first few pages of such a translation by John Broadhouse, 
are published in the October number of To-Day. I say distinctly 
that it is very far from being a faithful rendering of the text, and 
that because Mr. Broadhouse is deficient in every quality required 
in a translator of Marx. 
To translate such a book, a fair knowledge of literary German is 
not enough. Marx uses freely expressions of everyday life and 
idioms of provincial dialects; he coins new words, he takes his 
illustrations from every branch of science, his allusions from the 
literatures of a dozen languages; to understand him, a man must 
be a master of German indeed, spoken as well as written, and 
must know something of German life too. 
To use an illustration. When some Oxford Undergraduates 
rowed in a four-oar boat across the straits of Dover, it was stated 
in the Press reports that one of them "caught a crab." The 
London correspondent of the Cologne Gazette* took this literally, 
and faithfully reported to his paper, that "a crab had got 
entangled in the oar of one of the rowers." If a man who has been 
living for years in the midst of London is capable of such a 
a Kölnische Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第364页=====
336 Frederick Engels 
ludicrous blunder as soon as he comes across the technical terms 
of an art unknown to him, what must we expect from a man who 
with a passable knowledge of mere book-German, undertakes to 
translate the most untranslatable of German prose writers? And 
indeed we shall see that Mr. Broadhouse is an excellent hand at 
"catching crabs." 
But there is something more required. Marx is one of the most 
vigorous and concise writers of the age. To render him 
adequately, a man must be a master, not only of German, but of 
English too. Mr. Broadhouse, however, though evidently a man of 
respectable journalistic accomplishments, commands but that 
limited range of English used by and for conventional literary 
respectability. Here he moves with ease; but this sort of English is 
not a language into which "Das Kapital" can ever be translated. 
Powerful German requires powerful English to render it; the best 
resources of the language have to be drawn upon; new-coined 
German terms require the coining of corresponding new terms in 
English. But as soon as Mr. Broadhouse is faced by such a 
difficulty, not only his resources fail him, but also his courage. 
The slightest extension of his limited stock-in-trade, the slightest 
innovation upon the conventional English of everyday literature 
frightens him, and rather than risk such a heresy, he renders the 
difficult German word by a more or less indefinite term which 
does not grate upon his ear but obscures the meaning of the 
author; or, worse still, he translates it, as it recurs, by a whole 
series of different terms, forgetting that a technical term has to be 
rendered always by one and the same equivalent. Thus, in the 
very heading of the first section, he translates Werthgrösse by 
"extent of value," ignoring that grosse is a definite mathematical 
term, equivalent to magnitude, or determined quantity, while 
extent may mean many things besides. Thus even the simple 
innovation of "labour-time" for Arbeitszeit, is too much for him; he 
renders it by (1) "time-labour," which means, if anything, labour 
paid by time or labour done by a man "serving" time at hard 
labour; (2) "time of labour," (3) "labour-time," and (4) "period of 
labour", by which term (Arbeitsperiode) Marx, in the second 
volume, means something quite different. 215 Now as is well known, 
the "category" of labour-time is one of the most fundamental of 
the whole book, and to translate it by four different terms in less 
than ten pages is more than unpardonable. 
Marx begins with the analysis of what a commodity is. The first 
aspect under which a commodity presents  itself,  is that of an 
object of utility; as such it may be considered with regard either to 

=====第365页=====
How Not to Translate Marx 337 
its quality or its quantity. "Any such thing is a whole in  itself,  the 
sum of many qualities or properties, and may therefore be useful 
in different ways. To discover these different ways and therefore 
the various uses to which a thing may be put, is the act of history. 
So, too, is the finding and fixing of socially recognised standards of 
measure for the quantity of useful things. The diversity of the 
modes of measuring commodities arises partly from the diversity 
of the nature of the objects to be measured, partly from 
convention."3 
This is rendered by Mr. Broadhouse as follows: 
"To discover these various ways, and consequently the multifarious modes in 
which an object may be of use, is a work of time. So,  consequently,  is the finding of the 
social measure for the quantity of useful things. The diversity in the bulk of 
commodities arises partly from the different nature," etc. 
With Marx, the finding out of the various utilities of things 
constitutes an essential part of historic progress; with 
Mr. Broadhouse, it is merely a work of time. With Marx the same 
qualification applies to the establishment of recognised common 
standards of measure. With Mr. B., another "work of time" 
consists in the "finding of the social measure for the quantity of 
useful things," about which sort of measure Marx certainly never 
troubled  himself.  And then he winds up by mistaking Masse 
(measures) for Masse (bulk), and thereby saddling Marx with one of 
the finest crabs that was ever caught. 
Further on, Marx says: "Use values form the material out of 
which wealth is made up, whatever may be the social form of that 
wealth" (the specific form of appropriation by which it is held and 
distributed). Mr. Broadhouse has: 
"Use values constitute the actual basis of wealth which is always their social 
form"— 
which is either a pretentious platitude or sheer nonsense. 
The second aspect under which a commodity presents  itself,  is 
its exchange-value. That all commodities are exchangeable, in 
certain varying proportions, one against the other, that they have 
exchange-values, this fact implies that they contain something 
which is common to all of them. I pass over the slovenly way in 
which Mr. Broadhouse here reproduces one of the most delicate 
analyses in Marx's book, and at once proceed to the passage where 
Marx says: "This something common to all commodities cannot be 
a geometrical, physical, chemical or other natural property. In fact 
their material properties come into consideration only in so far as 
a Here and below italics by Engels. — Ed. 

=====第366页=====
338 Frederick Engels 
they make them useful, that is, in so far as they turn them into 
use-values." And he continues: "But it is the very act of making 
abstraction from their use-values which evidently is the characteristic 
point of the exchange- relation of commodities. Within this relation, 
one use-value is equivalent to any other, so long as it is provided 
in sufficient proportion." 
Now Mr. Broadhouse: 
"But on the other hand, it is precisely these Use-values in the abstract which 
apparently characterise the exchange-ratio of the commodities. In  itself,  one 
Use-value is worth just as much as another if it exists in the same proportion." 
Thus,  leaving minor mistakes aside, Mr. Broadhouse makes 
Marx say the very reverse of what he does say. With Marx, the 
characteristic of the exchange-relation of commodities is the fact, 
that total abstraction is made of their use-values, that they are 
considered as having no use-values at all. His interpreter makes 
him say, that the characteristic of the exchange ratio (of which 
there is no question here) is precisely their use-value, only taken 
"in the abstract"! And then, a few lines further on, he gives the 
sentence of Marx: "As Use-values, commodities can only be of 
different quality, as exchange-values they can only be of different 
quantity, containing not an atom of Use-value,^ neither abstract nor 
concrete. We may well ask: "Understandest thou what thou 
readest?" 3 
To this question it becomes impossible to answer in the 
affirmative, when we find Mr. Broadhouse repeating the same 
misconception over and over again. After the sentence just 
quoted, Marx continues: "Now, if we leave out of consideration''' 
(that is, make abstraction from) "the use-values of the com­
modities, there remains to them but one property: that of being the 
products of labour. But even this product of labour has already 
undergone a change in our hands. If we make abstraction from its 
use-value, we also make abstraction from the bodily components and 
forms which make it into a use-value." 
This is Englished by Mr. Broadhouse as follows: 
"If we separate Use-values from the actual material of the commodities, there 
remains" (where? with the use-values or with the actual material?) "one property 
only, that of the product of labour. But the product of labour is already 
transmuted in our hands. If we abstract from it its use-value, we abstract also the 
stamina and form which constitute its use-value." 
Again, Marx: "In the exchange-relation of commodities, their 
exchange-value presented itself to us as something perfectly 
a The Acts of the Apostles. VIII. 30.— Ed. 

=====第367页=====
How Not to Translate Marx 339 
independent of their use-values. Now, if we actually make 
abstraction from the use-value of the products of labour, we arrive 
at their value, as previously determined by us." This is made by 
Mr. Broadhouse to sound as follows: 
"In the exchange-ratio of commodities their exchange-value appears to us as 
something altogether independent of their use-value. If we now in effect abstract 
the use-value from the labour-products, we have their value as it is then determined." 
There is no doubt of it. Mr. Broadhouse has never heard of any 
other acts and modes of abstraction but bodily ones, such as the 
abstraction of money from a till or a safe. To identify abstraction 
and subtraction, will, however, never do for a translator of Marx. 
Another specimen of the turning of German sense into English 
nonsense. One of the finest researches of Marx is that revealing 
the duplex character of labour. Labour, considered as a producer 
of use-value, is of a different character, has different qualifications 
from the same labour, when considered as a producer of value. 
The one is labour of a specified kind, spinning, weaving, 
ploughing, etc.; the other is the general character of human 
productive activity, common to spinning, weaving, ploughing, etc., 
which comprises them all under the one common term, labour. 
The one is labour in the concrete, the other is labour in the 
abstract. The one is technical labour, the other is economical 
labour. In short—for the English language has terms for 
both—the one is work, as distinct from labour; the other is labour, 
as distinct from work. After this analysis, Marx continues: 
"Originally a commodity presented itself to us as something 
duplex: Use-value and Exchange-value. Further on we saw that 
labour, too, as far as it is expressed in value, does no longer  possess 
the same characteristics which belong to it in its capacity as a creator 
of use-value." Mr. Broadhouse insists on proving that he has not 
understood a word of Marx's analysis, and translates the above 
passage as follows: 
"We saw the commodity as first as a compound of Use-value and Exchange-
value. Then we saw that labour, so far as it is expressed in value, only  possesses  that 
character so far as it is a generator of use-value." 
When Marx says: White, Mr. Broadhouse sees no reason why he 
should not translate: Black. 
But enough of this. Let us turn to something more amusing. 
Marx says: "In civil society, the fictio juris prevails that everybody, 
in his capacity as a buyer of commodities, possesses an ency­
clopaedical knowledge of all such commodities."216 Now, although 
the expression, Civil Society, is thoroughly English, and Ferguson's 
24-1243 

=====第368页=====
340 Frederick Engels 
"History of Civil Society" is more than a hundred years old, this 
term is too much for Mr. Broadhouse. He renders it "amongst 
ordinary people," and thus turns the sentence into nonsense. For 
it is exactly "ordinary people" who are constantly grumbling at 
being cheated by retailers, etc., in consequence of their ignorance 
of the nature and values of the commodities they have to buy. 
The production (Herstellung) of a Use-value is rendered by "the 
establishing of a Use-value." When Marx says "If we succeed in 
transforming, with little labour, coal into diamonds, their value 
may fall below that of bricks," Mr. Broadhouse, apparently not 
aware that diamond is an allotropie form of carbon, turns coal into 
coke. Similarly he transmutes the "total yield of the Brazilian 
diamond mines" into "the entire profits of the whole yield." "The 
primitive communities of India" in his hands become "venerable 
communities." Marx says: "In the use-value of a commodity is 
contained" (steckt, which had better be translated: For the 
production of the use-value of a commodity there has been spent) 
"a certain productive activity, adapted to the peculiar purpose, or a 
certain useful labour." Mr. Broadhouse must say: 
"In the use-value of a commodity is contained a certain quantity of productive 
power or useful labour," 
thus turning not only quality into quantity, but productive 
activity which has been spent, into productive power which is to be 
spent. 
But enough. I could give tenfold this number of instances, to 
show that Mr. Broadhouse is in every respect not a fit and proper 
man to translate Marx, and especially so because he seems 
perfectly ignorant of what is really conscientious scientific work.* 
Frederick Engels 
Written in October 1885 Reproduced from the magazine 
First published in The Commonweal, 
No. 10, November 1885 
* From the above it will be evident that "Das Kapital" is not a book the 
translation of which can be done by contract. The work of translating it is in 
excellent hands, but the translators 3 cannot devote all their time to it. This is the 
reason of the delay. But while the precise time of publication cannot as yet be 
stated we may safely say that the English edition will be in the hands of the public 
in the course of next year. 
a E. Aveling and S. Moore.— Ed. 

=====第369页=====
341 
ON THE HISTORY OF THE PRUSSIAN PEASANTS 
[INTRODUCTION TO WILHELM WOLFF'S PAMPHLET 
THE SILESIAN MILLIARD]™ 
To aid comprehension of the following work by  Wolff,  I must 
preface it with a few words. 
Germany east of the Elbe and north of the Erzgebirge and 
Riesengebirge is a country wrested in the latter half of the Middle 
Ages from the invading Slavs, and Germanised once again by 
German colonists. The conquering German knights and barons to 
whom the land was allotted set themselves up as the "founders" 
["Gründer"] of villages, laying out their district in village lands, 
each of which was divided into a number of smallholdings or hides 
of equal size. To every hide there belonged a house plot with yard 
and garden in the village  itself.  These hides were distributed by lot 
to the newly arrived Franconian (Rhenish Franconian and Dutch), 
Saxon and Frisian colonists; in return the colonists had to render 
very moderate, firmly fixed dues and services to the founder, i.e. 
the knight or baron. The peasants were hereditary masters of 
their hides as long as they performed these services. In addition 
they enjoyed the same rights of usufruct to timber, grazing, 
pannage, etc., in the forest of the founder (the subsequent 
landlord) as the West German peasants possessed on their 
common land. The cultivated village land was subject to compul­
sory crop rotation, being chiefly cultivated in winter fields, 
summer fields and fallow fields in accordance with the three-field 
system; fallow and harvested fields were grazed jointly by the 
cattle of the peasantry and the founder. All village affairs were 
settled in the assembly of the manorial inhabitants, i.e. the 
hide-owners, by majority decision. The rights of the noble 
founders were restricted to collecting the dues and participating in 
the fallow grazing and stubble pasture, to the surplus from the 
24* 

=====第370页=====
342 Frederick Engels 
yield of the forests, and to taking the chair at the assembly of 
manorial inhabitants, who were all personally free men. This was 
the average condition of the German peasants from the Elbe to 
East Prussia and Silesia. And this condition was on the whole 
considerably much better than that of west and south German 
peasants at the time, who were already then engaged in a violent, 
continually recurring struggle with the feudal lords for their old 
hereditary rights, and had to a large extent already succumbed to 
a form of dependence that was far more oppressive, threatening 
to or even destructive of their personal freedom. 
The feudal lords' increasing need for money in the fourteenth 
and fifteenth centuries naturally led to attempts to oppress and 
exploit the peasants in contravention to agreements in the 
north-east as well. But certainly not on the same scale and with the 
same success as in South Germany. The population east of the 
Elbe was still sparse, the wasteland was still extensive; the 
reclamation of this wasteland, the spread of cultivation and the 
foundation of new tributary villages here remained the surest 
means of enrichment for the feudal landlords too. Furthermore, 
here,  on the imperial border with Poland, larger states had already 
been formed—Pomerania, Brandenburg, the Electorate of Saxony 
(Silesia was Austrian)—and for this reason the peace of the land 
was better observed, the feuds and depredations of the nobility 
were more forcefully suppressed than in the fragmented areas on 
the Rhine, in Franconia and Swabia. But those who suffered most 
from the permanent state of war were precisely the peasants. 
Only in the neighbourhood of subjugated Polish or Lithuanian-
Prussian villages did the nobility more frequently attempt to force 
the colonists settled there in accordance with German manorial law 
into the same serfdom as the Polish and Prussian subjects. This 
occurred in Pomerania and in the Prussian area of the Order,218 
more rarely in Silesia. 
As a result of this more favourable position, the peasants east of 
the Elbe remained almost untouched by the powerful movement 
of the south and west German peasants in the final quarter of the 
fifteenth and first quarter of the sixteenth centuries, and when the 
revolution of 1525 broke out it found in East Prussia only a faint 
echo,  which was suppressed without great difficulty. The peasants 
east of the Elbe left their rebelling brothers in the lurch, and they 
received their just deserts. In the regions where the great Peasant 
War had raged, the peasants were now made serfs without further 
ado,  subjected to unlimited labour services and dues dependent 
solely on the arbitrary power of the landlord. Their free land was 

=====第371页=====
On the History of the Prussian Peasants 343 
simply turned into seigneurial property, on which they only 
retained the usufruct accorded to them by the landlord in his 
bounty. This, the very ideal state of feudal landlordship, to which 
the German nobility had in vain been aspiring all through the 
Middle Ages and which it had finally attained now that the feudal 
system was decaying, was then gradually extended to the lands 
east of the Elbe as well. Not only were the peasants' contractual 
rights of usufruct in the seigneurial forest (in so far as they had 
not previously been curtailed) transformed into revocable conces­
sions bestowed at the grace of the landlord; not only were labour 
services and tributes unlawfully increased; but new burdens were 
also introduced, such as the "laudemien" (dues to the landlord on 
the death of the peasant smallholder) which were considered 
characteristic of serfdom; or traditional, innocuous services were 
given the character of services rendered only by serfs, but not by 
free men. In less than a hundred years the free peasants east of 
the Elbe were thus turned into serfs, at first in fact, and then also 
in law. 
In the meantime the feudal nobility became more and more 
bourgeois. To an ever increasing extent it became indebted to the 
urban money capitalists, and money thus came to be its pressing 
need. Yet there was no money to be had from the peasant, its  serf, 
but to begin with only labour or arable produce, and the farms, 
tilled under the most difficult conditions, would only yield a 
minimum of such produce over and above the most meagre 
livelihood for the working owners. Alongside, however, lay the 
lucrative estates of the monasteries, worked by the labour services 
of dependents or serfs under expert supervision at the expense of 
the lord. Hitherto the petty nobility had almost never been able to 
practise this kind of management on their domains, and the larger 
among them and the princes only in exceptional cases. But now, 
on the one hand, the restoration of the peace of the land made 
large-scale cultivation possible everywhere, while, on the other, it 
was increasingly forced on the nobility by its growing need for 
money. The running of large estates with the labour services of 
serf peasants at the expense of the landlord gradually became the 
source of income which had to compensate the nobility for the loss 
of the now outmoded robber-knight system. But where could they 
obtain the necessary land area? True, the noble was landlord of an 
area large or small, but with few exceptions this was entirely 
allotted to hereditary copyholders,219 who had just as much right 
to their farms and hides, including the land rights, as the noble lord 
himself,  as long as they performed the stipulated services. This 

=====第372页=====
344 Frederick Engels 
had to be remedied, and what was necessary above all was the 
transformation of the peasants into serfs. For even if the expulsion 
of serf peasants from house and farm was no less a breach of the 
law and an act of violence than the expulsion of free copyholders, 
it was still far easier to extenuate it with the aid of the now 
habitual Roman law. In short, once the peasants had been 
successfully turned into serfs, the necessary number of peasants 
were chased away or resettled on seigneurial land as cottagers, day 
labourers with a cottage and small garden. While the earlier 
strongholds of the nobility gave way to their new ones, more or 
less open manor houses, for this very reason the farms of formerly 
free peasants gave way to the wretched hovels of bond servants, 
on a much wider scale. 
Once the seigneurial estate—the dominium, as it was called in 
Silesia—had been established, it was then simply a matter of 
setting in motion the labour power of the peasants to work it. And 
this is where the second advantage of serfdom showed  itself.  The 
former labour services of the peasants as laid down by contract 
were by no means appropriate for this end. The vast majority of 
them were restricted to services in the public interest—road and 
bridge building, etc.—building work on the seigneurial castle, the 
labour of the women and girls at the castle in different branches 
of industry, and personal servants' duties. But as soon as the 
peasant had been turned into a serf and the latter had been 
equated with the Roman slave by Roman lawyers, the noble lord 
changed his tune entirely. With the assent of the lawyers at the 
bench he now demanded from the peasants unlimited services, as 
much, whenever and wherever he pleased. The peasant had to do 
labour service, drive, plough, sow and harvest as soon as he was 
summoned to do so, even if his own field was neglected and his 
own harvest ruined by rain. And his corn tribute and money 
tribute were likewise raised to the extreme limits of what was 
possible. 
But that was not enough. The no less noble reigning prince, 
who was present everywhere east of the Elbe, also needed money, 
a lot of money. In return for his permitting the noble to subjugate 
his peasants, the noble allowed him to impose state taxes on the 
same peasants—the nobleman himself was of course exempt from 
taxation! And to cap it all, the same reigning prince sanctioned the 
spreading transformation of the landlord's former right to preside 
at the—long since abolished — free manorial court of the peasants 
into the right of patrimonial jurisdiction and manorial police, 
according to which the lord of the manor was not only chief of 

=====第373页=====
On the History of the Prussian Peasants 345 
police but also the sole judge over his peasants—even when 
personally involved in a case—so that the peasant could only 
indict the lord of the manor through the lord of the manor 
himself.  He was thus legislator, judge and executor in one person, 
and absolute and supreme lord of his manor. 
These notorious conditions, which are not matched even in 
Russia—for there the peasant still had his self-governing com­
mune—reached their peak in the period between the Thirty 
Years'  War and the redeeming defeat at Jena.220  The terrible 
hardships of the Thirty Years' War allowed the nobility to 
complete the subjugation of the peasants; the devastation of 
countless peasant farms allowed them to be added without 
hindrance to the dominium of the manorial estate; the resettle­
ment of the population forcibly driven into vagabondage by war 
devastation provided the nobility with an excuse to fetter them to 
the soil as serfs. But that, too, was only short lived. For scarcely 
had the dreadful wounds of war begun to heal in the following 
fifty years, the fields again being tilled, the population growing, 
than the hunger of the noble landlords for peasant land and 
peasant labour once again made itself felt. The seigneurial 
dominium was not large enough to absorb all the labour that 
could still be knocked out of the serfs—"knock" being used here 
in a highly literal sense. The system of degrading peasants into 
cottagers, bond day-labourers, had worked magnificently. From 
the beginning of the eighteenth century it assumes ever greater 
momentum; it is now called "peasant expropriation [Bauernlegen]" . 
One "expropriates" as many peasants as possible, according to the 
circumstances; first one leaves as many as are necessary to 
perform the draught labour, turning the rest into cottagers 
(Dreschgärtner, Häusler, Instleute 221 or whatever they are called) who 
have to sweat away on the estate year in, year out in return for a 
cottage with a tiny potato patch, a wretched day-wage in corn and 
only very little in cash. Where his lordship is rich enough to 
provide his own draught-animals, he "expropriates" the other 
peasants too, adding their hides to the seigneurial estate. In this 
manner the entire large landed property of the German nobility, 
but particularly east of the Elbe, is composed of stolen peasant  land, 
and even if it is taken away from the robbers again without 
compensation, they will still not have got their just deserts. Really 
they should pay compensation as well. 
Gradually the reigning sovereigns noticed that this system was 
by no means to their advantage, however convenient it might be 
for the nobility. The peasants had paid state taxes before they 

=====第374页=====
346 Frederick Engels 
were "expropriated"; but when their hides were added to the 
tax-free dominiums the state did not receive a farthing from them 
and scarcely a penny from the newly-settled cottagers. A 
proportion of the "expropriated" peasants were quite simply 
chased away as superfluous for the running of the estate, and thus 
became free, i.e. outlawed. The population of the plains declined, 
and since the reigning prince had started complementing his 
expensive recruited army through the cheaper way of conscripting 
the peasants, this was by no means a matter of indifference to 
him. Thus we find throughout the eighteenth century, particularly 
in Prussia, one decree after another which was supposed to put a 
stop to "peasant expropriation"; but their fate was the same as 
ninety-nine percent of the immeasurable amount of waste-paper 
that has been issued by German governments since the capitularies 
of Charlemagne.222 They were only valid on paper; the nobility 
was not greatly burdened, and the practice of "peasant expropria­
tion" continued. 
Even the fearful example which the Great Revolution in France 
made of the stubborn feudal nobility only frightened them for a 
moment. Everything remained as before, and what Frederick II 
had not been able to do,223  his weak, short-sighted nephew 
Frederick William III was least of all able to carry out. Then came 
the vengeance. On October 14, 1806 the entire Prussian state was 
smashed to smithereens in a single day near Jena and Auerstedt, 
and the Prussian peasant has every reason to celebrate this day 
and March 18, 1848 more than all the Prussian victories from 
Mollwitz to Sedan. 224 Now, finally, it began to dawn dimly on the 
Prussian government, which had been chased back right to the 
Russian border, that the free landowning French peasants' sons 
could not be defeated by the sons of serf peasants who were daily 
liable to be evicted from house and home; it finally noticed that 
the peasant was also a human being, so to speak. Now something 
was to be done. 
But no sooner was peace concluded and Court and government 
back in Berlin than the noble intentions again melted like ice in 
the March sun. The famous edict of October 9, 1807 had 
admittedly abolished the name of serfdom or hereditary subjection 
on paper (and even this only from Martinmas 1810), but in reality 
almost everything had been left as before. That is how things 
remained; the King, who was as faint-hearted as he was bigoted, 
allowed himself to be led, as before, by the peasant-plundering 
nobility—so much so that from 1808 to 1810 four decrees 
appeared once again permitting the landowners to "expropriate" 

=====第375页=====
On the History of the Prussian Peasants 347 
peasants in a number of cases—in contravention of the edict of 
1807. 225 Not until Napoleon's war against Russia was already in 
sight was it again remembered that the peasants would be needed, 
and the edict of September 14, 1811 was issued whereby peasants 
and landlords were recommended to come to an amicable arrange­
ment within two years on the redemption of labour service and 
dues as well as the seigneurial property rights. A royal commission 
was then to implement this settlement compulsorily in accordance 
with fixed rules. The main rule was that after relinquishing a third 
of his landholding (or its value in money), the peasant should 
become a free proprietor of the part remaining to him. But even 
this redemption, so immensely advantageous to the nobility, 
remained illusory. For the nobility held back in order to obtain 
even more, and after the two years had elapsed Napoleon was 
back in the country. 
No sooner had he been finally expelled from the land—to the 
frightened King's constant promises of a constitution and popular 
representation—than all the fine assurances were again forgotten. 
As early as May 29, 1816—not even a year after the victory at 
Waterloo226—a declaration of the 1811 edict was issued which 
read quite differently. In it, the redeemability of feudal dues was 
no longer the rule, but the exception; it was only to apply to those 
arable estates valued in the land tax rolls (i.e. the larger ones) 
which had been settled by peasant occupiers back in 1749 in 
Silesia, 1752 in East Prussia, 1763 in Brandenburg and 
Pomerania,* and 1774 in West Prussia! In addition, a number of 
labour services at sowing and harvest time could be retained. And 
when the redemption commissions finally got down to serious 
business in 1817, the agrarian legislation regressed much faster 
than the agrarian commissions progressed. On June 7, 1821 there 
came a new redemption order, expressly laying down the 
limitation of redeemability to larger farms, so-called Acker-
nahrungen,228  and urging the perpetuation of labour services and 
other feudal dues for the owners of smaller holdings—cottagers, 
Häusler, Dreschgärtner —in short all settled day-labourers. From 
now on this remained the rule. Not until 1845, the redemption of 
* Prussian perfidy is fathomless. Here it shows itself again in the very date. 
Why was 1763 chosen? Quite simply because in the following year, on July 12, 
1764,  Frederick II issued a sharp edict ordering the recalcitrant nobles, under pain 
of punishment, to return the large numbers of farms and smallholdings confiscated 
since 1740, and particularly since the outbreak of the Seven Years' war,227 to their 
rightful occupants within one year. In so far as this edict had any effect, it was thus 
annulled in 1816 to the advantage of the nobility. 

=====第376页=====
348 Frederick Engels 
these kinds of dues made possible by way of exception for Saxony3 
and Silesia other than through the joint assent of landlord and 
peasant13 —for which, obviously, no law was necessary. Further­
more, the capital sum with which the services, translated into 
money or corn revenue, could be paid off once and for all, was 
fixed at twenty-five times the rent, and the instalments could only 
be made in sums of not less than 100 thalers 229 at once; while as 
early as 1809 the peasants on the state domains had been 
permitted to buy redemption at twenty times the amount of the 
revenue. In short, the much-lauded, enlightened agrarian legisla­
tion of the "state of intelligence" 230 had only one ambition: to 
salvage every bit of feudalism that could still be salvaged. 
The practical result was "in keeping with these lamentable 
measures. The agrarian commissions understood the benevolent 
intentions of the government perfectly and, as Wolff drastically 
depicts in detail, they made sure that the peasant was soundly 
cheated in favour of the nobility in the matter of these 
redemptions. From 1816 to 1848 70,582 peasant holdings were 
redeemed with a total landed property of 5,158,827 Morgen, 
making up 6/j of all the larger bond peasants. However, only 
289,651 of the smaller occupiers were redeemed (over 228,000 of 
these being in Silesia, Brandenburg and Saxony). The total 
number of annual service days redeemed amounted to: draught 
service, 5,978,295; manual service, 16,869,824. In return the high 
nobility received compensation as follows: capital payment, 
18,544,766 thalers; cash annuities,  1,599,992  thalers; rye revenue, 
260,069 Scheffel 0231 annually; and finally, peasant land relin­
quished,  1,533,050  Morgen.* Apart from the other forms of 
compensation, the former landlords thus received a full third of 
what had been the peasants' land! 
1848 finally opened the eyes of the Prussian backwoods Junkers, 
who were as narrow-minded as they were self-important. The 
peasants—particularly in Silesia, where the latifundia system and 
the concomitant downgrading of the population to day-labouring 
cottagers was furthest developed — stormed the manor houses, 
* For these statistics, see Meitzen, Der Boden des Preussischen Staates, I, p. 432 ff. 
a A reference to a Prussian province.— Ed. 
b Frederick William IV, "Gesetz, betreffend die Ablösung der Dienste in 
denjenigen Theilen der Provinz Sachsen, in welchen die Ablösungsordnung vom 7. 
Juni 1821 gilt. Vom 18. Juli 1845" and "Gesetz, betreffend die Ablösung der 
Dienste in der Provinz Schlesien. Vom 31. Oktober 1845".— Ed. 
c Bushel.— Ed. 

=====第377页=====
On the History of the Prussian Peasants 349 
burnt the redemption documents that had already been con­
cluded, and forced their lordships to renounce in writing all claim 
to any further services. The excesses—wicked even in the eyes of 
the bourgeoisie then in power—were, admittedly, suppressed with 
military force and severely punished; but now even the most 
brainless Junker's skull had realised that labour service had 
become impossible. Rather none at all than that from these 
rebellious peasants! It was now simply a matter of saving what 
could still be saved; and the landowning nobility really did have 
the insolence to demand compensation for these services, which 
had become impossible. And no sooner was reaction more or less 
firmly back in the saddle than it fulfilled this wish. 
First, however, there came the law of October 9, 1848, which 
adjourned all pending redemption negotiations and the lawsuits 
arising out of them, as well as a whole number of other lawsuits 
between landlords and peasants. As a result the entire, much-
praised agrarian legislation from 1807 on was condemned. But 
then as soon as the so-called National Assembly in Berlin had been 
successfully dissolved and the coup d'état was accomplished, 3 the 
feudal-bureaucratic ministry of Brandenburg-Manteuffel consi­
dered itself strong enough to oblige the nobility with a generous 
step.  It promulgated the provisional decree of December 20, 1848, 
whereby the services, etc., to be performed by the peasants until 
further settlement were restored on the old terms, with few 
exceptions. It was this decree that prompted our Wolff to deal 
with the conditions of the Silesian peasants in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung. 
Meanwhile it was over a year before the new, final Redemption 
Law of March 2, 1850 was enacted. The agrarian legislation of 
1807-47, which even today is still praised to the skies by Prussian 
patriots, cannot be more sharply condemned than it was, albeit 
reluctantly, in the motives for this law—and it is the Branden­
burg-Manteuffel ministry that speaks here. 
Enough: a few insignificant dues were simply abolished, the 
redemption of the rest was decreed by transforming them into 
cash annuities, and their capitalisation set at eighteen times this 
sum. To mediate the capital instalments annuity offices were 
established, which by means of well-known amortisation operations 
were to pay the landlord twenty times the amount of the rent, 
while the peasant was relieved of all obligation by fifty-six years of 
paying off the amortisation instalments. 
a See this volume, pp. 304-06.— Ed. 

=====第378页=====
350 Frederick Engels 
If the ministry condemned in the motives the entire preceding 
agrarian legislation, the commission of the Chamber condemned 
the new law. It was not to apply to the left bank of the Rhine, 
which had long since been freed of all that rubbish by the French 
Revolution. The commission concurred in this because at most a 
single one of the 109 sections of the bill was applicable there 
anyway: 
"While all the other stipulations do not apply there at all, rather they might 
easily create confusion and needless unrest ... because of legislation on the left bank 
of the Rhine having gone much further with regard to the redemption of 
real-property dues than it was at present intended to go",a 
and they could not expect the Rhinelanders to allow themselves to 
be brought down again to the new Prussian ideal state. 
Now at last a serious attempt was made to deal with the 
abolition of feudal forms of labour and exploitation. In a few 
years the redemption of the peasants was effected. From 1850 to 
the end of 1865 the following were redeemed: 1. the rest of the 
larger peasant proprietors; there were by now only 12,706 left 
with an area of 352,305 Morgen; 2. the smaller proprietors, 
including the cottagers; but whilst not quite 290,000 had been 
redeemed up to 1848, in the last fifteen years all of  1,014,341  had 
bought themselves free. Accordingly the number of redeemed 
days of draught labour due the larger farms was only 356,274, the 
number of days of manual service, however, 6,670,507. Similarly 
the compensation paid in plots of land, and also due only on the 
larger farms, amounted to only 113,071 Morgen, and the annual 
annuity to be paid in rye to 55,522 Scheffel. On the other hand 
the landed nobility received 3,890,136 thalers in new annual cash 
annuities, and in addition another 19,697,483 thalers in final 
capital compensation.* 
The sum which the entire Prussian landed proprietors, includ­
ing the state domains, have lifted from the pockets of the peasants 
for the free return of part of the land previously stolen from the 
peasants—up to this century—amounts to 213,861,035 thalers 
according to Meitzen, I, p. 437. But this is far too little. For a 
Morgen of cultivated land is here "only" assessed at 20 thalers, a 
Morgen of forest land at 10 thalers and a Scheffel of rye at 1 
thaler, which is much too low. Furthermore, only "the compensa-
* These figures have been arrived at by calculating the difference between the 
sum totals in the two tables in Meitzen, I, pp. 432 and 434.232 
a Report of the Agrarian Commission of the Prussian Second Chamber on the 
draft Redemption Law of March 2, 1850. Italics by Engels. — Ed. 

=====第379页=====
On the History of the Prussian Peasants 351 
tion established with certainty" is taken into account, thus making 
no allowance for at least all the settlements reached privately 
between the parties involved. As Meitzen himself says, the 
redeemed services entered here, hence also the compensation paid 
for them, are only a "minimum". 
We may thus assume that the sum paid by the peasants to the 
nobility and the treasury to be released from unlawfully imposed 
dues amounted to at least 300,000,000 thalers, perhaps a thousand 
million marks. 
A thousand million marks, to get back free of dues only the 
smallest part of the land stolen over a period of 400 years! The 
smallest part, since the nobility and the treasury retained by far 
the largest part in the form of entailed and other manorial estates 
and domains! 
London, November 24, 1885 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Wilhelm  Wolff,  Die Printed according to the book 
schlesische Milliarde, Hottingen-Zurich, 
1886 

=====第380页=====

=====第381页=====
LUDWIG FEUERBACH AND THE END 
OF CLASSICAL GERMAN PHILOSOPHY 2 

=====第382页=====
Written in early 1886 Printed according to the pamphlet 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, Nos. 4 
and 5, 1886 and as a pamphlet in 
Stuttgart in 1888 

=====第383页=====
LUDWIG FEUERBACH 
UND DER AUSGANG DER 
KLASSISCHEN DEUTSCHEN PHILOSOPHIE 
VON 
FRIEDRICH ENGELS 
REVIDIRTER SONDER  - ABDRUCK  AUS DER  „NEUEN ZEIT' 
MIT ANHANG: 
KARL MARX ÜBER FEUERBACH 
VOM JAHRE 1845. 
STUTTGART 
VERLAG VON  J. H.  W. DIETZ 
1888. 
Title page  of Ludwig Feuerbach  and the End 
of Classical German Philosophy 

=====第384页=====

=====第385页=====
357 
I 
The work* before us takes us back to a period which, although 
in time no more than a good generation behind us, has become as 
foreign to the present generation in Germany as if it were already 
a full century old. Yet it was the period of Germany's preparation 
for the Revolution of 1848; and all that has happened since then 
in our country has been merely a continuation of 1848, merely the 
execution of the testament of the revolution. 
Just as in France in the eighteenth century, so in Germany in 
the nineteenth, a philosophical revolution ushered in the political 
collapse. But how different the two looked! The French were in 
open combat against all official science, against the Church and 
often also against the State; their writings were printed across the 
frontier, in Holland or England, while they themselves were often 
in jeopardy of imprisonment in the Bastille. On the other hand, 
the Germans were professors, State-appointed instructors of 
youth; their writings were recognised textbooks, and the system 
that rounded off the whole development—the Hegelian system— 
was even raised, as it were, to the rank of a royal Prussian 
philosophy of State! Was it possible that a revolution could hide 
behind these professors, behind their obscure, pedantic phrases, 
their ponderous, wearisome periods? Were not precisely those 
people who were then regarded as the representatives of the 
revolution, the liberals, the bitterest opponents of this befuddling 
philosophy? But what neither governments nor liberals saw was 
seen at least by one man as early as 1833, and this man was none 
other than Heinrich Heine. 234 
* Ludwig Feuerbach, by C. N. Starcke, Ph. D., Stuttgart, Ferd. Encke, 1885. 
25* 

=====第386页=====
358 Frederick Engels 
Let us take an example. No philosophical proposition has 
earned more gratitude from narrow-minded governments and 
wrath from equally narrow-minded liberals than Hegel's famous 
statement: 
"All that is real is rational; and all that is rational is real." 
That was blatantly a sanctification of the existing order of 
things, the philosophical benediction upon despotism, the police 
state,  arbitrary justice, and censorship. And so it was understood by 
Frederick William III, and by his subjects. But according to Hegel 
certainly not everything that exists is also real, without further 
qualification. For Hegel the attribute of reality belongs only to that 
which is at the same time necessary: 
"In the course of its development reality proves to be necessity." 
Any particular governmental measure—Hegel himself cites the 
example of "a certain tax regulation"3—is therefore for him by 
no means real without qualification. That which is necessary, 
however, proves in the last resort to be also rational; and, applied 
to the Prussian state of that time, the Hegelian proposition, 
therefore, merely means: this state is rational, corresponds to 
reason, in so far as it [the state] is necessary; and if it nevertheless 
appears evil to us, but still, in spite of its evilness, continues to 
exist, then the evilness of the government is justified and 
explained by the corresponding evilness of the subjects. The 
Prussians of that day had the government that they deserved. 
Now, according to Hegel, reality is, however, in no way an 
attribute predicable of any given state of affairs, social or political, 
in all circumstances and at all times. On the contrary. The Roman 
Republic was real, but so was the Roman Empire which 
superseded it. In I789b the French monarchy had become so 
unreal, that is to say, so robbed of all necessity, so irrational, that it 
had to be destroyed by the Great Revolution, of which Hegel 
always speaks with the greatest enthusiasm. In this case, therefore, 
the monarchy was the unreal and the revolution the real. And so, 
in the course of development, all that was previously real becomes 
unreal, loses its necessity, its right of existence, its rationality. And 
in the place of moribund reality comes a new, viable reality— 
a G. W. F. Hegel, Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse. 
Erster Teil. "Die Logik", §§ 147, 142, Zusatz.— Ed. 
b The words "which superseded it. In 1789" were added by Engels in the 1888 
edition.— Ed. 

=====第387页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 359 
peacefully if the old has enough common sense to go to its death 
without a struggle; forcibly if it resists this necessity. Thus the 
Hegelian proposition turns into its opposite through Hegelian 
dialectics  itself:  All that is real in the sphere of human history 
becomes irrational in the course of time, is therefore irrational by 
its very destination, is encumbered with irrationality from the 
outset; and everything which is rational in the minds of men is 
destined to become real, however much it may contradict existing 
apparent reality. In accordance with all the rules of the Hegelian 
method of thought, the proposition of the rationality of everything 
which is real is dissolved to become the other proposition: All that 
exists deserves to perish .a 
But precisely therein lay the true significance and the revolutio­
nary character of Hegelian philosophy (to which, as the termina­
tion of the whole movement since Kant, we must here confine 
ourselves), that it once and for all dealt the death blow to the 
finality of all products of human thought and action. Truth, the 
cognition of which was the business of philosophy, was in the 
hands of Hegel no longer a collection of ready-made dogmatic 
statements, which, once discovered, had merely to be learned by 
heart. Truth now lay in the process of cognition  itself,  in the long 
historical development of science, which ascends from lower to 
ever higher levels of knowledge without ever reaching, by 
discovering so-called absolute truth, a point at which it can 
proceed no further, where it has nothing more to do than to sit 
back and gaze in wonder at the absolute truth to which it had 
attained. And what holds good for the realm of philosophical 
cognition holds good also for that of every other kind of cognition 
and also for practical action. Just as cognition is unable to reach a 
definitive conclusion in a perfect, ideal condition of humanity, so 
is history; a perfect society, a perfect "State", are things which can 
only exist in the imagination. On the contrary, all successive 
historical states are only transitory stages in the endless course of 
development of human society from the lower to the higher. Each 
stage is necessary, and therefore justified for the time and 
conditions to which it owes its origin. But in the face of new, 
higher conditions which gradually develop in its own womb, it 
loses its validity and justification. It must give way to a higher 
stage, which will also in its turn decay and perish. Just as the 
bourgeoisie by large-scale industry, competition and the world 
a A paraphrase of Mephistopheles' words from Goethe's Faust, Act I, Scene 3 
("Faust's Study").— Ed. 

=====第388页=====
360 Frederick Engels 
market dissolves in practice all stable time-honoured institutions, 
so this dialectical philosophy dissolves all conceptions of final, 
absolute truth and of absolute states of humanity corresponding to 
it. Against it [dialectical philosophy] nothing is final, absolute, 
sacred. It reveals the transitory character of everything and in 
everything; nothing can endure against it except the uninter­
rupted process of becoming and passing away, of ascending 
without end from the lower to the higher. And dialectical 
philosophy itself is nothing more than the mere reflection of this 
process in the thinking brain. It has, however, also a conservative 
side:  it recognises that definite stages of cognition and society are 
justified for their time and circumstances; but only so far. The 
conservatism of this outlook is relative; its revolutionary character 
is absolute—the only absolute dialectical philosophy admits. 
It is not necessary, here, to go into the question of whether this 
outlook is thoroughly in accord with the present state of natural 
science, which predicts a possible end for the earth itself and for 
its habitability a fairly certain one; which therefore recognises that 
for the history of mankind, too, there is not only an ascending but 
also a descending branch. At any rate we are still a considerable 
distance from the turning-point at which the historical course of 
society becomes one of descent, and we cannot expect Hegelian 
philosophy to be concerned with a subject which, in its time, 
natural science had not yet placed on the agenda at all. 
But what really must be said here is this: that in Hegel the views 
developed above are not so sharply defined. They are a necessary 
conclusion from his method, but one which he himself never drew 
with such explicitness. And this, indeed, for the simple reason that 
he was compelled to make a system and, in accordance with 
traditional requirements, a system of philosophy must conclude 
with some sort of absolute truth. Therefore, however much Hegel, 
especially in his Logik, emphasises that this eternal truth is nothing 
but the logical, or, the historical, process  itself,  he nevertheless 
finds himself compelled to supply this process with an end, just 
because he has to bring his system to a termination at some point 
or other. In his Logik he can make this end a beginning again, 
since here the point of conclusion, the absolute idea—which is 
only absolute in so far as he has absolutely nothing to say about 
it—"alienates", that is, transforms itself into nature and comes to 
itself again later in the mind, that is, in thought and in history. 
But at the end of the whole philosophy a similar return to the 
beginning is possible only in one way. Namely, by conceiving the 
end of history as follows: mankind arrives at the cognition of this 

=====第389页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 361 
selfsame absolute idea, and declares that this cognition of the 
absolute idea is attained in Hegelian philosophy.3  In this way, 
however, the whole dogmatic content of the Hegelian system is 
declared to be absolute truth, in contradiction to his dialectical 
method, which dissolves all that is dogmatic. Thus the revolutio­
nary side is smothered beneath the overgrowth of the conservative 
side.  And what applies to philosophical cognition applies also to 
historical practice. Having, in the person of Hegel, reached the 
point of working out the absolute idea, mankind must also in 
practice have advanced so far that it can carry out this absolute 
idea in reality. Hence the practical political demands of the 
absolute idea on contemporaries should not be pitched too high. 
And so we find at the conclusion of the  Rechtsphilosophie**  that the 
absolute idea is to be implemented in that monarchy based on 
social estates which Frederick William III so persistently promised 
his subjects to no avail, that is, in a limited and moderate, indirect 
rule of the possessing classes suited to the petty-bourgeois German 
conditions of that time; and, moreover, the necessity of the 
nobility is demonstrated to us in a speculative fashion. 
The inner necessities of the system are, therefore, of themselves 
sufficient to explain why a thoroughly revolutionary method of 
thinking produced an extremely tame political conclusion. As a 
matter of fact, the specific form of this conclusion derives from 
the fact that Hegel was a German, and like his contemporary 
Goethe, had a bit of the philistine's tail dangling behind. Each of 
them was an Olympian Zeus in his own sphere, yet neither of 
them ever quite freed himself from German philistinism. 
But all this did not prevent the Hegelian system from covering 
an incomparably greater domain than any earlier system, nor from 
developing in this domain a wealth of thought which is astounding 
even today. The phenomenology of the mind (which one may call 
a parallel to the embryology and palaeontology of the mind, a 
development of individual consciousness through its different 
stages, set in the form of an abbreviated reproduction of the 
stages through which the consciousness of man has passed in the 
course of history), logic, philosophy of nature, philosophy of the 
mind, and the latter in turn elaborated in its separate, historical 
subdivisions: philosophy of history, of law, of religion, history of 
a The end of the sentence, from the words "and declares...", was added by Engels 
in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 
b See G. W. F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, Dritter Abschnitt. 
"Der Staat", §§ 301-320, S. 308-29.— Ed. 

=====第390页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
philosophy, aesthetics, etc.—in all these different historical fields 
Hegel worked to discover and demonstrate the pervading thread 
of development. And as he was not only a creative genius but also 
a man of encyclopaedic erudition, he played an epoch-making role 
in every sphere. It is self-evident that owing to the needs of the 
"system" he very often had to resort to those forced constructions 
about which his pygmean opponents make such a terrible fuss 
even today. But these constructions are only the frame and 
scaffolding of his work. If one does not loiter here needlessly, but 
presses on farther into the huge edifice, one finds innumerable 
treasures which still today retain their full value. With all 
philosophers it is precisely the "system" which is perishable; and 
for the simple reason that it springs from an imperishable need of 
the human mind—the need to overcome all contradictions. But if 
all contradictions are once for all disposed of, we shall have 
arrived at so-called absolute truth—world history will be at an 
end. And yet it has to continue, although there is nothing left for 
it to do—hence, a new, insoluble contradiction. Once we have 
realised—and in the long run no one has helped us to realise it 
more than Hegel himself—that the task of philosophy thus stated 
means nothing but the task that a single philosopher should 
accomplish that which can only be accomplished by the entire 
human race in its ongoing development—as soon as we realise 
that, it is the end of all philosophy in the hitherto accepted sense 
of the word. One leaves alone "absolute truth", which is 
unattainable along this path or by any single individual; instead, 
one pursues attainable relative truths along the path of the 
positive sciences, and the summation of their results by means of 
dialectical thinking. With Hegel philosophy comes to an end 
altogether: on the one hand, because in his system he sums up its 
whole development in the most splendid fashion; and on the other 
hand, because, even if unconsciously,3 he shows us the way out of 
the labyrinth of systems to real positive cognition of the world. 
One can imagine what a tremendous effect this Hegelian system 
must have produced in the philosophy-tinged atmosphere of 
Germany. It was a triumphal procession which lasted for decades 
and which by no means came to a standstill on the death of Hegel. 
On the contrary, it was precisely from 1830 to 1840 that 
"Hegelianism" reigned most exclusively, and to a greater or lesser 
extent infected even its opponents. It was precisely in this period 
a The words "even if unconsciously" were added by Engels in the 1888 
edition.— Ed. 

=====第391页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 363 
that Hegelian views, consciously or unconsciously, most extensively 
penetrated the most diversified sciences and leavened even 
popular literature and the daily press, from which the average 
"educated consciousness" derives its mental pabulum. But this 
victory along the whole front was only the prelude to an internal 
struggle. 
As we have seen, Hegel's doctrine, taken as a whole, left plenty 
of room to accommodate the most diverse practical party views. 
And in the theoretical Germany of that time, two things were 
practical above all; religion and politics. Whoever placed the 
emphasis on the Hegelian system could be fairly conservative in 
both spheres; whoever regarded the dialectical method as the main 
thing could belong to the most extreme opposition, both in 
religion and politics. Hegel  himself,  despite the fairly frequent 
outbursts of revolutionary wrath in his works, seemed on the 
whole to be more inclined to the conservative side. Indeed, his 
system had cost him much more "hard mental plugging" than his 
method. Towards the end of the thirties, the cleavage in the 
school became more and more apparent. The Left wing, the 
so-called Young Hegelians, in their fight with the pietist orthodox 
and the feudal reactionaries, abandoned bit by bit that philosophi­
cal-genteel reserve in regard to the burning questions of the day 
which up to that time had secured state toleration and even 
protection for their teachings. And when, in 1840, orthodox 
sanctimony and absolutist feudal reaction ascended the throne 
with Frederick William IV, open partisanship became unavoidable. 
The fight was still carried on with philosophical weapons, but no 
longer for abstract philosophical aids. It turned directly on the 
destruction of traditional religion and the existing state. And while 
in the Deutsche Jahrbücher the practical ends were still predomi­
nantly put forward in philosophical disguise, in the Rheinische 
Zeitung of 1842 the Young Hegelian school revealed itself directly 
as the philosophy of the aspiring radical bourgeoisie and used the 
meagre cloak of philosophy only to deceive the censors. 
At that time, however, politics was a very thorny field, and 
hence the main fight came to be directed against religion; this 
fight, particularly since 1840, was indirectly also political. Strauss' 
Leben Jesu, published in 1835, had provided the initial impetus. 
The theory therein developed of the formation of the gospel 
myths was combated later by Bruno Bauer with proof that a whole 
series of evangelical stories had been invented by the authors 
themselves. The controversy between these two was carried on in 
the philosophical disguise of a battle between "self-consciousness" 

=====第392页=====
364 Frederick Engels 
and "substance". The question whether the miracle stories of the 
gospels came into being through unconscious traditional myth-
creation within the bosom of the community or whether they were 
invented by the evangelists themselves was blown up into the 
question whether, in world history, "substance" or  "self-
consciousness" was the decisive operative force. Finally came 
Stirner, the prophet of contemporary anarchism—Bakunin has 
taken a great deal from him—and surpassed the sovereign 
"self-consciousness" by his sovereign "ego".a 
We shall not go further into this aspect of the decomposition 
process of the Hegelian school. More important for us is the 
following: the bulk of the most determined Young Hegelians 
were, by the practical necessities of their fight against positive 
religion,236 driven back to Anglo-French materialism. This brought 
them into conflict with their school system. While materialism 
conceives nature as the sole reality, nature in the Hegelian system 
represents merely the "alienation" of the absolute idea, so to say, a 
degradation of the idea. At all events, thinking and its thought-
product, the idea, is here the primary, nature the derivative, which 
only exists at all by the condescension of the idea. And in this 
contradiction they floundered as well or as ill as they could. 
Then came Feuerbach's Wesen des Christenthums. With one blow 
it pulverised the contradiction, by plainly placing materialism on 
the throne again. Nature exists independently of all philosophy. It 
is the foundation upon which we human beings, ourselves 
products of nature, have grown up. Nothing exists outside nature 
and man, and the higher beings our religious fantasies have 
created are only the fantastic reflection of our own essence. The 
spell was broken; the "system" was exploded and cast aside, and 
the contradiction, shown to exist only in our imagination, was 
dissolved.—One must have experienced the liberating effect of 
this book for oneself to get an idea of it. Enthusiasm was 
universal: we were all Feuerbachians for a moment. How 
enthusiastically Marx greeted the new conception and how 
much—in spite of all critical reservations—he was influenced by 
it,b one may read in The Holy Family. 
Even the shortcomings of the book contributed to its immediate 
effect. Its literary, sometimes even bombastic, style secured for it a 
large public and was at any rate refreshing after long years of 
a M. Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum. —Ed. 
b The words "and how much he was influenced by it" were added by Engels in the 
1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第393页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 365 
abstract and abstruse Hegelianising. The same is true of its 
extravagant deification of love, which, coming after the now 
intolerable sovereign rule of "pure reason", had its excuse, if not 
justification. But what we must not forget is that it was precisely 
these two weaknesses of Feuerbach that "true socialism", 237 which 
had been spreading like a plague in "educated" Germany since 
1844,  took as its starting-point, putting literary phrases in the 
place of scientific knowledge, the liberation of mankind by means 
of "love" in place of the emancipation of the proletariat through 
the economic transformation of production—in short, losing itself 
in the nauseous fine writing and ecstasies of love typified by Herr 
Karl Grün. 
Another thing we must not forget is this: the Hegelian school 
had disintegrated, but Hegelian philosophy had not been over­
come through criticism; Strauss and Bauer each took one of its 
sides and set it polemically against the other. Feuerbach broke 
through the system and simply discarded it. But a philosophy is 
not disposed of by the mere assertion that it is false. And so 
mighty a work as Hegelian philosophy, which had exercised so 
enormous an influence on the intellectual development of the 
nation, could not be disposed of by simply being ignored. It had 
to be "transcended" in its own sense, that is, in the sense that 
while its form had to be annihilated through criticism, the new 
content which had been won through it had to be saved. How this 
was brought about we shall see below. 
But in the meantime the Revolution of 1848 thrust the whole of 
philosophy aside as unceremoniously as Feuerbach had thrust 
aside Hegel. And in the process Feuerbach himself was also 
pushed into the background. 
II 
The great basic question of all, especially of latter-day, philosophy, 
is that concerning the relation of thinking and being. From very 
early times when men, still completely ignorant of the structure of 
their own bodies, and prompted by dream apparitions* came to 
believe that their thinking and sensation were not activities of their 
* Among savages and lower barbarians the idea is still universal that the human 
forms which appear in dreams are souls which have temporarily left their bodies; 
the real man is, therefore, held responsible for acts committed by his dream 
apparition against the dreamer. Thus Im Thurn found this belief current, for 
example, among the Indians of Guiana in 1884. 

=====第394页=====
366 Frederick Engels 
bodies, but of a distinct soul which inhabits the body and leaves it 
upon death—from this time men have been driven to reflect 
about the relation between this soul and the outside world. If 
upon death it left the body and lived on, there was no occasion to 
ascribe another distinct death to it. Thus arose the idea of its 
immortality, which at that stage of development appeared not at 
all as a consolation but as a fate which it was pointless to fight, and 
often enough, as among the Greeks, a positive misfortune. Not 
religious desire for consolation, but the quandary arising from the 
universal ignorance of what to do with this soul, once its existence 
had been accepted, after the death of the body, led everywhere to 
the tedious fancy of personal immortality. In quite a similar 
manner the first gods arose through the personification of natural 
forces. And as religions continued to take shape, these gods 
assumed more and more an extramundane form, until finally by a 
process of abstraction, I might almost say of distillation, occurring 
naturally in the course of man's intellectual development, out of 
the many more or less limited and mutually limiting gods there 
arose in the minds of men the idea of the one exclusive God of 
the monotheistic religions. 
Thus the question of the relation of thinking to being, of the 
mind to nature—the paramount question of the whole of 
philosophy—has, no less than all religion, its roots in the 
narrow-minded and ignorant notions of savagery. But it was 
possible to put forward this question for the first time in full 
clarity to give it its full significance, only after humanity in Europe 
had awakened from the long hibernation of the Christian Middle 
Ages.  The question of the position of thinking in relation to being, 
a question which, by the way, had played a great part also in the 
scholasticism of the Middle Ages, the question: which is primary, 
mind or nature—that question, in relation to the Church, was 
sharpened into this: Did God create the world or has the world 
existed for all time? 
Answers to this question split the philosophers into two great 
camps. Those who asserted the primacy of the mind over nature 
and, therefore, in the last instance, assumed world creation in 
some form or other—and among the philosophers, e.g., Hegel, 
this creation often becomes still more intricate and impossible than 
in Christianity—comprised the camp of idealism. The others, who 
regarded nature as primary, belong to the various schools of 
materialism. 
These two expressions, idealism and materialism, originally 
signify nothing else but this; and here they are not used in any 

=====第395页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 367 
other sense either. What confusion arises when some other 
meaning is put into them will be seen below. 
But the question of the relation of thinking and being has yet 
another side: in what relation do our thoughts about the world 
surrounding us stand to this world itself? Is our thinking capable 
of cognition of the real world? Are we able in our ideas and 
notions of the real world to produce a correct reflection of reality? 
In the language of philosophy this question is called the question 
of the identity of thinking and being, and the overwhelming 
majority of philosophers answer it in the affirmative. In Hegel, for 
example, its affirmation is self-evident: for what we cognise in the 
real world is precisely its thought content—that which makes the 
world a gradual realisation of the absolute idea, which absolute 
idea has existed somewhere from eternity, independent of the 
world and before the world. But it is manifest without further 
proof that thinking can cognise a content which is from the outset 
a thought content. It is equally manifest that what is to be proved 
here is already tacitly contained in the premiss. But that in no way 
prevents Hegel from drawing the further conclusion from his 
proof of the identity of thinking and being that his philosophy, 
because it is correct for his thinking, is therefore the only correct 
one, and that the identity of thinking and being must prove its 
validity by mankind immediately translating his philosophy from 
theory into practice and transforming the whole world according 
to Hegelian principles. This is an illusion which he shares with 
well-nigh all philosophers. 
In addition there is yet another set of philosophers—those who 
dispute the possibility of any cognition, or at least of an exhaustive 
cognition, of the world. Among them, of the more recent ones, we 
find Hume and Kant, and they have played a very important role 
in philosophical development. What is decisive in the refutation of 
this view has already been said by Hegel, as far as this was possible 
from an idealist standpoint. The materialist additions made by 
Feuerbach are more quick-witted than profound. The most telling 
refutation of this as of all other philosophical quirks is practice, 
namely, experimentation and industry. If we are able to prove the 
correctness of our conception of a natural phenomenon by 
bringing it about ourselves, producing it out of its conditions and 
making it serve our own purposes into the bargain, then the 
ungraspable Kantian "thing-in-itself" is finished. The chemical 
substances produced in the bodies of plants and animals remained 
just such "things-in-themselves" until organic chemistry began to 
produce them one after another, whereupon the "thing-in-itself" 

=====第396页=====
368 Frederick Engels 
became a thing for us, as, for instance, alizarin, the colouring 
matter of the madder, which we no longer trouble to grow in the 
madder roots in the field, but produce much more cheaply and 
simply from coal tar. For three hundred years the Copernican 
solar system was a hypothesis with a hundred, a thousand or ten 
thousand chances to one in its favour, but still always a hypothesis. 
But when Leverrier, by means of the data provided by this system, 
not only deduced that an unknown planet must exist, but also 
calculated the position in the heavens which this planet must 
necessarily occupy, and when Galle really found this planet, 238 the 
Copernican system was proved. If, nevertheless, the Neo-Kantians 
are attempting to resurrect the Kantian conception in Germany 
and the agnostics that of Hume in England (where it never 
became extinct), this is, in view of their theoretical and practical 
refutation accomplished long ago, scientifically a regression and 
practically merely a shamefaced way of surreptitiously accepting 
materialism, while denying it before the world. 
But during this long period from Descartes to Hegel and from 
Hobbes to Feuerbach, the philosophers were by no means 
impelled, as they thought they were, solely by the force of pure 
reason. On the contrary, what really pushed them forward most 
was the powerful and ever more rapidly onrushing progress of 
natural science and industry. 3 Among the materialists this was 
plain on the surface, but the idealist systems also filled themselves 
more and more with a materialist content and attempted 
pantheistically to reconcile the antithesis between mind and 
matter. Thus, ultimately, the Hegelian system represents merely a 
materialism idealistically turned upside down in method and 
content. 
It is, therefore, comprehensible that Starcke in his characterisa­
tion of Feuerbach first of all investigates the latter's position in 
regard to this fundamental question of the relation of thinking 
and being. After a short introduction, in which the views of the 
preceding philosophers, particularly since Kant, are described in 
unnecessarily ponderous philosophical language, and in which 
Hegel, by an all too formalistic adherence to certain passages of 
his works, gets far less than his due, there follows a detailed 
description of the course of development of Feuerbach's 
"metaphysics"  itself,  in the manner it arises from the sequence of 
this philosopher's relevant works. This description is industriously 
and lucidly elaborated; only, like the whole book, it is loaded with 
a The words "and industry" were added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第397页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 369 
a ballast of philosophical phraseology by no means everywhere 
unavoidable, which is the more disturbing in its effect the less the 
author keeps to the manner of expression of one and the same 
school, or even of Feuerbach  himself,  and the more he interjects 
expressions of the most various tendencies, especially of those now 
rampant and calling themselves philosophical. 
Feuerbach's evolution is that of a Hegelian—a never quite 
orthodox Hegelian, it is true—into a materialist; an evolution 
which at a certain stage gives rise to a complete break with the 
idealist system of his predecessor. With irresistible force Feuerbach 
is finally driven to the realisation that the Hegelian premundane 
existence of the "absolute idea", the "pre-existence of the logical 
categories" before the world existed, is nothing more than a 
fantastic remnant of the belief in the existence of an extramun-
dane creator; that the material sensuously perceptible world to 
which we ourselves belong is the only reality; and that our 
consciousness and thinking, however suprasensuous they may 
seem, are the product of a material, bodily organ, the brain. 
Matter is not a product of the mind, but the mind itself is merely 
the highest product of matter. This is, of course, pure materialism. 
But, having got so far, Feuerbach stops short. He cannot 
overcome the habitual philosophical prejudice, prejudice not 
against the thing but against the name materialism. He says: 
"To me materialism is the foundation of the edifice of human essence and 
knowledge; but to me it is not what it is to the physiologist, to the natural scientist 
in the narrower sense, for example, to Moleschott, and necessarily is from their 
standpoint and profession, namely, the edifice  itself.  Backwards I fully agree with 
the materialists; but not forwards." 239 
Here Feuerbach lumps together the materialism that is a general 
world outlook resting upon a definite conception of the relation 
between matter and mind, and the special form in which this 
world outlook was expressed at a definite historical stage, namely, 
in the eighteenth century. 3 More than that, he lumps it together 
with the shallow, vulgarised form in which the materialism of the 
eighteenth century continues to exist today in the heads of 
naturalists and doctors, the form in which it was preached on their 
tours in the fifties by Büchner, Vogt and Moleschott. But just as 
idealism underwent a series of stages of development, so also did 
materialism. With each epoch-making discovery even in the sphere 
of natural science it has to change its form; and history too having 
a The words "namely, in the eighteenth century" were added by Engels in the 
1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第398页=====
370 Frederick Engels 
been subjected to materialistic treatment, a new avenue of 
development has opened here as well. 
The materialism of the last century was predominantly mechani­
cal, because at that time, of all the natural sciences, only 
mechanics, and indeed only the mechanics of solid bodies— 
celestial and terrestrial—in short, the mechanics of gravity, had 
come to any certain conclusion. Chemistry at that time existed only 
in its infantile, phlogistic form.240 Biology still lay in swaddling 
clothes; plant and animal organisms had been only crudely 
examined and were explained as the result of purely mechanical 
causes. What the animal was to Descartes, man was to the 
materialists of the eighteenth century—a machine. This applica­
tion exclusively of the standards of mechanics to processes of a 
chemical and organic nature—in which processes the laws of 
mechanics are, indeed, also valid, but are pushed into the 
background by other, higher laws—constitutes one specific, but at 
that time inevitable, limitation of classical French materialism. 
The other specific limitation of this materialism lay in its 
inability to comprehend the world as a process, as matter 
undergoing uninterrupted historical development. This accorded 
with the state of the natural science of that time, and with the 
metaphysical, that is, anti-dialectical manner of philosophising 
connected with it. Nature, so much was known, was in eternal 
motion. But according to the ideas of that time, this motion 
turned just as eternally in a circle and therefore never moved 
from the spot; it produced the same results over and over again. 
This conception was at that time inevitable. The Kantian theory of 
the origin of the solar system had only been put forward and was 
still regarded merely as an oddity. The history of the evolution of 
the earth, geology, was still totally unknown, and the idea that the 
animate natural beings of today are the result of a long sequence 
of evolution from the simple to the complex could not at that time 
scientifically be put forward at all. The unhistorical view of nature 
was therefore inevitable.3 We have the less reason to reproach the 
philosophers of the eighteenth century on this account since the 
same thing is found in Hegel. According to him, nature, as a mere 
"alienation" of the idea, is incapable of evolution in time—capable 
only of extending its manifoldness in space, so that it displays 
simultaneously and side by side all the stages of evolution 
comprised in it, and is condemned to an eternal repetition of the 
a The text below, up to the end of the paragraph, was added by Engels in the 
1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第399页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 371 
same processes. This absurdity of evolution in space, but outside 
of time—the fundamental condition of all evolution—Hegel 
imposes upon nature just at the very time when geology, 
embryology, the physiology of plants and animals, and organic 
chemistry were taking shape, and when everywhere on the basis of 
these new sciences brilliant presentiments of the subsequent theory 
of evolution were appearing (for instance, Goethe and Lamarck). 
But the system demanded it; hence the method, for the sake of 
the system, had to become untrue to  itself. 
This same unhistorical conception prevailed also in the domain 
of history. Here the struggle against the remnants of the Middle 
Ages captured the limelight. The Middle Ages were regarded as a 
mere interruption of history by a thousand years of universal 
barbarism. The great progress made in the Middle Ages—the 
extension of the domain of European civilisation, the viable great 
nations taking form there next to each other, and finally the 
enormous technical advances of the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries—all this was not seen. Thus a rational insight into the 
great historical coherence was made impossible, and history served 
at best as a collection of examples and illustrations for the use of 
philosophers. 
The vulgarising pedlars, who dabbled in materialism in the 
Germany of the fifties in no way overcame this limitation of their 
teachers. All the advances of natural science which had been made 
in the meantime served them only as fresh evidence against the 
existence of a world creator, and, indeed, they did not in the least 
make it their business to develop the theory any further. Though 
idealism was stumped and3  was dealt a death-blow by the 
Revolution of 1848, it had the satisfaction of seeing that 
materialism had for the moment sunk to even greater depths. 
Feuerbach was unquestionably right when he refused to take 
responsibility for this materialism; only he should not have 
confounded the doctrines of these itinerant preachers with 
materialism in general. 
Here, however, there are two things to be pointed out. First, 
even during Feuerbach's lifetime, natural science was still in that 
process of intense fermentation which has reached a clarifying, 
relative conclusion only during the last fifteen years. New data for 
cognition were acquired to a hitherto unheard-of extent, but the 
establishment of coherence, and thereby of order, in this chaos of 
a The words "was stumped and" were added by Engels in the 1888 
edition.— Ed. 
26-1243 

=====第400页=====
372 Frederick Engels 
discoveries following closely upon each other's heels, has only 
quite recently become possible. It is true that Feuerbach lived to 
see all three of the decisive discoveries—that of the cell, the 
transformation of energy and the theory of evolution named after 
Darwin. But how was the lonely philosopher in the country to 
sufficiently follow scientific developments in order to appreciate at 
their full value discoveries which natural scientists themselves at 
that time either still contested or did not know how to adequately 
exploit? The blame for this falls solely upon the wretched 
conditions in Germany, in consequence of which brooding eclectic 
flea-crackers had taken possession of the chairs of philosophy, 
while Feuerbach, who towered above them all, had to rusticate and 
go to seed in a little village. It is therefore not Feuerbach's fault 
that the historical conception of nature, which has now become 
possible and has removed all the one-sidedness of French 
materialism, remained inaccessible to him. 
Secondly, Feuerbach is quite correct in asserting that exclusively 
natural-scientific materialism is indeed 
"the foundation of the edifice of human knowledge, but not the edifice  itself". 
For we live not only in nature but also in human society, and 
this also has its evolution and its science no less than nature. It was 
therefore a question of bringing the science of society, that is, the 
sum total of the so-called historical and philosophical sciences, into 
harmony with the materialist foundation, and of reconstruct­
ing it thereupon. But it did not fall to Feuerbach's lot to do this. 
In spite of the "foundation", he remained bound here by the 
traditional idealist fetters, a fact which he recognises in these 
words: 
"Backwards I agree with the materialists, but not forwards." 
But it was Feuerbach himself who did not go "forwards" here, 
in the social domain, who did not get beyond his standpoint of 
1840 or 1844. And this was again chiefly due to his réclusion, 
which compelled him—of all philosophers the most inclined to 
social intercourse—to produce thoughts out of his solitary head 
instead of in amicable and hostile encounters with other men of 
his calibre. Below we shall see in detail how much he remained an 
idealist in this sphere. 
It need only be added here that Starcke looks for Feuerbach's 
idealism in the wrong place. 
"Feuerbach is an idealist; he believes in the progress of mankind" (p. 19). "The 
foundation, the substructure of the whole, remains nevertheless idealism. Realism 
for us is nothing more than a protection against aberrations, while we follow our 

=====第401页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 373 
ideal trends. Are not compassion, love and enthusiasm for truth and justice ideal 
forces?" (p. VIII). 
In the first place, idealism here means nothing but the pursuit 
of ideal goals. But these necessarily have to do with Kantian 
idealism at best, and its "categorical imperative"; however, Kant 
himself called his philosophy "transcendental idealism"; by no 
means because it dealt also with ethical ideals, but for quite other 
reasons, as Starcke will remember. The superstition that 
philosophical idealism revolves around a belief in ethical, that is, 
social, ideals, arose outside philosophy, among the German 
philistines, who learned by heart from Schiller's poems the few 
morsels of philosophical culture they needed. No one has criticised 
more severely the impotent Kantian "categorical imperative"— 
impotent because it demands the impossible, and therefore never 
attains to any reality—no one has more cruelly derided the 
philistine passion for unrealisable ideals purveyed by Schiller than 
Hegel of all people, the perfect idealist (see, for example, his 
Phänomenologie  ). 
In the second place, we simply cannot evade the fact that 
everything which motivates men must pass through their brains— 
even eating and drinking, which begins as a consequence of the 
sensation of hunger or thirst transmitted through the brain, and 
ends as a result of the sensation of satisfaction likewise transmitted 
through the brain. The influences of the external world upon man 
express themselves in his brain, are reflected therein as feelings, 
thoughts, impulses, volitions—in short, as "ideal tendencies", and 
in this form become "ideal powers". If, then, a man is to be 
deemed an idealist because he follows "ideal tendencies" and 
admits that "ideal powers" have an influence over him, then every 
person who is at all normally developed is a born idealist and how, 
in that case, can there be any materialists at all? 
In the third place, the conviction that humanity, at least at the 
present moment, is moving on the whole in a progressive direction 
has absolutely nothing to do with the antagonism between 
materialism and idealism. The French materialists no less than the 
deists 241 Voltaire and Rousseau held this conviction to an almost 
fanatical degree, and often enough made the greatest personal 
sacrifices to it. If ever anybody dedicated his whole life to 
"enthusiasm for truth and justice"—using this phrase in the 
positive sense—it was Diderot, for instance. If, therefore, Starcke 
declares all this to be idealism, this merely proves that the word 
materialism, and the whole antagonism between the two trends, 
has lost all meaning for him here. 
2 6* 

=====第402页=====
374 Frederick Engels 
The fact is that Starcke, although perhaps unconsciously, makes 
an unpardonable concession here to the traditional philistine 
prejudice against the word materialism resulting from its long-
continued defamation by the priests. By the word materialism the 
philistine understands gluttony, drunkenness, lust of the eye, lust 
of the flesh, arrogance, cupidity, avarice, covetousness, profiteer­
ing and stock-exchange swindling—in short, all the filthy vices in 
which he himself indulges in private. By the word idealism he 
understands the belief in virtue, universal philanthropy and 
altogether a "better world", of which he boasts to others but in 
which he himself believes at best only so long as he is having the 
blues or going through the bankruptcy consequent upon his 
customary "materialist" excesses. It is then that he sings his 
favourite song, What is man?—Half beast half angel. 
For the rest, Starcke takes great pains to defend Feuerbach 
against the attacks and doctrines of the vociferous assistant 
professors who today go by the name of philosophers in Germany. 
For people who afe interested in this afterbirth of classical 
German philosophy this is, of course, a matter of importance, for 
Starcke himself it may have appeared necessary. We will spare the 
reader this. 
Ill 
The real idealism of Feuerbach becomes evident as soon as we 
come to his philosophy of religion and ethics. He by no means 
wishes to abolish religion; he wants to perfect it. Philosophy itself 
must be absorbed in religion. 
"The periods of humanity are distinguished only by religious changes. A 
historical movement is fundamental only when it is rooted in the hearts of men. 
The heart is not a form of religion, so that the latter should exist also in the heart; 
the heart is the essence of religion." (Quoted by Starcke, p. 168).a 
According to Feuerbach, religion is the relation between human 
beings based on affection, on the heart, which relation until now 
has sought its truth in a fantastic mirror image of reality—in the 
mediation of one or many gods, the fantastic mirror images of 
human qualities—but now finds it directly and without any 
mediation in the love between "I" and "Thou". Thus, in 
Feuerbach sex love ultimately becomes one of the highest forms, if 
not the highest form, of the practice of his new religion. 
a L. Feuerbach, "Grundsätze der Philosophic Notwendigkeit einer Verän­
derung". — Ed. 

=====第403页=====
Feuerbach  and End of  Classical German Philosophy 375 
Now relations between human beings, based on affection, and 
especially between the two sexes, have existed as long as mankind. 
Sex love in particular has undergone a development and won a 
place during the last eight hundred years which has made it a 
compulsory pivot of all poetry during this period. The existing 
positive religions242 have limited themselves to the higher consec­
ration of state-regulated sex love, that is, of the marriage laws, and 
they could all disappear tomorrow without changing in the 
slightest the practice of love and friendship. Thus the Christian 
religion in France, as a matter of fact, so completely disappeared 
in the years 1793-98 that even Napoleon could not re-introduce it 
without opposition and difficulty; and this without any need for a 
substitute, in Feuerbach's sense, making itself felt in the interval. 
Feuerbach's idealism consists here in this: he does not simply 
accept people's relations based on reciprocal inclination, such as 
sex love, friendship, compassion, self-sacrifice, etc., as what they 
are in themselves—without relating them back to a particular 
religion which to him, too, belongs to the past; but instead he 
asserts that they will attain their full value only when consecrated 
by the name of religion. The chief thing for him is not that these 
purely human relations exist, but that they shall be conceived of as 
the new, true religion. They are to have full value only after they 
have been marked with a religious stamp. Religion is derived from 
religare and meant originally a bond. Therefore, every bond 
between two people is a religion. Such etymological tricks are the 
last resort of idealist philosophy. Not what the word means 
according to the historical development of its actual use, but what 
it ought to mean according to its derivation, is what counts. And 
so sex love and sex bonds are apotheosised to a "religion", merely 
in order that the word religion, which is so dear to idealist 
memories, may not disappear from the language. The Parisian 
reformers of the Louis Blanc trend used to speak in precisely the 
same way in the forties. They likewise were able to conceive of a 
man without religion only as a monster, and used to say to us: 
"Donc, l'athéisme c'est votre religion]" a If Feuerbach wishes to 
establish a true religion upon the basis of an essentially materialist 
conception of nature, that is the same as regarding modern 
chemistry as true alchemy. If religion can exist without its god, 
then alchemy can exist without its philosopher's stone. By the way, 
there exists a very close connection between alchemy and religion. 
The philosopher's stone has many godlike properties and the 
a "Well, then atheism  is your religion!"—Ed. 

=====第404页=====
376 Frederick Engels 
Egyptian-Greek alchemists of the first two centuries of our era had 
a hand in the development of Christian doctrines, as the facts 
given in Kopp and Berthelot have proved. 3 
Decidedly false is Feuerbach's assertion that 
"the periods of humanity are distinguished only by religious changes". 
Great historical turning-points have been accompanied by religi­
ous changes only so far as the three world religions which have 
existed up to the present, Buddhism, Christianity and Islam, are 
concerned.0 The old tribal and national religions, which arose 
spontaneously, did not proselytise andc lost all their power of 
resistance as soon as the independence of the tribe or people was 
lost. For the Germans it was sufficient simply to have contact with 
the decaying Roman world empire and with its just adopted 
Christian world religion that accorded with its economic, political 
and ideological conditions. Only with these world religions, which 
arose more or less artificially, particularly Christianity and Islam, 
do we find that more general historical movements acquire a 
religious imprint. Even in regard to Christianityd  the religious 
stamp in revolutions of really universal significance is restricted to 
the first stages of the bourgeoisie's struggle for emancipation— 
from the thirteenth to the seventeenth century—and is to be 
accounted for not, as Feuerbach thinks, by the hearts of men and 
their religious needs, but by the entire previous history of the 
Middle Ages, which knew no other form of ideology than actual 
religion and theology. But when the bourgeoisie of the eighteenth 
century had strengthened enough to possess an ideology of its 
own, suited to its own class standpoint, it made its great and 
conclusive revolution, the French one, appealing exclusively to 
juristic and e political ideas, and troubled itself with religion only 
in so far as it stood in its way. But it never occurred to it to put a 
new religion in place of the old one. Everyone knows how 
Robespierre failed in that/243 
a See H. Kopp, Die Alchemie in älterer und neuerer Zeit and M. Berthelot, Les 
origines de l'alchimie.—Ed. 
b In the 1886 edition this sentence reads: "This holds good, even relatively, only 
so far as the three world religions which have existed up to the present, Buddhism, 
Christianity and Islam, are concerned — and only between them."—Ed. 
c The words "did not proselytise and" were added by Engels in the 1888 
edition.— Ed. 
d The words "in regard to Christianity" were added by Engels in the 1888 
edition.— Ed. 
e The words "juristic and" were added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 
f This sentence was added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第405页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 377 
The possibility of purely human sentiments in our intercourse 
with other human beings has nowadays been sufficiently curtailed 
by the society in which we must live, which is based upon class 
antagonism and class rule. We have no reason to curtail it still 
more by exalting these sentiments to a religion. And similarly the 
understanding of the great historical class struggles has already 
been sufficiently obscured by current historiography, particularly 
in Germany, so that there is also no need for us to make such an 
understanding totally impossible by transforming the history of 
these struggles into a mere appendix of ecclesiastical history. 
Already here it becomes evident how far today we have moved 
beyond Feuerbach. His "finest passages" in glorification of this 
new religion of love are totally unreadable today. 
The only religion which Feuerbach examines seriously is 
Christianity, the world religion of the Occident, based upon 
monotheism. He proves that the Christian God is only a fantastic 
reflection, a mirror image, of man. Now, this God is, however, 
himself the product of a protracted process of abstraction, the 
concentrated quintessence of the numerous earlier tribal and 
national gods. And accordingly man, whose image this God is, is 
also not a real man, but likewise the quintessence of the numerous 
real men, man in the abstract, therefore himself again a mental 
image. The same Feuerbach, who on every page preaches 
sensuousness, immersion in the concrete, in actuality, becomes 
thoroughly abstract as soon as he begins to talk of any other than 
mere sexual intercourse between human beings. 
This intercourse presents him with only one aspect: morality. 
And here we are again struck by Feuerbach's astonishing poverty 
when compared with Hegel. The latter's ethics or doctrine of 
social ethics, is the philosophy of law and embraces: 1) abstract 
law; 2) morality; 3) social ethics under which again are comprised: 
the family, civil society and the state. Here the content is as 
realistic as the form is idealistic. Besides morality the whole sphere 
of law, economy, politics is included here. With Feuerbach it is just 
the reverse. In form he is realistic since he takes man as his point 
of departure; but there is absolutely no mention of the world in 
which this man lives; hence, this man remains always the same 
abstract man who occupied the field in the philosophy of religion. 
For this man is not born of woman; he emerged, as if from a 
chrysalis, from the god of the monotheistic religions. He therefore 
does not live in a real world historically come into being and 
historically determined. True, he has contact with other men; 
however, each one of them is just as much an abstraction as he 

=====第406页=====
378 Frederick Engels 
himself.  In the  philosophy  of religion  we still had men and  women 
at least,  but in  ethics even this last distinction disappears. 
Feuerbach, however,  at long intervals makes such statements  as: 
"Man thinks differently  in a  palace  and in a  hut."a  "If  because  of hunger,  of 
misery,  you  have  no stuff  in your body,  you  likewise have  no stuff  for  morality  in 
your head,  in your mind  or heart."b "Politics must become  our  religion,"0  etc. 
But Feuerbach knows absolutely nothing what  to do  with these 
maxims. They remain mere phrases,  and  even Starcke  has to 
admit that  for  Feuerbach politics constituted  an  impassable 
frontier  and the 
"science  of society, sociology,  was  terra incognita  to him."d 
He appears just  as shallow,  in comparison with Hegel,  in his 
treatment  of the  antithesis  of good  and  evil. 
"One believes  one is  saying something great," Hegel remarks,  "if one  says that 
'man  is naturally good'.  But one  forgets that  one  says something  far greater when 
one says  'man is  naturally evil'."e 
In Hegel evil  is the  form  in which  the  motive force  of historical 
development presents  itself.  Herein lies  the twofold meaning that, 
on the one  hand, each  new  advance necessarily appears  as a 
heinous deed against what  is sacred,  as a  rebellion against 
conditions, though  old and  moribund,  yet  sanctified  by custom; 
and that,  on the  other hand,  it is  precisely  the  wicked passions  of 
man—greed  and  lust  for power—which, since  the  emergence  of 
class antagonisms, have become levers  of historical development— 
of which  the  history  of feudalism  and of the  bourgeoisie,  for 
example, constitutes singular continual  proof/ But it  does  not 
occur  to Feuerbach  to investigate  the  historical role  of moral evil. 
To him  history  is altogether  an uncomfortable, uncanny domain. 
Even  his  dictum: 
a L. Feuerbach, "Wider  den Dualismus  von  Leib  und  Seele, Fleisch  und  Geist" 
in Ludwig Feuerbach's sämmtliche Werke,  Vol. II, p. 363.—  Ed. 
b L. Feuerbach, "Noth meistert alle Gesetze  und  hebt  sie auf" in  Ludwig 
Feuerbach  in seinem Briefwechsel  und  Nachlass,  Vol. II, pp.  285-86. Quoted  in 
C. N. Starcke, Ludwig Feuerbach,  p. 254.—  Ed. 
c L. Feuerbach, "Grundsätze  der  Philosophie"  in Ludwig Feuerbach  in seinem 
Briefwechsel  und  Nachlass,  Vol. I, p. 409.  Quoted  in C. N.  Starcke, Ludwig Feuerbach, 
p. 280.—  Ed. 
d C. N.  Starcke, Ludwig Feuerbach,  p. 280.—  Ed. 
e A summary  of Hegel's ideas expressed mainly  in his  Grundlinien  der 
Philosophie  des Rechts.  §§ 18 and 139 and Vorlesungen über  die Philosophie  der Religion, 
Part 3, II,  3.—  Ed. 
f The 1886  edition  has "of  which  the  history  of feudalism  and of the 
bourgeoisie provide  the  classical example".—  Ed. 

=====第407页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 379 
"Man as he sprang originally from nature was only a mere creature of nature, 
not man. Man is a product of man, of culture, of history"3— 
with him even this dictum remains absolutely sterile. 
What Feuerbach has to tell us about morality can, therefore, 
only be extremely meagre. The urge for bliss is innate in man, 
and must therefore form the basis of all morality. But the urge for 
bliss is subject to a double correction. First, by the natural 
consequences of our actions: after the intoxication comes the 
"hangover", and habitual excess is followed by illness. Second, by 
their social consequences: if we do not respect the same urge of 
other people for bliss they will defend themselves, and so interfere 
with our own urge for bliss. Consequently, in order to satisfy our 
urge,  we must be in a position to correctly appreciate the results of 
our conduct and must likewise allow others an equal right to seek 
bliss.  Rational self-restraint with regard to ourselves, and love— 
again and again love!—in our contact with others—these are the 
basic rules of Feuerbach's morality; from them all others are 
derived. And neither the wisest utterances of Feuerbach nor the 
strongest eulogies of Starcke can hide the tenuity and banality of 
these few propositions. 
Only very exceptionally, and by no means to his and other 
people's profit, can an individual satisfy his urge for bliss by 
preoccupation with  himself.  Rather it requires preoccupation with 
the outside world, means to satisfy his needs, that is to say, food, 
an individual of the opposite sex, books, conversation, argument, 
activity, objects to use and work. Feuerbach's morality either 
presupposes that these means and objects of satisfaction are given 
to every individual as a matter of course, or else it offers him only 
impracticable good advice and is, therefore, not worth a brass 
farthing to people who lack these means. And Feuerbach himself 
states this in plain terms: 
"Man thinks differently in a palace and in a hut." "If because of hunger, of 
misery, you have no stuff in your body, you likewise have no stuff for morality in 
your head, in your mind or heart." 
Do matters fare any better in regard to the equal right of others 
to satisfy their urge for bliss? Feuerbach poses this claim as 
absolute, as holding good for all times and circumstances. But 
since when has it been valid? Was there ever in antiquity between 
slaves and masters, or in the Middle Ages between serfs and 
barons, any talk about an equal right in the urge for bliss? Was 
not the urge for bliss of the oppressed class sacrificed ruthlessly 
a L. Feuerbach, "Fragmente zur Characteristik meines philosophischen Cur­
riculum vitae" in Ludwig Feuerbach's sämmtliche Werke, Vol. II, p. 411.—  Ed. 

=====第408页=====
380 Frederick Engels 
and "by right of law" to that of the ruling class?—Yes, that was 
indeed immoral; nowadays, however, equality of rights is recog­
nised.— Recognised in words ever since and inasmuch as the 
bourgeoisie, in its fight against feudalism and in the development 
of capitalist production, was compelled to abolish all privileges of 
estate, that is, personal privileges, and to introduce the equality of 
all individuals before the law, first in the sphere of private law, 
then gradually also in the sphere of public law. But the urge for 
bliss lives only to a trivial extent on idealistic rights. To the 
greatest extent of all it lives on material means; and capitalist 
production takes care to ensure that the great majority of those 
with equal rights shall get only what is essential for bare existence. 
It scarcely has, therefore, more respect, if indeed at all, for the 
equal right to the urge for bliss of the majority than had slavery 
or serfdom. And are we better off in regard to the mental means 
of bliss, the educational means? Is not even "the school-master of 
Sadowa"244 a mythical person? 
More. According to Feuerbach's theory of morals the Stock 
Exchange is the highest temple of social ethics, provided only that 
one always speculates right. If my urge for bliss leads me to the 
Stock Exchange, and if there I correctly gauge the consequences 
of my actions so that only agreeable results and no disadvantages 
ensue, that is, if I always win, then I am fulfilling Feuerbach's 
precept. Moreover, I do not thereby interfere with the equal right 
of another person to pursue his bliss; for that other man went to 
the Exchange just as voluntarily as I did and in concluding the 
speculative transaction with me he has followed his urge for bliss 
as I have followed mine. If he loses his money, his action is ipso 
facto proved to have been unethical, because it was poorly 
calculated, and since I have given him the punishment he 
deserves, I can even slap my chest proudly, like a modern 
Rhadamanthus. Love, too, rules on the Stock Exchange, in so far 
as it is not simply a sentimental figure of speech, for each finds in 
others the satisfaction of his own urge for bliss, which is just what 
love ought to achieve and how it acts in practice. And if I gamble 
with correct prevision of the consequences of my operations, and 
therefore with success, I fulfil all the strictest injunctions of 
Feuerbachian morality—and become a rich man into the bargain. 
In other words, Feuerbach's morality is geared to contemporary 
capitalist society, little though Feuerbach himself might desire or 
imagine it. a 
a This sentence was added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第409页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 381 
But love!—ryes, in Feuerbach love is everywhere and at all times 
the miracle-working god called on to help surmount all difficulties 
of practical life—and that in a society which is split into classes 
with diametrically opposite interests. At this point the last relic of 
its revolutionary character disappears from his philosophy, leaving 
only the old cant: Love one another—fall into each other's arms 
without distinction as to sex or estate—a universal orgy of 
reconciliation! 
In short, the Feuerbachian theory of morals fares like all its 
predecessors. It is designed to suit all times, all peoples and all 
conditions, and precisely for that reason it is never and nowhere 
applicable. Vis-à-vis the real world it remains as powerless as 
Kant's categorical imperative. In reality every class, even every 
profession, has its own morality, and even this it violates whenever 
it can do so with impunity. And love, which is to unite all, 
manifests itself in wars, altercations, lawsuits, domestic broils, 
divorces and every possible exploitation of one by another. 
Now how was it possible that the powerful impetus given by 
Feuerbach turned out to be so unfruitful for himself? For the 
simple reason that Feuerbach himself cannot find the way out of 
the realm of abstraction—for which he has a deadly hatred—into 
that of living reality. He clings fiercely to nature and man; but 
nature and man remain mere words to him. He is incapable of 
telling us anything definite either about real nature or real men. 
But from the abstract man of Feuerbach one arrives at real living 
men only when one considers them as participants in history. And 
that is what Feuerbach resisted, and therefore the year 1848, 
which he did not understand, meant to him merely the final break 
with the real world, withdrawal into solitude. The blame for this 
again falls chiefly on the conditions then obtaining in Germany, 
which condemned him to rot away miserably. 
But the step which Feuerbach did not take had nevertheless to 
be taken. The cult of abstract man, which formed the kernel of 
Feuerbach's new religion, had to be replaced by the science of real 
men and of their historical development. This further develop­
ment of Feuerbach's standpoint beyond Feuerbach was inaugu­
rated by Marx in 1845 in The Holy Family. 
IV 
Strauss, Bauer, Stirner, Feuerbach —these were the offshoots of 
Hegelian philosophy, in so far as they did not abandon the field of 

=====第410页=====
382 Frederick Engels 
philosophy. Strauss, after his Leben Jesu and Dogmatik? produced 
only literary studies in philosophy and ecclesiastical history à la 
Renan. Bauer worked only in the field of the history of the origin 
of Christianity, though what he did here was important. Stirner 
remained an oddity, even after Bakunin blended him with 
Proudhon and labelled the blend "anarchism". Feuerbach alone 
was of significance as a philosopher. But not only did 
philosophy—claimed to soar above all individual sciences and to 
be the science of sciences, connecting them—remain to him an 
impassable barrier, an inviolable sacrament, but as a philosopher, 
too, he stopped halfway, was a materialist below and an idealist 
above. He could not cope with Hegel through criticism; he simply 
cast him aside as useless, while he  himself,  compared with the 
encyclopaedic wealth of the Hegelian system, achieved nothing 
positive beyond a bombastic religion of love and a meagre, 
impotent morality. 
Out of the dissolution of the Hegelian school, however, there 
emerged still another tendency, the only one which has borne real 
fruit. And this tendency is essentially connected with the name of 
Marx.* 
The departure from Hegelian philosophy was here too the 
result of a return to the materialist standpoint. That means it was 
resolved to comprehend the real world—nature and history—just 
as it presents itself to everyone who approaches it free from 
preconceived idealist quirks. It was decided mercilessly to sacrifice 
every idealist quirk which could not be brought into harmony with 
the facts conceived in their own, and not in a fantastic, 
* Here I may be permitted to make a personal explanation. Lately repeated 
reference has been made to my share in this theory, and so I can hardly avoid 
saying a few words here to settle this point. I cannot deny that both before and 
during my forty years' collaboration with Marx I had a certain independent share 
in laying the foundations of the theory, and more particularly in its elaboration. 
But the greater part of its leading basic principles, especially in the realm of 
economics and history, and, above all, their final trenchant formulation, belongs to 
Marx. What I contributed—at any rate with the exception of my work in a few 
special fields—Marx could very well have done without me. What Marx 
accomplished I would not have achieved. Marx stood higher, saw further, and took 
a wider and quicker view than all the rest of us. Marx was a genius; we others were 
at best talented.b Without him the theory would not be by far what it is today. It 
therefore rightly bears his name. 
a A reference to the second part of D. Strauss' Die christliche Glaubenslehre... 
entitled Der materiale Inbegriff der christlichen Glaubenslehre (Dogmatik). — Ed. 
b This sentence was added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第411页=====
Feuerbach  and End of  Classical German Philosophy  383 
interconnection.  And  materialism means nothing more than this. 
But here  the  materialistic world outlook  was  taken really seriously 
for the  first time  and was  carried through consistently—at least  in 
its basic features—in  all relevant domains  of knowledge. 
Hegel  was not  simply  put  aside.  On the  contrary,  his revolution­
ary side, described above,  the  dialectical method  was  taken  up. 
But in its  Hegelian form this method  was no use.  According  to 
Hegel, dialectics  is the  self-development  of the  concept.  The 
absolute concept does  not  only exist—unknown where—from 
eternity,  it is  also  the actual living soul  of the  whole existing world. 
It develops into itself through  all the  preliminary stages which  are 
treated  at length  in Logik  and which  are all  included  in it.  Then  it 
"alienates" itself  by changing itself into nature, where, without 
consciousness  of itself,  disguised  as the  necessity  of nature,  it goes 
through  a new  development  and  finally comes again  to self-
consciousness  in man.  This self-consciousness then elaborates itself 
again  in history from  the  crude form until finally  the  absolute 
concept again comes  to itself completely  in Hegelian philosophy. 
According  to Hegel, therefore,  the  dialectical development appar­
ent in nature  and  history, that  is, the  causal interconnection  of the 
progressive movement from  the  lower  to the  higher, which asserts 
itself through  all zigzag movements  and  temporary retrogressions, 
is only  a copy  of the  self-movement  of the  concept going  on from 
eternity,  no one  knows where,  but at all  events independently  of 
any thinking human brain. This ideological perversion  had to be 
done away with.  We  comprehended  the  concepts  in our  heads 
once more materialistically—as images  of real things instead  of 
regarding  the  real things  as images  of some  or other stage  of the 
absolute concept. Thus dialectics reduced itself  to the  science  of 
the general laws  of motion, both  of the  external world  and of 
human thinking—two sets  of laws which  are identical  in substance, 
but differ  in their expression  in so far as the  human mind  can 
apply them consciously, while  in nature  and  also  up to now for the 
most part  in human history, these laws assert themselves uncon­
sciously,  in the  form  of external necessity,  in the  midst  of an 
endless series  of apparent accidents. Thereby  the  dialectic  of 
concepts itself became merely  the  conscious reflection  of the 
dialectical motion  of the  real world  and  thus  the Hegelian dialectic 
was placed upon  its head;  or rather, turned  off its  head,  on which 
it was  standing,  and  placed upon  its feet.  And  this materialist 
dialectic, which  for  years  was our  best means  of labour  and our 
sharpest weapon,  was,  remarkably enough, rediscovered  not  only 

=====第412页=====
384 Frederick Engels 
by us but also, independently of us and even of Hegel, by a 
German worker, Joseph Dietzgen.* 
In this way, however, the revolutionary side of Hegelian 
philosophy was again taken up and at the same time freed from 
the idealist trimmings which with Hegel had prevented its 
consistent execution. The great basic thought that the world is not 
to be comprehended as a complex of ready-made things, but as a 
complex of  processes,  in which the apparently stable things, no less 
than their mental images in our heads, the concepts, go through 
uninterrupted change of coming into being and passing away, in 
which, for all apparent accidentality and despite all temporary 
retrogression, a progressive development asserts itself in the 
end—this great fundamental thought has, especially since the time 
of Hegel, so thoroughly permeated ordinary consciousness that in 
this generality it is now scarcely ever contradicted. But to 
acknowledge this fundamental thought in words and to apply it in 
reality in detail to each domain of investigation are two different 
things. If, however, investigation always proceeds from this 
standpoint, the demand for final solutions and eternal truth ceases 
once and for all; one is always conscious of the necessary limitation 
of all acquired knowledge, of the fact that it is conditioned by the 
circumstances in which it was acquired. On the other hand, one no 
longer permits oneself to be impressed by the antitheses, 
unsuperable for the still common old metaphysics, between true 
and false, good and bad, identical and different, necessary and 
accidental. One knows that these antitheses have only a relative 
validity; that that which is now recognised as true has also its 
hidden false side which will later manifest  itself,  just as that which 
is now recognised as false has also its true side by virtue of which 
it was previously regarded as true. One knows that what is 
maintained to be necessary is composed of sheer accidents and 
that the allegedly accidental is the form behind which necessity 
hides itself—and so on. 
The old method of. investigation and thinking which Hegel calls 
"metaphysical", which preferred to investigate things as given, as 
fixed and stable, a method the relics of which still strongly haunt 
people's minds, had a great deal of historical justification in its 
day. It was necessary first to examine things before it was possible 
to examine processes. One had first to know what any particular 
thing was before one could observe the changes it was undergoing. 
And such was the case with natural science. The old metaphysics, 
* See Das Wesen der Kopfarbeit, von einem Handarbeiter, Hamburg, Meißner. 

=====第413页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 385 
which accepted things as faits accomplis, arose from a natural 
science which investigated dead and living things as faits accomplis. 
But when this investigation had progressed so far that it became 
possible to take the decisive step forward, that is, to pass on to the 
systematic investigation of the changes which these things undergo 
in nature  itself,  then the death knell of the old metaphysics struck 
in the realm of philosophy too. And in fact, while natural science 
up to the end of the last century was predominantly a collecting 
science, a science of faits accomplis, in our century it is essentially a 
systematising science, a science of the processes, of the origin and 
development of these things and of the interconnection which 
binds all these natural processes into one great whole. Physiology, 
which investigates the processes occurring in plant and animal 
organisms; embryology, which deals with the development of 
individual organisms from germ to maturity; geology, which traces 
the gradual formation of the earth's surface—all these are the 
offspring of our century. 
But, above all, there are three great discoveries which have 
advanced our knowledge of the interconnection of natural 
processes by leaps and bounds: 
First, the discovery of the cell as the unit from whose 
multiplication and differentiation the whole plant and animal body 
develops, so that not only is the development and growth of all 
higher organisms recognised to proceed according to a single 
general law,3 but also, in the capacity of the cell to change, the way 
is pointed out by which organisms can change their species and 
thus go through a more than individual development. 
Second, the transformation of energy, which has demonstrated 
to us that all the so-called forces operative in the first instance in 
inorganic nature—mechanical force and its complement, so-called 
potential energy, heat, radiation (light, or radiant heat), electricity, 
magnetism and chemical energy—are different forms of manifes­
tation of universal motion, which pass into one another in definite 
proportions so that in place of a certain quantity of one which 
disappears, a certain quantity of another makes its appearance and 
thus the whole motion of nature0 is reduced to this incessant 
process of transformation from one form into another. Finally, the 
proof which Darwin first developed in coherent form that the 
stock of organic products of nature surrounding us today, 
a The words "and differentiation", "not only", "general", and the rest of the 
sentence were added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 
b The 1886 edition has "inanimate nature".— Ed. 

=====第414页=====
386 Frederick Engels 
including man, is the product of a long process of evolution from 
a few originally unicellular germs, and that these in turn arose 
from protoplasm or albumen, which came into existence by 
chemical means. 
Thanks to these three great discoveries and the other immense 
advances in natural science, we have now arrived at the point 
where we can demonstrate the interconnection between the 
processes in nature not only in particular spheres but also the 
interconnection of these particular spheres as a whole, and so can 
present in an approximately systematic form a clear picture of the 
coherence in nature by means of the facts provided by empirical 
natural science  itself.  To furnish this overall picture was formerly 
the task of so-called philosophy of nature. It could do this only 
by putting in place of the real but as yet unknown interconnec­
tions ideational, fancied ones, filling in the missing facts by mental 
images and bridging the actual gaps merely in imagination. In the 
course of this procedure it conceived many brilliant ideas and 
foreshadowed many later discoveries, but it also produced a 
considerable amount of nonsense, which indeed could not have 
been otherwise. Today, when one needs to comprehend the results 
of natural science only dialectically, that is, in the sense of their 
own interconnection, in order to arrive at a "system of nature" 
sufficient for our time; when the dialectical character of this 
interconnection is forcing itself against their will even into the 
metaphysically trained minds of the natural scientists, today the 
philosophy of nature is definitively discarded. Every attempt at 
resurrecting it would be not only superfluous but a step backwards. 
But what is true of nature, which is hereby recognised also as a 
historical process of development, is likewise true of the history of 
society in all its branches and of the totality of all sciences which 
occupy themselves with things human (and divine). Here, too, the 
philosophy of history, of law, of religion, etc., has consisted in the 
substitution of an interconnection fabricated in the mind of the 
philosopher for the real interconnection demonstrable in events; 
has consisted in the comprehension of history as a whole, as well 
as in its separate parts, as the gradual implementation of 
ideas—and naturally always only the pet ideas of the philosopher 
himself.  According to this, history worked unconsciously but of 
necessity towards a certain ideal goal set in advance—as, for 
example, in Hegel, towards the implementation of his absolute 
idea—and the unshakeable trend towards this absolute idea 
formed the inner interconnection of the events in history. A new 
mysterious providence—unconscious or gradually coming into 

=====第415页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 387 
consciousness—was thus put in the place of the real, still unknown 
interconnection. Here, therefore, just as in the realm of nature, it 
was necessary to do away with these fabricated, artificial intercon­
nections by the discovery of the real ones—a task which ultimately 
amounts to the discovery of the general laws of motion which 
assert themselves as the ruling ones in the history of human 
society. 
In one point, however, the history of the development of society 
turns out to be essentially different from that of nature. In 
nature—in so far as we ignore man's reverse action upon 
nature—there are only blind, unconscious agencies acting upon 
one another, out of whose interplay the general law comes into 
operation. Of all that happens—whether in the innumerable 
apparent accidents observable upon the surface, or in the ultimate 
results which confirm the regularity inherent in these accidents— 
nothing happens as a consciously desired aim. In the history of 
society, on the contrary, the actors are all endowed with 
consciousness, are men acting with deliberation or passion, 
working towards definite goals; nothing happens without a 
deliberate intention, without a desired aim. But this distinction, 
important as it is for historical investigation, particularly of 
individual epochs and events, cannot alter the fact that the course 
of history is governed by innate general laws. For here, too, on the 
whole, in spite of the consciously desired aims of all individuals, 
accident apparently reigns on the surface. What is desired 
happens but rarely; in the majority of instances the numerous 
desired ends cross and conflict with one another, or these ends 
themselves are from the outset impracticable or the means of 
attaining them are insufficient. Thus the conflicts of innumerable 
individual wills and individual actions in the domain of history 
lead to a state of affairs quite similar to that prevailing in the 
realm of unconscious nature. The ends of the actions are desired, 
but the results which actually follow from these actions are not 
desired; or when they do seem to correspond to the desired end, 
they ultimately have consequences quite other than those desired. 
Historical events thus appear on the whole to be likewise governed 
by chance. But wherever on the surface chance holds sway, it is 
always governed by inner, hidden laws and these laws only have to 
be discovered. 
Men make their own history, whatever its outcome may be, in 
that each person follows his own consciously desired end, and it is 
precisely the result of these many wills operating in different 
directions and of their manifold effects upon the world outside 
27-1243 

=====第416页=====
388 Frederick Engels 
that constitutes history. Thus it is also a question of what the many 
individuals desire. The will is determined by passion or delibera­
tion. But the levers which immediately determine passion or 
deliberation are of very different kinds. In part they may be 
external objects, in part ideal motives, ambition, "enthusiasm for 
truth and justice", personal hatred or even purely individual 
whims of all kinds. But, on the one hand, we have seen that the 
many individual wills active in history for the most part produce 
results quite other than those desired—often quite the opposite; 
that their motives, therefore, in relation to the total result are 
likewise of only secondary importance. On the other hand, the 
question also arises: What driving forces in turn stand behind 
these motives? What are the historical causes which transform 
themselves into these motives in the minds of the actors? 
The old materialism never asked itself this question. Its 
conception of history, as far as it has one at all, is therefore 
essentially pragmatic; it judges everything according to the motives 
of the action; it divides men who act in history into noble and 
ignoble and then finds that as a rule the noble are defrauded and 
the ignoble are victorious. Hence, it follows for the old materialism 
that nothing very edifying is to be got from the study of history, 
and for us that in the realm of history the old materialism 
becomes untrue to itself because it takes the ideal driving forces 
which operate there as ultimate causes, instead of investigating 
what is behind them, what are the driving forces of these driving 
forces. The inconsistency does not lie in the fact that ideal driving 
forces are recognised, but in the investigation not being carried 
further back from these into their motive causes. On the other 
hand, the philosophy of history, particularly as represented by 
Hegel, recognises that the ostensible and also the actually 
operating motives of men who act in history are by no means the 
ultimate causes of historical events; that behind these motives are 
other motive powers, which have to be explored. But it does not 
seek these powers in history  itself,  it imports them rather from 
outside, from philosophical ideology, into history. Hegel, for 
example, instead of explaining the history of Ancient Greece out 
of its own inner coherence, simply maintains that it is nothing 
more than the bringing out of "forms of beautiful individuality", 
the realisation of a "work of art" as such.3 He says much in this 
connection about the Ancient Greeks that is fine and profound, 
a G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte, Zweiter Teil, 
Zweiter Abschnitt. — Ed. 

=====第417页=====
Feuerbach  and End of  Classical German Philosophy 389 
but that does  not  prevent  us today from refusing  to be  palmed  off 
with such  an explanation, which  is mere empty talk. 
When, therefore,  it is a  question  of investigating  the  driving 
powers which—consciously  or  unconsciously,  and  indeed very 
often unconsciously—lie behind  the  motives  of men who act in 
history  and  which constitute  the  real ultimate driving forces  of 
history, then  it is not a  question  so much  of the  motives  of single 
individuals, however eminent,  as of  those motives which  set in 
motion great masses, whole peoples,  and  again whole classes  of the 
people  in each people;  and  even this,  not  momentarily, giving rise 
to the  transient flaring  up of a  straw-fire which quickly dies down, 
but to lasting action resulting  in a  great historical transformation. 
Ascertaining  the  driving causes which  in this context,  in the  minds 
of the  acting masses  and  their leaders—the so-called great 
men—are reflected  as  conscious motives, clearly  or unclearly, 
directly  or in  ideological, even sanctified form—that  is the  only 
way which  can put us on the  track  of the  laws holding sway  in 
history  as a  whole,  as well  as in  particular periods  and in  particular 
countries. Everything which sets  men in  motion must pass through 
their minds;  but  what form  it takes  in the  mind depends very 
much upon  the  circumstances.  The  workers have  by no  means 
become reconciled  to capitalist machine industry  now  that they  no 
longer simply break  the  machines  to pieces,  as they  did as  recently 
as 1848 on the  Rhine. 
But while  in all  earlier periods  the  investigation  of these driving 
causes  of history  was  almost impossible—on account  of the 
complicated  and  concealed interconnections with their effects— 
our present period  has so far  simplified these interconnections 
that it has  been possible  to solve  the  riddle. Since  the  establishment 
of large-scale industry, that  is, at  least since  the  European peace  of 
1815,  it has  been  no longer  a secret  to any man in  England that 
the whole political struggle there turned  on the  claims  to 
supremacy  of two classes: the  LANDED ARISTOCRACY3  and the 
bourgeoisie (MIDDLE CLASS).  In France, with  the  return  of the 
Bourbons,  the  same fact  was  perceived,  the  historians  of the 
Restoration period, from Thierry  to Guizot, Mignet  and  Thiers, 
speak  of it  everywhere  as the key to the  understanding  of French 
history since  the  Middle Ages.  And  since  1830 the  working class, 
the proletariat,  has  been recognised  in both countries  as a  third 
competitor  for  power. Conditions  had  become  so simplified that 
a In the  original this English term  is given  in parentheses after  its German 
equivalent.—  Ed. 
27* 

=====第418页=====
390 Frederick Engels 
one would have had to close one's eyes deliberately not to see in 
the fight of these three great classes and in the conflict of their 
interests the driving force of modern history—at least in the two 
most advanced countries. 
But how had these classes come into existence? If it was possible 
at first glance still to ascribe the origin of the large, formerly 
feudal landed property—at least in the first instance—to political 
causes, to seizure by force, this could not be done in regard to the 
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Here the origin and development 
of two great classes was seen to lie clearly and palpably in purely 
economic causes. And it was just as clear that in the struggle 
between landed proprietors and the bourgeoisie, no less than in 
the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, the 
matter at issue was, first and foremost, economic interests, which 
were to be secured using political power merely as a means. 
Bourgeoisie and proletariat both arose in consequence of a change 
in the economic conditions, more precisely, in the mode of 
production. The transition, first from guild handicrafts to 
manufacture, and then from manufacture to large-scale industry 
with steam and mechanical power, had caused the development of 
these two classes. At a certain stage the new forces of production 
set in motion by the bourgeoisie—in the first place the division of 
labour and the combination of many workers performing indi­
vidual operations in one manufactory handling all stages of 
production—and the conditions and requirements of exchange, 
developed through these forces of production, became incompati­
ble with the existing order3 of production handed down through 
history and sanctified by law, that is to say, incompatible with the 
privileges of the guild and the numerous other personal and local 
privileges (which were just as numerous fetters for the un­
privileged estates) of the feudal order of society. The forces of 
production represented by the bourgeoisie rebelled against the 
order3 of production represented by the feudal landlords and the 
guild-masters. The result is well known: the feudal fetters were 
smashed, gradually in England, at one blow in France. In 
Germany the process is not yet finished. But just as, at a definite 
stage of its development, manufacture came into conflict with the 
feudal order3 of production, so large-scale industry has even now 
come into conflict with the bourgeois order of production 
established in its place. Tied down by this order, by the narrow 
limits of the capitalist mode of production, this industry produces, 
a The 1886 edition has "relations".— Ed. 

=====第419页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 391 
on the one hand, an ever-increasing proletarianisation of the great 
mass of the people, and on the other hand, an ever greater 
volume of unsaleable products. Overproduction and mass destitu­
tion, each the cause of the other—that is the absurd contradiction 
which is its outcome, and which of necessity calls for the 
productive forces to be unfettered by means of a change in the 
mode of production. 
In modern history at least it is, therefore, proved that all 
political struggles are class struggles, and all struggles by classes 
for emancipation, despite their necessarily political form—for 
every class struggle is a political struggle3—turn ultimately on the 
question of economic emancipation. Therefore, here at least, the 
state—the political order—is the subordinate factor and civil 
society—the realm of economic relations—the decisive element. 
The traditional conception, to which Hegel, too, pays homage, saw 
in the state the determining element, and in civil society the 
element determined by it. Appearances correspond to this. As all 
the driving forces of the actions of any individual person must 
pass through his brain, and transform themselves into motives of 
his will in order to set him into action, so also all the needs of civil 
society—no matter which class happens to be the ruling one— 
must pass through the will of the state in order to attain general 
validity in the form of laws. That is the formal aspect of the 
matter which is self-evident. The question arises, however, as to 
the content of this merely formal will—of the individual as well as 
of the state—and whence this content is derived. Why is just this 
willed and not something else? If we enquire into this, we discover 
that in modern history the will of the state is, on the whole, 
determined by the changing needs of civil society, by the 
supremacy of this or that class, in the last resort, by the 
development of the productive forces and relations of exchange. 
But if even in our modern era, with its gigantic means of 
production and communication, the state is not an independent 
domain with independent development, but one whose existence 
as well as development is to be explained in the last resort by the 
economic conditions of life of society, then this must be still more 
true of all earlier times when the production of the material life of 
man was not yet carried on with these abundant auxiliary aids, 
and when, therefore, the necessity of such production must have 
exercised a still greater rule over men. If the state even today, in 
the era of large-scale industry and railways, is on the whole only 
a The words in dashes were added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第420页=====
392 Frederick Engels 
the reflection, in concentrated form, of the economic needs of the 
class controlling production, then this must have been much more 
the case ini.an epoch when each generation of men had to spend a 
far greater part of its aggregate lifetime satisfying its material 
needs,  and was therefore much more dependent on them than we 
are today. An examination of the history of earlier periods, as 
soon as it deals seriously with this aspect, most abundantly 
confirms this. But, of course, this cannot be gone into here. 
If the state and public law are determined by economic 
relations, so, too, of course is private law, which indeed in essence 
only sanctions the existing economic relations between individuals 
which are normal in the given circumstances.3 The form in which 
this occurs can, however, vary considerably. It is possible, as 
happened in England, in harmony with the whole of national 
development, to retain to a large extent the forms of the old 
feudal laws and give them a bourgeois content; in fact, directly 
reading a bourgeois meaning into the feudal name. But, also, as 
happened in continental Western Europe, Roman Law, the first 
world law of a commodity-producing society, with its unsurpassa-
bly fine elaboration of all the essential legal relations of simple 
commodity owners (of buyers and sellers, creditors and debtors, 
contracts, obligations, etc.), can be taken as the foundation. In 
which case, for the benefit of a still petty-bourgeois and 
semi-feudal society it can either be reduced to the level of such a 
society simply through judicial practice (common law) or else, with 
the help of allegedly enlightened, moralising jurists, it can be 
worked into a special code of law to correspond with such a social 
level—a code which in these circumstances will be a bad one even 
from the legal standpoint (for instance, Prussian common law). In 
which case, however, after a great bourgeois revolution, it is also 
possible to work out upon the basis of this same Roman Law such 
a classic legal code of bourgeois society as the French Code civile. 
If, therefore, bourgeois legal rules merely express the economic 
conditions of life in society in legal form, then they can do so well 
or badly according to circumstances. 
The state presents itself to us as the first ideological power over 
man. Society creates for itself an organ for the safeguarding of its 
common interests against internal and external attacks. This organ 
is the state power. Hardly come into being, this organ makes itself 
independent vis-à-vis society; and, indeed, all the more so, the 
a The words "which are normal in the given circumstances" were added bv 
Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第421页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 393 
more it becomes the organ of a particular class, the more it 
directly enforces the rule of that class. The fight of the oppressed 
class against the ruling class necessarily becomes a political fight, a 
fight first of all against the political rule of this class. Conscious­
ness of the connection between this political struggle and its 
economic foundation becomes dulled and can be lost altogether. 
While this is not wholly the case with the participants, it almost 
always happens with the historians. Of the ancient sources on the 
struggles within the Roman Republic only Appian tells us clearly 
and distinctly what was ultimately at issue—namely, landed 
property.3 
But once the state has become an independent power vis-à-vis 
society, it immediately produces a further ideology. It is among 
professional politicians, theorists of public law and jurists of 
private law that the connection with economic facts gets well and 
truly lost. Since in each particular case the economic facts must 
assume the form of juristic motives in order to receive legal 
sanction; and since, in so doing, consideration has, of course, to be 
given to the whole legal system already in operation, the juristic 
form is, in consequence, made everything and the economic 
content nothing. Public law and private law are treated as separate 
spheres, each having its own independent historical development, 
each being capable of, and needing, a systematic presentation by 
the consistent elimination of all innate contradictions. 
Still higher ideologies, that is, such as are still further removed 
from the material, economic basis, take the form of philosophy 
and religion. Here the connection between conceptions and their 
material conditions of existence becomes more and more compli­
cated, more and more obscured by intermediate links. But the 
connection exists. Just as the whole Renaissance period, from the 
middle of the fifteenth century, was an essential product of the 
towns and, therefore, of the burghers, so also was the subsequent­
ly newly awakened philosophy. Its content was in essence only the 
philosophical expression of the thoughts corresponding to the 
development of the small and middle burghers into a big 
bourgeoisie. Among the last century's Englishmen and Frenchmen 
who in many cases were just as much political economists as 
philosophers, this is clearly evident; and we have proved it above 
in regard to the Hegelian school. 
Let us now in addition deal only briefly with religion, since this 
a See Appian of Alexandria, The Roman History, Books 13-17.— Ed. 
b The 1886 edition has "another".— Ed. 

=====第422页=====
394 Frederick Engels 
stands furthest away from material life and seems to be most alien 
to it. Religion arose in very primitive times from erroneous, 
primitive conceptions by men about their own nature and external 
nature surrounding them. Every ideology, however, once it has 
arisen, develops in connection with the given concept-material, 
and develops this material further; otherwise it would not be an 
ideology, that is, occupation with thoughts as with independent 
entities, developing independently and subject only to their own 
laws.  That the material conditions of life of the persons inside 
whose heads this thought process goes on in the last resort 
determine the course of this process remains of necessity unknown 
to these persons, for otherwise all ideology would be finished. 
These original religious notions, therefore, which in the main are 
common to each group of kindred peoples, develop, after the 
group separates, in a manner peculiar to each people, according to 
the conditions of life falling to their lot. For a number of groups 
of peoples, and particularly for the Aryans (so-called Indo-
Europeans), this process has been demonstrated in detail by 
comparative mythology. The gods thus fashioned among each 
people were national gods, whose domain extended no farther 
than the national territory which they were to protect; on the 
other side of its frontiers other gods held undisputed sway. They 
could continue to exist, in the imagination, only as long as the 
nation existed; they fell with its fall. The Roman world empire, 
the economic conditions of whose origin we do not need to 
examine here, brought about this downfall of the old nationalities. 
The old national gods declined, even those of the Romans, which 
also were geared to suit only the narrow confines of the city of 
Rome. The need to complement the world empire by means of a 
world religion was clearly revealed in the attempts made to 
provide in Rome recognition and altars for all the foreign gods 
that were to the slightest degree respectable, alongside the 
indigenous ones. But a new world religion is not to be made in 
this fashion, by imperial decrees. The new world religion, 
Christianity, had already quietly come into being, out of a mixture 
of generalised Oriental, particularly Jewish, theology, and vulgar­
ised Greek, particularly Stoic, philosophy. What it originally 
looked like has yet to be laboriously discovered, since its official 
form, as it has been handed down to us, is merely that in which it 
became the state religion, to which purpose it was adapted by the 
Council of Nicaea.245 The fact that it became the state religion in 
as little as 250 years suffices to show that it was the religion 
corresponding to the conditions of the time. In the Middle Ages, 

=====第423页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 395 
in the same measure as feudalism developed, Christianity grew 
into its religious counterpart, with a corresponding feudal 
hierarchy. And when the burghers began to thrive, there 
developed, in opposition to feudal Catholicism, the Protestant 
heresy, which first appeared in Southern France, among the 
Albigenses,246 at the time the cities there were in their heyday. The 
Middle Ages had attached to theology all the other forms of 
ideology—philosophy, politics, jurisprudence—and made them 
subdivisions of theology. It thereby constrained every social and 
political movement to take on a theological form. The sentiments 
of the masses, fed exclusively on religion, had to have their own 
interests presented to them in a religious guise in order to 
create a great turbulence. And just as the burghers from the 
beginning produced an appendage of propertyless urban plebeians, 
day labourers and servants of all kinds, belonging to no recognised 
social estate, precursors of the later proletariat, so likewise3 heresy 
soon became divided into a moderate burgher heresy and a 
revolutionary plebeian one, the latter an abomination even to the 
burgher heretics. 
The ineradicableness of the Protestant heresy corresponded to 
the invincibility of the rising burghers. When these burghers had 
become sufficiently strengthened, their struggle against the feudal 
nobility, which till then had been predominantly local, began to 
assume national dimensions. The first great campaign occurred in 
Germany—the so-called Reformation. The burghers were neither 
powerful enough nor sufficiently developed to be able to unite 
under their banner the remaining rebellious estates—the 
plebeians of the towns, the lower nobility and the peasants in the 
countryside. The nobles were the first to be defeated; the peasants 
rose in a revolt which formed the climax of the whole 
revolutionary movement; the cities left them in the lurch, and thus 
the revolution succumbed to the armies of the sovereigns, who 
swept the board. Thenceforward Germany disappears for three 
centuries from among the countries playing an independent active 
part in history. But beside the German Luther there had appeared 
the Frenchman Calvin. With true French acuity he put the 
bourgeois character of the Reformation in the forefront, repub-
licanised and democratised the Church. While the Lutheran 
Reformation in Germany degenerated and reduced the Country to 
rack and ruin, the Calvinist Reformation served as a banner for 
the republicans in Geneva, in Holland and in Scotland, freed 
a This part of the sentence was added by Engels in the 1888 edition.— Ed. 

=====第424页=====
396 Frederick Engels 
Holland from Spain and from the German Empire and provided 
the ideological costume for the second act of the bourgeois 
revolution, which was taking place in England. Here Calvinism 
stood the test as the true religious disguise of the interests of the 
contemporary bourgeoisie and on this account did not attain full 
recognition when the revolution ended in 1689 in a compromise 
between part of the nobility and the bourgeoisie.247  The English 
Established Church was reconstituted; but not in its earlier form, 
as a Catholicism with the king for its pope, being, instead, strongly 
Calvinised. The old Established Church had celebrated the merry 
Catholic Sunday and had fought against the dull Calvinist one. 
The new, bourgeois Church introduced the latter, which adorns 
England to this day. 
In France, the Calvinist minority was suppressed in 1685 and 
either Catholicised or driven out of the country. 248 But what was 
the good? Already at that time the freethinker Pierre Bay le was 
hard at work, and in 1694 Voltaire was born. The forcible 
measures of Louis XIV only made it easier for the French 
bourgeoisie to carry through its revolution in the irreligious, 
exclusively political form which alone was suited to a developed 
bourgeoisie. Instead of Protestants, freethinkers took their seats in 
the national assemblies. Christianity had thus entered into its final 
stage. It had become incapable of continuing to serve any 
progressive class as the ideological garb of its aspirations. It 
became more and more the exclusive possession of the ruling 
classes and they use it as a mere means of government, to keep 
the lower classes within certain bounds. Moreover, each of the 
different classes uses its own appropriate religion: the landed 
junkers—Catholic Jesuitism or Protestant orthodoxy; the liberal 
and radical bourgeoisie—rationalism; and it makes no difference 
whether these gentlemen themselves believe in their respective 
religions or not. 
We see, therefore: religion, once formed, always contains 
traditional material, just as in all ideological domains tradition 
constitutes a great conservative force. But the changes which this 
material undergoes spring from class relations, that is to say, from 
the economic relations of the people who carry out these changes. 
And here that is sufficient. 
In the above it could only be a question of giving a general 
outline of the Marxian conception of history, at most with a few 
illustrations as well. The proof must be derived from history  itself; 
and in this regard I may be permitted to say that it has been 
sufficiently provided in other writings. This conception, however, 

=====第425页=====
Feuerbach and End of Classical German Philosophy 397 
puts an end to philosophy in the realm of history, just as the 
dialectical conception of nature makes all philosophy of nature as 
unnecessary as it is impossible. It is no longer a question anywhere 
of inventing interconnections from out of our brains, but of 
discovering them in the facts. For philosophy, having been 
expelled from nature and history, there remains only the realm of 
pure thought, so far as anything is left of it: the theory of the laws 
of the thought process  itself,  logic and dialectics. 
* * * 
With the revolution of 1848, "educated" Germany said farewell 
to theory and went over to the field of practice. Small-scale 
production and manufacture, based upon manual labour, were 
superseded by real large-scale industry. Germany again appeared 
on the world market. The new little German Empire249 abolished 
at least the most flagrant of the abuses with which this 
development had been obstructed by the system of petty states, the 
relics of feudalism, and bureaucratic management. But to the 
same degree that speculation abandoned the philosopher's study 
in order to erect its temple in the Stock Exchange, educated 
Germany lost the great aptitude for theory which had been the 
glory of Germany in the days of its deepest political humiliation — 
the aptitude for purely scientific investigation, irrespective of 
whether the result obtained was applicable in practice or not, 
adverse to the police or not. Official German natural science, it is 
true,  kept abreast of the times, particularly in the field of 
specialised research. But even the American journal Science rightly 
remarks that the decisive advances in the sphere of the com­
prehensive correlation of particular facts and their generalisation 
into laws are now being made much more in England, instead of 
in Germany, as used to be the case. And in the sphere of the 
historical sciences, philosophy included, the old reckless zeal for 
theory has now well and truly disappeared, along with classical 
philosophy. Inane eclecticism and an obsessive concern for career 
and income, down to the most vulgar tuft-hunting, have taken its 
place. The official representatives of these sciences have become the 
undisguised ideologists of the bourgeoisie and the existing 
state—but at a time when both stand in open antagonism to the 
working class. 
Only among the working class does the German aptitude for 
theory remain unimpaired. Here it cannot be exterminated. Here 

=====第426页=====
398 Frederick Engels 
there is no concern for careers, for profiteering, or for gracious 
patronage from above. On the contrary, the more ruthlessly and 
disinterestedly science proceeds the more it finds itself in harmony 
with the interests and aspirations of the workers. The new 
tendency, which recognised that the key to the understanding of 
the whole history of society lies in the history of the development 
of labour, from the outset addressed itself preferentially to the 
working class and here found the response which it neither sought 
nor expected from official science. The German working-class 
movement is the heir to German classical philosophy. 

=====第427页=====
399 
APPENDIX [TO THE AMERICAN EDITION 
OF THE CONDITION OF THE WORKING CLASS 
IN ENGLAND]250 
The book which is herewith submitted to the English-speaking 
public in its own language, was written rather more than forty 
years ago. The author, at the time, was young, twenty-four years 
of age, and his production bears the stamp of his youth with its 
good and its faulty features, of neither of which he feels ashamed. 
That it is now translated into English, is not in any way due to his 
initiative. Still he may be allowed to say a few words, "to show 
cause" why this translation should not be prevented from seeing 
the light of day. 
The state of things described in this book belongs to-day in 
many respects to the past, as far as England is concerned. Though 
not expressly stated in our recognized treatises, it is still a law of 
modern Political Economy that the larger the scale on which 
Capitalistic Production is carried on, the less can it support the 
petty devices of swindling and pilfering which characterize its early 
stages. The pettifogging business-tricks of the Polish Jew, the 
representative in Europe of commerce in its lowest stage, those 
tricks that serve him so well in his own country, and are generally 
practiced there, he finds to be out of date and out of place when 
he comes to Hamburg or Berlin; and again the Commission 
Agent, who hails from Berlin or Hamburg, Jew or Christian, after 
frequenting the Manchester Exchange for a few months, finds out 
that in order to buy cotton-yarn or cloth cheap, he, too, had better 
drop those slightly more refined but still miserable wiles and 
subterfuges which are considered the acme of cleverness in his 
native country. The fact is, those tricks do not pay any longer in a 

=====第428页=====
400 Frederick Engels 
large market, where time is money, and where a certain standard 
of commercial morality is unavoidably developed, purely as a 
means of saving time and trouble. And it is the same with the 
relation between the manufacturer and his "hands." The repeal of 
the Corn-laws,251 the discovery of the Californian and Australian 
gold-fields,252 the almost complete crushing-out of domestic 
handweaving in India, the increasing access to the Chinese market, 
the rapid multiplication of railways and steam-ships all over the 
world, and other minor causes have given to English manufactur­
ing industry such a colossal development, that the status of 1844 
now appears to us as comparatively primitive and insignificant. 
And in proportion as this increase took place, in the same 
proportion did manufacturing industry become apparently moral­
ized. The competition of manufacturer against manufacturer by 
means of petty thefts upon the workpeople did no longer pay. 
Trade had outgrown such low means of making money; they were 
not worth while practicing for the manufacturing millionaire, and 
served merely to keep alive the competition of smaller traders, 
thankful to pick up a penny wherever they could. Thus the 
truck-system was suppressed; the Ten Hours' Bill253 was enacted, 
and a number of other secondary reforms introduced—much 
against the spirit of Free Trade and unbridled competition, but 
quite as much in favor of the giant-capitalist in his competition 
with his less favored brother. Moreover, the larger the concern, 
and with it the number of hands, the greater the loss and 
inconvenience caused by every conflict between master and men; 
and thus a new spirit came over the masters, especially the large 
ones,  which taught them to avoid unnecessary squabbles, to 
acquiesce in the existence and power of Trades Unions, and 
finally even to discover in strikes—at opportune times—a 
powerful means to serve their own ends. The largest manufactur­
ers, formerly the leaders of the war against the working-class, were 
now the foremost to preach peace and harmony. And for a very 
good reason. The fact is, that all these concessions to justice and 
philanthropy were nothing else but means to accelerate the 
concentration of capital in the hands of the few, for whom the 
niggardly extra extortions of former years had lost all importance 
and had become actual nuisances; and to crush all the quicker and 
all the safer their smaller competitors who could not make both 
ends meet without such perquisites. Thus the development of 
production on the basis of the capitalistic system has of itself 
sufficed—at least in the leading industries, for in the more 
unimportant branches this is far from being the case—to do away 

=====第429页=====
Appendix to American Edition of The Condition ... 401 
with all those minor grievances which aggravated the workman's 
fate during its earlier stages. And thus it renders more and more 
evident the great central fact, that the cause of the miserable 
condition of the working class is to be sought, not in these minor 
grievances, but in the Capitalistic System  itself.  The wage-worker 
sells to the capitalist his labor-force for a certain daily sum. After a 
few hours' work he has reproduced the value of that sum; but the 
substance of his contract is, that he has to work another series of 
hours to complete his working day; and the value he produces 
during these additional hours of surplus labor is surplus value 
which costs the capitalist nothing but yet goes into his pocket. That 
is the basis of the system which tends more and more to split up 
civilized society into a few Vanderbilts, the owners of all the means 
of production and subsistence, on the one hand, and an immense 
number of wage-workers, the owners of nothing but their 
labor-force, on the other. And that this result is caused, not by this 
or that secondary grievance, but by the system itself—this fact has 
been brought out in bold relief by the development of Capitalism 
in England since 1847. 
Again, the repeated visitations of cholera, typhus, small-pox and 
other epidemics have shown the British bourgeois the urgent 
necessity of sanitation in his towns and cities, if he wishes to save 
himself and family from falling victims to such diseases. Accord­
ingly, the most crying abuses described in this book have either 
disappeared or have been made less conspicuous. Drainage has 
been introduced or improved, wide avenues have been opened out 
athwart many of the worst "slums" I had to describe. "Little 
Ireland" has disappeared and the "Seven Dials" 2M are next on the 
list for sweeping away. But what of that? Whole districts which in 
1844 I could describe as almost idyllic have now, with the growth 
of the towns, fallen into the same state of dilapidation, discomfort 
and misery. Only the pigs and the heaps of refuse are no longer 
tolerated. The bourgeoisie have made further progress in the art 
of hiding the distress of the working class. But that, in regard to 
their dwellings, no substantial improvement has taken place, is 
amply proved by the Report of the Royal Commission "on the 
Housing of the Poor," 1885.a And this is the case, too, in other 
respects. Police regulations have been plentiful as blackberries; but 
they can only hedge in the distress of the workers, they cannot 
remove it. 
a See Report of the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working  Classes.  England 
and Wales. 1885.—Ed. 

=====第430页=====
402 Frederick Engels 
But while England has thus outgrown the juvenile state of 
capitalist exploitation described by me, other countries have only 
just attained it. France, Germany, and especially America, are the 
formidable competitors who at this moment—as foreseen by me in 
1844a—are more and more breaking up England's industrial 
monopoly. Their manufactures are young as compared with those 
of England, but increasing at a far more rapid rate than the latter; 
but curious enough, they have at this moment arrived at about the 
same phase of development as English manufacture in 1844. With 
regard to America, the parallel is indeed most striking. True, the 
external surroundings in which the working class is placed in 
America are very different, but the same economical laws are at 
work, and the results, if not identical in every respect, must still be 
of the same order. Hence we find in America the same struggles 
for a shorter working-day, for a legal limitation of the working 
time,  especially of women and children in factories; we find the 
truck system in full blossom, and the cottage-system, in rural 
districts,255 made use of by the "bosses" as a means of domination 
over the workers. At this very moment I am receiving the 
American papers with accounts of the great strike of 12,000 
Pennsylvanian coal-miners in the Connellsville district, and I seem 
but to read my own description of the North of England colliers' 
strike of 1844.256 The same cheating of the work-people by false 
measure; the same truck system; the same attempt to break the 
miners' resistance by the Capitalists' last, but crushing, resource, 
the eviction of the men out of their dwellings, the cottages owned 
by the companies. 
There were two circumstances which for a long time prevented 
the unavoidable consequences of the Capitalist system from 
showing themselves in the full glare of day in America. These 
were the easy access to the ownership of cheap land, and the 
influx of immigration. They allowed, for many years, the great 
mass of the native American population to "retire" in early 
manhood from wage-labor and to become farmers, dealers, or 
employers of labor, while the hard work for wages, the position of 
a proletarian for life, mostly fell to the lot of immigrants. But 
America has outgrown this early stage. The boundless backwoods 
have disappeared, and the still more boundless prairies are fast 
and faster passing from the hands of the Nation and the States 
into those of private owners. The great safety-valve against the 
a See present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 579-80.— Ed. 

=====第431页=====
Appendix to American Edition of The Condition ... 403 
formation of a permanent proletarian clarss has practically ceased 
to act. A class of life-long and even hereditary proletarians exists 
at this hour in America. A nation of sixty millions striving hard to 
become—and with every chance of success, too—the leading 
manufacturing nation of the world—such a nation cannot 
permanently import its own wage-working class; not even if 
immigrants pour in at the rate of half a million a year. The 
tendency of the Capitalist system towards the ultimate splitting-up 
of society into two classes, a few millionaires on the one hand, and 
a great mass of mere wage-workers on the other, this tendency, 
though constantly crossed and counteracted by other social 
agencies, works nowhere with greater force than in America; and 
the result has been the production of a class of native American 
wage-workers, who form, indeed, the aristocracy of the wage-
working class as compared with the immigrants, but who become 
conscious more and more every day of their solidarity with the 
latter and who feel all the more acutely their present condemna­
tion to life-long wage-toil, because they still remember the bygone 
days,  when it was comparatively easy to rise to a higher social 
level. Accordingly the working class movement, in America, has 
started with truly American vigor, and as on that side of the 
Atlantic things march with at least double the European speed, 
we may yet live to see America take the lead in this respect 
too. 
I have not attempted, in this translation, to bring the book up to 
date,  to point out in detail all the changes that have taken place 
since 1844. And for two reasons: Firstly, to do this properly, the 
size of the book must be about doubled, and the translation came 
upon me too suddenly to admit of my undertaking such a work. 
And secondly, the first volume of "Das Kapital", by Karl Marx, an 
English translation of which is about to appear, contains a very 
ample description of the state of the British working class, as it 
was about 1865, that is to say, at the time when British industrial 
prosperity reached its culminating point. I should, then, have been 
obliged again to go over the ground already covered by Marx's 
celebrated work. 
It will be hardly necessary to point out that the general 
theoretical standpoint of this book—philosophical, economical, 
political—does not exactly coincide with my standpoint of to-day. 
Modern international Socialism, since fully developed as a science, 
chiefly and almost exclusively through the efforts of Marx, did not 
as yet exist in 1844. My book represents one of the phases of its 
embryonic development; and as the human embryo, in its early 
28-1243 

=====第432页=====
404 Frederick Engels 
stages, still reproduces the gill-arches of our fish ancestors, so this 
book exhibits everywhere the traces of the descent of Modern 
Socialism from one of its ancestors, German philosophy. Thus 
great stress is laid on the dictum that Communism is not a mere 
party doctrine of the working class, but a theory compassing the 
emancipation of society at large, including the Capitalist class, 
from its present narrow conditions. This is true enough in the 
abstract, but absolutely useless, and worse, in practice. So long as 
the wealthy classes not only do not feel the want of any 
emancipation, but strenuously oppose the self-emancipation of the 
working class, so long the social revolution will have to be 
prepared and fought out by the working class alone. The French 
bourgeois of 1789, too, declared the emancipation of the 
bourgeoisie to be the emancipation of the whole human race; but 
the nobility and clergy would not see it; the proposition—though 
for the time being, with respect to feudalism, an abstract historical 
truth—soon became a mere sentimentalism, and disappeared 
from view altogether in the fire of the revolutionary struggle. And 
to-day, the very people who, from the impartiality of their 
"superior stand-point" preach to the workers a Socialism soaring 
high above their class interests and class struggles, and tending to 
reconcile in a higher humanity the interests of both the 
contending classes—these people are either neophytes, who have 
still to learn a great deal, or they are the worst enemies of the 
workers—wolves in sheeps' clothing. 
The recurring period of the great industrial crises is stated in 
the text as five years. This was the period apparently indicated by 
the course of events from 1825 to 1842. But the industrial history 
from 1842 to 1868 has shown that the real period is one of ten 
years;  that the intermediate revolutions were secondary and 
tended more and more to disappear. Since 1868 the state of things 
has changed again, of which more anon. 
I have taken care not to strike out of the text the many 
prophecies, amongst others that of an imminent social revolution 
in England, which my youthful ardor induced me to venture 
upon. The wonder is, not that a good many of them proved 
wrong, but that so many of them have proved right, and that the 
critical state of English trade, to be brought on by German and 
especially American competition, which I then foresaw—though in 
too short a period—has now actually come to pass. In this respect 
I can, and am bound to, bring the book up to date, by placing 
here an article which I published in the London "Commonweal" 
of March 1, 1885, under the heading: "England in 1845 and in 

=====第433页=====
Appendix to American Edition of The Condition ... 405 
1885."a  It gives at the same time a short outline of the history of 
the English working class during these forty years. 
London, February 25, 1886 
Frederick Engels 
First published in F. Engels, The Condi- Reproduced from the book 
tion of the Working Class in England in 
1844, New York, 1887 
a See this volume, pp.  295-301.—  Ed. 
28* 

=====第434页=====
406 
[ON THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE PARIS COMMUNE] 
This evening, at the same time as you, and with you, the 
workers of the Two Worlds celebrate the anniversary of the most 
glorious and most tragic stage of proletarian evolution. In 1871, 
for the first time in its history, the working class seized political 
power in a major capital. It was, alas! but a dream. Caught 
between the mercenaries of the former French Empire on one 
side and the Prussians on the other, the Commune was soon 
strangled in an unparalleled massacre which will never be 
forgotten. Victorious, reaction knew no bounds; socialism seemed 
to have been drowned in blood, and the proletariat doomed to 
slavery forever. 
Fifteen years have elapsed since that defeat. In all this time, in 
every country, the powers-that-be, in the service of the owners of 
land and capital, have not shunned any means to eradicate the last 
remaining intentions of working class revolt. And what have they 
achieved? 
Look around you. Revolutionary working-class socialism, more 
alive than ever, is today a force before which governments 
everywhere tremble, the French radicals as well as Bismarck, the 
stock-exchange kings of America just as the Tsar of all the 
Russias. 
That is not all. 
We have arrived at the point where all our adversaries, whatever 
they do, are working for us in spite of themselves. 
They believed they had killed the International. Yet at the 
present moment the international union of the proletariat, the 
revolutionary brotherhood between the workers of different 
countries, is a thousand times stronger, more widespread than it 

=====第435页=====
On the Anniversary of the Paris Commune 407 
was before the Commune. The International no longer needs an 
organisation in the proper sense; it lives and grows through the 
spontaneous and heartfelt cooperation of the workers of Europe 
and America. 
In Germany Bismarck has exhausted every means, even the 
foulest, in order to crush the working-class movement. Result: 
before the Commune he was faced with four socialist deputies; his 
persecutions have led to the election of twenty-five today.258 And 
the German proletariat is laughing at the Grand Chancellor who 
could not have made better revolutionary propaganda if he were 
paid for it. 
In France they have imposed on you voting by list,259 this 
bourgeois election method par excellence, deliberately invented to 
ensure the election of lawyers, journalists and other political 
adventurers, the spokesmen of capital. And what has it done for 
the bourgeoisie, this poll of the rich? It has created in the heart of 
the French parliament a revolutionary socialist workers' party 
whose mere appearance on the scene was sufficient to throw the 
ranks of all the bourgeois parties into disarray.260 
This is where we are now. Every event turns out in our favour. 
The most calculated measures to arrest the progress of the 
proletariat serve only to speed its victorious march. The enemy 
itself is fighting for us, is condemned to fight for us. And it has 
done so much and done it so well that on this day, the 18 March 
1886,  the same cry emerges from thousands of workers' throats, 
from the proletarian miners of California and Aveyron to the 
convict miners of Siberia: 
"Long live the Commune! Long live the international union of 
workers!" 
Written on March 15, 1886 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Le Socialiste, No. 31, 
March 27, 1886 Translated from the French 

=====第436页=====
408 
A STATEMENT TO THE EDITORIAL BOARD 
OF THE NEW YORKER VOLKSZEITUNG 261 
As a report of an interview with me by one of its correspondents 
has appeared in the Missouri Republican, I have the following 
remarks to make: 
It is true that a Mr. McEnnis visited me as representative of this 
newspaper and put various questions to me, but promising on his 
honour not to send a line of it for print without first submitting it 
to me. Instead of doing that he never turned up again. I therefore 
declare herewith that I must refuse each and every responsibility 
for his publication, all the more so as I had the opportunity to 
satisfy myself that, because he lacked the necessary background 
knowledge, Mr. McEnnis, even with the best of wills, is hardly in a 
position to understand my statements correctly. 
London 
Frederick Engels 
Written on April 29, 1886 
First published in the New Yorker Volks-
zeitung, No. 162, July 8, 1886 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第437页=====
409 
[ON THE STRIKE AT A GLASS-WORKS IN LYONS] 
The French Republican Government26 seem resolved to show 
in every possible way that they are quite as much the Government 
of the capitalists as any of their predecessors. Not content with 
siding with the Mining Company in Decazeville,263 they now come 
out even stronger in Lyons. There is a strike at a glass-works there; 
a few knobsticks continue working, and are lodged inside the 
works for safety's sake. When the furniture of one of them—a 
German anarchist of the name of Litner—was removed to the 
works, the strikers followed it, hooting. No sooner was the cart 
with the furniture inside and the gates closed, than shots were 
fired from the windows upon the people outside—revolver-bullets, 
and buckshot flying about in every direction, and wounding about 
thirty people. The crowd of course dispersed. Now the police and 
the judicial authorities interfered. But not to arrest the capitalist 
and his retainers who had fired—oh no! they arrested a number 
of the strikers for interfering with the freedom of labour! This 
affair coming on at this very moment, has caused immense 
excitement in Paris. Decazeville has swelled the Socialist votes in 
Paris from 30,000 to above 100,000,264 and the effect of this 
murderous affair on the La Malotier3 Gray at Lyons will be 
greater still. 
F. E. 
Written between May 8 and 14, 1886 Reproduced from the magazine 
First published in The Commonweal, 
No. 18, May 15, 1886 
a Should read "La Mulatier".— Ed. 

=====第438页=====
410 
THE POLITICAL SITUATION IN EUROPE 
In March 1879a  Disraeli sent four armour-plated ships into the 
Bosporus; their presence alone was sufficient to halt the Russians' 
triumphal march on Constantinople and to break the Treaty of 
San Stefano. The Peace of Berlin regulated the situation in the 
Orient for some time. 266 Bismarck managed to bring about an 
accord between the Russian Government and Austrian Govern­
ment. Austria was to dominate behind the scenes in Serbia, 
whereas Bulgaria and Rumelia were to be abandoned to the 
overwhelming influence of Russia. This allowed one to predict 
that if, later on, Bismarck permitted the Russians to take 
Constantinople, he was reserving Salonica and Macedonia for 
Austria. 
But what is more, Austria was given Bosnia too, just as in 1794 
Russia had abandoned the greater part of Poland proper to the 
Prussians and Austrians, only to take it back in 1814. Bosnia was 
a permanent drain on Austria, a bone of contention between 
Hungary and Western Austria, and above all it was proof to Turkey 
that the Austrians, just like the Russians, were preparing for it the 
same fate that Poland had suffered. Henceforth Turkey could 
have no confidence in Austria: an important victory for Russian 
government policy. 
Serbia had Slavophile, and hence Russophile, tendencies; but 
since its emancipation it has drawn all its means of bourgeois 
development from Austria. Young people go to study in the 
a Engels' letter has "winter of 1879". The erroneous date was preserved in the 
article. The English squadron entered the Sea of Marmara (not the Bosporus) in 
February 1878.— Ed. 

=====第439页=====
The Political Situation in Europe 411 
Austrian universities; the bureaucratic system, the code, the court 
procedure, the schools—everything has been copied from the 
Austrian models. It was natural. But Russia had to prevent this 
imitation in Bulgaria; it did not wish to pull Austria's chestnuts out 
of the fire. So Bulgaria was organised as a Russian satrapy. The 
administration, the officers and the non-commissioned officers, 
the staff,  in fact the entire system were Russian: the Battenberg 
who was bestowed on it was the cousin of Alexander III. 
The domination of the Russian Government, at first direct and 
then indirect, was sufficient to stifle in less than four years all 
Bulgarian sympathy for Russia, though it had been great and 
enthusiastic. The population grew increasingly fractious in the face 
of the insolence of their "liberators"; and even Battenberg, a man 
without any political ideas, with a pliant character, who sought 
merely to serve the Tsar but clamoured for esteem, became more 
and more intractable. 
Meanwhile, things were developing in Russia: by taking severe 
action the government was able to disperse the Nihilists and break 
up their organisation for a time.268 But that was not enough, it 
needed some support in public opinion, it needed to turn minds 
away from the contemplation of the growing social and political 
ills at home; finally, what it needed was a little patriotic 
phantasmagoria. Under Napoleon III the left bank of the Rhine 
had served to deflect revolutionary passions towards the exterior; 
similarly, the Russian Government snowed a troubled and restless 
people the conquest of Constantinople, the "deliverance" of Slavs 
oppressed by the Turks and their unification into one great 
federation under Russian tutelage. But it was not sufficient to 
evoke this phantasmagoria—it was necessary to do something to 
translate it into the sphere of reality. 
Circumstances were favourable. The annexation of Alsace and 
Lorraine had sown seeds of discord between France and Germany 
which seemed bound to neutralise these two powers. Austria on 
her own could not stand up to Russia, because its most effective 
weapon, the appeal to the Poles, would always be held in the 
scabbard by Prussia. And the occupation, the theft, of Bosnia was 
an Alsace between Austria and Turkey. Italy was offered most, 
that is with regard to Russia, who offered it Trentino and Istria, 
along with Dalmatia and Tripoli. And England? The peace-loving 
Russophile Gladstone had listened to the tempting words of 
Russia; he had occupied Egypt, in a time of peace,269 which 
guaranteed England a perpetual quarrel with France and, in 
addition, ensured the impossibility of an alliance between the Turks 

=====第440页=====
412 Frederick Engels 
and the English, who had just  robbed  them by appropriating a Turkish 
fief, Egypt. Moreover, the Russian preparations in Asia were 
sufficiently far advanced to give the English plenty of trouble in 
the Indies in the event of war. Never before had the Russians 
been presented with so many chances: their diplomacy was 
triumphing all along the line. 
The rebellion of the Bulgarians against Russian despotism 
provided the opportunity to enter into the fray. In the summer of 
1885 they dangled before the eyes of the Bulgarians and the 
Rumelians the possibility of this union promised by the peace of 
San Stefano and destroyed by the Treaty of Berlin. They were 
told that if they threw themselves once again into the arms of 
Russia the liberator the Russian Government would fulfil its 
mission by bringing about this union; but to achieve this the 
Bulgarians had to start by chasing out Battenberg. The latter was 
warned in time; unusually for him he acted promptly and 
vigorously; he brought about, for his own ends, this union which 
Russia hoped to make against him. 270 From this moment there was 
relentless warfare between him and the Tsar. 
To begin with, this war was waged slyly and indirectly. Louis 
Bonaparte's splendid doctrine, whereby when a hitherto scattered 
people such as Italy or Germany was united and attained 
nationhood, the other states such as France were entitled to 
territorial compensation, was revived for the small states of the 
Balkans. Serbia swallowed the bait and declared war on the 
Bulgarians; Russia triumphed by making this war, instigated in its 
own interests, appear in the eyes of the world to be under the 
auspices of Austria, who dared not prevent it for fear of seeing 
the Russian side coming to power in Serbia. For its part, Russia 
threw the Bulgarian army into confusion by recalling all the 
Russian officers, that is to say the entire general staff and all the 
senior officers, including the battalion commanders. 
But contrary to all expectations the Bulgarians, without their 
Russian officers, and fighting two against three, beat the Serbs 
hands down and won the respect and admiration of an astonished 
Europe. These victories were due to two things. Firstly, Alexander 
of Battenberg, although a weak politician, is a good soldier; he 
waged the war as he had learnt from the Prussian school, while 
the Serbs followed the strategy and tactics of their Austrian 
models. So it was a second edition of the 1866 campaign in 
Bohemia. 271 Moreover, the Serbs had lived for sixty years under a 
bureaucratic Austrian regime which, without giving them a 
powerful bourgeoisie and an independent peasantry (the peasants 

=====第441页=====
The Political Situation in Europe 413 
are already all mortgaged), had ruined and disorganised the 
remains of collectivism of the gens which had been their strength 
in their battles with the Turks. Amongst the Bulgarians, on the 
other hand, these primitive institutions had been left intact by the 
Turks—which explains their superior gallantry. 
So, a further setback for the Russians; they had to begin from 
scratch. Slavophile chauvinism, stoked up as a counter-weight to 
the revolutionary element, was growing day by day and already 
becoming a threat to the government. The Tsar goes off to 
Crimea; and the Russian newspapers announce that he is about to 
do something great; he tries to attract the Sultan by showing him 
his old allies (Austria and England) betraying and despoiling him, 
with France following suit and at the mercy of Russia. But the 
Sultan turns a deaf ear and the enormous armaments of Western 
and Southern Russia remain idle for the time being. 
The Tsar returns from Crimea (last June). But meanwhile the 
chauvinist tide rises, and the government, unable to repress this 
aggressive movement, is increasingly dragged along behind it; so 
much so that it is necessary to allow the mayor of Moscow3 to 
speak publicly about the conquest of Constantinople in his address 
to the T!sar.b272 The press, under the influence and the protection of 
the generals, says openly that it expects from the Tsar an 
energetic operation against Austria and Germany, who are 
hindering him, and the government lacks the courage to silence it. 
Slavophile chauvinism is more powerful than the Tsar, he will 
have to give wayc for fear of revolution, the Slavophiles would ally 
with the constitutionalists, with the nihilists,273 and finally with all 
malcontents. 
The dire financial plight complicates the situation. Nobody is 
willing to lend to this government which, from 1870 to 1875, 
borrowed 1 billion 750,000 francs from London and which 
threatens the peace of Europe. Two or three years ago Bismarck 
facilitated a loan of 375 million francs in Germany; but this has 
long since been swallowed up; and without Bismarck's signature 
the Germans will not hand over a farthing. But this signature 
cannot be obtained without humiliating conditions. The manufac­
ture of warrants at home has produced too much, the silver rouble 
a N. A. Alexeyev.— Ed. 
b See "Morning Post. Wednesday, May 14", Novoye Vremya, No. 3666, May 15 
(27),  1886.— Ed. 
c The rest of the paragraph is missing in Engels' letter; instead it says: "or 
else—the Slavophiles would rebel".— Ed. 

=====第442页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
is worth 4 frs, the paper rouble 2 frs 20. Armaments cost no end of 
money. 
In the end it is necessary to act.— Success in the direction of 
Constantinople, or revolution.— Giers goes to see Bismarck and 
explains the situation to him; he understands it very well. Out of 
consideration for Austria he would have liked to hold back the 
government of the Tsar, whose insatiability worries him. But 
revolution in Russia means the fall of the Bismarck regime. Without 
Russia, the great reserve army of reaction, the domination by the 
Prussian squirearchy, would not last a single day. Revolution in 
Russia would change the situation in Germany immediately; it 
would destroy at a stroke this blind faith in Bismarck's omnipo­
tence which secures him the cooperation of the ruling classes; it 
would bring revolution in Germany to a head. 
Bismarck, who knows that the existence of Tsarism is the basis 
of his whole system, would hurry to Vienna to inform his friends 
that in the face of such danger it is no longer the time to dwell on 
questions of amour-propre; that it is necessary to allow the Tsar 
some semblance of triumph, and that it is in the interests of 
Austria and Germany, as they well realise, that they should bow 
before Russia. Moreover, if the Austrians insist on meddling in 
Bulgaria's affairs he would wash his hands of them; they would 
see what would happen. Kalnoky gives way, Alexander Battenberg 
is sacrificed, and Bismarck runs off to carry the news to Giers in 
person. 
Unfortunately the Bulgarians display unexpected political skill 
and energy, intolerable in a Slav nation "delivered by holy 
Russia". Battenberg is arrested by night, but the Bulgarians arrest 
the conspirators, appoint a government that is capable, energetic 
and incorruptible, qualities completely intolerable in a nation that 
is scarcely liberated; they recall Battenberg; the latter displays all 
his spinelessness and takes flight. But the Bulgarians are 
incorrigible. With or without Battenberg they resist the sovereign 
orders of the Tsar and compel the heroic Kaulbars to make a fool 
of himself in front of the whole of Europe. 274 
Imagine the fury of the Tsar. Having forced Bismarck to 
submit, broken the Austrian resistance, he sees himself pulled up 
short by this tiny people of yesteryear which owes its "indepen­
dence" to him or his father,3 and refuses to realise that this 
independence means nothing more than blind obedience to the 
orders of the "liberator". The Greeks and the Serbs were 
a Alexander II.— Ed. 

=====第443页=====
The Political Situation in Europe 415 
ungrateful; but the Bulgarians are really overdoing it. Fancy 
taking their independence seriously! What a crime! 
To save himself from revolution the poor Tsar is obliged to take 
another step forward. But every step becomes more dangerous, 
because it is only taken at the risk of a European war, which 
Russian diplomacy has always sought to avoid. It is certain that if 
there is direct intervention by the Russian government in Bulgaria 
and if it leads to further complications, the moment will come 
when the hostility between Russian and Austrian interests will 
break out into the open. It will then be impossible to localise the 
war—it will become general. Given the honesty of the rogues who 
govern Europe, it is impossible to predict how the two camps will 
form up. Bismarck is quite capable of siding with the Russians 
against the Austrians if he can see no other way of delaying the 
revolution in Russia. But it is more likely that if war breaks out 
between Russia and Austria, Germany will come to the aid of the 
latter in order to prevent its complete annihilation. 
While waiting for spring, for the Russians will not be able to 
mount a major winter campaign on the Danube before April, the 
Tsar is working to lure the Turks into his net, and the treason of 
Austria and England towards Turkey are making the task easier 
for him. His goal is to occupy the Dardanelles and thus to 
transform the Black Sea into a Russian lake; to turn it into an 
inaccessible shelter for the organisation of powerful fleets which 
would emerge to dominate what Napoleon called a "French lake", 
the Mediterranean. But he has not managed it yet, although his 
supporters in Sofia have betrayed his secret thought. 
This is the situation. In order to escape a revolution in Russia 
the Tsar needs Constantinople; Bismarck hesitates, he would like 
to find the means to avoid one eventuality as well as the other. 
* * * 
And France? 
The patriotic French, who have been dreaming of revenge for 
sixteen years, believe there is nothing more natural than to grasp 
any opportunity which may present  itself.  But for our party the 
matter is not so simple; nor is it any simpler for' Messieurs the 
chauvinists. A war of revenge, conducted with the alliance and 
under the aegis of Russia, could lead to a revolution or a 
counter-revolution in France. In the eventuality of a revolution 
which brought the socialists to power, the Russian alliance would 

=====第444页=====
416 Frederick Engels 
collapse. First, the Russians would immediately make peace with 
Bismarck to fling themselves with the Germans on revolutionary France. 
Then France would not bring the socialists to power in order to 
prevent by a war a revolution in Russia. But this eventuality is 
hardly likely; the monarchist counter-revolution is more so. The Tsar 
wants the restoration of the Orléans, his intimate friends, the only 
government which offers him the conditions of a good and solid 
alliance. Once the war was under way, good use would be made of 
the monarchist officers to prepare it. At the slightest partial 
defeat, and there would be some, the cry would go up that it is the 
fault of the Republic, that in order to win victories and to obtain 
the full cooperation of Russia, a stable, monarchist government is 
needed, in other words Philippe VII a; the monarchist generals 
would act feebly so as to be able to blame their lack of success on 
the Republican government; and there you are—the monarchy is 
back. With Philippe VII restored, the kings and emperors will 
reach immediate agreement and instead of devouring one another 
they will divide Europe up, swallowing the small states. With the 
French Republic dead, a new congress of Vienna would be held 
where, perhaps, the sins of the French republicans and socialists 
would be used as a pretext to deny France Alsace-Lorraine, either 
in part or entirely; and the princes would mock the republicans 
for having been so naive as to believe in the possibility of a true 
alliance between Tsarism and the Republic. 
Moreover, is it true that General Boulanger is saying to anyone 
who will listen to him, "A war is necessary to prevent the social 
revolution"? If it is true, may it serve as a warning to the socialist 
party. This fine Boulanger has boastful airs, for which as a soldier 
he may be forgiven, but they give a poor idea of his political sense. 
He is not the one who will save the Republic. Between the 
socialists and the Orleanists 275 it is possible that he will reach an 
arrangement with the latter if they assure him of the Russian 
alliance. In any case, the bourgeois republicans in France are in the 
same position as the Tsar; they see the  spectre  of social  revolution looming 
up ahead of them, and they know but one means of salvation: war. 
In France, Russia and Germany events are turning out so well 
for us that, for the time being, we can only desire the continuation 
of the status quo. If revolution broke out in Russia it would create a 
set of most favourable conditions. A general war would, on the 
other hand, propel us into the realm of the unforeseen. 
Revolution in Russia and Germany would be delayed; our party in 
a Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans, count of Paris.— Ed. 

=====第445页=====
The Political Situation in Europe 417 
Germany would meet the fate of the Commune of 1871. Without 
a doubt events will finish by turning in our favour; but what a 
waste of time, what sacrifices, what new obstacles to surmount. 
The forces in Europe which are pushing towards a war are 
powerful. The Prussian military system, adopted everywhere, 
requires twelve to sixteen years for its complete development; 
after this interval the reserve lists are filled with men who are 
experienced in handling arms. These twelve to sixteen years have 
elapsed everywhere; everywhere there are twelve to sixteen year 
groups which have passed through the army. So everywhere 
people are ready, and the Germans have no special advantage on 
their side. That is to say: this war which is threatening us would 
throw ten million soldiers into the field of battle. And old William 
is probably going to die. Bismarck will see his position shaken, 
more or less, and perhaps he will push for war as a means of hanging 
on. Indeed, the Stock Exchange everywhere believes in war as soon 
as the old man has breathed his last. 
If there is a war, it will be with the sole aim of preventing 
revolution: in Russia to forestall the common action of all the 
malcontents, Slavophiles, constitutionalists, nihilists, peasants; in 
Germany to keep Bismarck in office; in France to drive back the 
victorious movement of the socialists and restore the monarchy. 
Between French socialists and German socialists there is no 
Alsace question. The German socialists know only too well that the 
annexations of 1871, against which they have always protested, 
have been the main focus of Bismarck's reactionary politics, both 
at home and abroad. The socialists of the two countries have an 
equal interest in preserving the peace; it is they who will pay all 
the costs of the war. 
F. Engels 
Written on October 25, 1886 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Le Socialiste, No. 63, 
November 6, 1886 Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第446页=====
418 
JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER 
Death has torn another hole in the ranks of the champions of 
the proletarian revolution. Johann Philipp Becker died in Geneva 
on December 7. 
Born at Frankenthal in the Bavarian Palatinate in 1809, he took 
part in the political movement of his native region back in the 
1820s, when little more than a child. When this movement became 
republican in character in the early 1830s, after the July 
Revolution, Becker was one of its most active and stalwart 
supporters. Several times arrested, brought before a jury and 
acquitted, when reaction triumphed he eventually had to flee. He 
went to Switzerland, settled in Biel and took Swiss citizenship. He 
did not remain idle there, either. He was involved not only in the 
affairs of the German workingmen's associations and the revolutio­
nary endeavours of the German, Italian and European refugees in 
general, but also in the struggle of the Swiss democrats for control 
of the individual cantons. It will be recalled that this struggle was 
waged by means of a series of armed raids on the aristocratic and 
clerical cantons, particularly in the early 1840s. Becker was 
implicated to a greater or lesser extent in most of these "coups" 
and was finally sentenced to ten years' banishment from his home 
canton of Berne on this account. These minor campaigns 
eventually culminated in the Sonderbund War of 1847. Becker, 
who was an officer in the Swiss Army, took up his post and, 
during the march on Lucerne, led the advance guard of the 
division to which he was assigned. 
The February Revolution of 1848 broke out; there ensued 
attempts to republicanise Baden by means of campaigns by 
volunteer corps. When Hecker launched his campaign,277 Becker 

=====第447页=====
Johann Philipp Becker 419 
formed a refugees legion but was not able to get to the border 
until Hecker had already been pushed back. This legion, most 
members of which were subsequently interned in France, provided 
the nucleus for some of the best units in the armies of the 
Palatinate and Baden in 1849. 
When the republic was proclaimed in Rome in the spring of 
1849, 278 Becker sought to form an auxiliary corps from this legion 
to fight on the side of Rome. He went to Marseilles, set up the 
officer cadre and took steps to gather together the troops. But, as 
we well know, the French Government was preparing to suppress 
the Roman republic and bring back the Pope.3 It went without 
saying that the French Government prevented the auxiliaries from 
coming to the aid of its Roman adversaries. Becker, who had 
already hired a ship, was informed in no uncertain terms that she 
would be sent to the bottom as soon as she made any move to 
leave harbour. 
Revolution then broke out in Germany.279  Becker immediately 
hurried to Karlsruhe; the legion followed, and later took part in 
the struggle under Böning's leadership, while another section of 
the old legion of 1848, trained by Willich in Besançon, formed the 
nucleus of Willich's voluntary corps. Becker was appointed head of 
the entire Baden people's militia, that is to say, all troops except 
troops of the line, and at once set about organising it. He 
immediately came up against the government, which was domi­
nated by the reactionary bourgeoisie, and its leader, Brentano. His 
orders were countermanded, his requests for arms and equipment 
left unheeded or turned down flat. The attempt on June 6 to 
intimidate the government by a show of revolutionary armed 
strength, an attempt in which Becker was a major participant, 
proved indecisive 28 ; but Becker and his troops were then sent 
post-haste from Karlsruhe to the Neckar to face the enemy. 
There the battle had already started in a small way, and the 
decisive moment was rapidly approaching. With his volunteers and 
militiamen, Becker occupied the Odenwald forest. Without artil­
lery and cavalry he was obliged to waste his few troops holding 
this extensive and awkward area, and not enough was left at his 
disposal to mount an attack. Nonetheless, on June 15 he relieved, 
in a brilliantly fought action, his Hanau Gymnasts, 281 who had 
been surrounded in Hirschhorn Castle by Peucker's imperial 
troops. 
a Pius IX.— Ed. 
29-1243 

=====第448页=====
420 Frederick Engels 
When Mieroslawski became commander-in-chief of the rev­
olutionary army, Becker was given command of the 5th 
Division—nothing but militiamen and infantry—with orders to 
resist Peucker's corps, which outnumbered Becker's division by at 
least 6 to 1. But shortly afterwards came the crossing of the Rhine 
by the first Prussian corps at Germersheim, Mieroslawski's 
countermove and the defeat at Waghäusel on June 21. Becker 
occupied Heidelberg; the second Prussian corps under Groben 
advanced from the north, from the northeast came Peucker's 
corps,  each more than 20,000 strong, while to the southwest were 
Hirschfeld's Prussians, likewise more than 20,000 strong. And 
then the refugees from Waghäusel —the entire Baden army, both 
troops of the line and militiamen—poured into Heidelberg to 
make an enormous detour through the mountains and rejoin the 
road to Karlsruhe and Rastatt, which was blocked to them in the 
plain. 
Becker was supposed to cover this retreat—with his newly 
recruited, untrained troops and as usual without cavalry or 
artillery. At 8 p.m. on the 22nd, after allowing the refugees an 
adequate start, he marched from Heidelberg to Neckargemünd, 
where he rested for a few hours. Arriving on the 23rd at 
Sinsheim, where he again gave his troops a few hours' rest in 
battle formation in the face of the enemy, he reached Eppingen 
the same evening, and on the 24th he marched via Bretten to 
Durlach, arriving at 8 p.m. only to become tangled up again in the 
disorderly retreat of the now united Palatinate-Baden army. Here 
Becker was also given command of the remnants of the Palatinate 
troops, and was now expected not only to cover Mieroslawski's 
retreat but also to hold Durlach long enough for Karlsruhe to be 
evacuated. As always, he was again left without any artillery, since 
the artillery assigned to him had already marched off. 
Becker hastily fortified Durlach as well as he could, and was 
attacked the very next morning (June 25) on three sides by two 
Prussian divisions and Peucker's imperial troops. He not only 
repulsed all the attacks but also launched several counter-attacks, 
although he had only small arms to pit against the enemy's 
artillery fire, and after four hours' fighting withdrew in perfect 
order, unchecked by the columns despatched to outflank him, 
after receiving word that Karlsruhe had been evacuated and his 
mission accomplished. 
This must be the most brilliant episode in the entire Baden-
Palatinate campaign. With men most of whom had only been in 
the army for 2-3 weeks and who as completely raw recruits had 

=====第449页=====
Johann Philipp Becker 421 
been given a perfunctory training by improvised officers and 
NCOs and hardly had a trace of discipline, Becker carried out, as 
the rearguard of the beaten and half-dispersed armies, a march of 
more than 80 kilometres (or 11 German milesa) in 48 hours, 
starting straight away with a night march, bringing them right 
through the enemy to Durlach in a fit state to offer the Prussians, 
the next morning, one of the few engagements of the campaign in 
which the battle objective of the revolutionary army was achieved 
in full. It was an achievement that would do credit to experienced 
troops and in the case of such young soldiers is extremely rare 
and praiseworthy. 
Having reached the Murg, Becker came to a halt with his 
division east of Rastatt and played an honourable part in the 
battles of June 29 and 30. The outcome is well known: the enemy, 
six times superior in strength, marched round the position 
through the territory of Württemberg and then rolled it back 
from the right flank. The campaign was now formally settled and 
ended of necessity with the withdrawal of the revolutionary army 
to Swiss territory. 
Until then Becker had acted basically as an ordinary democratic 
republican; but from now on he went considerably further. Closer 
acquaintance with the German "pure republicans", particularly the 
south German ones, and his experience in the 1849 revolution 
demonstrated to him that the matter would have to be tackled 
differently in future. The strong proletarian sympathies that 
Becker had entertained since his youth now assumed a more 
tangible form; he had realised that while the bourgeoisie always 
formed the core of the reactionary parties, only the proletariat 
could form the core of a genuinely revolutionary force. The 
communist by sentiment became a conscious communist. 
Once again he attempted to set up a voluntary corps; it was in 
1860,  after Garibaldi's victorious march on Sicily. He travelled 
from Geneva to Genoa to make the preparations in collaboration 
with Garibaldi. But Garibaldi's rapid progress and the intervention 
of the Italian Army, which was to secure the fruits of victory for 
the monarchy, brought the campaign to an end. Meanwhile, there 
were widespread expectations of another war with Austria next 
year. It is common knowledge that Russia sought to use Louis 
Napoleon and Italy to consummate the Russian revenge on 
Austria, which had remained incomplete in 1859. The Italian 
Government sent a high-ranking officer from the general staff to 
a The German geographical mile=s7.42 km.— Ed. 
29* 

=====第450页=====
422 Frederick Engels 
see Becker in Genoa, offering him the rank of colonel in the 
Italian Army, a splendid salary and an allowance, and command 
over a legion to be formed by him in the war that was expected, 
provided he agreed to make propaganda in Germany for Italy 
and against Austria. But the proletarian Becker turned the offer 
down; the service of princes was not for him. 
That was his last attempt as a volunteer. Soon after, the 
International Workingmen's Association was established, and 
Becker was among its founders; he was present at the famous 
meeting in St. Martin's Hall that saw the birth of the Internation­
al.282  He organised the German and native workers of Romance 
Switzerland, founded the Vorbote as the group's journal, attended 
all the congresses of the International and was in the vanguard 
of the struggle against the Bakuninist anarchists of the 
Alliance de la Démocratie socialiste 283 and the Swiss Jura. 
After the disintegration of the International there was less 
opportunity for Becker to play a public role. But he always 
remained, nevertheless, in the midst of the working-class move­
ment and continued to exert his influence on its development 
through his extensive correspondence and by virtue of the many 
visits he received in Geneva. In 1882 he played host to Marx for a 
day, and as recently as this September the 77-year-old undertook a 
journey through the Palatinate and Belgium to London and Paris, 
during which I had the pleasure of having him to stay for a 
fortnight and talking over old times and new with him. And 
scarcely two months later the telegraph brings news of his death! 
Becker was a rare kind of man. He can be epitomised in a 
nutshell: hale and hearty. In body and mind he was hale and hearty 
to the end. A giant of a man, of tremendous physical strength and 
handsome with it, he had developed his untutored, but far from 
uncultivated mind, thanks to a fortunate disposition and healthy 
activity, as harmoniously as his body. He was one of the few men 
who,  to do the right thing, only need to follow their own instinct. 
That was why it was so easy for him to keep pace with every 
development in the revolutionary movement and to stand in the 
front rank in his seventy-eighth year as fresh as when he was 
eighteen. The boy who had played with cossacks passing through 
in 1814 and seen Sand (who stabbed Kotzebue to death) executed 
in 1820, advanced further and further from the vague opposition­
al figure of the 1820s and was still fully abreast of the movement 
in 1886. Yet he was no gloomy timeserver like most of the 
"serrrious" republicans of 1848, but a true son of the gay 
Palatinate, full of life and as fond of wine, women and song as the 

=====第451页=====
Johann Philipp Becker 423 
next man. Having grown up in the land of the Nibelungenlied 284 
around Worms, he still looked like one of the figures from our old 
epic,  even in old age: light-hearted yet sardonic, calling to his 
opponent between sword blows, composing popular ballads if 
there was no one to beat—this, and no other ways, is how Volker 
the Fiddler must have looked! 
But his greatest talent was undoubtedly military. In Baden he 
accomplished much more than anyone else. While the other 
officers, raised in the school of standing armies, found outlandish, 
almost unmanageable soldier material here, Becker had learned all 
his organisational skill, tactics and strategy in the outrageous 
school of the Swiss militia. A people's army was nothing strange to 
him, its inevitable shortcomings nothing new. Where others 
despaired or raged, Becker remained calm and found one solution 
after another; he knew how to handle his men, cheering them up 
with a jest, and finally had them in his hand. Many a Prussian 
general of 1870 might envy him the march from Heidelberg to 
Durlach with a division of almost nothing but untrained recruits, 
who still remained capable of going straight into battle and giving 
a good account of themselves. And in the same engagement he 
threw into battle the hitherto intractable Palatinate troops that had 
been assigned to him, and even got them to attack in open 
country. In Becker we have lost the only German revolutionary 
general we had. 
He was a man who took part, with distinction, in the freedom 
struggles of three generations. 
But the workers will honour his memory as one of their best! 
London, December 9, 1886 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the news-
No. 51, December 17, 1886 paper 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第452页=====
424 
PREFACE 
[TO THE SECOND EDITION 
OF THE HOUSING QUESTION"] 
The following work is a reprint of three articles which I wrote 
in 1872 for the Leipzig Volksstaat. Just at that time the French 
milliards came pouring down on Germany 285; public debts were 
paid off, fortresses and barracks built, stocks of weapons and war 
matériel renewed; the available capital no less than the volume of 
money in circulation was suddenly enormously increased, and all 
this just at a time when Germany was entering the world arena 
not only as a "united empire", but also as a great industrial 
country. These milliards lent young large-scale industry a power­
ful upswing, and it was they above all that brought about the short 
period of prosperity, rich in illusions, which followed the war, and 
immediately afterwards, in 1873-74 the great crash by which 
Germany proved itself to be an industrial country capable of 
holding its own on the world market. 
The period in which an old civilised country makes such a 
transition from manufacture and small-scale production to large-
scale industry, a transition, moreover, accelerated by such favoura­
ble circumstances, is at the same time predominantly a period of 
"housing shortage". On the one hand, masses of rural workers are 
suddenly drawn into the big towns, which develop into industrial 
centres; on the other hand, the concept applied in building these 
older towns no longer accords with the conditions needed for the 
new large-scale industry and the corresponding traffic; streets are 
widened and new ones cut through, and railways are run right 
across them. At the very time when workers are streaming into the 
towns in masses, workers' dwellings are pulled down wholesale. 
a See present edition, Vol. 23, pp.  317-91.—  Ed. 

=====第453页=====
Preface to 2nd Ed. of The  Housing Question  425 
Hence the sudden housing shortage for the workers and for the 
small traders and small manufacturing businesses, which depend 
on the workers for their custom. In towns which grew up from the 
outset as industrial centres, this housing shortage is as good as 
unknown; for instance, Manchester, Leeds, Bradford, Barmen-
Elberfeld. On the other hand, in London, Paris, Berlin, Vienna it 
took on an acute form at the time, and has, for the most part, 
continued to exist in a chronic form. 
It was therefore precisely this acute housing shortage, this 
symptom of the industrial revolution taking place in Germany, 
which filled the press of the day with treatises on the "housing 
question" and gave rise to all sorts of social quackery. A series of 
such articles also found their way into the Volksstaat. The 
anonymous author, who revealed himself later on as A. Mül-
berger, M. D. of Württemberg, considered the opportunity a 
favourable one for enlightening the German workers, by means of 
this question, on the miraculous effects of Proudhon's social 
panacea. 3 When I expressed my astonishment to the editors at the 
acceptance of these peculiar articles, I was challenged to answer 
them, and this I did (see Part I: How Proudhon Solves the 
Housing Question). This series of articles was soon followed by a 
second series, in which I examined the philanthropic bourgeois 
view of the question, on the basis of a work by Dr. Emil Saxb 
(Part II: How the Bourgeoisie Solves the Housing Question). 
After a rather long pause Dr. Mülberger did me the honour of 
replying to my articles, 0 and this compelled me to make a 
rejoinder (Part III: Supplement on Proudhon and the Housing 
Question), whereby both the polemic and also my special 
occupation with this question came to an end. That is the genesis 
of these three series of articles, which have also appeared as a 
separate reprint in pamphlet form. The fact that a new reprint 
has now become necessary I owe undoubtedly to the benevolent 
solicitude of the German imperial government which, by prohibit­
ing the work, tremendously increased its sale, as usual, and I hereby 
take this opportunity of expressing my respectful thanks to it.286 
I have revised the text for this new edition, inserted a few 
additions and notes, and have corrected a small economic error in 
a [A. Mülberger,] "Die Wohnungsfrage", Der Volksstaat, Nos  10-13,  15, 19, 
February 3, 7, 10, 14, 21 and March 6, 1872.— Ed. 
b E. Sax, Die Wohnungszustände der arbeitenden Classen und ihre Reform, Vienna, 
1869.—  Ed. 
c A. Mülberger, "Zur Wohnungsfrage (Antwort an Friedrich Engels von 
A. Mülberger)", Der Volksstaat, No. 86, October 26, 1872.— Ed. 

=====第454页=====
426 Frederick Engels 
the first part,3  as my opponent, Dr. Mülberger, unfortunately 
failed to discover it. 
During this revision it came home to me what gigantic progress 
the international working-class movement has made during the 
past fourteen years. At that time it was still a fact that "for twenty 
years the workers speaking Romance languages have had no other 
mental pabulum than the works of Proudhon",b  and at a pinch, 
the still more one-sided version of Proudhonism presented by the 
father of "anarchism", Bakunin, who regarded Proudhon as "the 
schoolmaster of us all", notre maître à nous tous. Although the 
Proudhonists in France were only a small sect among the workers, 
they were still the only ones who had a definitely formulated 
programme and who under the Commune were able to take over 
the leadership in the economic field. In Belgium, Proudhonism 
reigned unchallenged among the Walloon workers, and in Spain 
and Italy, with a few isolated exceptions, everything in the 
working-class movement which was not anarchist was decidedly 
Proudhonist. And today? In France, Proudhon has been complete­
ly discarded among the workers and retains supporters only 
among the radical bourgeois and petty bourgeois, who as 
Proudhonists also call themselves "socialists", but against whom 
the most energetic fight is carried on by the socialist workers. In 
Belgium, the Flemings have ousted the Walloons from the 
leadership of the movement, deposed Proudhonism and greatly 
raised the level of the movement. In Spain, as in Italy, the 
anarchist high tide of the seventies has receded and washed away 
with it the remnants of Proudhonism. While in Italy the new party 
is still in process of clarification and formation, in Spain the small 
nucleus, which as the Nueva Federaciôn Madrilena 287 remained 
loyal to the General Council of the International, has developed 
into a strong party, which—as can be seen from the republican 
press itself—is destroying the influence of the bourgeois republi­
cans on the workers far more effectively than its noisy anarchist 
predecessors were ever able to do. Among Latin workers the 
forgotten works of Proudhon have been replaced by Capital, the 
Communist Manifesto and a number of other works of the Marxian 
school, and Marx's main demand—the seizure of all the means of 
production in the name of society by a proletariat risen to absolute 
political power—is now the demand of the whole revolutionary 
working class in the Latin countries as well. 
a See present edition, Vol. 23, p. 334.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 369.— Ed. 

=====第455页=====
Preface to 2nd Ed. of The Housing Question 427 
If therefore Proudhonism has been finally supplanted among 
the workers of the Latin countries as well, if it—in accordance 
with its real destination—only serves French, Spanish, Italian and 
Belgian bourgeois radicals as an expression of their bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois cravings, why then return to it today? Why combat 
anew a dead opponent by reprinting these articles? 
First of all, because these articles do not confine themselves to a 
mere polemic against Proudhon and his German deputies. As a 
consequence of the division of labour that existed between Marx 
and myself,  it fell to me to present our views in the periodical 
press,  and, therefore, particularly in the fight against opposing 
views,  in order that Marx should have time for the elaboration of 
his great main work. This made it necessary for me to present our 
views for the most part in a polemical form, in opposition to other 
views.  Here too. Parts One and Three contain not only a critique 
of the Proudhonist conception of the question, but also a 
presentation of our own conception. 
Secondly, Proudhon played much too significant a role in the 
history of the European working-class movement for him to fall 
into oblivion without more ado. Refuted theoretically and dis­
carded practically, he remains of historical interest. Anyone who 
occupies himself in any detail with modern socialism must also 
acquaint himself with the "surmounted standpoints" of the 
movement. Marx's Poverty of Philosophy appeared several years 
before Proudhon put forward his practical proposals for social 
reform.288 Here Marx could only discover in embryo and criticise 
Proudhon's exchange bank. From this angle, therefore, his work is 
supplemented by the present one, imperfectly enough, sad to say. 
Marx would have done it all much better and far more 
convincingly. 
And finally, bourgeois and petty-bourgeois socialism is strongly 
represented in Germany down to this very hour. On the one 
hand, by armchair socialists289 and philanthropists of all sorts, 
among whom the wish to turn the workers into owners of their 
dwellings still plays a great role and with regard to whom, 
therefore, my work is still appropriate. On the other hand, a 
certain petty-bourgeois socialism finds representation in the 
Social-Democratic Party  itself,  and even in the ranks of the 
Reichstag group. This is done in the following way: while the 
fundamental views of modern socialism and the demand for the 
transformation of all the means of production into social property 
are recognised as justified, their accomplishment is declared 
possible only in the distant, and for all practical purposes, 

=====第456页=====
428 Frederick Engels 
unforeseeable future. Thus, for the present one has to rely on 
mere social patchwork, and sympathy can be shown, according to 
circumstances, even with the most reactionary efforts for what is 
known as the "uplifting of the labouring class". The existence of 
such a tendency is quite inevitable in Germany, the land of 
philistinism par excellence, particularly at a time when industrial 
development is uprooting this deeply rooted philistinism forcibly 
and on a mass scale. The tendency is quite harmless to the 
movement, in view of the wonderful common sense of our 
workers, which has stood the test so magnificently precisely during 
the past eight years of struggle against the Anti-Socialist Law,29 
the police and the judges. But it is necessary clearly to realise that 
such a tendency exists. And if this tendency subsequently takes on 
a firmer shape and more defined contours, as is necessary and 
even desirable, it will have to go back to its predecessors for the 
formulation of its programme, and in doing so it will hardly be 
able to overlook Proudhon. 
The essence of both the big-bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
solutions of the "housing question" is that the worker should own 
his dwelling. However, this is a point which has been shown in a 
very peculiar light by the industrial development of Germany 
during the past twenty years. In no other country do there exist so 
many wage labourers who own not only their dwellings but also a 
garden or field as well. Besides these there are numerous others 
who hold house and garden or field as tenants, having in fact 
fairly secure possession. Rural domestic industry combined with 
gardening or small-scale agriculture forms the broad basis of 
Germany's new large-scale industry. In the West the workers are for 
the most part owners, in the East chiefly tenants, of their 
homesteads. We find this combination of domestic industry with 
gardening and agriculture, and therefore with a secure dwelling, not 
only wherever hand weaving still fights against the mechanical loom: 
in the Lower Rhineland and in Westphalia, in the Saxon Erzgebirge 
and in Silesia, but also wherever domestic industry of any sort has 
established itself as a rural occupation, as, for instance, in the 
Thuringian Forest and in the Rhön area. At the time of the 
discussion of the tobacco monopoly, it was revealed to what great 
extent cigar making too was being carried on as a rural domestic 
industry. Wherever distress spreads among the small peasants, as for 
instance a few years ago in the Eifel area, 291 the bourgeois press 
immediately raises a call for the introduction of a suitable domestic 
industry as the only remedy. And in fact both the growing plight of 
the German allotment peasants and the general situation of German 

=====第457页=====
Preface to 2nd Ed. of The Housing Question 429 
industry urge a continual extension of rural domestic industry. This 
is a phenomenon peculiar to Germany. Only very exceptionally do 
we find anything similar in France; for instance, in the regions of silk 
cultivation. In England, where there are no small peasants, rural 
domestic industry rests on the work of the wives and children of the 
agricultural day-labourers. Only in Ireland can we observe the rural 
domestic industry of garment making being carried on, as in 
Germany, by real peasant families. We are not, of course, concerned 
here with Russia and other countries not represented on the 
industrial world market. 
Thus,  as regards industry there exists today a state of affairs in 
large parts of Germany which appears at first glance to resemble 
that which prevailed generally before the introduction of machin­
ery. However, this is so only at first glance. The rural domestic 
industry of earlier times, combined with gardening and agricul­
ture,  was, at least in the countries in which industry was 
developing, the basis of a tolerable and, here and there, even 
comfortable material situation for the working class, but at the 
same time the basis of its intellectual and political insignificance. 
The hand-made product and its cost determined the market price, 
and owing to the infinitesimal labour productivity compared with 
the present day, the sales markets as a rule grew faster than the 
supply. This held good at about the middle of the last century for 
England, and partly for France, particularly in the textile industry. 
In Germany which was at that time only just recovering from the 
devastation of the Thirty Years' War292 and working its way up 
under most unfavourable circumstances, the situation was, how­
ever, quite different. The only domestic industry producing for 
the world market there, linen weaving, was so oppressed by taxes 
and feudal dues that it did not raise the peasant weavers above the 
very low level of the rest of the peasantry. Nevertheless, at that 
time the rural industrial worker enjoyed a certain guaranteed 
existence. 
With the introduction of machinery all this changed. Prices were 
now determined by the machine-made product, and the wage of 
the domestic industrial worker fell with this price. However, the 
worker had to accept it or look for other work, and he could not 
do that without becoming a proletarian, that is, without giving up 
his little house, garden and field, whether owned or rented. Only 
in the rarest cases was he ready to do this. And thus the gardening 
and agriculture of the old rural hand weavers became the cause by 
virtue of which the struggle of the hand loom against the 
mechanical loom was everywhere so protracted and has not yet 

=====第458页=====
430 Frederick Engels 
been fought to conclusion in Germany. In this struggle it was 
demonstrated for the first time, especially in England, that the 
same circumstance which had previously served as a basis of 
comparative prosperity for the worker—the fact that he owned his 
means of production—had now become a hindrance and a 
misfortune for him. In industry the mechanical loom defeated his 
hand loom, and in agriculture large-scale cultivation got the better 
of his small-scale cultivation. However, while the collective labour 
of many and the application of machinery and science became the 
social rule in both fields of production, he was chained to the 
antiquated method of individual production and hand labour by 
his little house, garden, field and hand loom. The possession 
of house and garden was now worth much less than com­
plete freedom of movement. No factory worker would have 
changed places with the slowly but surely starving rural hand 
weaver. 
Germany appeared late on the world market. Our large-scale 
industry dates from the forties; it owed its first upswing to the 
revolution of 1848, and was able to develop fully only after the 
revolutions of 1866 and 1870293 had cleared at least the worst 
political obstacles out of its way. But it found the world market 
occupied to a large extent. The articles of mass consumption were 
supplied by England and the elegant luxury articles by France. 
Germany could not beat the former in price or the latter in 
quality. For the moment, therefore, nothing else remained but, 
following the beaten path of German production up to that time, 
to wedge its way into the world market with articles which were 
too petty for the English and too shoddy for the French. However, 
the favourite German custom of cheating, by first sending good 
samples and afterwards inferior articles, soon met with sufficiently 
severe punishment on the world market and was pretty well 
abandoned. On the other hand, the competition of overproduc­
tion gradually forced even the respectable English onto the 
downward path of quality deterioration and so gave an advantage 
to the Germans, who are matchless in this sphere. And thus we 
finally came to possess a large-scale industry and to play a role on 
the world market. But our large-scale industry works almost 
exclusively for the home market (with the exception of the iron 
industry, which produces far beyond the limits of home demand), 
and our mass export consists of a tremendous number of small 
articles, for which large-scale industry provides at most the 
necessary semi-manufactures, while the small articles themselves 
are supplied chiefly by rural domestic industry. 

=====第459页=====
Preface to 2nd Ed. of The Housing Question 431 
And here is seen in all its glory the "blessing" of house and 
landownership for the modern worker. Nowhere, hardly excepting 
even the Irish domestic industries, are such infamously low wages 
paid as in the German domestic industries. Competition permits 
the capitalist to deduct from the price of labour power that which 
the family earns from its own little garden or field. The workers 
are compelled to accept any piece rates offered them, because 
otherwise they would get nothing at all and they could not live 
from the products of their agriculture alone, and because, on the 
other hand, it is precisely this agriculture and landownership 
which chains them to the spot and prevents them from looking 
around for other employment. This is the reason which maintains 
Germany's capacity to compete on the world market in a whole 
number of small articles. The whole profit is derived from a deduction 
from normal wages and the whole surplus value can be presented to the 
purchaser. That is the secret of the extraordinary cheapness of 
most German export articles. 
It is this circumstance more than any other which keeps the 
wages and the living conditions of the German workers also in 
other industrial fields below the level of the West European 
countries. The dead weight of such prices for labour, kept 
traditionally far below the value of labour power, depresses also 
the wages of the urban workers, and even of the workers in the 
cities,  below the value of labour power; and this all the more so as 
poorly paid domestic industry has taken the place of the old 
handicrafts in the towns as well, and here too depresses the 
general level of wages. 
Here we see clearly that what at an earlier historical stage was 
the basis of relative well-being for the workers, namely, the 
combination of agriculture and industry, the ownership of house, 
garden and field, and guarantee of a dwelling place, is becoming 
today, under the rule of large-scale industry, not only the most 
terrible shackle to the worker, but the greatest misfortune for the 
whole working class, the basis for an unprecedented depression of 
wages below their normal level, and that not only for separate 
branches of enterprise and districts, but for the whole country. No 
wonder the big and petty bourgeoisie, who live and grow rich on 
these abnormal deductions from wages, are enthusiastic over rural 
industry and home-owning workers, and they regard the introduc­
tion of new domestic industries as the sole remedy for all rural 
distress! 
That is one side of the matter, but it also has its reverse side. 
Domestic industry has become the broad basis of the German 

=====第460页=====
432 Frederick Engels 
export trade and therefore of the whole of large-scale industry. 
Due to this it is spread over wide areas of Germany and is 
extending still further by the day. The ruin of the small peasant, 
inevitable ever since his industrial domestic labour for his own use 
was destroyed by cheap ready-made clothing and machined 
products, as was his animal husbandry, and hence his manure 
production, by the dissolution of the mark system, the common 
mark and compulsory crop rotation—this ruin forcibly drives the 
small peasant, having fallen victim to the usurer, into the arms of 
modern domestic industry. Like the ground rent of the landowner 
in Ireland, the interest of the mortgage usurer in Germany cannot 
be paid from the yield of the soil but only from the wages of the 
industrial peasant. However, with the expansion of domestic 
industry one peasant area after another is being dragged into the 
present-day industrial movement. It is this revolutionising of the 
rural districts by domestic industry which is spreading the 
industrial revolution in Germany over a far wider territory than 
was the case in England and France. It is the comparatively low 
level of our industry which makes its extension in area all the 
more necessary. This explains why in Germany, in contrast to 
England and France, the revolutionary working-class movement 
has spread so tremendously over the greater part of the country 
instead of being confined exclusively to urban centres. And this in 
turn explains the tranquil, certain and irresistible progress of the 
movement. In Germany it is perfectly clear that a victorious rising 
in the capital and in the other big cities will be possible only when 
the majority of the smaller towns and a great part of the rural 
districts as well have become ripe for revolutionary change. Given 
anything like normal development, we shall never be in a position 
to win working-class victories like those of the Parisians in 1848 
and 1871, but for just that reason we shall also not suffer defeats 
of the revolutionary capital by the reactionary province, such as 
Paris suffered in both cases. In France the movement always 
originated in the capital; in Germany it originated in the areas of 
large-scale industry, of manufacture and of domestic industry; the 
capital was conquered only later. Therefore, perhaps in future 
too, the initiative will continue to rest with the French, but the 
decisive struggle can be fought out only in Germany. 
Now, this rural domestic industry and manufacture, which due 
to its expanse has become the decisive branch of German 
production and is thus revolutionising the German peasantry more 
and more, is  itself,  however, only the preliminary stage of a 
further revolutionary change. As Marx has already proved 

=====第461页=====
Preface to 2nd Ed. of The Housing Question 433 
(Capital, Vol. I, 3rd edition, pp. 484-95a), at a certain stage of 
development the hour of downfall owing to machinery and factory 
production will sound for it also. And this hour would appear to 
be at hand. But the destruction of rural domestic industry and 
manufacture by machinery and factory production means in 
Germany the destruction of the livelihood of millions of rural 
producers, the expropriation of almost half the German small 
peasantry; the transformation, not only of domestic industry into 
factory production, but also of peasant farming into large-scale 
capitalist agriculture, and of small landed property into big 
estates—an industrial and agricultural revolution in favour of 
capital and big landownership at the cost of the peasants. Should it 
be Germany's fate to undergo also this transformation while still 
under the old social conditions, it will unquestionably be the 
turning point. If the working class of no other country has taken 
the initiative by that time, Germany will certainly strike first, and 
the peasant sons of the "glorious army" will bravely lend 
assistance. 
And with this the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois Utopia, which 
would give each worker the ownership of his little house and thus 
chain him in semi-feudal fashion to his particular capitalist, takes 
on a very different complexion. As its materialisation there 
appears the transformation of all the small rural house-owners 
into industrial domestic workers; the destruction of the old 
isolation and, with it, of the political insignificance of the small 
peasants, who are dragged into the "social turmoil"; the expansion 
of the industrial revolution over the rural areas and thus the 
transformation of the most stable and conservative class of the 
population into a nursery for revolutionaries; and, as the 
culmination of it all, the expropriation of the peasants engaged in 
home industry by machinery, which drives them forcibly into 
insurrection. 
We can readily allow the bourgeois-socialist philanthropists the 
private enjoyment of their ideal so long as they continue in their 
public function as capitalists to implement it in this inverted 
fashion, for the greater good of the social revolution. 
London, January 10, 1887 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the book 
Nos.  3 and 4, January 15 and 22, 1887 
and in the book: F. Engels, Zur Wohnungs­
frage, Hottingen-Zurich, 1887 
a See present edition, Vol. 35, Ch. XIII, 8 (e).— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
434 
THE LABOR MOVEMENT IN AMERICA 
PREFACE TO THE AMERICAN EDITION 
OF THE CONDITION OF THE WORKING CLASS IN ENGLAND^4 
Ten months have elapsed since, at the translator's3 wish, I wrote 
the Appendixb to this book; and during these ten months, a 
revolution has been accomplished in American society such as, in 
any other country, would have taken at least ten years. In 
February 1886,c American public opinion was almost unanimous 
on this one point; that there was no working class, in the 
European sense of the word, in America;* that consequently no 
class struggle between workmen and capitalists, such as tore 
European society to pieces, was possible in the American Republic; 
and that, therefore, Socialism was a thing of foreign importation 
which could never take root on American soil. And yet, at that 
moment, the coming class struggle was casting its gigantic shadow 
before it in the strikes of the Pennsylvania coal miners,296 and of 
many other trades, and especially in the preparations, all over the 
country, for the great Eight Hours' movement which was to come 
* An English translation of the book I had written in 1844 was justified 
precisely by the fact that industrial conditions in present-day America coincide 
almost entirely with those in the England of the forties, that is those described by 
myself.  How much this is the case is evinced by the articles on "The Labor 
Movement in America" by Edward and Eleanor Marx-Aveling in the London 
monthly Time of March, April, May and June. I take all the greater pleasure in 
referring to these excellent articles in that it gives me an opportunity to 
simultaneously rebuff the miserable slander about Aveling which the Executive of 
the Socialist Labor Party of America has so foolishly transmitted around the 
world.295  [Note by Engels for the 1887 offprint] 
3 Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 399-405.— Ed. 
c In the original mistakenly "1885".— Ed. 

=====第463页=====
The Labor Movement in America 435 
off, and did come off, in the May following.297 That I then duly 
appreciated these symptoms, that I anticipated a working class 
movement on a national scale, my "Appendix" shows; but no one 
could then foresee that in such a short time the movement would 
burst out with such irresistible force, would spread with the 
rapidity of a prairie-fire, would shakea American society to its very 
foundations. 
The fact is there, stubborn and indisputable. To what an extent 
it had struck with terror the American ruling classes, was revealed 
to me, in an amusing way, by American journalists who did me 
the honor of calling on me last summer; the "new departure" had 
put them into a state of helpless fright and perplexity.298 But at 
that time the movement was only just on the start; there was but a 
series of confused and apparently disconnected upheavals of that 
class which, by the suppression of negro slavery and the rapid 
development of manufactures, had become the lowest stratum of 
American society. Before the year closed, these bewildering social 
convulsions began to take a definite direction. The spontaneous, 
instinctive movements of these vast masses of working people, over 
a vast extent of country, the simultaneous outburst of their 
common discontent with a miserable social condition, the same 
everywhere and due to the same causes, made them conscious of 
the fact, that they formed a new and distinct class of American 
society; a class of—practically speaking—more or less hereditary 
wage-workers, proletarians. And with true American instinct this 
consciousness led them at once to take the next step towards their 
deliverance: the formation of a political workingmen's party, with 
a platform of its own, and with the conquest of the Capitol and 
the White House for its goal. In May the struggle for the Eight 
Hours' working-day, the troubles in Chicago, Milwaukee, etc., the 
attempts of the ruling class to crush the nascent uprising of Labor 
by brute force and brutal class-justice; in November the new 
Labor Party organized in all great centres, and the New York, 
Chicago and Milwaukee elections.299 May and November have 
hitherto reminded the American bourgeoisie only of the payment 
of coupons of U.S. bonds; henceforth May and November will 
remind them, too, of the dates on which the American working 
class presented their coupons for payment. 
In European countries, it took the working class years and years 
before they fully realized the fact that they formed a distinct and, 
a The German has: "...would even now shake American society to its 
foundations".— Ed. 
30-1243 

=====第464页=====
436 Frederick Engels 
under the existing social conditions, a permanent class of modern 
society; and it took years again until this class-consciousness led 
them to form themselves into a distinct political party, indepen­
dent of, and opposed to,a all the old political parties formed by 
the various sections of the ruling classes. On the more favored soil 
of America, where no mediaeval ruins bar the way, where history 
begins with the elements of modern bourgeois society as evolved 
in the seventeenth century, the working class passed through these 
two stages of its development within ten months. 
Still, all this is but a beginning. That the laboring masses should 
feel their community of grievances and of interests, their solidarity 
as a class in opposition to all other classes; that in order to give 
expression and effect to this feeling, they should set in motion the 
political machinery provided for that purpose in every free 
country—that is the first step only. The next step is to find the 
common remedy for these common grievances, and to embody it 
in the platform of the new Labor Party. And this—the most 
important and the most difficult step in the movement—has yet to 
be taken in America. 
A new party must have a distinct positive platform; a platform 
which may vary in details as circumstances vary and as the party 
itself develops, but still one upon which the party, for the time 
being, is agreed. So long as such a platform has not been worked 
out, or exists but in a rudimentary form, so long the new party, 
too, will have but a rudimentary existence; it may exist locally but 
not yet nationally; it will be a party potentially but not actually. 
That platform, whatever may be its first initial shape, must 
develop in a direction which may be determined beforehand. The 
causes that brought into existence the abyss between the working 
class and the Capitalist class are the same in America as in Europe; 
the means of filling up that abyss, are equally the same 
everywhere. Consequently, the platform of the American pro­
letariat will in the long runb coincide as to the ultimate end to be 
attained, with the one which, after sixty years of dissensions and 
discussions, has become the adopted platform of the great mass of 
the European militant proletariat. It will proclaim, as the ultimate 
end, the conquest of political supremacy by the working class, in 
order to effect the direct appropriation of all means of produc­
tion—land, railways, mines, machinery, etc.—by society at large, 
to be worked in common by all for the account and benefit of all. 
a Instead of "opposed to", we find in the German edition "hostile to".— Ed. 
b Instead of "in the long run", the German edition has "as the movement 
continues to develop".— Ed. 

=====第465页=====
The Labor Movement in America 437 
But if the new American party, like all political parties 
everywhere, by the very fact of its formation aspires to the 
conquest of political power, it is as yet far from agreed upon what 
to do with that power when once attained.3 In New York and the 
other great cities of the East, the organization of the working class 
has proceeded upon the lines of Trades' Societies, forming in each 
city a powerful Central Labor Union. In New York the Central 
Labor Union, last November, chose for its standard bearer Henry 
George, and consequently its temporary electoral platform has 
been largely imbued with his principles. In the great cities of the 
North West the electoral battle was fought upon a rather 
indefinite labor platform, and the influence of Henry George's 
theories was scarcely, if at all, visible. And while in these great 
centres of population and of industry the new class movement 
came to a political head, we find all over the country two wide 
spread labor organizations: the "Knights of Labor"300 and the 
"Socialist Labor Party," of which only the latter has a platform in 
harmony with the modern European standpoint as summarized 
above. 
Of the three more or less definite forms under which the 
American labor movement thus presents  itself,  the first, the Henry 
George movement in New York, is for the moment of a chiefly 
local significance. No doubt New York is by far the most 
important city of the States; but New York is not Paris and the 
United States are not France. And it seems to me that the Henry 
George platform, in its present shape, is too narrow to form the 
basis for anything but a local movement, or at best for a 
short-lived phase of the general movement. To Henry George, the 
expropriation of the mass of the people from the land is the great 
and universal cause of the splitting up of the people into Rich and 
Poor. Now this is not quite correct historically. In Asiatic and 
classical antiquity, the predominant form of class-oppression was 
slavery, that is to say, not so much the expropriation of the masses 
from the land as the appropriation of their persons. When, in the 
decline of the Roman Republic, the free Italian peasants were 
expropriated from their farms, they formed a class of "poor 
whites" similar to that of the Southern Slave States before 1861; 
and between slaves and poor whites,b two classes equally unfit for 
self-emancipation, the old world went to pieces. In the middle 
a In the German edition the words "when once attained" are omitted.— Ed. 
b Instead of "poor whites", the German edition has "free men gone to the 
dogs".—  Ed. 
30* 

=====第466页=====
438 Frederick Engels 
ages,  it was not the expropriation of the people from, but on the 
contrary, their appropriation to the land which became the source 
of feudal oppression. The peasant retained his land, but was 
attached to it as a serf or villein, and made liable to tribute to the 
lord in labor and in produce. It was only at the dawn of modern 
times,  towards the end of the fifteenth century, that the 
expropriation of the peasantry on a large scale laid the foundation 
for the modern class of wage-workersa who possess nothing but 
their labor-power and can live only by the selling of that labour 
power to others. But if the expropriation from the land brought 
this class into existence, it was the development of capitalist 
production, of modern industry and agriculture on a large scale 
which perpetuated it, increased it, and shaped it into a distinct 
class with distinct interests and a distinct historical mission. All this 
has been fully expounded by Marx ("Capital," Part VIII: "The 
so-called primitive Accumulation.") According to Marx, the cause 
of the present antagonism of the classes and of the social 
degradation0 of the working class is their expropriation from all 
means of production, in which the land is of course included. 
If Henry George declares land-monopolization to be the sole 
cause of poverty and misery, he naturally finds the remedy in the 
resumption of the land by society at large. Now, the Socialists of 
the school of Marx, too, demand the resumption, by society, of the 
land, and not only of the land but of all other means of 
production likewise. But even if we leave these out of the question, 
there is another difference. What is to be done with the land? 
Modern Socialists, as represented by Marx, demand that it should 
be held and worked in common and for common account, and the 
same with all other means of social production, mines, railways, 
factories, etc.; Henry George would confine himself to letting it 
out to individuals as at present, merely regulating its distribution 
and applying the rents for public, instead of, as at present, for 
private purposes. What the Socialists demand, implies a total 
revolution of the whole system of social production; what Henry 
George demands, leaves the present mode of social production 
untouched, and has, in fact,c been anticipated by the extreme 
a Instead of "the expropriation of the peasantry on a large scale laid the 
foundation for the modern class of wage-workers", the German edition has: "the 
expropriation of the peasants was carried out on a grand scale, and this time under 
historical conditions which gradually turned the peasants who had become 
propertyless into the modern class of wage-workers, into people...".— Ed. 
b The German has "current humiliation" instead of "social degradation".— Ed. 
c In the German edition, the words "in fact" are followed by "years ago".— Ed. 

=====第467页=====
The Labor Movement in America 439 
section of Ricardian bourgeois economists who, too, demanded the 
confiscation of the rent of land by the State. 
It would of course be unfair to suppose that Henry George has 
said his last word once for all. But I am bound to take his theory 
as I find it. 
The second great section of the American movement is formed 
by the Knights of Labor. And that seems to be the section most 
typical of the present state of the movement, as it is undoubtedly 
by far the strongest. An immense association spread over an 
immense extent of country in innumerable "assemblies," repres­
enting all shades of individual and local opinion within the 
working class; the whole of them sheltered under a platform of 
corresponding indistinctness and held together much less by their 
impracticable constitution than by the instinctive feeling that the 
very fact of their clubbing together for their common aspiration 
makes them a great power in the country; a truly American 
paradox clothing the most modern tendencies in the most 
mediaeval mummeries, and hiding the most democratic and even 
rebellious spirit behind an apparent, but really powerless despot­
ism—such is the picture the Knights of Labor offer to a European 
observer. But if we are not arrested by mere outside whim­
sicalities, we cannot help seeing in this vast agglomeration an 
immense amount of potential energy evolving slowly but surely 
into actual force. The Knights of Labor are the first national 
organization created by the American Working Class as a whole; 
whatever be their origin and history, whatever their shortcomings 
and little absurdities, whatever their platform and their constitu­
tion, here they are, the work of practically the whole class of 
American wage-workers, the only national bond that holds them 
together, that makes their strength felt to themselves not less than 
to their enemies, and that fills them with the proud hope of future 
victories. For it would not be exact to say that the Knights of 
Labor are liable to development. They are constantly in full 
process of development and revolution; a heaving, fermenting 
mass of plastic material seeking the shape and form appropriate to 
its inherent nature. That form will be attained as surely as 
historical evolution has, like natural evolution, its own immanent 
laws.  Whether the Knights of Labor will then retain their present 
name or not, makes no difference, but to an outsider it appears 
evident that here is the raw material out of which the future of 
the American working class movement, and along with it, the 
future of American society at large, has to be shaped. 
The third section consists of the Socialist Labor Party. This 

=====第468页=====
440 Frederick Engels 
section is a party but in name, for nowhere in America has it, up 
to now, been able actually to take its stand as a political party. It is, 
moreover, to a certain extent foreign to America, having until 
lately been made up almost exclusively by German immigrants, 
using their own language and for the most part little conversant 
with the common language of the country. But if it came from a 
foreign stock, it came, at the same time, armed with the 
experience earned during long years of class-struggle in Europe, 
and with an insight into the general conditions of working class 
emancipation,3 far superior to that hitherto gained by American 
workingmen. This is a fortunate circumstance for the American 
proletarians who thus are enabled to appropriate, and to take 
advantage of, the intellectual and moral fruits of the forty years' 
struggle of their European classmates, and thus to hasten on the 
time of their own victory. For, as I said before, there cannot be 
any doubt that the ultimate platform of the American working 
class must and will be essentially the same as that now adopted by 
the whole militant working class of Europe, the same as that of the 
German-American Socialist Labor Party. In so far this party is 
called upon to play a very important part in the movement. But in 
order to do so they will have to doff every remnant of their 
foreign garb. They will have to become out and out American. 
They cannot expect the Americans to come to them; they, the 
minority and the immigrants, must go to the Americans, who are 
the vast majority and the natives. And to do that, they must above 
all things learn English. 
The process of fusing together these various elements of the 
vast moving mass—elements not really discordant, but indeed 
mutually isolated by their various starting-points—will take some 
time and will not come off without a deal of friction, such as is 
visible at different points even now. The Knights of Labor, for 
instance, are here and there, in the Eastern cities, locally at war 
with the organized Trades Unions. But then this same friction 
exists within the Knights of Labor themselves, where there is 
anything but peace and harmony. These are not symptoms of 
decay, for capitalists to crow over. They are merely signs that the 
innumerable hosts of workers, for the first timeb set in motion in a 
common direction, have as yet found out neither the adequate 
expression for their common interests, nor the form of organiza-
a In the German edition the end of the sentence reads: "as found only 
exceptionally hitherto in American workers".— Ed. 
b Instead of "for the first time", the German edition has "now at last".— Ed. 

=====第469页=====
The Labor Movement in America 441 
tion best adapted to the struggle, nor the discipline required to 
insure victory.3 They are as yet the first levies en masse of the great 
revolutionary war, raised and equipped locally and independently, 
all converging to form one common army, but as yet without 
regular organization and common plan of campaign. The converg­
ing columns cross each other here and there; confusion, angry 
disputes, even threats of conflict arise. But the community of 
ultimate purpose in the end overcomes all minor troubles; ere 
long the straggling and squabbling battalions will be formed in a 
long line of battle array, presenting to the enemy a well-ordered 
front, ominously silent under their glittering arms, supported by 
bold skirmishers in front and by unshakeable reserves in the rear. 
To bring about this result, the unification of the various 
independent bodies into one national Labor Army, with no matter 
how inadequate a provisional15 platform, provided it be a truly 
working class platform—that is the next great step to be 
accomplished in America. To effect this, and to make that 
platform worthy of the cause, the Socialist Labor Party can 
contribute a great deal, if they will only act in the same way as the 
European Socialists have acted at the time when they were but a 
small minority of the working class. That line of action was first 
laid down in the "Communist Manifesto" of 1847 in the following 
words: 
"The Communists"—that was the name we took at the time and 
which even now we are far from repudiating—"the Communists 
do not form a separate party opposed to other working class 
parties. 
"They have no interests separate and apart from the interests of 
the whole working class. 
"They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by 
which to shape and model the proletarian movement. 
"The Communists are distinguished from the other working 
class parties by this only: 1. In the national struggles of the 
proletarians of the different countries they point out, and bring to 
the front, the common interests of the whole proletariat, interests 
independent of all nationality; 2. In the various stages of 
development which the struggle of the working class against the 
capitalist class has to pass through, they always and everywhere 
represent the interests of the movement as a whole. 
a In the German edition the end of the sentence from the words "nor the 
discipline..." is omitted.— Ed. 
b The German has "general" instead of "provisional".— Ed. 

=====第470页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
"The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, 
the most advanced and resolute section of the working class 
parties of all countries, that section which ever pushes forward all 
others; on the other hand, theoretically, they have, over the great 
mass of the proletarians, the advantage of clearly understanding 
the line of march, the conditions, and the ultimate general results 
of the proletarian movement. 
"Thus they fight for the attainment of the immediate ends, for 
the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; 
but in the movement of the present, they represent and take care 
of the future of the movement."3 
That is the line of action which the great founder of Modern 
Socialism, Karl Marx, and with him, I and the Socialists of all 
nations who worked along with us, have followed for more than 
forty years, with the result that it has led to victory everywhere, 
and that at this moment the mass of European Socialists, in 
Germany and in France, in Belgium, Holland and Switzerland, in 
Denmark and Sweden as well as in Spain and Portugal, are 
fighting as one common0 army under one and the same flag. 
London, January 26, 1887 
Frederick Engels 
First published in F. Engels, The Condi- Reproduced from the book coi­
tion of the Working Class in England in lated with the German translation 
1844, New York, 1887 and, in the 
author's translation into German, in Der 
Sozialdemokrat, Nos. 24 and 25, June 10 
and 17, 1887 
a Cf. present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 497, 518.— Ed. 
b The German edition follows "common" with "great".— Ed. 

=====第471页=====
443 
[LETTER TO THE ORGANISING COMMITTEE 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL FESTIVAL IN PARIS] 
Citizens, 
We find ourselves face to face with a terrible danger. We are 
threatened by a war in which those who loathe it and have only 
common interests—the French proletariat and the German 
proletariat—will be forced to butcher each other. 
What is the real cause of this state of things? 
It is militarism, it is the introduction of the Prussian military 
system in all the major countries of the Continent. 
This system claims to arm the whole nation for the defence of 
its territory and its rights. That is a lie. 
The Prussian system ousted the system of limited conscription 
and substitution bought by the wealthy, because it placed at the 
disposal of rulers all the resources of their countries, both 
manpower and materials. But it has not been able to create a 
popular army. 
The Prussian system divides the citizens who are called up into 
two categories. The first are drafted into the army of the line, 
while the second are straightway assigned to the reserve or to the 
territorial army. The men in this second category receive no 
military instruction at all, or almost none; but the first serve with 
the colours for two or three years, sufficient time to turn them 
into an obedient army, accustomed to discipline, in other words an 
army ever ready to embark on foreign conquests and to suppress 
by violence any popular movements at home. For let us not forget 
that all the governments which have adopted this system are much 
more frightened of the working people within their frontiers than 
of rival governments beyond them. 

=====第472页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
Thanks to its flexibility this system is capable of enormous 
expansion. For as long as there remains a single young man who 
has not been drafted into the army, the available resources have 
not been exhausted. Hence the frantic competition between the 
states as to which of them possesses the largest and strongest 
army. Every addition to the military force of one state prompts the 
other states to do the same, if not more. And all this costs an 
enormous amount of money. The peoples are crushed by the 
burden of military expenditure. Peace becomes almost more 
expensive than war, so that eventually war no longer seems like a 
terrible scourge, but like a salutary crisis which will put an end to 
an impossible situation. 
This is what has allowed intriguers of all countries keen to fish 
in troubled waters to press for war. 
And the remedy? 
Abolish the Prussian system, replace it with a truly popular 
army, an ordinary school into which any citizen capable of bearing 
arms will be drafted for the time strictly necessary in order to 
learn the soldier's job; group the men graduating from this school 
into a reserve list, firmly organised by districts, so that every town, 
every canton has its own battalion, made up of men who know one 
another, united, armed, equipped, ready to march at twenty-four 
hours'  notice if necessary. This means that every man will keep his 
rifle and equipment at home, as they do in Switzerland. 
The first nation to adopt this system will double its real military 
strength while halving its war budget. It will prove its love of 
peace by the very fact of arming all its citizens. For this army, 
which is the nation  itself,  is as ill suited to conquest abroad as it is 
invincible in the defence of its own territory. And what government 
would dare lay a finger on civil liberties, if every citizen has at home his 
rifle and fifty rounds of ammunition? 
London, February 13, 1887 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Le Socialiste, No. 79, Printed according to the news-
February 26, 1887 paper collated with the manuscript 
Translated from the French 

=====第473页=====
445 
TO THE FEDERATION OF THE CENTRE 
OF THE FRENCH WORKERS' PARTY302 
IN PARIS 
London, 18 March, 1887 
Citizens, 
I am with you in my heart to celebrate the 18 March. 
F. Engels 
First published in Le Socialiste, No. 83, Printed according to the news-
March 26, 1887 paper 
Translated from the French 

=====第474页=====
446 
INTRODUCTION 
[TO SIGISMUND BORKHEIM'S PAMPHLET, 
IN MEMORY OF THE GERMAN BLOOD-AND-THUNDER 
PA TRIO TS. 1806-180  7] 303 
Sigismund Borkheim, the author of the following pamphlet, was 
born in Glogau on March 29, 1825. After completing his 
grammar-school education in Berlin in 1844, he studied in turn in 
Breslau, Greifswald and Berlin. Since he was too poor to bear the 
costs of the one-year military service, he satisfied his obligations to 
the army by joining in 1847 the artillery in Glogau as a three-year 
volunteer. After the 1848 revolution he took part in democratic 
meetings and this led to his being investigated by a court martial, 
from which he escaped by fleeing to Berlin. Here, safe from 
pursuit for the moment, he remained active in the movement and 
played an outstanding role in the storm on the Arsenal. 304 A 
further flight to Switzerland became necessary to evade the new 
threat of arrest arising from this. In September 1848, when Struve 
organised the march of his volunteer corps to the Black Forest in 
Baden,305 Borkheim joined his force, was captured and remained 
in gaol until the Baden Revolution of May 1849306 liberated the 
prisoners. 
Borkheim went to Karlsruhe to offer his services as a soldier to 
the revolution. When Johann Philipp Becker was appointed 
colonel in command of the entire people's militia, he gave 
Borkheim the task of forming a battery for which the government 
initially supplied only the unharnessed guns. The horse teams had 
still not arrived when the movement of June 6 broke out. 307 This 
was an attempt by the more resolute elements to induce the inert 
provisional government, which consisted in part of outright 
traitors, to bestir itself to greater efforts. Along with Becker, 
Borkheim had taken part in the demonstration whose only 
immediate effect, however, was that Becker, together with all his 

=====第475页=====
Introduction to S. Borkheim's In Memory... 447 
volunteers and militiamen, was sent away from Karlsruhe to join 
the front on the Neckar. Borkheim could not follow him with his 
battery until he had been provided with horses for his cannons. By 
the time he was finally issued with these— Herr Brentano, the 
head of the government, found it was very much in his interest to 
get rid of the revolutionary battery—the Prussians had already 
conquered the Palatinate and the first act of Borkheim's battery 
was to take position on the Knieling Bridge and cover the 
withdrawal of the Palatinate army to Baden territory. 
Together with the troops from the Palatinate and those from 
Baden still stationed around Karlsruhe, Borkheim's battery now 
advanced in a northerly direction. On June 21 it saw action at 
Blankenloch and played an honourable part in the encounter at 
Ubstadt (June 25). As part of the reorganisation of the army for 
its new positions on the River Murg, Borkheim and his artillery 
were assigned to the Oborski Division and distinguished himself in 
the fighting around Kuppenheim. 
After the withdrawal of the revolutionary army to Swiss 
territory, Borkheim went to Geneva. Here he found his old 
commander and friend, J. Ph. Becker, and some younger com­
rades-in-arms, and they all banded together to form as cheerful a 
society as possible amidst the privations of refugee life. I myself 
spent several enjoyable days with them when I passed through 
there in autumn 1849. This was the same society that under the 
name of the "Brimstone Gang" acquired a highly undeserved 
posthumous notoriety thanks to the colossal lies of Herr Karl 
Vogt. 308 
However, the fun was not to last long. In the summer of 1850 
the arm of the stern Federal Council reached also the harmless 
"Brimstone Gang", and the majority of its happy-go-lucky 
members were forced to leave Switzerland, since they were among 
the categories of refugees to be expelled. Borkheim went to Paris 
and subsequently to Strasbourg. But here too his stay was cut 
short. In February 1851 he was arrested and taken under police 
escort to Calais for deportation to England. For a whole three 
months he was dragged from place to place, for the most part in 
chains, through 25 different prisons. But wherever he came, the 
republicans had been notified in advance, and they went out to 
meet the prisoner, made sure he was well-provided for, did deals 
with and bribed the police and officials, and provided transport 
whenever possible. In this way he finally arrived in England. 
Of course, he found the condition of the refugees in London 
far more wretched than in Geneva or even in France, but even 

=====第476页=====
448 Frederick Engels 
here his resilience did not desert him. He looked around for work 
and found it at first in a Liverpool emigration firm which needed 
German clerks to act as interpreters for the numerous German 
emigrants bidding farewell to their old fatherland in which peace 
and quiet had at last been restored. At the same time, he looked 
around for other business contacts and was so successful that after 
the outbreak of the Crimean War, he managed to despatch a 
steamship laden with all sorts of goods to Balaclava and, once 
there, to sell the cargo at fantastic prices, partly to the army 
authorities and partly to the English officers. On his return he had 
made a net profit of £15,000 (300,000 marks). But this success 
only spurred him on to further speculation. He made an 
agreement with the English Government to arrange for a further 
shipment. However, since by this time peace negotiations were 
already underway, the government stipulated in the contract that 
it could refuse to take delivery of the goods if the peace 
preliminaries had been settled by the time they arrived. Borkheim 
agreed to this. When he arrived in the Bosporus with his 
steamship, peace was already a fact. Since the ship had only been 
hired for the outward voyage and since any amount of lucrative 
cargoes could be obtained for the return journey, the captain 
insisted on unloading without delay. The harbour was full to 
bursting point and as Borkheim was unable to find anywhere to 
store the cargo which was now left on his hands, the captain 
simply unloaded everything on the nearest beach. So Borkheim 
was stuck there in the middle of his useless crates and bales and 
barrels and had to helplessly watch his wares being plundered by 
the rabble that had come to the Bosporus from all corners of 
Turkey and the whole of Europe. When he returned to England 
he found himself a pauper again—the £15,000 were all gone. His 
irrepressible resilience, however, was still there. He had lost all his 
money through speculation, but had gained a knowledge of 
business and made contacts in the world of commerce. He now 
discovered that he had an extremely fine palate for wine and 
became a successful representative for various Bordeaux export­
ers. 
At the same time, however, he remained as active as he could in 
the political movement. He had known Liebknecht from Karlsruhe 
and Geneva. He came into contact with Marx through the Vogt 
scandal and in this way I renewed my acquaintance with him. 
Without committing himself to any specific programme, Borkheim 
always sided with the most extreme revolutionary party. His 
principal political activity was combating the great bulwark of 

=====第477页=====
Introduction to S. Borkheim's In Memory... 449 
European reaction, Russian absolutism. So as to be better able to 
follow the Russian intrigues designed to subjugate the Balkans and 
indirectly increase its influence in Western Europe, he learnt 
Russian and spent many years studying the Russian daily press 
and émigré writings. Among other things, he translated Serno-
Solovyevich's pamphlet Our Russian Affairs which denounced the 
hypocrisies fabricated by Herzen (and continued subsequently by 
Bakunin) as a result of which the Russian refugees in Western 
Europe propagated not the truth they knew about Russia, but a 
conventional legend which fitted in with their nationalist and 
Pan-Slavist twaddle. He also wrote many essays on Russia for the 
Berlin Zukunft, the Volksstaat and so on. 
In the summer of 1876, while on a visit to Germany, he 
suffered a stroke in Badenweiler which left him paralysed to his 
last day on the left side of his body. He was forced to give up his 
business. His wife died some years later. Since he had a weak 
chest, he had to move to Hastings so as to enjoy the mild sea air 
of the South English coast. Neither paralysis, nor illness, nor his 
straitened and far from assured means of subsistence were 
able to break his irrepressible mental powers. His letters were 
always cheerful to the point of exuberance, and when you visited 
him you had to help him laugh. His favourite reading matter was 
the Zurich Sozialdemokrat. He died after an attack of pneumonia 
on December 16, 1885. 
The Blood-and-Thunder Patriots appeared straight after the war 
against France in the Volksstaat and soon after in an off-print. It 
proved to be a highly effective antidote to the mood of 
super-patriotic intoxication which overcame and which still affects 
both the German authorities and the German bourgeois. And, 
indeed, there could have been no better aid to sobering down than 
to recall the time when the same Prussia which was now praised to 
the skies had collapsed ignominiously before the onslaught of the 
same Frenchmen who were now being derided as the vanquished 
foe. And the medicine had to be all the more effective since the 
facts it recounted were drawn from a book in which a Prussian 
general, who was moreover the director of the general Academy 
of War, had used official Prussian documents to portray the 
moment of humiliation—and it should be admitted, in an 
impartial and dispassionate manner. 3 Like any other large social 
a E. Höpfner, Der Krieg von 1806 und 1807.— Ed. 

=====第478页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
organisation, a great army is never better than when it turns in 
upon itself after a major defeat and does penance for its past sins. 
This was the fate of the Prussians after Jena, and again after 1850. 
In the latter case, even though they had not suffered a major 
defeat, their total military decline became palpably clear both to 
themselves and to the whole world in a series of minor 
campaigns—in Denmark and South Germany—and in the first 
large-scale mobilisation of 1850, when they only averted a real 
defeat by the political humiliations of Warsaw and Olmütz. 309 They 
were forced to subject their own past to ruthless criticism in order 
to learn how to repair the damage. Their military literature, which 
in Clausewitz had brought forth a star of the first magnitude, but 
which had since sunk to unbelievable depths, arose once more 
under the necessity for this self-examination. And one of the fruits 
of this self-examination was Höpfner's book from which Borkheim 
culled the material for his pamphlet. 
Even today it will be essential to recall again and again that age 
of arrogance and defeat, of the incapacity of the monarch, of the 
naive cunning of the Prussian diplomats ensnared in their own 
double-dealing, of the aristocratic officer-class whose loud­
mouthed swaggering outlived their cowardly betrayals, and of the 
total collapse of a state-authority estranged from the people and 
based on lies and deception. The German philistine (and that 
includes the nobility and the princes) is, if possible, even more 
conceited and chauvinistic than he was then; diplomatic practice 
has become significantly more insolent, but it is as two-faced as 
ever; the aristocratic officer-class has grown sufficiently, both by 
natural and by artificial means, to enable it more or less to regain 
its old control over the army; the state is becoming more and 
more estranged from the masses of the people and is now well on 
the way to transforming itself into a consortium of landowners, 
stockbrokers and big industrialists for the exploitation of the 
people. True enough, if another war breaks out the Prussian-
German army will have significant advantages over its opponents 
as well as its allies, if only because it was the model they all 
imitated. But these advantages will never again be as great as in 
the last two wars.310 The unity of the supreme command, for 
example, such as existed then, thanks to particularly fortunate 
circumstances, and the corresponding unconditional obedience of 
the lower echelons, is unlikely to recur in the same way. The 
business clique which now occupies a dominant position between 
the agrarian and military nobility—right up to the Emperor's 
entourage—and the stockjobbers, can easily prove fatal for the 

=====第479页=====
Introduction to S. Borkheim's In Memory... 451 
provision of the army in the field. Germany will have allies, but it 
will leave them in the lurch, and they Germany, at the first 
opportunity. And, finally, the only war left for Prussia-Germany to 
wage will be a world war, a world war, moreover, of an extent and 
violence hitherto unimagined. Eight to ten million soldiers will be 
at each other's throats and in the process they will strip Europe 
barer than a swarm of locusts. The depredations of the Thirty 
Years'  War311 compressed into three to four years and extended 
over the entire continent; famine, disease, the universal lapse into 
barbarism, both of the armies and the people, in the wake of acute 
misery; irretrievable dislocation of our artificial system of trade, 
industry and credit, ending in universal bankruptcy; collapse of 
the old states and their conventional political wisdom to the point 
where crowns will roll into the gutters by the dozen, and no one 
will be around to pick them up; the absolute impossibility of 
foreseeing how it will all end and who will emerge as victor from 
the battle. Only one consequence is absolutely certain: universal 
exhaustion and the creation of the conditions for the ultimate 
victory of the working class. 
That is the prospect for the moment when the systematic 
development of mutual oneupmanship in armaments reaches its 
climax and finally brings forth its inevitable fruits. This is the pass, 
my worthy princes and statesmen, to which you in your wisdom 
have brought our ancient Europe. And when no alternative is left 
to you but to strike up the last dance of war—that will be no skin 
off our noses. The war may push us into the background for a 
while, it may wrest many a conquered base from our hands. But 
once you have unleashed the forces you will be unable to restrain, 
things can take their course: by the end of the tragedy you will be 
ruined and the victory of the proletariat will either have already 
been achieved or else inevitable. 
London, December 15, 1887 
Frederick Engels 
First published in S. Borkheim, Zur Erin- Printed according to the book 
nerung fur die deutschen Mordspatrioten. 
1806-1807, Hottingen-Zurich, 1888 Published in English in full for the 
first time 
31-1243 

=====第480页=====

=====第481页=====
THE ROLE OF FORCE IN HISTORY312 

=====第482页=====
Written between the end of December 
1887 and March 1888 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 1, 
Nos.  22-26, 1895-96 Printed according to the manu­
script, and the text of the journal 
where the manuscript has not 
been preserved 

=====第483页=====
455 
Let us now apply our theory to contemporary German history 
and its use of force, its policy of blood and iron. We shall clearly 
see from this why the policy of blood and iron was bound to be 
successful for a time and why it was bound to collapse in the end. 
In 1815, the Vienna Congress had partitioned and sold off 
Europe in a manner which revealed to the whole world the 
complete ineptitude of the potentates and statesmen. The univer­
sal war of the peoples against Napoleon was the reaction of the 
national feeling of all the peoples which Napoleon had trampled 
on. In gratitude for this, the princes and diplomats at the Vienna 
Congress trampled still more contemptuously on that national 
feeling. The smallest dynasty was more esteemed than the largest 
nation. Germany and Italy were once again split up into small 
states,  Poland partitioned for the fourth time and Hungary 
remained enslaved. It cannot even be said that an injustice was 
committed against the peoples; why did they tolerate it, and why 
did they greet the Russian Tsara as their liberator? 
But this could not go on for long. Since the end of the Middle 
Ages,  history has been working towards a Europe composed of large 
national states. Only such states are the normal political constitution 
of the ruling European bourgeoisie and, at the same time, an 
indispensable precondition for the establishment of harmonious 
international co-operation between peoples, without which the rule 
of the proletariat is impossible. To ensure international peace, all 
avoidable national friction must first be done away with, each people 
must be independent and master in their own house. With the 
a Alexander I.— Ed. 

=====第484页=====
456 Frederick Engels 
advance of commerce, agriculture, industry and thereby of the social 
position of power enjoyed by the bourgeoisie, national feeling rose 
everywhere and partitioned and oppressed nations demanded unity 
and independence. 
Hence the 1848 revolution was aimed everywhere except in 
France at satisfying national demands just as much as the demand 
for freedom. But behind the bourgeoisie, which had been 
victorious at the first attempt, there already arose everywhere the 
menacing figure of the proletariat, which had actually won the 
victory, and which drove the bourgeoisie into the arms of the just 
defeated enemy—monarchistic, bureaucratic, semi-feudal and 
military reaction to which the revolution succumbed in 1849. In 
Hungary, where this was not the case, the Russians invaded and 
crushed the revolution. Not content with this, the Russian Tsara 
went to Warsaw, where he sat in judgment as the arbiter of 
Europe. He appointed his obedient creature Christian of Glücks­
burg heir to the Danish throne. He humiliated Prussia as it had 
never been humiliated before, prohibiting it even the slightest 
craving to exploit the German aspirations for unity and forcing it 
to re-establish the Federal Diet and submit to Austria. 313 At first 
sight it seemed that the whole result of the revolution was the 
establishment in Austria and Prussia of a system of government, 
constitutional in form, but in the old spirit, and that the Russian 
Tsar was master of Europe more than ever before. 
In reality, however, the revolution had vigorously jostled the 
bourgeoisie even in the dismembered countries, notably in 
Germany, out of its old traditional rut. The bourgeoisie had 
received a share, however modest, of political power, and every 
political success of the bourgeoisie is used for industrial advance. 
The "crazy year",314 which had fortunately passed, tangibly 
demonstrated to the bourgeoisie that it now had to put an end to 
the old lethargy and doziness once and for all. As a result of the 
Californian and Australian gold rush315 and other circumstances, 
an expansion of world trade contacts and a business boom set in as 
never before—it was a matter of seizing the opportunity and 
making sure of one's share. The large-scale industry which had 
appeared since 1830, and particularly since 1840, on the Rhine, in 
Saxony, in Silesia, in Berlin and some towns in the south, was now 
rapidly developed and expanded, cottage industry in rural districts 
became increasingly widespread, railway construction was acceler­
ated, while the rapidly increasing flow of emigrants which 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 

=====第485页=====
The Role of Force in History 457 
accompanied all this gave rise to a German transatlantic steamship 
service which required no subsidies. German merchants settled in 
all overseas trade centres on a wider scale than ever before, 
handled an ever growing share of world trade and gradually 
began to offer their services for the sale not only of English, but 
also of German industrial products. 
But the German system of small states with their numerous and 
varied trade and industrial laws inevitably soon became an 
unbearable fetter on vigorously growing industry and the trade 
associated with it. Every few miles a different law governed bills of 
exchange, there were different trade conditions; everywhere, 
literally everywhere, there were different sorts of chicanery, 
bureaucratic and fiscal traps, and often also guild barriers against 
which even licences were powerless. In addition there were many 
different local settlement laws316 and residence restrictions which 
made it impossible for the capitalists to move the labour force at 
their disposal in sufficient numbers to places where the availability 
of ore, coal, water power and other favourable natural conditions 
called for the siting of industrial enterprises. The ability to exploit 
the massive labour force of the Fatherland without hindrance was 
the first condition for industrial development, but wherever the 
patriotic manufacturer gathered workers from all parts, the police 
and the poor administration opposed the settlement of the new 
arrivals. All-German civic rights and full freedom of movement 
for all citizens of the Empire, a uniform body of commercial and 
industrial law were no longer patriotic fantasies of eccentric 
students, they had now become vital conditions for industry. 
Besides, there were different currencies, different weights and 
measures in every state, no matter how small, and often there 
were two or three in a single state. And not a single one of these 
innumerable kinds of coins, weights and measures was recognised 
on the world market. [It is] hardly surprising, therefore, that 
merchants and manufacturers who traded on the world market or 
had to compete against imported articles, had, in addition to the 
many coins, weights and measures, to use also foreign ones; that 
cotton yarn was reeled in English pounds, silk cloth was produced 
in metres, foreign bills were issued in pounds sterling, dollars and 
francs. And how could large credit institutions be set up in these 
limited currency zones with banknotes here in gulden, there in 
Prussian talers, next to them in gold talers, "new two-third" talers, 
bank marks, current marks, the twenty-gulden system, the 
twenty-four-gulden system, with endless exchange computations 
and rate fluctuations? 317 

=====第486页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
And even if all this was finally overcome, how much effort had 
been spent on all this friction, how much money and time had 
been wasted! Finally, in Germany too, people became aware that 
nowadays time is money. 
The fledgling German industry had to stand the test on the 
world market, it could grow only through export. For this it had 
to enjoy abroad the protection of international law. The English, 
French, American merchant could still take somewhat greater 
liberties abroad than at home. His legation intervened on his 
behalf,  and, if need be, even a few men-of-war. But the German! 
In the Levant the Austrian at least could rely to some extent on 
his legation, elsewhere it did not help him much either. But 
whenever a Prussian merchant in a foreign land complained to his 
ambassador about an injustice he had suffered, he was almost 
always told: "Serves you right, what do you want here, why don't 
you stay well at home?" The subject of a small state was well and 
truly deprived of all rights everywhere. Wherever one went, 
German merchants were under foreign—French, English or 
American—protection, or else had quickly got themselves natural­
ised in their new country.3 Even if their ambassadors had wished 
to intervene on their  behalf,  what would have been the use? 
German ambassadors themselves were treated no better than 
boot-blacks overseas. 
This shows that the call for a united "Fatherland" had a very 
material background. It was no longer the obscure urge of a 
member of a Burschenschaft at the Wartburg festival, 318 "where 
courage and power burned bright in German souls", and where, 
as in the song set to a French tune, "the young man was carried 
away by a tempestuous striving to go and die fighting for the 
Fatherland"b in order to restore the romantic imperial grandeur 
of the Middle Ages,— while in his older days the tempestuous 
youth became a common sanctimonious and absolutist vassal of his 
prince. Neither was it any longer the considerably more down-to-
earth call for unity of the lawyers and other bourgeois ideologists 
of the Hambach festival,319 who thought they loved freedom and 
unity for their own sake and did not at all notice that the turning 
of Germany into a cantonal republic after the Swiss pattern, which 
the ideal of the least muddled among them amounted to, was just 
as impossible as the Hohenstaufen Empire320 of the students 
mentioned above. No, it was the desire of the practical merchant 
a Here Engels wrote "Weerth" in pencil in the margin.— Ed. 
b K. Hinkel, "Jugend-Muth und -Kraft".— Ed. 

=====第487页=====
The Role of Force in History 459 
and industrialist arising out of immediate business needs to sweep 
away all the historically inherited small state junk which was 
obstructing the free development of commerce and industry, to 
abolish all the unnecessary friction the German businessman first 
had to overcome at home if he wished to enter the world market, 
and to which all his competitors were superior. German unity had 
become an economic necessity. And the people who now 
demanded it knew what they wanted. They had been educated in 
commerce and for commerce, knew how to drive a bargain and 
were willing to bargain. They knew that it was necessary to 
demand a high price but also that it was necessary to reduce it 
liberally. They sang of the "German Fatherland" including in it 
Styria, the Tyrol and "Austria rich in honours and victories",3 and 
From the Maas to the Memel, 
From the River Adige to the Belt 
Deutschland, Deutschland über alles, 
Over everything in the world— b 
but for a payment in cash they were prepared to grant a 
considerable discount—from 25 to 30 per cent—on that Father­
land that was to become ever greater.321 Their plan for unification 
was ready and immediately practicable. 
German unity, however, was not a purely German question. 
Since the Thirty Years' War,322 not a single all-German issue had 
been decided without very perceptible foreign interference.c 
Frederick II had conquered Silesia in 1740 with the help of the 
French.324 The reorganisation of the Holy Roman Empire by 
decision of the Imperial Deputation in 1803 had literally been 
dictated by France and Russia.325 After that, Napoleon had 
organised Germany to suit his convenience. And finally, at the 
Vienna Congress,0  it was again mainly owing to Russia and in the 
second place to England and France that it was shattered into 
thirty-six states with over two hundred separate large and small 
patches of land, and, just as at the 1802-03 Imperial Diet in 
Regensburg, 326 the German dynasties had veritably assisted in this 
and made the fragmentation still worse. In addition, some parts of 
Germany had been  . handed over to foreign sovereigns. Thus, 
Germany was not only powerless and helpless, torn by internal 
a E. M. Arndt, "Des Teutschen Vaterland". — Ed. 
b [A. H. Hoffmann von Fallersleben,] "Das Lied der Deutschen". — Ed. 
c Here Engels wrote in the margin in pencil: "Westphalian and Teschen 
Peace." 323— Ed. 
d Here Engels wrote between the lines: "Germany—Poland."—Ed. 

=====第488页=====
460 Frederick Engels 
strife, condemned to political, military and even industrial 
insignificance. What was much worse, France and Russia had by 
repeated usage acquired a right to the fragmentation of Germany, 
just as France and Austria arrogated the right to see that Italy 
remained dismembered. This alleged right was invoked in 1850 by 
Tsar Nicholas when, refusing in the coarsest manner to allow any 
change in the constitution without authorisation, he endorsed the 
restoration of that expression of Germany's impotence, the 
Federal Diet.327 
Germany's unity therefore had to be won in struggle not only 
against the princes and other internal enemies, but also against 
foreign countries. Or else—with help from abroad. What was the 
situation abroad at that time? 
In France, Louis Bonaparte had utilised the struggle between 
the bourgeoisie and the working class to raise himself with the 
help of the peasants into the office of President and with the help 
of the army to the imperial throne. But a new Emperor Napoleon, 
one placed on the throne by the army within the borders of the 
France of 1815, was a still-born chimera. The resurrected 
Napoleonic empire meant the extension of France to the Rhine, 
the realisation of the hereditary dream of French chauvinism. At 
first, however, the Rhine was beyond Louis Bonaparte's reach; 
every attempt in that direction would have led to a European 
coalition against France. On the other hand, there was an 
opportunity to enhance France's position of power and to win 
fresh laurels for the army by waging in agreement with almost the 
whole of Europe a war against Russia, which had made use of the 
revolutionary period in Western Europe to occupy on the quiet 
the Danubian principalities and to prepare for a new war of 
conquest against Turkey. England entered into alliance with 
France, Austria showed good will towards both, only heroic 
Prussia kissed the Russian rod which had chastised it only but 
yesterday, and continued to maintain a pro-Russian neutrality. But 
neither England nor France wished a serious defeat of the enemy, 
and the war thus ended in very mild humiliation for Russia and a 
Russo-French alliance against Austria.* 
* The Crimean War was an unparalleled, colossal comedy of errors, where one 
wondered at every new scene: who will be cheated this time? But that comedy took 
a toll of uncountable wealth and over a million human lives. No sooner had the 
war begun than Austria invaded the Danubian principalities; the Russians retreated 
before them. This made a war against Turkey on Russia's land frontier impossible 
so long as Austria remained neutral. However, Austria was willing to become an 
ally in a war on this frontier on condition that the war was waged in all seriousness 

=====第489页=====
The Role of Force in History 461 
The Crimean War made France Europe's leading power and the 
adventurer Louis Napoleon the greatest man of the day, which, to 
be sure, does not mean much. However, the Crimean War had not 
brought France any territorial expansion and was therefore 
pregnant with a new war, in which Louis Napoleon was to fulfil 
his true mission, that of "aggrandiser of the empire".328 This new 
war had already been planned during the first one, since Sardinia 
was allowed to join the alliance of the Western powers as a satellite 
of imperial France and especially as its outpost against Austria; 
further preparations were made during the conclusion of peace by 
Louis Napoleon's agreement with Russia,329 who wanted nothing 
more than to chastise Austria. 
Louis Napoleon was now the idol of the European bourgeoisie. 
Not only because he had "saved society" on December 2,  1851,330 
when he destroyed the political rule of the bourgeoisie, it is true, 
but only to save its social rule. Not only because he showed that, 
under favourable circumstances, universal suffrage could be 
turned into an instrument for the oppression of the masses. Not 
only because, under his rule, industry and trade and notably 
speculation and stock exchange machinations advanced to a 
degree previously unknown. But, first and foremost, because the 
bourgeoisie saw in him the first "great statesman", who was 
flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bone. He was an upstart 
like every true bourgeois. "A dyed in the wool" Carbonari 
to restore Poland and permanently push back Russia's western border. This would 
also have brought in Prussia, through which Russia was still getting all imports; 
Russia would have been blockaded by land and by sea and would soon have been 
defeated. This, however, did not enter the plans of the allies. On the contrary, they 
were glad to have escaped the danger of a serious war. Palmerston proposed that 
the theatre of war be transferred to the Crimea—which was what Russia 
desired—and Louis Napoleon gladly agreed. Here the war could only be a sham 
one, and so all the protagonists were satisfied. However, Tsar Nicholas took it into 
his head to wage a serious war and forgot at the same time that this was most 
favourable country for a sham war but most unfavourable for a serious war. What 
is Russia's strength in defence—the immense extent of its territory, sparsely 
populated, roadless and poor in auxiliary resources — in the event of any Russian 
offensive war turns against Russia  itself,  and nowhere more than in the Crimean 
direction. The South Russian steppes, which were to become the graves of the 
invaders, became the graves of the Russian armies, whom Nicholas, with brutal and 
stupid ruthlessness, drove one after another—finally in mid-winter—into Sebas-
topol. When the last hurriedly recruited, haphazardly equipped and miserably 
provisioned army lost about two-thirds of its number (whole battalions perished in 
snowstorms) and the rest was unable to drive the enemy from Russian soil, 
arrogant, empty-headed Nicholas miserably broke down and poisoned  himself. 
From then on, the war once again became a sham war and peace was soon 
concluded. 

=====第490页=====
462 Frederick Engels 
conspirator in Italy, an artillery officer in Switzerland, a 
debt-burdened tramp of distinction and special constable in 
England,331 yet constantly and everywhere a pretender to the 
throne, he had prepared himself by his adventurous past and 
moral failings in all countries for the role of Emperor of the 
French and ruler of the destinies of Europe, as the exemplary 
bourgeois, the American, prepares himself by a series of bankrupt­
cies, genuine and fraudulent, for the role of millionaire. As 
Emperor he not only made politics serve the interests of capitalist 
profits and stock exchange machinations, but also pursued politics 
entirely according to the rules of the stock exchange and 
speculated on the "nationalities principle".332 In France's previous 
policy the fragmentation of Germany and Italy had been an 
inalienable fundamental right of France; Louis Napoleon im­
mediately began to sell off that fundamental right bit by bit for 
so-called compensations. He was ready to help Italy and Germany 
do away with their fragmentation, provided Germany and Italy 
paid him for every step towards national union by ceding 
territory. This not only satisfied French chauvinism and gradually 
expanded the empire to its 1801 borders333 but, in addition, 
restored to France the exclusive role of enlightened power and the 
liberator of the peoples, and depicted Louis Napoleon as the 
protector of oppressed nationalities. And the whole enlightened 
bourgeoisie, enthusiastic for national ideas—because it was deeply 
interested in the removal of all obstacles to business on the world 
market—unanimously exulted in this world-liberating enlighten­
ment. 
The beginning was made in Italy.3 Austria had exercised 
absolute rule there since 1849, and Austria was then the scapegoat 
for the whole of Europe. The meagre results of the Crimean War 
were not ascribed to the indecision of the Western powers, which 
had only wanted a sham war, but to Austria's irresolute attitude, 
for which no one had been more to blame than the Western 
powers themselves. But the advance of the Austrians to the 
Pruth—in gratitude for Russia's assistance in Hungary in 
1849335—aggrieved Russia so much (although it was precisely that 
advance which had saved Russia), that it looked with joy upon 
every attack on Austria. Prussia no longer counted and had 
already been treated en canaille0 at the Paris Peace Congress. 
Thus,  the war for the liberation of Italy "up to the Adriatic" was 
a Here Engels wrote "Orsini" 334 in pencil in the margin.— Ed. 
b Ungraciously.— Ed. 

=====第491页=====
The Role of Force in History 463 
contrived with Russia's participation, launched in the spring of 
1859 and completed in the summer on the Mincio. Austria was 
not driven out of Italy, Italy was not "free up to the Adriatic" and 
not united, Sardinia had extended its territory, but France had 
acquired Savoy and Nice and thus re-established its 1801 frontier 
with Italy.336 
However, the Italians were not satisfied with this state of affairs. 
At that time, manufacture proper was still predominant in Italy, 
large-scale industry being as yet in its infancy. The working class 
was far from fully expropriated and proletarianised; in the towns, 
it still had its own means of production, in rural areas, industrial 
labour was a side-line occupation of small peasant owners or 
tenants. The energy of the bourgeoisie had therefore not yet been 
broken by opposition to a modern class-conscious proletariat. And 
since the fragmentation of Italy was preserved only as a result of 
foreign rule by the Austrians, under whose protection the princes 
carried their misgovernment to the extreme, the big landed 
nobility and the mass of the townspeople sided with the 
bourgeoisie as the champion of national independence. However, 
foreign rule was thrown off, except in Venetia, in 1859; Austria's 
further intervention in Italy was made impossible by France and 
Russia and nobody was afraid of it any longer. In Garibaldi, Italy 
had a hero of ancient dignity, who was able to work wonders and 
did work wonders. With a thousand volunteers, he overthrew the 
entire Kingdom of Naples, in fact united Italy, and tore to pieces 
the ingenious web of Bonapartist politics. Italy was free and 
essentially united — though not by Louis Napoleon's intrigues, but 
by the revolution. 
Since the Italian war, the foreign policy of the Second French 
Empire was no longer a secret to anybody. The conquerors of the 
great Napoleon were to be punished—but l'un après l'autre, one 
after another. Russia and Austria had received their share, Prussia 
was next in turn. And Prussia was despised more than ever 
before; its policy during the Italian war had been cowardly and 
wretched, just as at the time of the Basle Peace in 1795. 337 With its 
"free-hand policy"338 it had reached a point when it stood 
absolutely isolated in Europe, and its neighbours, big and small, 
anticipated with pleasure the spectacle of its being given a 
thrashing; its hands were free for one thing only—to cede the left 
bank of the Rhine to France. 
Indeed, in the years immediately following 1859, the conviction 
grew everywhere, and nowhere more than on the Rhine, that the 
left bank would irretrievably be lost to France. Not that this was 

=====第492页=====
464 Frederick Engels 
particularly desired, but it was regarded as an inescapable fate, 
and, to tell the truth, it was not particularly feared. Old memories 
of French times, which had really brought liberty, were aroused in 
the peasant and petty bourgeois; among the bourgeoisie, the 
finance aristocracy, especially in Cologne, was already deeply 
involved in the machinations of the Parisian Crédit Mobilier 339 and 
other fraudulent Bonapartist companies and loudly demanded 
annexation.* 
However, the loss of the left bank of the Rhine would weaken 
not only Prussia, but Germany too. And Germany was more 
divided than ever before. There was greater estrangement than 
ever between Austria and Prussia owing to Prussia's neutrality in 
the Italian war; the brood of small princes cast half scared, half 
longing looks at Louis Napoleon as protector of a renewed 
Confederation of the Rhine340—such was the position of official 
Germany. And that at a time when only the united forces of the 
entire nation were capable of averting the danger of dismember­
ment. 
But how could the forces of the entire nation be united? After 
the attempts of 1848—almost all of them hazy—had failed and 
some of the haze was dispelled precisely because of this, three 
roads lay open. 
The first road was that of genuine unification through the 
abolition of all individual states, that is, the openly revolutionary 
road. This road had just led Italy to its goal; the Savoy dynasty 
had joined the revolution and thereby walked off with the Italian 
crown. However, our German Savoyans, the Hohenzollerns, and 
even their most daring Cavours à la Bismarck, were altogether 
unable to take such a courageous step. The people would have 
had to do everything themselves—and in a war over the left bank 
of the Rhine they would have probably been able to do the 
necessary. The inevitable retreat of the Prussians beyond the 
Rhine, a protracted war at the fortifications on the Rhine, and the 
betrayal by the South German princes that would undoubtedly 
ensue, would have been sufficient to fan up a national movement 
which would have swept away the entire dynastic system. In that 
case,  Louis Napoleon would have been the first to sheathe the 
sword. The Second Empire could afford to have opponents only 
among reactionary states against which it appeared as the 
* Marx and I repeatedly saw on the spot that this was the general mood on the 
Rhine at that time. Industrialists on the left bank asked me, inter alia, how their 
industry would fare under the French customs  tariff. 

=====第493页=====
The Role of Force in History 465 
continuer of the French revolution, the liberator of the peoples. It 
was powerless against a people themselves embroiled in revolution, 
in fact, a victorious German revolution could have provided the 
impetus for the overthrow of the entire French Empire. That was 
at best; at worst, if the dynastic princes got the better of the 
movement, the left bank of the Rhine would be temporarily lost to 
France, the active and passive betrayal of the dynastic princes 
would be revealed to the whole world and would create a 
predicament in which there would be no way out for Germany but 
that of revolution, the eviction of all the princes, the establishment 
of a united German republic. 
As things stood, this road to the union of Germany could be 
taken only if Louis Napoleon began a war over the border on the 
Rhine. But, for reasons we shall soon explain, this war did not 
take place. As a result, however, the issue of national union also 
ceased to be a vital question, one that had to be settled 
immediately under pain of destruction. For the time being, the 
nation could wait. 
The second road was that of a union under Austrian 
supremacy. In 1815, Austria had willingly retained the position of 
a state with a compact, rounded-off territory, which had been 
imposed on it by the Napoleonic wars. It laid no claim to the 
former possessions in South Germany which it had ceded. It was 
content with annexing old and new territories which could be 
matched geographically and strategically with the remaining 
nucleus of the monarchy. The separation of German Austria from 
the rest of Germany, begun by the protective tariffs of Joseph II, 
aggravated by the police regime of Francis I in Italy, and carried 
to the extreme by the disintegration of the German Empire341 and 
by the Confederation of the Rhine, continued for all practical 
purposes ever after 1815. Metternich built a veritable Chinese 
Wall between his state and Germany. Tariffs kept out the material, 
censorship the intellectual products of Germany, the most 
incredible chicanery with regard to passports limited personal 
contacts to the barest minimum. The country was protected 
domestically against any, even the mildest, political stirring by an 
absolutist tyranny unique even in Germany. Thus, Austria had 
remained absolutely aloof from Germany's entire bourgeois-liberal 
movement. By 1848, at least the intellectual barrier was torn down 
to a large extent, but the events of that year and their 
consequences were hardly fitted to bring Austria closer to the rest 
of Germany. On the contrary, Austria more and more insisted on 
its independent position as a great power. And thus it happened 

=====第494页=====
466 Frederick Engels 
that, although the Austrian soldiers in the fortresses of the 
Confederation342 were liked, while the Prussians were hated and 
derided, and although Austria was still popular and respected 
throughout the predominantly Catholic South and West, no one 
thought seriously of German unification under Austrian suprema­
cy, except perhaps a few princes from the small and medium 
German states. 
Nor could it be otherwise. Austria itself had not wanted it any 
other way, even though it continued on the quiet to cherish 
romantic dreams of an empire. The Austrian customs barrier had 
in time become the only remaining material partition within 
Germany, and was therefore felt all the more acutely. There was 
no sense in the independent great power policy if it did not mean 
a sacrifice of German interests to specifically Austrian, that is, 
Italian, Hungarian, etc., interests. After, as before the revolution, 
Austria continued to be the most reactionary state in Germany, the 
most reluctant to follow modern trends, and, besides, the only 
remaining specifically Catholic great power. The more the 
post-March government343 strove to re-establish the old manage­
ment of priests and Jesuits, the more impossible became its 
hegemony over a country which was one to two-thirds Protestant. 
And, finally, a unification of Germany under Austria was only 
possible through the breaking-up of Prussia. Although this in itself 
would have been no calamity for Germany, the breaking-up of 
Prussia by Austria would have been just as harmful as the 
breaking-up of Austria by Prussia before the imminent triumph of 
the revolution in Russia (after which it would become superfluous, 
because the now redundant Austria would disintegrate of itself). 
In short, German unity under Austria's wing was a romantic 
dream and proved such when the German princes of the small 
and medium states assembled in Frankfurt in 1863 to proclaim 
Francis Joseph of Austria emperor of Germany. The King of 
Prussia3 simply did not show up and the emperor comedy was a 
flop.344 
There remained the third road: unification under Prussia's 
supremacy. And because this road was actually taken, it leads us 
from the field of speculation onto the more solid, even if rather 
filthy, ground of practical "Realpolitik". 345 
Since Frederick II, Prussia had regarded Germany, as also 
Poland, merely as territory to be conquered, from which one took 
what one could get, on the understanding, however, that one had 
a William I.— Ed. 

=====第495页=====
y* S if* 
4 fx ^ 
A page of the manuscript 
of TTie J?o/e o/ Force in History 

=====第496页=====

=====第497页=====
The Role of Force in History 469 
to share with others. The division of Germany with foreign 
countries, notably with France, had been Prussia's "German 
mission" since 1740. "Je vais, je crois, jouer votre jeu; si les as me 
viennent, nous partagerons" (I think I am going to play your game; 
if I am dealt the aces, we shall share them)—such were Frederick's 
parting words to the French ambassador, 3 when he went off to his 
first war.346 True to this "German mission", Prussia betrayed 
Germany in 1795 when the peace was signed in Basle, agreed in 
advance (in the Treaty of August 5, 1796) to cede the left bank of 
the Rhine to France in return for a promise of territorial 
expansion, and actually collected the reward for its treason against 
the Empire under a decision of the imperial deputation dictated 
by Russia and France.347 Again in 1805, it betrayed Russia and 
Austria, its allies, when Napoleon held up Hanover to it—a bait it 
was always willing to swallow, but became so entangled in its own 
stupid cunning that it was drawn into war with Napoleon after all 
and received a well-deserved thrashing at Jena.348 Still under the 
impression of these blows, Frederick William III was willing, even 
after the victories of 1813 and 1814, to forego all West German 
outposts, to confine himself to the possession of North-East 
Germany, to withdraw, like Austria, as much as possible from 
Germany—which would have transformed the whole of West 
Germany into a new Confederation of the Rhine under Russian or 
French protection. The plan failed: Westphalia and the Rhine 
Province were forced upon the King against his will, and with 
them a new "German mission". 
For the time being, it was over with annexations—except for the 
purchase of some tiny patches of land. At home, the old 
bureaucratic Junker system gradually began to flourish again; the 
constitutional promises made to the people in times of great 
distress were persistently broken. Yet in spite of all that, the 
bourgeoisie was increasingly in the ascendant in Prussia too, 
because without industry and trade even the haughty Prussian 
state was now nothing. Slowly, unwillingly, in homeopathic doses, 
economic concessions had to be made to the bourgeoisie. In a way, 
these concessions offered a prospect of support for Prussia's 
"German mission": since Prussia, to remove the foreign customs 
barriers between its two parts, invited the neighbouring German 
states to form a customs union. Thus came into existence the 
Customs Union which, up to 1830, had been no more than a pious 
wish (only Hesse-Darmstadt had joined), but later, as a result of 
a L. Ch. Beauvau.— Ed. 
32* 

=====第498页=====
470 Frederick Engels 
the somewhat quicker rate of political and economic development, 
joined the greater part of inner Germany economically to Prussia.349 
The non-Prussian coastal regions remained outside the Union even 
after 1848. 
The Customs Union was a major success for Prussia. The fact 
that it meant a victory over Austrian influence was hardly the crux 
of the matter. The main thing was that it won over the entire 
bourgeoisie of the medium and small states to Prussia's side. With 
the exception of Saxony, there was no German state whose 
industry had developed to a degree even approaching Prussia's, 
and this was due not only to natural and historical preconditions, 
but also to its bigger customs area and internal market. The more 
the Customs Union expanded, and the more it drew small states 
into this internal market, the more the rising bourgeoisie of these 
states became used to regarding Prussia as its economic and later 
also political leader, and the professors danced to the tune of the 
bourgeoisie. What the Hegelians construed philosophically in 
Berlin—namely that Prussia was called upon to assume leadership 
in Germany, Schlosser's pupils, notably Hausser and Gervinus, 
demonstrated historically in Heidelberg. This naturally presup­
posed that Prussia would change its entire political system, that it 
would fulfil the demands of the ideologists of the bourgeoisie.* 
All this, however, happened not because there was any special 
bias in favour of the Prussian state, as was the case, for example, 
when the Italian bourgeoisie accepted Piedmont as the leading 
state after it had openly placed itself at the head of the national 
and constitutional movement. No, it was done reluctantly, the 
bourgeoisie chose Prussia as the lesser evil, because Austria barred 
them from its market and because, compared with Austria, Prussia 
still had a certain bourgeois nature, if only because of its meanness 
in financial matters. Prussia had two good institutions ahead of 
other large states: universal conscription and universal compulsory 
education. It had introduced them in times of desperate need, and 
in better days had been content with emptying them of their 
content—dangerous under certain circumstances—by negligently 
enforcing them and deliberately distorting them. But they 
continued to exist on paper, and this gave Prussia the possibility 
some day to unfold the latent potential energy of the masses to a 
* The Rheinische Zeitung of 1842 discussed the question of Prussia's hegemony 
from this viewpoint. Gervinus told me as early as the summer of 1843 in Ostend: 
Prussia must assume leadership in Germany, but this presupposes three conditions: 
Prussia must provide a constitution, grant freedom of the press and pursue a more 
definite foreign policy. 

=====第499页=====
The Role of Force in History 471 
degree unattainable in any other place with the same population. 
The bourgeoisie reconciled itself to these two institutions: around 
1840 it was easy and comparatively cheap for the one-year 
conscripts, that is, for the sons of the bourgeois, to evade service 
by bribery, especially as the army itself attached little value to 
Landwehr 50 officers recruited from merchant and industrial 
circles. The undoubtedly larger number of people with a certain 
amount of elementary knowledge still available in Prussia as a 
result of compulsory education was highly useful for the 
bourgeoisie; with the advance of large-scale industry it ultimately 
even became insufficient.* The complaints over the high cost of 
the two institutions, 3 expressed in heavy taxation, were made 
predominantly by the petty bourgeoisie; the ascendant bourgeoisie 
calculated that the annoying, to be sure, but unavoidable 
expenditure connected with the country's future position as a 
great power would be amply compensated by higher profits. 
In short, the German bourgeois had no illusions about Prussian 
kindness. If the idea of Prussian hegemony had become popular 
with them since 1840, it was only because and insofar as the 
Prussian bourgeoisie, owing to its quicker economic development, 
assumed the economic and political leadership of the German 
bourgeoisie, only because and insofar as the Rottecks and 
Welckers of the old constitutional South were eclipsed by the 
Camphausens, Hansemanns and Mildes of the Prussian North, 
and the lawyers and professors were eclipsed by the merchants 
and manufacturers. Indeed, in the years just preceding 1848, 
there had developed among Prussian liberals, especially on the 
Rhine, a quite different revolutionary atmosphere from that of the 
cantonalist liberals of the South. 352 At that time there appeared the 
two best political folk songs since the 16th century, the song about 
Burgomaster Tschech and the one about the Baroness von 
Droste-Fischering,353 whose wantonness appals the now aged 
people who in 1846 gaily sang: 
Has ever man had such hard luck 
As our poor Burgomaster Tschech, 
He shot at Fatty two paces away 
And yet his bullet went astray! 
* Even during the  Kulturkampf* 5* days, Rhenish industrialists complained to me 
that they could not promote otherwise excellent workers to the job of supervisor 
because of the insufficiency of their knowledge acquired at school. This was 
particularly true in Catholic regions. 
a Engels wrote in the margin: "Secondary schools for the bourgeoisie." — Ed. 

=====第500页=====
472 Frederick Engels 
But all this was soon to change. The February revolution was 
followed by the March days in Vienna and the Berlin revolution of 
March 18. The bourgeoisie triumphed without having to put up a 
serious fight, it did not even want the serious fight when it came. 
The bourgeoisie, which shortly before had flirted with the 
socialism and communism of the time (notably on the Rhine), 
suddenly noticed that it had reared not only individual workers, 
but a working class, a still half-dreaming, it is true, but gradually 
awakening and, by its innate nature, revolutionary proletariat. 
This proletariat, which had everywhere won the victory for the 
bourgeoisie, was already advancing demands, particularly in 
France, which were incompatible with the entire bourgeois system; 
in Paris the first terrible struggle between the two classes took 
place on June 23, 1848, and after a four-day battle the proletariat 
was defeated. From then on, the mass of the bourgeoisie in the 
whole of Europe went over to the side of reaction and allied itself 
with the absolutist bureaucrats, feudals and priests, whom it had 
just overthrown with the help of the workers, against the enemies 
of society, those very same workers. 
The form this took in Prussia was that the bourgeoisie left in the 
lurch the representatives it had itself elected and, with concealed 
or overt glee, sat by and watched them being dispersed by the 
government in November 1848. True, the Junker-bureaucratic 
ministry, which now asserted itself in Prussia for nigh on a decade, 
had to rule according to constitutional forms, but it avenged itself 
by resorting to a system of petty vexations and obstructions, 
unprecedented even in Prussia, under which no one suffered 
more than the bourgeoisie.354 But the latter had retired penitently 
into its shell and meekly submitted to the blows and kicks raining 
down on it as a punishment for its former revolutionary cravings, 
and gradually learned to think what it later was to express aloud: 
Yes, to be sure, we are dogs! 
Then came the regency. To prove his loyalty to the throne 
Manteuffel surrounded the heir apparent,3  the present emperor, 
with spies, just at Puttkamer now does the editorial office of the 
Sozialdemokrat. When the heir apparent became regent,  Manteuf­
fel, of course, was immediately kicked out and the New Era set 
in.355 It was only a change of scenery. The prince regent deigned 
to allow the bourgeoisie to be liberal again. The bourgeoisie gladly 
availed themselves of this permission, but they deluded themselves 
that they were now in full control of the situation and that the 
a Prince William, later Emperor William I.— Ed. 

=====第501页=====
The Role of Force in History 473 
Prussian state would have to dance to their tune. That was by no 
means what was intended by the "authoritative circles", as they are 
servilely called. The reorganisation of the army was to be the price 
the liberal bourgeoisie had to pay for the New Era. The 
government demanded only the implementation of universal 
conscription to the extent to which it had been practised around 
1816.  From the viewpoint of the liberal opposition, absolutely 
nothing could be said against it that would not at the same time 
have flown in the face of its own talk about Prussia's authority 
and its German mission. But the liberal opposition demanded as a 
condition for its consent that the term of service be limited by law 
to two years. In itself this was quite rational, the question was 
whether it could be enforced, whether the liberal bourgeoisie of 
the country were prepared to insist on this condition to the end, to 
risk their property and their lives. The government firmly insisted 
on a three years' term of service, the Chamber on two, and a 
conflict broke out.356 And with the conflict over the military 
question, foreign policy once again became decisive for domestic 
policy too. 
We have seen how Prussia, by its stance in the Crimean and 
Italian wars, forfeited the last remnants of respect it had still 
enjoyed. That miserable policy could be partially justified by the 
poor state of its army. Since even before 1848, new taxes could 
not be imposed or new loans taken out without the consent of the 
estates, and since no one was willing to assemble the estates for 
this purpose, there never was enough money for the army, which 
went to ruin as a result of this boundless niggardliness. The spirit 
of parade and military drill that had prevailed under Frederick 
William III did the rest. How helpless this parade army showed 
itself in 1848 on the battlefields in Denmark can be read in the 
writings of Count Waldersee.3 The mobilisation of 1850 was a 
complete fiasco; there was a shortage of everything, and what was 
available was mostly useless.357 True, the voting of funds by the 
Chambers helped in this respect, the army was shaken out of the 
old rut, field service replaced parades, at least in most cases. But 
the numerical strength of the army was still the same as it had 
been around 1820, while all other great powers, notably France, 
which now presented the main danger, had substantially increased 
their armed forces. And yet there was universal conscription in 
Prussia, on paper every Prussian was a soldier, and while the 
a See F. G. Waldersee, Die Methode zur kriegsgemäßen Ausbildung der Infanterie für 
das zerstreute Gefecht. —Ed. 

=====第502页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
population had grown from 10 72 million (1817) to  l73/4  million 
(1858),  the scale of the army was insufficient to accommodate and 
train more than a third of all the men fit for service. The 
government now demanded an increase in the army's strength 
corresponding almost exactly to the population growth since 1817. 
But the same liberal deputies who had been continually insisting 
on the government assuming the leadership of Germany, 
safeguarding its external power, and restoring its prestige among the 
nations — these same people higgled and haggled and refused to 
grant anything except on the basis of a two-year term of service. Did 
they possess the power to accomplish their will, on which they so 
stubbornly insisted? Did the people, or at least the bourgeoisie, back 
them, ready for action? 
Quite the reverse. The bourgeoisie exulted in their verbal battles 
with Bismarck but actually organised a movement which, even if 
unconsciously, was in fact directed against the policy of the 
majority in the Prussian Chamber. Denmark's encroachments 
upon the Holstein constitution and the attempts at a forcible 
Danification of Schleswig made the German bourgeois indig­
nant. 358 He was used to being bullied by the great powers; but to 
be kicked by little Denmark, that roused his ire. The National 
Association3  9 was formed; it was precisely the bourgeoisie of the 
small states that constituted its strength. And the National 
Association, liberal to the bone as it was, demanded first and 
foremost national unification under Prussia's leadership, a liberal 
Prussia if possible, a Prussia the same as ever if it came to the 
worst. Getting a move on at long last, doing away with the 
wretched position of second-rank people the Germans held on the 
world market, chastising Denmark, showing their teeth to the 
great powers in Schleswig-Holstein, those were the main demands 
of the National Association. The demand for Prussian leadership 
was now free of the vagueness and haziness which had still 
characterised it up to 1850. It was now known for sure that it meant 
Austria's expulsion from Germany, the actual abolition of the 
sovereignty of small states, and that neither could be achieved 
without civil war and the division of Germany. But there was no 
longer any fear of civil war and the division was no more than the 
conclusion drawn from the Austrian customs restrictions. Germany's 
industry and trade had advanced to such a height, the network of 
German trading firms that spanned the world market had become so 
extensive and dense, that the proliferation of small states at home 
and the lack of rights and protection abroad had become 
intolerable. And while the strongest political organisation the 

=====第503页=====
The Role of Force in History 475 
German bourgeoisie had ever had practically gave a vote of no 
confidence in the Berlin deputies, the latter continued to haggle 
over the term of service. 
Such was the state of affairs when Bismarck decided to 
intervene actively in foreign politics. 
Bismarck is Louis Napoleon translated from the adventurous 
French pretender to the throne into the Prussian backwoods 
Junker and member of the German students' association. Just like 
Louis Napoleon, Bismarck is a man of great practical judgment 
and great cunning, a born and sharp businessman, who in 
different circumstances would have competed on the New York 
stock exchange with the Vanderbilts and Jay Goulds; indeed, he 
has not badly succeeded in feathering his nest. But this advanced 
sense of the practical often goes hand in hand with a correspond­
ing narrowness of outlook, and in this respect Bismarck excels his 
French predecessor. The latter had himself worked out his 
"Napoleonic ideas"3 during his vagabond years—of which they 
bore the stamp—while Bismarck, as we shall see, never managed 
to produce even a hint of any political ideas of his own but always 
combined the ready-made ideas of others to suit his own purposes. 
However, precisely this narrow-mindedness was his good fortune. 
Without it he would never have been able to regard the entire 
history of the world from a specific Prussian point of view; and if 
in this typically Prussian world outlook of his there had been a 
rent through which daylight could penetrate, he would have 
bungled his entire mission and it would have been the end of his 
glory. True, he was stumped when he had fulfilled, in his own 
way, his special mission dictated to him from outside, and we shall 
see what leaps he was forced to make because of his absolute lack 
of rational ideas and his inability to understand the historical 
situation he himself had created. 
If Louis Napoleon's past had taught him to show little 
consideration in the choice of methods, Bismarck learned from the 
history of Prussian politics, notably from those of the so-called 
Great Elector15 and of Frederick II, to have even less regard for 
scruples, though here he could retain the exalting awareness of 
having remained true to the traditions of the Fatherland. His 
business sense taught him to repress his Junker appetites when 
this was necessary; when no longer necessary, they once again 
came sharply to the fore; this was, of course, a sign of his decline. 
a An allusion to N. L. Bonaparte's Des idées napoléoniennes. —Ed. 
b Frederick William. — Ed. 

=====第504页=====
476 Frederick Engels 
His political method was that of the students' association, the 
comically literal interpretation of the students' beer drinking code 
designed to get them out of a scrape in their pub, and he used it 
unceremoniously in the Chamber in respect of the Prussian 
constitution; all innovations he introduced in diplomacy were 
borrowed from the students' association. But if Louis Napoleon 
often hesitated in decisive moments, as, for example, during the coup 
d'état in 1851, when Morny positively had to force him to complete 
what he had begun, or on the eve of the 1870 war, when his 
uncertainty spoiled his whole position, it must be admitted that this 
never happened with Bismarck. His willpower never abandoned 
him, it was much more likely to turn into open brutality. And this, 
more than anything else, was the secret of his success. All the 
ruling classes in Germany, the Junkers and the bourgeoisie, had so 
much lost the last remnants of energy, it had become so much the 
custom in "educated" Germany to have no will, that the only man 
among them who really still possessed one became, precisely 
because of this, the greatest man among them and a tyrant over 
them all, at whose bidding they were ready to "jump over the 
stick", as they themselves call it, against their better judgment and 
their conscience. True, in the "uneducated" Germany things have 
not yet reached such a pass; the working people have shown that 
they possess a will against which even Bismarck's strong will is 
unable to prevail. 
A brilliant career lay before our Brandenburg Junker, if only he 
had the courage and sense to help himself to it. Had not Louis 
Napoleon become the idol of the bourgeoisie precisely because he 
dispersed their parliament while raising their profits? And did not 
Bismarck possess the same business talents which the bourgeois 
admired so much in the false Napoleon? Was he not attracted to 
his Bleichröder as much as Louis Napoleon to his Fould? Was 
there not in 1864 a contradiction in Germany between the 
bourgeois representatives in the Chamber, who, out of stinginess, 
wanted to reduce the service term, and the bourgeois outside, in 
the National Association, who demanded national action at any 
cost, action for which an army was essential? Was it not a 
contradiction quite similar to the one that existed in France in 
1851 between the bourgeois in the Chamber who wanted to keep 
the power of the President in check and the bourgeois outside 
who wanted peace and quiet and a strong government, peace and 
quiet at any cost—a contradiction which Louis Napoleon solved by 
dispersing the brawlers in parliament and giving peace and quiet 
to the mass of the bourgeois? Were not things in Germany much 

=====第505页=====
The Role of Force in History 477 
more assuredly in favour of a bold move? Had not the plan for 
the reorganisation been supplied ready-made by the bourgeoisie, 
and were not the latter themselves calling loudly for an energetic 
Prussian statesman who would carry out their plan, expel Austria 
from Germany and unite the small states under Prussia's 
supremacy? And if this demanded that the Prussian constitution 
be treated a bit roughly, that the ideologists in and outside the 
Chamber be pushed aside according to their deserts, was it not 
possible to rely on universal suffrage, just as Louis Bonaparte had 
done? What could be more democratic than to introduce universal 
suffrage? Had not Louis Napoleon proved that it was absolutely 
safe—if properly handled? And did not precisely this universal 
suffrage. offer the means to appeal to the broad mass of the 
people, to flirt a bit with the emerging social movement, should 
the bourgeoisie prove refractory? 
Bismarck took action. What had to be done was to repeat Louis 
Napoleon's coup d'état, to make the real balance of power tangibly 
clear to the German bourgeoisie, forcibly to dispel their liberal 
self-delusion, but to carry out their national demands which 
coincided with Prussia's aspirations. It was Schleswig-Holstein that 
first provided a lever for action. As regards foreign policy, the 
field had been prepared. The Russian Tsar a had been won over to 
Bismarck's side by the latter's dirty work against the Polish 
insurgents in  1863 360; Louis Napoleon had also been worked on 
and could justify his indifference, if not his silent abetment, of 
Bismarck's plans, with his favourite "nationalities principle"361 ; 
Palmerston was Prime Minister in England, but he had placed the 
little Lord John Russell in the Foreign Office only for the purpose 
of having him make a laughing-stock of  himself.  But Austria was 
Prussia's rival for supremacy in Germany and precisely in this 
matter it could not afford to let Prussia outdo it, especially since it 
had in 1850 and 1851 acted in Schleswig-Holstein as Emperor 
Nicholas' henchman more vilely even than Prussia. 362 The situation 
was therefore extremely favourable. No matter how much 
Bismarck hated Austria, and how gladly Austria would once again 
have taken it out of Prussia, there was nothing they could do after 
the death of Frederick VII of Denmark but take joint action 
against Denmark—with the tacit consent of Russia and France. 
Success was assured in advance, so long as Europe remained 
neutral; it did, the duchies were conquered and ceded under the 
peace treaty. 
Alexander II.— Ed. 

=====第506页=====
478 Frederick Engels 
In this war, Prussia had pursued an additional purpose—that of 
testing before the enemy the army it had been training according 
to new principles since 1850 and had reorganised and 
strengthened in 1860. It had stood the test beyond all expectations 
and that in all manner of military situations. The battle at Lyngby 
in Jutland proved that the needle-gun was far superior to the 
muzzle-loader and that the Prussians knew how to use it properly, 
since the rapid firing of 80 Prussians from behind hedgerows 
turned three times as many Danes to flight. At the same time 
it had been noticed that the only lesson the Austrians had drawn 
from the Italian war3  and French fighting tactics was that shoot­
ing was no good, that a true soldier had to repulse the enemy 
immediately with his bayonet, and this was borne in mind, for no 
more welcome enemy tactics could even be desired against the 
muzzles of the breech-loaders. To give the Austrians the 
chance of convincing themselves of this in practice at the earliest 
possible moment, the peace treaty gave over the duchies to the 
joint sovereignty of Austria and Prussia, thereby creating a purely 
temporary situation, which was bound to breed conflict 
after conflict, and which thus left it entirely to Bismarck to decide 
when he should choose to use such a conflict for his big blow at 
Austria. Since it was a Prussian political tradition to exploit a 
favourable situation "ruthlessly to extreme", in Herr von Sybel's 
words, it was self-evident that under the pretext of freeing the 
Germans from Danish oppression about 200,000 Danes of North 
Schleswig were annexed to Germany. The one who got nothing 
was the Duke of Augustenburg, the candidate of the small 
states and of the German bourgeoisie for the Schleswig-Holstein 
throne. 
Thus Bismarck had carried out the will of the German 
bourgeoisie in the duchies against their will. He had expelled the 
Danes and defied the foreign countries, and the latter had not 
made a move. But no sooner were they liberated than the duchies 
were treated as conquered territory, not consulted about their 
wishes and simply temporarily shared out between Austria and 
Prussia. Prussia had once again become a great power, was no 
longer the fifth wheel on the European coach, there was good 
progress in the fulfilment of the bourgeoisie's national aspirations, 
but the way chosen was not the liberal way of the bourgeoisie. 
Thus the Prussian military conflict continued; it even became ever 
a Austro-Italo-French war of 1859.— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
The Role of Force in History 479 
more insoluble. The second scene of Bismarck's principal state 
action364 had to be ushered in. 
* * * 
The Danish war had fulfilled part of the national aspirations. 
Schleswig-Holstein was "liberated", the Warsaw and London 
Protocols, in which the great powers had put their seal to 
Germany's humiliation by Denmark, 365 had been torn to pieces 
and thrown at their feet, and they had not uttered a sound. 
Austria and Prussia were together again, their armies had been 
victorious shoulder to shoulder, and no potentate any longer 
thought of encroaching upon German territory. Louis Napoleon's 
cravings for the Rhine, which hitherto had been pushed into the 
background by other business—the Italian revolution, the Polish 
insurrection, the Danish complications, and finally the Mexican 
campaign,366 had no longer any chance of being satisfied. For a 
conservative Prussian statesman, the world situation left nothing to 
be desired from the foreign policy point of view. But up to 1871 
Bismarck had never been conservative, and was less so now than 
ever, and the German bourgeoisie was not at all satisfied. 
The German bourgeoisie continued to labour under the familiar 
contradiction. On the one hand, it demanded exclusive political 
power for  itself,  i.e., for a ministry elected from among the liberal 
majority in the Chamber; and such a ministry would have had to 
wage a ten-year struggle against the old system represented by the 
crown before its new position of power was finally recognised; 
hence ten years of internal weakness. On the other hand, it 
demanded a revolutionary transformation of Germany, which 
could be effected only by force, that is, only by an actual 
dictatorship. At the same time, however, the bourgeoisie since 
1848 had demonstrated again and again, at every decisive 
moment, that it did not possess even a trace of the energy needed 
to accomplish either of these demands, let alone both. In politics 
there are only two decisive powers: organised state power, the 
army, and the unorganised, elemental power of the popular 
masses. Since 1848, the bourgeoisie had forgotten how to appeal 
to the masses; it feared them even more than it did absolutism. 
The bourgeoisie by no means had the army at its disposal. But 
Bismarck had. 
In the continuing conflict over the constitution, Bismarck fought 
the parliamentary demands of the bourgeoisie to the uttermost. 

=====第508页=====
480 Frederick Engels 
But he burned with the desire to carry out its national demands, 
since they coincided with the innermost strivings of Prussian 
policy. If he now once more carried out the will of the bourgeoisie 
against its will, if he made the unification of Germany, in the way 
it had been formulated by the bourgeoisie, a reality, the conflict 
would be resolved of  itself,  and Bismarck would inevitably become 
the idol of the bourgeoisie as Louis Napoleon, his model, before 
him. 
The bourgeoisie supplied him with the aim, Louis Napoleon 
with the method of achieving the aim; only the implementation 
was left to Bismarck. 
To place Prussia at the head of Germany, it was necessary not 
only to expel Austria forcibly from the German Confederation367 
but also to subjugate the small states. In Prussian politics, such a 
refreshing jolly war368 of Germans against Germans had been the 
principal means of territorial expansion since the year dot, no 
worthy Prussian feared such a thing. Just as little misgiving could 
be caused by the other principal means: alliance with foreign 
countries against Germans. The out-and-out support of sentimen­
tal Alexander of Russia was certain. Louis Napoleon had never 
denied Prussia's Piedmont mission in Germany and was quite 
willing to make a deal with Bismarck. If he could get what he 
wanted peacefully, in the form of compensation, so much the 
better. Besides, he did not need to get the entire left bank of the 
Rhine at one go, if he received it piecemeal, a strip for every new 
advance by Prussia, it would be less conspicuous, and yet lead to 
his goal. In the eyes of the French chauvinists, a square mile on 
the Rhine was worth the whole of Savoy and Nice. Negotiations 
were therefore held with Louis Napoleon, and his permission was 
obtained for Prussia's expansion and the establishment of a North 
German Confederation.3  9 That he was offered in return a strip of 
German territory on the Rhine is beyond doubta; in the 
negotiations with Govone, Bismarck mentioned Rhenish Bavaria 
and Rhenish Hesse.370  This he subsequently denied, to be sure. 
But a diplomat, particularly a Prussian diplomat, has his own views 
of the limits within which one is justified, and even obliged, to do 
a little violence to the truth. After all, truth is a woman and 
therefore, according to Junker ideas, actually likes it. Louis 
Napoleon was not so stupid as to allow Prussian expansion without 
a Prussian promise of compensation; Bleichröder would sooner 
a Engels' note in pencil in the margin: "Division — the Main line" (see p. 484 of 
this volume).— Ed. 

=====第509页=====
The Role of Force in History 481 
have lent money without interest. But he did not know his 
Prussians well enough and was anyway cheated in the end. In 
short, after he had been assured, an alliance was formed with Italy 
for the "stab in the heart". 
The philistines in various countries were highly indignant over 
this expression. But quite wrongly. A la guerre comme à la guerre? 
The expression only proves that Bismarck recognised the German 
civil war of 1866 for what it was, namely, a revolution, and that he 
was willing to carry out that revolution with revolutionary 
methods. And he did. His treatment of the Federal Diet was 
revolutionary. Instead of submitting to the constitutional decision 
of the federal authorities, he accused them of violating the federal 
treaty—a pure pretext—broke up the Confederation, proclaimed 
a new constitution with a Reichstag elected by revolutionary 
universal suffrage and finally expelled the Federal Diet from 
Frankfurt. 371 In Upper Silesia he formed a Hungarian legion 
under revolutionary General Klapka and other revolutionary 
officers whose soldiers, Hungarian deserters and prisoners of war, 
were to fight against their own legitimate commander-in-chief.b 
After the conquest of Bohemia, Bismarck issued a proclamation 
"To the Population of the Glorious Kingdom of Bohemia", whose 
content was likewise a hard slap in the face for legitimist 
traditions.0 After peace had already been established, he seized for 
Prussia all the possessions of three legitimate German federal 
monarchs and a free city372 without the slightest qualms of his 
Christian and legitimist conscience over the fact that these princes 
who had been expelled were no less rulers "by the grace of God" 
than the King of Prussia. In short, it was a complete revolution, 
carried out with revolutionary means. We are naturally the last to 
reproach him for this. On the contrary, what we reproach him 
with is that he was not revolutionary enough, that he was no more 
than a Prussian revolutionary from above, that he began a whole 
revolution in a position where he was able to carry through only 
half a revolution, that, once having set out on the course of 
annexations, he was content with four miserable small states. 
And then Napoleon the Little373 came limping up behind and 
demanded his reward. During the war he could have taken 
whatever he wanted on the Rhine, for not only the land, but also 
a That's how it is in wartime.— Ed. 
b Engels' note in pencil in the margin: "Oath!"—Ed. 
c O. Bismarck, "Ansprache an die Einwohner des glorreichen Königreichs 
Böhmen". — Ed. 

=====第510页=====
482 Frederick Engels 
the fortresses, were exposed. He hesitated; he expected a 
protracted war that would wear out both sides; instead, there was 
a series of quick blows, and Austria was crushed in eight days. At 
first he demanded what Bismarck had named to General Govone 
as a possible compensation—Rhenish Bavaria and Rhenish Hesse, 
including Mainz. But Bismarck could not give that up now, even if 
he had wanted to. The enormous successes of the war had 
imposed new obligations on him. At a time when Prussia set itself 
up as the protector of Germany, it could not sell off Mainz, the 
key to the Middle Rhine, to a foreign country. Bismarck refused. 
Louis Napoleon was willing to bargain; he now demanded only 
Luxemburg, Landau, Saarlouis and the Saarbrücken coal basin. 
But this too Bismarck no longer could relinquish, the more so as 
Prussian territory too was claimed. Why had Louis Napoleon not 
seized it himself at the right moment, when the Prussians were 
stuck in Bohemia? In short, nothing came of the compensation to 
France. Bismarck knew this meant a future war with France, but 
that was exactly what he wanted. 
In the peace treaties, Prussia did not exploit the favourable 
situation as ruthlessly this time as it had usually done in moments 
of success. There were sound reasons for it. Saxony and 
Hesse-Darmstadt were included in the new North German 
Confederation and, if only for this reason, were spared. Bavaria, 
Württemberg and Baden had to be treated with indulgence, 
because Bismarck had to sign secret offensive and defensive 
agreements with them. And Austria—had not Bismarck rendered 
it a service by smashing the traditional entanglement that tied it to 
Germany and Italy? Had he not just now secured for it the 
long-sought position of an independent great power? Had he not 
actually known better than Austria itself what was good for it 
when he had defeated it in Bohemia? Did not Austria, if properly 
handled, have to realise that the geographical position, the mutual 
entanglement of the two countries made the Germany united by 
Prussia its essential and natural ally? 
Thus it came about that, for the first time in its existence, 
Prussia was able to surround itself with a halo of generosity, and 
this because it threw a sprat to catch a salmon. 
Not only Austria had been beaten on the Bohemian bat­
tlefields—the German bourgeoisie had been beaten as well. 
Bismarck had shown it that he knew better what was good for it 
than it knew  itself.  A continuation of the conflict by the Chamber 
was out of the question. The liberal pretensions of the bourgeoisie 
had been buried for a long time to come, but its national demands 

=====第511页=====
The Role of Force in History 483 
were receiving fuller satisfaction with every passing day. Bismarck 
fulfilled its national programme with a speed and accuracy that 
surprised the bourgeoisie  itself,  and having proved to it palpably, 
in corpore vili—on its own vile body—its limpness and listlessness, 
and thus its complete inability to implement its own programme, 
he also played the magnanimous towards it and applied to the 
now actually disarmed Chamber to exempt the government from 
indemnity for its anti-constitutional rule during the conflict. 
Touched to tears, it agreed to this now harmless step forward. 374 
Nevertheless, the bourgeoisie was reminded that it too had been 
defeated at Königgrätz. 3 The constitution of the North German 
Confederation was modelled on the pattern of the Prussian 
constitution as authentically interpreted during the conflict. 
Refusal of taxes was prohibited. The federal Chancellor and his 
ministers were appointed by the King of Prussia, independently of 
any parliamentary majority. The army's independence of parlia­
ment, secured by the conflict, was stressed also in respect of the 
Reichstag. But the members of this Reichstag had the exalting 
awareness that they had been elected by universal suffrage. They 
were also reminded of this, and most unpleasantly, by the sight of 
the two socialists 3 sitting among them. For the first time socialist 
deputies, representatives of the proletariat, appeared in a par­
liamentary body. This was an ominous sign. 
At first all this was unimportant. The thing now was to advance 
and exploit the new unity of the Empire, at least that of the 
North, in the interests of the bourgeoisie and thereby to lure the 
South German bourgeois too into the new Confederation. The 
constitution of the Confederation took the economically most 
important legislative relations away from the competency of the 
individual states and transferred them to the Confederation: 
common civil law and freedom of movement within the entire 
Confederation, right of residence, legislation on the crafts, trade, 
customs tariffs, navigation, coins, weights and measures, railways, 
waterways, post and telegraphs, patents, banks, all foreign policy, 
consulates, commercial protection abroad, sanitary police, the 
penal code, judicial proceedings, etc. Most of these questions were 
now regulated quickly, and in general liberally, by law. And 
then,—at long last!—the ugliest abuses of the small state system 
were abolished, those that, on the one hand, most obstructed 
capitalist development, and, on the other, the Prussian craving for 
power. But that was no world-historic achievement, as the 
a August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht. — Ed. 
33-1243 

=====第512页=====
484 Frederick Engels 
bourgeoisie, now turning chauvinistic, trumpeted forth, but a very, 
very long overdue and imperfect imitation of what the French 
Revolution had already done seventy years before, and what all 
other civilised states had introduced long ago. Instead of boasting, 
it would have been more appropriate to feel ashamed that "highly 
educated" Germany was the last to do it. 
Throughout all this period of the North German Confederation, 
Bismarck willingly obliged the German bourgeoisie in the 
economic field and, even in questions affecting the competency of 
parliament, showed the iron fist only in a velvet glove. This was 
his best period; at times one could entertain doubts about his 
peculiarly Prussian narrow-mindedness, his inability to realise that 
there are in world history other and more powerful forces than 
armies and diplomatic intrigues relying on them. 
Bismarck not only knew that the peace with Austria was 
pregnant with war with France, he also desired it. This war was to 
provide the means of perfecting the Prusso-German Empire 
demanded of him by the German bourgeoisie.* The attempts 
gradually to transform the Customs Parliament376 into a Reichstag 
and thus to draw the southern states little by little into the North 
German Confederation were wrecked by the loud call of the South 
German deputies: No extension of competence! The mood of the 
governments, which had only recently been defeated on the field 
of battle, was no more favourable. Only fresh, palpable proof that 
the Prussians were not only much more powerful than these 
governments, but also powerful enough to protect them, that is, a 
new all-German war, could rapidly bring the moment of surren­
der. Besides, after the victories, it seemed as though the dividing 
line on the Main,377 upon which Bismarck and Louis Napoleon 
had secretly agreed beforehand, had after all been imposed on the 
Prussians by the latter; in that case, a union with South Germany 
was a violation of the formally recognised right of the French this 
time to the fragmentation of Germany, was a casus belli. 
In the meantime, Louis Napoleon had to search for a patch of 
* Even before the Austrian war, when Bismarck was interpellated by a minister 
from a central German state on his demagogic German policy, he replied that, 
despite all the rhetoric, he would expel Austria from Germany and break up the 
Confederation.— "And the central states, do you think they will quietly look 
on?"  — "You, the central states, you will do nothing." — "And what is to become of 
the Germans then?" — "I shall then lead them to Paris and unite them there." 
(Told in Paris before the Austrian] war by the said minister from the central state 
and published during that war in the Manchester Guardian by Mrs. Crawford, its 
Paris correspondent.) 

=====第513页=====
The Role of Force in History 485 
land somewhere near the German border which he could pocket 
as compensation for Sadowa. When the new North German 
Confederation was formed, it did not include Luxemburg, now a 
state in personal union with Holland, but otherwise completely 
independent. Besides, it was approximately as much Frenchified as 
Alsace and was far more attracted to France than to Prussia, which 
it positively hated. 
Luxemburg is a striking example of what Germany's political 
wretchedness since the Middle Ages had made of the German-
French borderlands, the more striking because Luxemburg had 
until 1866 nominally belonged to Germany. Up to 1830, it had 
been composed of a French and a German part, but the German 
part had already at this early stage submitted to superior French 
culture. The German Emperors of Luxemburg were French in 
both language and education. Since its incorporation in the 
Burgundy lands (1440), Luxemburg, like all the other Low 
Countries, had remained in a purely nominal union with 
Germany; even admission to the German Confederation in 1815 
changed nothing. After 1830, the French part and a substantial 
portion of the German part were annexed to Belgium. However, 
in what remained of German Luxemburg, everything continued 
on a French footing: the courts, the authorities, the Chamber, 
everything was conducted in French, all public and private 
documents, all business accounts were kept in French, in 
secondary schools the teaching was in French, French was and 
remained the language of the educated—naturally a French that 
groaned and panted with the High German sound shift. In short, 
two languages were spoken in Luxemburg: a Rhenish Franconian 
popular dialect, and French, while High German remained a 
foreign tongue. The Prussian garrison in the capital made things 
worse rather than better. This may be shameful for Germany but 
it is true. And this voluntary Frenchification of Luxemburg 
showed the similar processes in Alsace and German Lorraine in 
their true light. 
The King of Holland,3 the sovereign Duke of Luxemburg, who 
could well use hard cash, was willing to sell the duchy to Louis 
Napoleon. The people of Luxemburg would have undoubtedly 
approved their incorporation into France—the proof was their 
attitude in the war of 1870. From the standpoint of international 
law, Prussia could not object, since it had itself brought about 
a William III.— Ed. 
33* 

=====第514页=====
486 Frederick Engels 
Luxemburg's exclusion from Germany. Its troops were stationed 
in the capital as the federal garrison of a federal German fortress; 
as soon as Luxemburg ceased to be a federal fortress, they no 
longer had any right to be there. Why did they not go home, why 
could Bismarck not agree to Luxemburg's annexation? 
Simply, because the contradictions in which he had become 
entangled were now becoming evident. As far as Prussia was 
concerned, before 1866 Germany was simply territory for an­
nexation, which had to be shared with foreign countries. After 
1866,  Germany became a Prussian protectorate, which had to be 
defended against foreign claws. True, in the interests of Prussia, 
whole parts of Germany had been excluded from the newly 
founded so-called Germany. But the right of the German nation 
to its own territory now imposed on the Prussian Crown the duty 
of preventing the incorporation of these parts of the former 
federal territory into foreign states, of leaving the door open for 
their future union with the new Prussian-German state. It was for 
this reason that Italy had stopped at the Tyrolean border,378 and 
that Luxemburg could not be allowed to go over to Louis 
Napoleon. A truly revolutionary government could declare this 
openly. Not so the royal Prussian revolutionary, who had finally 
succeeded in transforming Germany into a "geographic concept" 
in Metternich's sense.379 From the point of view of international 
law, he had placed himself in the wrong, and the only way he 
could get out of the difficulty was to use his favourite students' 
beerhouse interpretation of international law. 
If in so doing he was not simply laughed to scorn, it was only 
because, in the spring of 1867, Louis Napoleon was not at all 
ready for a big war. Agreement was reached at the London 
Conference. The Prussians evacuated Luxemburg, the fortress was 
demolished, the duchy was declared neutral.380 The war was again 
postponed. 
Louis Napoleon could not rest content with this. He was willing 
to tolerate the aggrandisement of Prussia only if he received 
corresponding compensation on the Rhine. He was willing to 
content himself with little, he had even reduced that, but he had 
received nothing, had been cheated of everything. However, a 
Bonapartist Empire in France could exist only if it shifted the 
border gradually towards the Rhine and if France—in fact or at 
least in imagination — remained the arbiter of Europe. The border 
shift had failed, France's position as arbiter was already 
threatened, the Bonapartist press loudly called for revenge for 
Sadowa—if Louis Napoleon wanted to keep his throne, he had to 

=====第515页=====
The Role of Force in History 487 
remain true to his role and to obtain by force what he had not 
obtained amicably, in spite of services rendered. 
So eager war preparations, both diplomatic and military, were 
begun by both sides. And then the following diplomatic event 
occurred: 
Spain was looking for a candidate for the throne. In March3 
Benedetti, the French ambassador in Berlin, picked up rumours 
about claims for the throne advanced by Prince Leopold of 
Hohenzollern; he was charged by Paris to investigate the matter. 
Under-Secretary of State von Thile gave him his word of honour 
that the Prussian Government knew nothing about it. During a 
visit to Paris, Benedetti learned the Emperor's opinion: "This 
candidature is essentially anti-national, the country will not tolerate 
it, it must be prevented." 
Incidentally, Louis Napoleon showed thereby that he was 
already down at heel. Indeed, what could have been a better 
"revenge for Sadowa" than a Prussian Prince on the Spanish 
throne, the unavoidable annoyances resulting therefrom, Prussian 
involvement in the internal relations between the Spanish parties, 
perhaps even a war, a defeat of the dwarfish Prussian navy, in 
any case a Prussia looking quite grotesque in the eyes of Europe? 
But Louis Bonaparte could no longer afford this spectacle. His 
credit was already so much shaken that he was committed to the 
traditional point of view according to which a German sovereign 
on the Spanish throne would place France between two fires and 
was therefore intolerable—a childish point of view after 1830. 
So Benedetti visited Bismarck to receive further information 
and to make France's point of view clear to him (May 11, 1869). 
He did not learn anything particularly conclusive from Bismarck. 
Bismarck, however, did learn from Benedetti what he wanted to 
find out: that Leopold's nomination as candidate would mean an 
immediate war with France. This gave Bismarck the opportunity 
to have the war break out when it suited him. 
In actual fact, Leopold's candidature emerged once again in July 
1870 and immediately led to war, no matter how much Louis 
Napoleon resisted it. He not only saw that he had walked into a 
trap,  he also knew that his emperorship was at stake, and he had 
little confidence in the faithfulness of his Bonapartist Brimstone 
gang,381 who assured him that everything was ready, up to the last 
button on the men's spats, and even less confidence in their 
military and administrative skill. But the logical consequences of 
a 1869.— Ed. 

=====第516页=====
488 Frederick Engels 
his own past drove him towards destruction; his hesitation itself 
hastened his doom. 
Bismarck, on the other hand, was not only quite ready for 
action militarily, but this time he actually had the people behind 
him, who saw only one fact behind the diplomatic lies spread by 
both sides: namely, that this was a war not only for the Rhine, but 
for national existence. For the first time since 1813, reserves and 
the Landwehr 582 once again flocked to the colours, eager and keen 
to fight. It did not matter how all this had come about, did not 
matter what piece of the two-thousand-year-old national heritage 
Bismarck had, off his own back, promised or not promised to 
Louis Napoleon: the thing was to teach foreign countries once and 
for all that they were not to interfere in German internal affairs 
and that it was not Germany's mission to support Louis Napoleon's 
shaky throne by ceding German territory. All class differences 
vanished in the face of this national upsurge, all cravings of the 
South German courts for a Confederation of the Rhine, all attempts 
at a restoration of the expelled monarchs melted away. 
Both sides had sought allies. Louis Napoleon had Austria and 
Denmark for sure, and was pretty certain of Italy. Bismarck had 
Russia. But Austria, as always, was not ready and could not 
participate effectively before September  2—  and on September 2 
Louis Napoleon was a prisoner of war of the Germans, and Russia 
had informed Austria that it would attack Austria the moment 
Austria attacked Prussia. In Italy, however, Louis Napoleon's 
double-dealing policy wrought vengeance upon him: he had 
sought to set national unity in motion, but at the same time to 
protect the Pope from that same national unity; he had kept Rome 
occupied with troops he now needed at home but which he could 
not withdraw without obliging Italy to respect the sovereignty of 
Rome and the Pope; this in turn prevented Italy from supporting 
him. Denmark finally got the order from Russia to behave  itself. 
The rapid blows of the German armies from Spicheren and 
Worth to Sedan383 were more decisive in localising the war than all 
diplomatic negotiations. Louis Napoleon's army was defeated in 
every battle and finally three-quarters of it went to Germany as 
prisoners of war. This was not the fault of the soldiers, who had 
fought bravely enough, but of the leaders and the administration. 
But if, like Louis Napoleon, one had created an empire with the 
help of a gang of rascals, if this empire had been maintained for 
eighteen years merely by abandoning France to the exploitation of 
that gang, if all decisive posts in the state had been filled with 
people belonging to that very gang and all subordinate posts with 

=====第517页=====
The Role of Force in History 489 
their accomplices, then one should not engage in a life-and-death 
battle if one does not wish to be left in the lurch. The entire 
edifice of the empire that had been the admiration of European 
philistines for years crashed in less than five weeks; the revolution 
of September  4384  simply cleared away the rubble, and Bismarck, 
who had gone to war to found a small German empire, turned out 
one fine morning to be the founder of a French republic. 
According to Bismarck's own proclamation,385  the war was 
waged not against the French people, but against Louis Napoleon. 
With his fall, all the reasons to wage war thus disappeared. The 
government of September 4, which was not so naïve in other 
matters, also deluded itself to this effect, and was greatly surprised 
when Bismarck suddenly showed himself a Prussian Junker. 
No one in the world hates the French as much as the Prussian 
Junkers do. For not only had the hitherto tax-exempled Junker 
suffered heavily during the chastisement by the French (from 
1806 to 1813), which he had brought about by his own arrogance; 
but, what was much worse, the godless French had so confused 
the people by their outrageous revolution that the old grandeur of 
the Junkers had for the most part been laid to rest even in old 
Prussia, so that year in and year out the poor Junkers had to 
struggle hard to keep what was left of it, and many of them were 
already debased to a shabby sponging nobility. For this, revenge 
had to be taken on France, and the Junker officers in the army 
under Bismarck's leadership took care of that. Lists of war 
contributions exacted by France from Prussia were drawn up and 
the size of the war contributions imposed on the various towns 
and departments was calculated accordingly, but naturally taking 
into account France's much greater wealth. Foodstuffs, forage, 
clothes, footwear, etc., were requisitioned with demonstrative 
ruthlessness. A mayor in the Ardennes who said that he would be 
unable to make the deliveries was given twenty-five strokes of the 
cane without further ado, as the Paris government officially 
proved. The francs-tireurs, who acted in such strict accordance 
with the Prussian Landsturm Statute of  1813 386 as if they had 
made a special study of it, were shot without mercy on the spot. 
The stories about clocks being sent home are also true, even the 
Kölnische Zeitung reported it. Only, according to Prussian views, 
those clocks were not stolen but were ownerless, having been 
found in abandoned villas near Paris and confiscated for the dear 
ones at home. Thus, the Junkers under Bismarck's leadership saw 
to it that, despite the irreproachable behaviour of the men and 
many of the officers, the specifically Prussian character of the war 

=====第518页=====
490 Frederick Engels 
was preserved, and that this was driven home to the French, who 
held the entire army responsible for the mean spitefulness of the 
Junkers. 
And yet it fell to the lot of these same Junkers to render to the 
French people an honour unequalled in history. When all attempts 
to make the enemy relieve the siege of Paris had failed, all the 
French armies had been beaten back. Bourbaki's last great 
counter-attack on the German lines of communication had proved 
abortive, when all Europe's diplomats had abandoned France to its 
fate without stirring a finger, emaciated Paris finally had to 
surrender.387 The hearts of the Junkers beat faster when they were 
finally able to enter the godless nest in triumph and take complete 
vengeance upon the Paris arch-rebels—the complete vengeance 
which had been denied to them by Alexander of Russia in 1814 
and Wellington in 1815; now they could chastise the seat and 
homeland of the revolution to their hearts' content. 
Paris surrendered, it paid a contribution of 200 millions; the 
forts were handed over to the Prussians; the garrison laid down its 
arms before the victors and delivered up its field guns; the 
cannons on the wall around Paris were taken off their gun-
carriages; all means of resistance belonging to the state were 
handed over piece by piece. But the actual defenders of Paris, the 
National Guard, the armed Parisians, remained untouched, for 
nobody expected them to give up their arms, either their rifles or 
their cannons*; and so that it would be known to the whole world 
that the victorious German army had respectfully stopped before 
the armed people of Paris, the victors did not enter Paris, but 
were content to be allowed to occupy for three days the Champs 
Elysées, a public park, protected, guarded and enclosed on all 
sides by the sentries of the Parisians! No German soldier set foot 
in Paris City Hall or stepped on the boulevards, and the few that 
were admitted to the Louvre to admire the art treasures there had 
to ask for permission, otherwise it would have been a violation of 
the surrender. France was defeated, Paris starved, but the Parisian 
people had by their glorious past ensured respect for themselves, 
so that no victor dared to demand their disarmament, no one had 
the courage to enter their homes or to desecrate by a triumphal 
march those streets which had been the battle-ground of so many 
* It was these cannons, which belonged to the National Guard and not to the 
state,  and had therefore not been handed over to the Prussians, that Thiers 
ordered on March 18, 1871, to be stolen from the Parisians, thereby bringing about 
the rebellion that gave rise to the Commune. 

=====第519页=====
The Role of Force in History 491 
revolutions. It was as if the upstart German Emperor3 was taking 
off his hat before the living revolutionaries of Paris, as once his 
brotherb had before the dead March fighters of Berlin,388 and as if 
the entire German army stood behind him presenting arms. 
But that was the only sacrifice Bismarck had to make. Under the 
pretext that there was no government in France which could sign 
a peace treaty with him—which was just as true as it was false 
both on September 4 and on January 28—he had exploited his 
successes in the truly Prussian manner, to the very last drop, and 
declared himself ready for peace only after France had been 
completely crushed. In the peace treaty  itself,  once again 
according to the good old Prussian custom, he "ruthlessly 
exploited the favourable situation". Not only was the unheard-of 
sum of  5,000  millions in war reparations extorted, but also two 
provinces, Alsace and German Lorraine, with Metz and Strasbourg 
were torn away from France and incorporated into Germany. 3 
With this annexation, Bismarck appeared for the first time as an 
independent politician, who was no longer implementing in his 
own way a programme dictated from outside, but translating into 
action the products of his own brain, thereby committing his first 
enormous blunder.0 
Alsace had been conquered in the main by France during the 
Thirty Years' War.390 Richelieu had thereby abandoned Henry 
IV's sound principle: 
"Let the Spanish language belong to the Spaniard, the German to the German, 
but where French is spoken, that belongs to me." 
In so doing, Richelieu relied on the principle of the natural 
border on the Rhine, the historical border of old Gaul. This was 
folly; but the German Empire, which incorporated the French-
speaking parts of Lorraine and Belgium and even of the 
Franche-Comté, had no right to reproach France with annexing 
German-speaking lands. And even if, in 1681, in peacetime, 
Louis XIV had seized Strassburg with the help of a pro-French 
party in the city, 391 it is not for Prussia to be indignant over it, 
having raped the Free Imperial town of Nuremberg in exactly the 
a William I.— Ed. 
b Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
c The text below, up to the words "Bismarck had reached his objective" (see 
this volume, p. 497), is printed according to the Neue Zeit, Vol. I, No. 25, 1895-96, 
pp. 772-76, because the relative manuscript pages are missing.— Ed. 

=====第520页=====
492 Frederick Engels 
same way in 1796, although, to be sure, without having been 
called by a Prussian party, and without success.* 
Lorraine was sold off to France in 1735 by Austria under the 
Peace of Vienna,394 and in 1766 it definitively became a French 
possession. For centuries it had belonged to the German Empire 
only nominally, its dukes were French in every respect and had 
almost always been allied with France. 
Before the French Revolution, there were a great many small 
domains in the Vosges which behaved in respect to Germany like 
estates of the empire subject immediately to the emperor, but 
recognised the sovereignty of France. They derived benefits from 
this hermaphroditic position, and if the German Empire tolerated 
it instead of calling these sovereigns to account, it could not 
complain when France, by virtue of its sovereignty, extended 
protection to the people of these territories against the expelled 
princes. 
On the whole, before the Revolution, this German territory was 
practically not Frenchified at all. German remained the school and 
official language internally, at least in Alsace. The French 
Government patronised the German provinces, which now, after 
many years of war devastation, had seen no more enemies on their 
lands since the early 18th century. The German Empire, 
perpetually torn by internal wars, was really not in a state to 
attract the Alsatians back to the maternal bosom; at least they now 
* Louis XIV is reproached with having set loose his "reunion chambers" 392 in 
times of peace on German areas which did not belong to him. This is something 
that could not be said of the Prussians even by those who had the most malicious 
envy of them. On the contrary. After they had signed a separate peace with France 
in 1795393  in direct violation of the imperial constitution and had rallied their 
equally renegade small neighbours behind the demarcation line around themselves 
in the first North German Confederation, they utilised, for attempts to annex 
territory in Franconia, the tight spot the South German estates of the empire found 
themselves in as a result of continuing the war alone in alliance with Austria. They 
set up reunion chambers according to Louis' pattern in Ansbach and Bayreuth 
(which were then Prussian), raised claims to a series of neighbouring areas, in 
comparison with which Louis' legal pretexts were absolutely convincing; and when 
the Germans then retreated after a beating and the French moved into Franconia, 
the Prussian saviours occupied the Nuremberg area, including the suburbs up to 
the city wall, and tricked the Nuremberg philistines, who were trembling with fear, 
into signing a treaty (September 2, 1796) which subjected the city to Prussian rule 
on the condition that Jews would never be allowed within the city walls. 
Immediately after that, Archduke Charles took the offensive again, beat the French 
at Würzburg on September 3 and 4, 1796, and the attempt to knock the idea of 
Prussia's German mission into the heads of the Nurembergers thus went up in 
smoke. 

=====第521页=====
The Role of Force in History 493 
had peace and quiet, knew how things stood, and the philistines 
who set the tone accepted the inscrutable ways of the Lord; after 
all, their fate was not unprecedented: the people of Holstein were 
also under foreign, Danish, rule. 
Then came the French Revolution. What Alsace and Lorraine 
never dared hope to receive from Germany was given to them by 
France as a gift. The feudal fetters were smashed. The  serf,  the 
peasant liable to statute labour, became a free man, in many cases 
the free owner of his farmstead and field. In the towns, patrician 
rule and guild privileges disappeared. The nobility was driven out. 
In the lands of the small princes and lords, the peasants followed 
the example of their neighbours and expelled the sovereigns, 
government chambers and nobility, and declared themselves free 
French citizens. In no other part of France did the people join the 
revolution with greater enthusiasm than in the German-speaking 
part. And when the German Empire now declared war on the 
revolution, when the Germans, who not only continued to carry 
their own chains submissively, but also allowed themselves to be 
used once again to force the old servitude upon the French and to 
re-impose on the Alsatian peasants the feudal lords they had only 
just expelled, now it was all over with the Germanism of the 
people of Alsace and Lorraine, it was then that they learned to 
hate and despise the Germans; it was then that the Marseillaise was 
written in Strasbourg, set to music and first sung by the Alsatians, 
and that the German French, despite their language and their 
past, fused on hundreds of battlefields in the struggle for the 
revolution into a single nation with the native French. 
Did not the great revolution work the same miracle with the 
Flemings of Dunkirk, the Celts of Brittany, the Italians of Corsica? 
And if we complain that this happened also with Germans, does it 
not show that we have forgotten our entire history, which made 
this possible? Have we forgotten that the whole left bank of the 
Rhine, which took only a passive part in the revolution, was 
pro-French when the Germans again moved in in 1814, and 
continued to be pro-French up to 1848, when the revolution 
rehabilitated the Germans in the eyes of the people on the Rhine? 
Have we forgotten that Heine's enthusiasm for the French and 
even his Bonapartism were but the echo of general public feeling 
on the left bank of the Rhine? 
When the allies invaded in 1814 it was precisely in Alsace and 
German Lorraine that they encountered the most resolute 
hostility, the most vehement resistance on the part of the people 
themselves; because here the danger was felt of having to become 

=====第522页=====
494 Frederick Engels 
German again. And yet, at that time, practically only German was 
spoken there. But when the danger of being torn from France 
had passed, when an end had been put to the annexationist 
appetites of the romantic Germanophile chauvinists, the awareness 
appeared that a closer fusion with France was needed also in 
respect of the language, and then the Frenchification of schools 
was introduced, similar to that voluntarily established by the 
Luxemburgers in their land. Yet the transformation proceeded 
very slowly; only the present generation of the bourgeoisie is really 
Frenchified, while the peasants and workers speak German. The 
position is approximately the same as in Luxemburg: literary 
German has been ousted by French (except partially in the pulpit), 
but the German folk dialect has lost ground only at the language 
border and is used as the popular language to a much greater 
extent than in most parts of Germany. 
Such was the land that Bismarck and the Prussian Junkers, 
backed by the revival of chauvinistic romanticism which seems 
inseparable from all German problems, undertook to make 
German again. The wish to make Strasbourg, the homeland of the 
Marseillaise, German, was just as absurd as to make Nice, the 
homeland of Garibaldi, French. But in Nice, Louis Napoleon at 
least observed decency and put the question of annexation to the 
vote—and the manoeuvre succeeded. Quite apart from the fact 
that for very good reasons the Prussians detest such revolutionary 
measures—never and nowhere has there been an instance when 
the mass of the people wanted to be annexed to Prussia—it was 
known only too well that precisely here the entire population was 
more closely attached to France than were the native French 
themselves. And thus this arbitrary act was performed by brute 
force. It was an act of revenge against the French Revolution; one 
of the parts which had been fused with France precisely as a result 
of the revolution was torn away. 
It is true that militarily there was a purpose behind this 
annexation. Metz and Strasbourg gave Germany an enormously 
strong line of defence. So long as Belgium and Switzerland remain 
neutral a massive French offensive can be begun only on the 
narrow strip of land between Metz and the Vosges; and besides, 
Koblenz, Metz, Strasbourg and Mainz form the strongest and 
biggest quadrangle of fortresses in the world. However, half of 
this quadrangle of fortresses, as is the case also with the Austrian 
fortresses in Lombardy, 395 lies in enemy territory and forms 
citadels there to keep the population down. Moreover, to complete 
the quadrangle, it was necessary to seize areas beyond the 

=====第523页=====
The Role of Force in History 495 
German-language border and to annex a quarter of a million of 
native Frenchmen as well. 
The great strategic advantage is thus the only reason that can 
justify the annexation. However, can this gain in any way be 
compared with the harm it wrought? 
The Prussian Junker refused to reckon with the great moral 
disadvantage at which the young German Empire had placed itself 
by openly and frankly declaring brutal force its guiding principle. 
Quite the reverse, refractory subjects forcibly kept in check are a 
necessity for him; they are proof of increased Prussian might; and 
essentially he has never any others. But he was obliged to reckon 
with the political consequences of the annexation. And these were 
clearly apparent. Even before the annexation came into force, 
Marx loudly drew the world's attention to it in a circular of the 
International: The annexation of Alsace and Lorraine makes Russia the 
arbiter of Europe.3 And this has been repeated often enough by the 
Social-Democrats from the rostrum of the Reichstag until the truth 
of this statement was finally acknowledged by Bismarck himself in 
his Reichstag speech of February 6, 1888, by his whimpering 
before the almighty Tsar,b the lord of war and peace.396 
Actually, the situation was clear as daylight. To tear from France 
two of its fanatically patriotic provinces, meant to push it into the 
arms of anybody who held out hope for their return and to make 
it an eternal enemy. However, Bismarck, in this respect a worthy 
and conscientious representative of the German philistines, de­
manded that the French renounce Alsace and Lorraine not only 
constitutionally but also morally, and in addition wanted them to 
be downright glad that these two parts of revolutionary France 
"had been returned to the old Fatherland", of which they simply 
would not hear. Unfortunately, however, the French did not do 
so, any more than the Germans morally renounced the left bank 
of the Rhine during the Napoleonic wars, even though this area 
had not the slightest longing to return to them at that time. As 
long as the people of Alsace and Lorraine wish to return to 
France, it must and will strive to regain them and look for means 
and, hence, also for allies, to achieve this. And the natural ally 
against Germany is Russia. 
If the two biggest and strongest nations of the Western 
a See K. Marx, Second Address of the General Council of the International Working 
Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War (present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 266-
68).—  Ed. 
b Alexander III.— Ed. 

=====第524页=====
496 Frederick Engels 
continent neutralise each other by their hostility, if there is just 
one bone of contention between them which incites them to fight 
each other, the advantage lies only with Russia, whose hands are 
so much the freer; Russia who is all the less hampered by 
Germany in its cravings for conquest, the more it can count on 
unconditional support from France. And was it not Bismarck who 
placed France in a position where it has to beg for Russia's 
alliance, where it must willingly abandon Constantinople to Russia, 
if only the latter promises the return of France's lost provinces? 
And if in spite of all that the peace has been kept for seventeen 
years,  is there any other reason than that the Landwehr system 
introduced in France and Russia requires at least sixteen, and 
after the most recent German improvements even twenty-five 
years,  to provide the full number of trained age groups? And now 
that the annexation has for seventeen years been the dominant 
factor in all European politics, is it not at this moment the main 
cause of the crisis threatening the continent with war? Remove this 
single fact and peace is assured! 
The Alsatian bourgeois who speaks French with an Upper 
German accent, that hybrid fop who puts on greater French airs 
than a Frenchman through and through, who looks down on 
Goethe and goes into raptures over Racine, who still cannot rid 
himself of his bad conscience over his secret Germanness and 
exactly for that reason has to run down everything German, so 
that he does not even suit the role of a mediator between 
Germany and France, this Alsatian bourgeois is indeed a 
despicable fellow, be he a Mulhouse industrialist or a Paris 
journalist. But what has made him what he is if not the history of 
Germany over the past three hundred years? And were not until 
quite recently almost all Germans abroad, especially the mer­
chants, genuine Alsatians, who denied their German origin, who 
masochistically imposed on themselves the alien nationality of their 
new homeland and thus voluntarily made themselves certainly no 
less ridiculous than the Alsatians, who at least are more or less 
compelled by circumstances to do so? In England, for example, 
the German merchants who immigrated between 1815 and 1840 
had almost without exception become Anglicised, spoke almost 
exclusively English among themselves, and even today, for 
example, at the Manchester Stock Exchange, there are old 
German philistines running around who would give half their 
wealth if they could pass for true Englishmen. Only in 1848 did a 
change set in, and since 1870, when even lieutenants of the 
reserve have been coming to England and Berlin has been sending 

=====第525页=====
The Role of Force in History 497 
its contingents here, the former servility is being ousted by a 
Prussian arrogance which makes us no less ridiculous abroad. 
Perhaps the union with Germany has been made more palatable 
to the Alsatians since 1871? On the contrary. They have been 
placed under a dictatorship, whereas next door, in France, there 
was a republic. A pedantical and obtrusive Prussian Landrat 
system has been introduced, in comparison with which the 
interference of the notorious French system of prefects, regulated 
by strict laws, is solid gold. An end has been rapidly put to the 
last remnants of freedom of the press, right of assembly and 
association, refractory town councils have been dissolved and 
German bureaucrats appointed mayors. On the other hand, 
however, there has been flattery of the "notables", that is, the 
thoroughly Frenchified nobles and bourgeois, and their exploiter 
interests have been protected against the peasants and workers, 
who,  although not well disposed towards Germany, at least spoke 
German, and formed the only element with which an attempt at 
reconciliation was possible. And what has been the result? That in 
February 1887, when the whole of Germany allowed itself to be 
intimidated and put a majority of the Bismarck cartel 397 in the 
Reichstag, Alsace and Lorraine elected nothing but staunch 
Frenchmen and rejected everyone who was suspected of even the 
mildest pro-German sympathies. 
Now, if the Alsatians are as they are, have we the right to be 
angry over that? Not at all. Their opposition to the annexation is 
an historical fact, which should not be deleted but explained. And 
this is the time for us to ask ourselves: how numerous and how 
colossal were the historical sins Germany committed before such a 
feeling could assert itself in Alsace? And how must our new 
German Empire look from the outside if, after seventeen years of 
re-Germanisation attempts, the Alsatians unanimously tell us: 
Spare us that? Have we the right to imagine that two successful 
campaigns and seventeen years of Bismarckian dictatorship suffice 
to do away with all the effects of three hundred years of 
ignominious history? 
Bismarck had reached his objective. His new Prussian-German 
Empire had been publicly proclaimed at Versailles, in Louis XIV's 
splendid state hall.398 France lay defenceless at his feet; defiant 
Paris,  which he himself had not dared touch, had been incited to 
the Commune uprising by Thiers and then crushed by the soldiers 
of the former imperial army returning from captivity. All 
European philistines admired Bismarck as they had admired Louis 
Napoleon, Bismarck's model, in the fifties. With Russian help 

=====第526页=====
498 Frederick Engels 
Germany had become the first power in Europe, and all power in 
Germany was concentrated in the hands of dictator Bismarck. 
Everything depended now on what he could do with that power. 
If he had so far carried out the unification plans of the 
bourgeoisie, even if not by bourgeois, but by Bonapartist methods, 
this matter was pretty well settled, and he now had to make his 
own plans, to show what ideas his own head could produce, and 
these had to find expression in the internal consolidation of the 
new empire. 
German society is composed of big landowners, peasants, 
bourgeois, petty bourgeois and workers; these can in turn be 
grouped into three major classes. 
Big landed property is in the hands of a few magnates (notably in 
Silesia) and a large number of middle landowners, most highly 
concentrated in the old Prussian provinces east of the Elbe. It is 
these Prussian Junkers who more or less dominate the entire class. 
They are farmers themselves, inasmuch as they entrust the 
cultivation of their estates for the most part tö managers, and in 
addition they often own distilleries and beet-sugar refineries. 
Wherever possible, their landed property is entailed upon the 
family by right of primogeniture. The younger sons join the army 
or the civil service, so that an even less wealthy petty nobility made 
up of officers and civil servants clings to this petty landowning 
gentry and is supplemented over and above this through the 
intensive promotion of nobles from among the higher officers and 
civil servants of bourgeois origin. On the lower fringes of all this 
bunch of nobles, there naturally emerges a numerically parasitic 
nobility, a noble Lumpenproletariat, which lives on debts, dubious 
gambling, pushiness, begging and political espionage. This society 
in its totality forms the Prussian Junkers and is one of the main 
pillars of the old Prussian state. However, the landowning core 
of the Junkers themselves has feet of clay. The duty to live up 
to its status becomes more and more expensive every day; the 
support for the younger sons through the lieutenant and asses­
sor stage, the marrying off of daughters, all costs money; and 
since all these are duties which push all other considerations 
into the background, it is no wonder that incomes are insufficient, 
that IOUs have to be signed or even mortgages have to be taken 
out. In short, Junkers stand always on the brink of the abyss; 
every misfortune, be it a war, a bad harvest or a commercial crisis, 
threatens to push them over the brink; and it is therefore no 
wonder that for well over a hundred years now they have been 
saved from ruin only by all sorts of state assistance and, in fact, 

=====第527页=====
The Role of Force in History 499 
continue to exist only thanks to state assistance. This artificially 
preserved class is doomed to extinction and no state assistance can 
keep it alive in the long run. But with it disappears also the old 
Prussian state. 
The peasant is an element that is little active politically. In so far 
as he himself is a proprietor, he is going ever more to ruin 
because of the unfavourable production conditions of the allot­
ment peasants, who cannot engage in stock-breeding, having been 
deprived of the old common Mark or community pasture. As a 
tenant, his position is even worse. Petty peasant production 
presupposes a predominantly subsistence economy, the money 
economy seals its doom. Hence the growing indebtedness, the 
massive expropriation by mortgage creditors, the recourse to 
domestic industry, so as just not to be evicted from his native soil. 
Politically, the peasantry is mainly indifferent or reactionary: on 
the Rhine it is ultramontane because of its old hatred for the 
Prussians, in other areas it is particularist or protestant-
conservative. Religious feeling still serves this class as an expres­
sion of social or political interests. 
We have already spoken about the bourgeoisie. From 1848 it 
experienced an unprecedented economic advance. Germany had 
increasingly participated in the vast expansion of industry 
following the 1847 commercial crisis, an expansion brought about 
by the establishment during that period of ocean steam navigation, 
the enormous extension of the railways and the discovery of gold 
in California and Australia.399 It was precisely the bourgeoisie's 
striving for the abolition of the obstructions to trade caused by the 
system of small states and for a position on the world market 
equal to that of its foreign competitors that gave the impetus to 
Bismarck's revolution. Now that French milliards were flooding 
Germany, a new period of feverish enterprise opened up before 
the bourgeoisie, during which it—by a crash on a national 
German scale400—proved for the first time that it had become a 
big industrial nation. The bourgeoisie was even then the economi­
cally most powerful class among the population; the state had to 
obey its economic interests; the revolution of 1848 had given the 
state an external constitutional form within which the bourgeoisie 
could rule also politically and develop its domination. Yet it was 
still far from actual political domination. In the conflict it had not 
triumphed over Bismarck; the resolution of the conflict through 
the revolutionising of Germany from above had also taught it that, 
for the time being, the executive power was dependent on it, at 
best, in a very indirect form, that it could neither appoint nor 
34-1243 

=====第528页=====
500 Frederick Engels 
dismiss ministers, nor dispose of the army. Besides, it was 
cowardly and limp in the face of an energetic executive power, but 
so were the Junkers, though this was more excusable in the case 
of the bourgeoisie because of the direct economic antagonism 
between it and the revolutionary industrial working class. There 
was no doubt, however, that it gradually had to destroy the 
Junkers economically, that it was the only propertied class which 
retained any prospect of a future. 
The petty bourgeoisie consisted first of all of remnants of the 
medieval craftsmen, who had been represented on a larger scale in 
backward Germany than in the rest of Western Europe; secondly, 
of the down-and-out bourgeois; and thirdly, of elements of the 
propertyless population who had risen to be small merchants. 
With the expansion of large-scale industry, the existence of the 
entire petty bourgeoisie lost the last remnants of stability; changes 
of occupation and periodic bankruptcies became the rule. This 
once so stable class which had been the nucleus of the German 
philistines fell from its previous contentment, docility, servility, 
piety and respectability into wild decadence and dissatisfaction 
with the fate allotted to it by God. The remnants of the craftsmen 
loudly demanded the restoration of guild privileges, some of the 
others became mildly democratic men of Progress,401 some even 
grew closer to the Social-Democrats and in some instances directly 
joined the working-class movement. 
Finally the workers. The agricultural workers, at least those in 
the east, still lived in semi-serfdom and could not be taken into 
account. On the other hand, Social-Democracy had made enor­
mous progress among the urban workers and grew to the extent 
that large-scale industry proletarianised the mass of the people 
and thereby exacerbated the class antagonism between the 
capitalists and the workers. Even if the Social-Democratic workers 
were for the time being still divided into two parties fighting each 
other,402 since the publication of Marx's Capital, the fundamental 
differences between them had nevertheless as good as disap­
peared. Orthodox Lassalleanism, with its exclusive demand for 
"producer associations assisted by the state", was gradually dying 
away and proved less and less capable of forming the nucleus of a 
Bonapartist state socialist workers' party. The harm wrought in 
this respect by individual leaders was rectified by the common 
sense of the masses. The union of the two Social-Democratic 
tendencies, which was delayed almost exclusively because of 
questions of personalities, was certain to take place in the near 
future. But even during the split and despite it, the movement was 

=====第529页=====
The Role of Force in History 501 
strong enough to strike fear into the industrial bourgeoisie and to 
paralyse it in its struggle against the government, which was still 
independent of it; and after 1848 the German bourgeoisie never 
rid itself of the Red spectre again. 
The class structure underlay the party structure in parliament 
and in the provincial diets. The large landed estate owners and 
part of the peasantry formed the mass of the conservatives403; the 
industrial bourgeoisie provided the Right wing of the bourgeois 
liberals—the National Liberals,404 while the Left wing comprised 
the weakened democratic party or so-called Party of Progress, 
which consisted of petty bourgeois supported by a section of 
the bourgeoisie and the workers. Finally, the workers had their 
independent party, the Social-Democrats, which included also 
some petty bourgeois. 
A person in Bismarck's position and with Bismarck's past, 
having a certain understanding of the state of affairs, could not 
but realise that the Junkers, such as they were, were not a viable 
class,  and that of all the propertied classes only the bourgeoisie 
could lay claim to a future, and that therefore (disregarding the 
working class, an understanding of whose historical mission we 
cannot expect of him) his new empire promised to be all the 
stabler, the more he succeeded in laying the groundwork for its 
gradual transition to a modern bourgeois state. Let us not expect 
of him what was impossible under the circumstances. An 
immediate transition to a parliamentary government with the 
decisive power vested in the Reichstag (as in the British House of 
Commons) was neither possible nor even advisable at that 
moment; Bismarck's dictatorship in parliamentary forms must 
have seemed to him still necessary for the time being; and we do 
not in the least blame him for allowing it to survive for the 
moment, we only ask what good it was. And there can be hardly 
any doubt that paving the way for a system corresponding to the 
British constitution was the only way which offered the prospect of 
ensuring a sound basis and quiet internal development for the 
new empire. By leaving the larger part of the Junkers, who were 
beyond salvation anyway, to their inevitable doom, it still seemed 
possible to forge what remained of them with new elements into a 
class of independent big landowners, which would become only 
the ornamental élite of the bourgeoisie; a class to which the 
bourgeoisie, even at the height of its power, would have to grant 
state representation and with it the most lucrative positions and 
enormous influence. By granting the bourgeoisie political conces­
sions,  which anyway could not be withheld for any length of time 
34* 

=====第530页=====
502 Frederick Engels 
(such at least should have been the argument from the standpoint 
of the propertied classes), by granting it these concessions 
gradually, and even in small and rare doses, the new empire 
would at least be steered onto a course which would enable it to 
catch up with the other, politically far more advanced West-
European states, to shake off the last remnants of feudalism and 
philistine traditions which still held a firm grip on the bureaucra­
cy, and, above all, to stand on its own feet by the time its by no 
means youthful founders departed this life. 
This was not even difficult. Neither the Junkers nor the 
bourgeoisie possessed even average energy. The Junkers had 
proved this in the past sixty years, during which the state had 
constantly done what was best for them despite the opposition of 
these Don Quixotes. The bourgeoisie, also made malleable by its 
long prehistory, was still licking the wounds left by the conflict; 
Bismarck's successes since then had further broken its power of 
resistance, and fear of the dangerously growing working-class 
movement did the rest. Under these circumstances, it would not 
have been difficult for the man who had put the national 
aspirations of the bourgeoisie into practice to keep any pace he 
desired in implementing its political demands, which were in any 
case very modest on the whole. It was only necessary for him to be 
clear about the objective. 
From the point of view of the propertied classes, this was the 
only rational way. From the standpoint of the working class, it was 
obvious that it was already too late to set up bourgeois rule on a 
lasting basis. Large-scale industry, and with it the bourgeoisie and 
the proletariat, took shape in Germany at a time when the 
proletariat could enter the political scene as an independent force 
almost simultaneously with the bourgeoisie, that is, at a time when 
the struggle of the two classes has already begun, before the 
bourgeoisie has conquered exclusive or predominant political 
power. But even if the time for quiet and firmly founded rule by 
the bourgeoisie had already passed in Germany, it was still the best 
policy in 1870, in the interests of the propertied classes in general, 
to steer towards this bourgeois rule. For only in this way was it 
possible to abolish the abundant remnants of the times of decaying 
feudalism which continued to flourish in legislation and adminis­
tration; only thus was it possible gradually to transplant all the 
achievements of the Great French Revolution to Germany, in 
short, to cut off Germany's overlong old pigtail, and to place it 
deliberately and irrevocably on the road of modern development, 
to adapt its political system to its industrial development. When 

=====第531页=====
The Role of Force in History 503 
ultimately the unavoidable struggle between the bourgeoisie and 
the proletariat set in, it would at least proceed under normal 
circumstances, in which everyone would realise what was at stake, 
and not in the state of disorder, obscurity, conflicting interests and 
perplexity we saw in Germany in 1848. The only difference being 
that this time the perplexity would be exclusively on the side 
of the propertied classes; the working class knows what it 
wants. 
As things stood in Germany in 1871, a man like Bismarck was 
indeed compelled to pursue a policy of manoeuvring between the 
various classes. And to that extent he is not open to reproach. It is 
only a question of what aim that policy pursued. If, irrespective of 
the pace, it was aimed consciously and resolutely at the ultimate 
rule of the bourgeoisie, it was in harmony with historical 
development as far as this could be possible at all from the 
standpoint of the propertied classes. If it aimed at preserving the 
old Prussian state, at gradually Prussianising Germany, it was 
reactionary and doomed to ultimate failure. But if it only pursued 
the aim of preserving Bismarck's rule, it was Bonapartist and 
bound to meet the same end as all Bonapartism. 
* * * 
The immediate task was the imperial constitution. The material 
available was the constitution of the North German Confederation, 
on the one hand, and the treaties with the South German states,405 
on the other. The factors which were to help Bismarck draw up 
the imperial constitution were, on the one hand, the dynasties 
represented in the Federal Council406 and, on the other, the 
people represented in the Reichstag. The North German constitu­
tion and treaties limited the claims of the dynasties. The people, 
on the other hand, were entitled to a considerable increase in their 
share of political power. They had won independence from 
foreign interference and unification—as far as there could be any 
talk of unification—on the battlefield; they were also above all 
called upon to decide what use this independence was to be put to, 
how this unification would be implemented in detail and how it 
would be used. And even if the people recognised the legal 
grounds underlying the North German constitution and treaties, 
that in no way prevented them from being granted a greater share 
of power in the new constitution than they had in the old one. 
The Reichstag was the only body which in reality represented the 

=====第532页=====
504 Frederick Engels 
new "unity". The greater the voice of the Reichstag and the freer 
the imperial constitution as compared with the constitutions of the 
individual provinces, the more the new Empire would have to fuse 
into one, the more the Bavarian, Saxon and Prussian would have 
to dissolve into the German. 
To anyone who could see further than his nose this should have 
been obvious. But Bismarck held quite a different opinion. On the 
contrary, he used the patriotic frenzy unleashed after the war 
precisely to persuade the majority in the Reichstag to renounce 
not only an extension but even a clear definition of the rights of 
the people and to confine itself to a simple reproduction in the 
imperial constitution of the legal basis underlying the North 
German constitution and the treaties. All attempts of the small 
parties to give expression in it to the freedoms of the people were 
dismissed, including even the proposal of the Catholic Centre to 
incorporate in it the articles of the Prussian constitution guarantee­
ing the freedom of the press, of assembly and association and the 
independence of the Church. The Prussian constitution, twice and 
thrice pruned as it was, was still more liberal than the imperial 
constitution. Taxes were voted not yearly, but once and for all, 
"by law", so that any refusal of taxes by the Reichstag was out of 
the question. Thus there was applied to Germany the Prussian 
doctrine, inconceivable to the non-German constitutional world, 
according to which the elected assembly had only the right on 
paper to refuse expenditure, while the government pocketed the 
revenue in hard cash. While the Reichstag was thus robbed of the 
most effective means of power and reduced to the humble 
position of the Prussian chamber smashed up by the revisions of 
1849 and 1850, by Manteuffelism, by conflict and by Sadowa,407 
the Federal Council, in effect, enjoyed full power, which the old 
Federal Diet possessed nominally, and enjoyed it in reality, for it 
had been freed of the fetters that paralysed the Federal Diet. The 
Federal Council had a decisive voice not only in legislation, 
alongside the Reichstag; it was also the supreme administrative 
body, inasmuch as it issued instructions on the implementation of 
imperial laws, and in addition decides "on shortcomings, which 
emerge during the implementation of imperial laws...", i.e., on 
shortcomings, which in other civilised countries can be remedied 
only by a new law (Article 7, Para. 3, which greatly resembles a 
legal trap).3 
Thus,  Bismarck sought his main support not in the Reichstag, 
a Verfassung des Deutschen Reichs in Reichs-Gesetzblatt, 1871, p. 68.—  Ed. 

=====第533页=====
The Role of Force in History 505 
which represented national union, but in the Federal Council, 
which represented particularistic disunion. He lacked the cour­
age—he, who set himself up as champion of the national idea—to 
place himself genuinely at the head of the nation or of its 
representatives; democracy was to serve him and not he democra­
cy; rather than rely on the people, he relied on underhand 
dealings behind the scenes, on his ability to scrape together a 
majority, even if a refractory one, in the Federal Council by means 
of diplomacy, the stick and the carrot. The pettiness of his 
conception, the baseness of his view point that is revealed to us 
here is quite in keeping with the man's character as we have got to 
know him so far. Yet, it is suprising that his great successes were 
unable to make him rise above himself even for a moment. 
However, in the prevailing situation, the point was to provide a 
single firm pivot for the entire imperial constitution, namely, the 
imperial chancellor. The Federal Council had to be put in a 
position in which there could be no other responsible executive 
authority than that of the imperial chancellor and which would 
exclude the admissibility of responsible imperial ministers. Indeed, 
every attempt to normalise the imperial administration by setting 
up a responsible ministry was regarded as an encroachment upon 
the rights of the Federal Council and encountered insurmountable 
resistance. As was soon discovered, the constitution was "made to 
measure" for Bismarck. It was a further step on the road to his 
absolute personal dictatorship by balancing the parties in the 
Reichstag and the particularist states in the Federal Council—a 
further step on the road to Bonapartism. 
By the way, it cannot be said that the new imperial constitu­
tion—except for certain concessions to Bavaria and Württem­
berg —was a direct step back. But that is the best that can be said 
of it. The economic requirements of the bourgeoisie were in 
the main satisfied, its political claims—inasmuch as it still 
made any—encountered the same obstructions as during the con­
flict. 
Inasmuch as it still made political claims! For it cannot be 
denied that with the National Liberals these claims had shrunk to 
a very modest size and continued to shrink with every passing day. 
These gentlemen, far from demanding that Bismarck should 
facilitate their collaboration with  himself,  were much more 
concerned with doing his will wherever possible, and quite often 
also where it was impossible, or should have been impossible. • 
Bismarck despised them and no one can blame him for that—but 
were his Junkers one iota better or braver? 

=====第534页=====
506 Frederick Engels 
The next field in which unity of the Empire had to be 
introduced, the monetary system, was normalised by the currency 
and banking laws passed between 1873 and 1875. The introduc­
tion of gold currency was a considerable step forward; but it was 
introduced only hesitantly and waveringly and is not firmly 
established even today. The monetary system adopted—the third 
of a taler under the name of "mark", a unit with a decimal 
division—had been suggested by von Soetbeer at the close of the 
thirties; the actual unit was the gold twenty-mark piece. By a 
barely noticeable change in value it could have been made 
absolutely equivalent either to the British sovereign, or the gold 
twenty-five franc coin, or the gold U.S. five-dollar piece, and 
linked to one of the three great currency systems on the world 
market. Preference was given to a separate currency system, 
thereby needlessly complicating trade and exchange calculations. 
The laws on imperial treasury notes and banks408 limited the 
fraudulent transactions in securities of small states and their banks 
and, taking into consideration the crash which had in the 
meantime occurred, they were marked by a definite timidity, 
which well became Germany, still inexperienced in this field. But 
here,  too, the economic interests of the bourgeoisie were on the 
whole adequately looked after. 
Finally there came an agreement on uniform laws. The 
resistance of the central German states to the extension of imperial 
competency to the material civil law was overcome, but the civil 
code is still in the making, while the penal code, criminal and civil 
procedural law, trade laws, the regulations concerning insolvency 
and the judicial system have been unified everywhere. The 
abolition of the motley formal and material legal standards in 
force in the small states was in itself an urgent requirement for 
ongoing bourgeois development, and this abolition is the chief 
merit of the new laws—a far greater one than their content. 
The English jurist relies on a legal heritage that has preser­
ved a good part of the old German freedoms through the Middle 
Ages,  that does not know the police state, which was nipped in the 
bud by the two revolutions of the 17th century and has attained 
its apex in two centuries of uninterrupted development of civic 
freedom. The French jurist relies on the Great Revolution, which, 
after the total destruction of feudalism and absolutist police 
tyranny, translated the economic conditions of life in the newly 
created modern society into the language of legal standards in the 
classical code of law proclaimed by Napoleon. But on what legal 
basis do our German jurists rely? Nothing but the several-century-

=====第535页=====
The Role of Force in History 507 
long process of disintegration of medieval survivals, a passive 
process mostly spurred on by blows from the outside, and not 
complete to this day; an economically backward society, which the 
feudal Junker and the guild master haunt as ghosts looking for a 
new body; a legal order in which police tyranny—even though the 
arbitrary justice of the princes disappeared in 1848—is daily 
tearing new holes. The fathers of the new imperial legal codes 
have come from this worst of all bad schools, and their work is 
quite in keeping with it. Apart from the purely legal aspect, 
political freedom has fared pretty badly in these codes of law. If 
the Schöffen courts 409 provide the bourgeoisie and petty 
bourgeoisie with a means of collaborating in repressing the 
working class, the state insures itself as much as possible against 
the danger of renewed bourgeois opposition by curtailing the 
rights of the jury. The political paragraphs of the penal code are 
frequently enough as vague and elastic as if they were made to 
measure for the present imperial court, and the latter for them. 
That the new legal codes are a step forward in comparison with 
Prussian common law410—today even Stoecker would be unable to 
concoct something as horrible as that code, even if he were to 
allow himself to be cut back. But the provinces which had until 
now lived under French law feel very acutely the difference 
between the blurred copy and the classic original. It was the 
defection of the National Liberals from their programme that 
made possible this strengthening of state power at the expense of 
civic freedoms, this first actual retrogression. 
Mention should also be made of the imperial press law.411 The 
penal code had essentially already regulated the material law 
pertaining to it; the elaboration of identical formal stipulations for 
the whole Empire and the abolition of the security and stamp 
duties existing here and there were therefore the main content of 
the law and at the same time the only progress it achieved. 
To enable Prussia once again to prove itself a model state, 
so-called self-government was introduced there. The aim was to 
abolish the most objectionable survivals of feudalism and yet, 
actually, to leave, as far as possible, everything as before. The 
District Ordinance412  served this purpose. The manorial police 
power of the Junkers had become an anachronism. In name—as a 
feudal privilege—it was abolished, but actually it was reinstituted 
by the establishment of independent rural districts [Gutsbezirke], 
within which the landowner either himself acts as rural superin­
tendent [Gutsvorsteher] with the powers of the head of the rural 
community [Gemeindevorsteher] or appoints this rural superinten-

=====第536页=====
508 Frederick Engels 
dent, and was also reinstituted by transferring the entire police 
power and police jurisdiction of the administrative district 
[Amtsbezirk] to a district head [Amtsvorsteher], a position held in 
rural areas almost exclusively by big landowners, of course, who in 
this way got the rural community under their thumb. The feudal 
privileges of individuals were abolished, but the absolute power 
connected with these privileges was handed over to the entire 
class.  By similar conjuring the English big landowners turned into 
justices of the peace and the masters of the rural administration, 
the police and the lower courts of justice and thereby secured for 
themselves under a new, modernised title further enjoyment of all 
essential positions of authority, which they could not continue to 
hold under the old feudal form. That, however, is the only 
similarity between the English and the German "self-government". 
I should like to see the British Minister who would dare to 
propose in Parliament that elected local officials should be 
approved and that in case an undesired person is elected he be 
forcibly replaced by an appointee of the state, to propose that 
there be civil servants vested with the authority of the Prussian 
Landrats, heads of administrative districts and Oberpräsidents, to 
propose that the administrative bodies of the state be given the 
right provided for in the District Ordinance to intervene in the 
internal affairs of communities, small administrative units and 
districts and to exclude recourse to law, a thing unheard of in 
English-speaking countries and in English law, but which we see 
on almost every page of the District Ordinance. And while the 
district diets [Kreistag] as well as the provincial diets are still 
composed in the old feudal manner of representatives of the three 
estates: the big landowners, towns and rural communities, in 
England even a highly conservative ministry moves a bill 
transferring the whole county administration to authorities 
elected by almost universal suffrage. 413 
The draft of the District Ordinance for the six Eastern 
provinces (1871) was the first indication that Bismarck did not 
even think of allowing Prussia to dissolve into Germany, but that, 
on the contrary, he sought to further strengthen these six 
provinces — the stronghold of the old Prussianism. Under changed 
names, the Junkers retained all essential positions of power, while 
the helots of Germany, the rural workers of these areas—such as 
farmhands and day labourers—remained in their former de facto 
serfdom and were admitted to only two public functions: to 
become soldiers and to serve the Junkers as voting stock during 
the elections to the Reichstag. The service Bismarck rendered 

=====第537页=====
The Role of Force in History 509 
thereby to the revolutionary socialist party is indescribable and 
deserves the warmest gratitude. 
What can be said about the mindlessnèss of the Junker 
gentlemen, who, like spoiled children, kicked against the District 
Ordinance which had been drawn up exclusively in their interest, 
in the interest of perpetuating their feudal privileges, under a 
somewhat modernised name? The Prussian House of Lords, or, to 
be more exact, of Junkers, at first rejected the draft, which had 
already been delayed for a whole year, and adopted it only after 
24 new "Lords" had been nominated peers. Once again the 
Prussian Junkers proved that they were petty, obdurate, incorrigi­
ble reactionaries, unable to form the nucleus of a large indepen­
dent party which could play an historical role in the life of the 
nation, as the English big landowners actually do. Thereby they 
proved their complete lack of sense; Bismarck had only to reveal 
to the world their equally complete lack of character, and a little 
pressure, pertinently applied, would transform them into a 
Bismarck Party sans phrase. 
The Kulturkampf 4 4 was to serve this purpose. 
The implementation of the Prussian-German imperial plan 
should have evoked a counterblow—the amalgamation into a 
single party of all anti-Prussian elements, which had previously 
relied on separate development. These motley elements found a 
common banner in Ultramontanism.415 The rebellion of sound 
common sense even among the numerous orthodox Catholics 
against the new dogma of Papal infallibility, on the one hand, the 
destruction of the Papal States, and the so-called imprisonment of 
the Pope in Rome,416  on the other, forced all the pugnacious 
forces of Catholicism to rally closer together. Thus even during 
the war, in the autumn of 1870, the specifically Catholic Party of 
the Centre was formed in the Prussian Provincial Diet; in the first 
German Reichstag of 1871 it had only 57 seats, but it grew 
stronger with every new election until it had over 100 representa­
tives.  It was composed of very heterogeneous elements. In Prussia 
its main strength consisted of the Rhenish small peasants, who still 
regarded themselves as "Prussians under duress", then of the 
Catholic big landowners and peasants of the Westphalian bishop­
rics of Münster and Paderborn, and of the Catholic Silesians. The 
second great contingent was provided by the South German 
Catholics, notably the Bavarians. It was not so much the Catholic 
religion that formed the Centre Party's strength, but the fact that 
it represented the antipathies of the popular masses against 
everything specifically Prussian, now laying claim to domination 

=====第538页=====
510 Frederick Engels 
over Germany. These antipathies were particularly strong in the 
Catholic areas; and then there were sympathies with Austria, now 
expelled from Germany. In harmony with these two popular 
trends, the Centre was decidedly particularist and federalist. 
This essentially anti-Prussian character of the Centre was 
immediately recognised by the other small Reichstag factions, 
which were anti-Prussian for local reasons, not, as the Social-
Democrats, for national and general reasons. Not only the Catholic 
Poles and Alsatians, but even the Protestant Guelphs417  allied 
themselves closely with the Centre. And even though the 
bourgeois liberal factions could never fully understand the actual 
character of the so-called Ultramontanes, they did have an inkling 
of the true state of affairs when they styled the Centre 
"unpatriotic" and "hostile to the Empire".... 3 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 

=====第539页=====
511 
[ROUGH DRAFT OF THE PREFACE 
TO THE ROLE OF FORCE IN HISTORY]4™ 
The following piece of writing is an off-print of part of my work 
Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science, and contains three 
chapters that bear the title "The Force Theory". 419 They have 
already appeared separately in Russian translation, namely as the 
appendix to the Russian edition of my Socialism: Utopian and 
Scientific* Only the most necessary changes and addenda have 
been made in the present edition. But an off-print requires a 
special addendum. 
If I publish in German a pamphlet on "the role of force in 
history", the German reader has every right to expect me not to 
conceal my views on the very important part played by force 
precisely in his own history over the past thirty years. For this 
reason I have added a fourth section, which naturally covers only 
the main points. Perhaps I shall be granted the opportunity one 
day to deal with the subject in more detail. 
Written between the end of December Printed according to the manu-
1887 and March 1888 script 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 1, Published in English for the first 
No. 22, 1895 time 
a O. 9HreAbc, Pcueumie uayunazo  cov,icuiU3Ma,  >KeHeBa, 1884.— Ed. 

=====第540页=====
512 
PREFACE TO THE 1888 ENGLISH EDITION 
OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY 
The "Manifesto" was published as the platform of the "Commun­
ist League", a working-men's association, first exclusively German, 
later on international, and, under the political conditions of the 
Continent before 1848, unavoidably a secret society. At a Congress 
of the League, held in London in November, 1847, Marx and 
Engels were commissioned to prepare for publication a complete 
theoretical and practical party programme. Drawn up in German, 
in January, 1848, the manuscript was sent to the printer in 
London a few weeks before the French revolution of February 
24th. A French translation was brought out in Paris, shortly before 
the insurrection of June, 1848. The first English translation, by 
Miss Helen Macfarlane, appeared in George Julian Harney's "Red 
Republican," London, 1850. A Danish and a Polish edition had also 
been published. 
The defeat of the Parisian insurrection of June, 1848,—the first 
great battle between Proletariat and Bourgeoisie—drove again 
into the background, for a time, the social and political aspirations 
of the European working-class. Thenceforth, the struggle for 
supremacy was again, as it had been before the revolution of 
February, solely between different sections of the propertied class; 
the working class was reduced to a fight for political elbow-room, 
and to the position of extreme wing of the Middle-class Radicals. 
Wherever independent proletarian movements continued to show 
signs of life, they were ruthlessly hunted down. Thus the Prussian 
police hunted out the Central Board of the Communist League, 
then located in Cologne. The members were arrested, and, after 
eighteen months' imprisonment, they were tried in October, 1852. 
This celebrated "Cologne Communist trial" lasted from October 
4th till November 12th; seven of the prisoners were sentenced to 
terms of imprisonment in a fortress, varying from three to six 

=====第541页=====
PRICE TWOPENCE. 
MANIFESTO 
OF THE 
COMMUNIST PARTY, 
By KARL  MARX,  and FREDERICK ENGELS. 
Authorized English Translation. 
EDITED AND ANNOTATED BY FREDERICK ENGELS, 
1888. 
uottîtott : 
WILLIAM REEVES,  185, FLEET STREET,  E.C. 
Title page of the English edition 
of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 

=====第542页=====

=====第543页=====
Preface to the 1888 English Ed. of the Manifesto 515 
years.  Immediately after the sentence, the League was formally 
dissolved by the remaining members.3 As to the "Manifesto," it 
seemed thenceforth to be doomed to oblivion. 
When the European working-class had recovered sufficient 
strength for another attack on the ruling classes, the International 
Working Men's Association sprang up. But this association, 
formed with the express aim of welding into one body the whole 
militant proletariat of Europe and America, could not at once 
proclaim the principles laid down in the "Manifesto." The 
International was bound to have a programme broad enough to 
be acceptable to the English Trades' Unions, to the followers of 
Proudhon in France, Belgium, Italy, and Spain, and to the 
Lassalleans* in Germany. Marx, who drew up this programme to 
the satisfaction of all parties, entirely trusted to the intellectual 
development of the working-class, which was sure to result from 
combined action and mutual discussion. The very events and 
vicissitudes of the struggle against Capital, the defeats even more 
than the victories, could not help bringing home to men's minds 
the insufficiency of their various favourite nostrums, and prepar­
ing the way for a more complete insight into the true conditions of 
working-class emancipation. And Marx was right. The Internation­
al, on its breaking up in 1874, left the workers quite different men 
from what it had found them in 1864. Proudhonism in France, 
Lassalleanism in Germany were dying out, and even the Conserva­
tive English Trades' Unions, though most of them had long since 
severed their connexion with the International, were gradually 
advancing towards that point at which, last year at Swansea, their 
President15 could say in their name "Continental Socialism has lost 
its terrors for us."c In fact: the principles of the "Manifesto" had 
made considerable headway among the working men of all 
countries. 
The Manifesto itself thus came to the front again. The German 
text had been, since 1850, reprinted several times in Switzerland, 
* Lassalle personally, to us, always acknowledged himself to be a disciple of 
Marx, and, as such, stood on the ground of the "Manifesto". But in his public 
agitation, 1862-64, he did not go beyond demanding co-operative workshops 
supported by State credit. 
a See this volume, p. 329.— Ed. 
b W. Bevan.— Ed. 
c [W. Bevan's speech at the Twentieth Annual Trades' Union Congress at 
Swansea on September 6, 1887.] In: W. Binning, "The Trades' Union Congress", 
The Commonweal, No. 88, September 17, 1887.— Ed. 
35-1243 

=====第544页=====
516 Frederick Engels 
England and America. In 1872, it was translated into English in 
New York, where the translation was published in Woodhull and 
Claflin's Weekly.420  From this English version, a French one was 
made in "Le Socialiste" of New York. Since then at least two more 
English translations, more or less mutilated, have been brought 
out in America, and one of them has been reprinted in England. 
The first Russian translation, made by Bakounine, was published 
at Herzen's "Kolokol" office in Geneva, about  1863 421; a second 
one, by the heroic Vera Zasulitch, also in Geneva, 1882.422  A new 
Danish edition is to be found in "Socialdemokratisk Bibliothek," 
Copenhagen, 1885; a fresh French translation in "Le Socialiste," 
Paris,  1886. From this latter a Spanish version was prepared and 
published in Madrid, 1886. 423 The German reprints are not to be 
counted, there have been twelve altogether at the least. An 
Armenian translation, which was to be published in Constan­
tinople some months ago, did not see the light, I am told, because 
the publisher was afraid of bringing out a book with the name of 
Marx on it, while the translator declined to call it his own 
production. Of further translations into other languages I have 
heard, but have not seen them. Thus the history of the Manifesto 
reflects, to a great extent, the history of the modern working-class 
movement; at present it is undoubtedly the most wide-spread, the 
most international production of all Socialist Literature, the 
common platform acknowledged by millions of working men from 
Siberia to California. 
Yet, when it was written, we could not have called it a Socialist 
Manifesto. By Socialists, in 1847, were understood, on the one 
hand, the adherents of the various Utopian systems: Owenites in 
England, Fourierists in France,424  both of them already reduced to 
the position of mere sects, and gradually dying out; on the other 
hand, the most multifarious social quacks, who, by all manners of 
tinkering, professed to redress, without any danger to capital and 
profit, all sorts of social grievances in both cases men outside the 
working class movement, and looking rather to the "educated" 
classes for support. Whatever portion of the working class had 
become convinced of the insufficiency of mere political revolu­
tions,  and had proclaimed the necessity of a total social change, 
that portion, then, called itself Communist. It was a crude, 
rough-hewn, purely instinctive sort of Communism; still, it 
touched the cardinal point and was powerful enough amongst the 
working class to produce the Utopian Communism, in France, of 
Cabet, and in Germany, of Weitling. Thus, Socialism was, in 1847, 
a middle-class movement, Communism a working class movement. 

=====第545页=====
Preface to the 1888 English Ed. of the Manifesto 517 
Socialism was, on the Continent at least, "respectable"; Commun­
ism was the very opposite. And as our notion, from the very 
beginning, was that "the emancipation of the working class must 
be the act of the working class  itself,"3  there could be no doubt as 
to which of the two names we must take. Moreover, we have, ever 
since, been far from repudiating it. 
The "Manifesto" being our joint production, I consider myself 
bound to state that the fundamental proposition which forms its 
nucleus, belongs to Marx. That proposition is: that in every 
historical epoch, the prevailing mode of economic production and 
exchange, and the social organisation necessarily following from it, 
form the basis upon which is built up, and from which alone can 
be explained, the political and intellectual history of that epoch; 
that consequently the whole history of mankind (since the 
dissolution of primitive tribal society, holding land in common 
ownership) has been a history of class struggles, contests between 
exploiting and exploited, ruling and oppressed classes; that the 
history of these class struggles form a series of evolution in which, 
nowadays, a stage has been reached where the exploited and 
oppressed class—the proletariat—cannot attain its emancipation 
from the sway of the exploiting and ruling class—the 
bourgeoisie—without, at the same time, and once and for all 
emancipating society at large from all exploitation, oppression, 
class-distinctions and class-struggles. 
This proposition which, in my opinion, is destined to do for 
history what Darwin's theory has done for biology, we, both of us, 
had been gradually approaching for some years before 1845. How 
far I had independently progressed towards it, is best shown by 
my "Condition of the Working Class in England."* But when I 
again met Marx at Brussels, in spring, 1845, he had it ready 
worked out, and put it before me, in terms almost as clear as those 
in which I have stated it here. 
From our joint preface to the German edition of 1872, I quote 
the following: — 
"However much the state of things may have altered during the 
last 25 years, the general principles laid down in this Manifesto 
are, on the whole, as correct to-day as ever. Here and there some 
* The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844. By Frederick Engels. 
Translated by Florence K. Wischnewetzky, New York, Lovell—London. W. Reeves. 
1888. 
a K. Marx, "Provisional Rules of the Association" (present edition, Vol. 20, 
p. 14; see also Vol. 23, p. 3.).— Ed. 
35* 

=====第546页=====
518 Frederick Engels 
detail might be improved. The practical application of the 
principles will depend, as the manifesto itself states, everywhere 
and at all times, on the historical conditions for the time being 
existing, and, for that reason, no special stress is laid on the 
revolutionary measures proposed at the end of Section II. That 
passage would, in many respects, be very differently worded 
to-day. In view of the gigantic strides of Modern Industry since 
1848, a and of the accompanying improved and extendedb 
organisation of the working-class, in view of the practical 
experience gained, first in the February revolution, and then, still 
more, in the Paris Commune, where the proletariat for the first 
time held political power for two whole months, this programme 
has in some details become antiquated. One thing especially was 
proved by the Commune, viz., that 'the working-class cannot 
simply lay hold of the ready-made State machinery, and wield it 
for its own purposes.' (See "The Civil War in France; Address of 
the General Council of the International Working-men's Associa­
tion," London, Truelove, 1871, p. 15, where this point is further 
developed.)0 Further, it is self-evident, that the criticism of socialist 
literature is deficient in relation to the present time, because it 
comes down only to 1847; also, that the remarks on the relation of 
the Communists to the various opposition-parties (Section IV.), 
although in principle still correct, yet in practice are antiquated, 
because the political situation has been entirely changed, and the 
progress of history has swept from off the earth the greater 
portion of the political parties there enumerated. 
"But then, the Manifesto has become a historical document 
which we have no longer any right to alter."d 
The present translation is by Mr. Samuel Moore, the 
translator of the greater portion of Marx's Capital. We have 
revised it in common, and I have added a few notes explanatory 
of historical allusions. 
London, 30th January, 1888  Frederick Engels 
First published  in K. Marx and F. Engels, Reproduced from  the  book 
Manifesto  of the Communist Party, London, 
1888 
a Instead  of  "since 1848",  the 1872  edition  has "in the  past twenty-five 
years".—  Ed. 
b Instead  of "of the  accompanying improved  and  extended",  the  1872 edition 
has "with  its advancing party".— Ed. 
c See  present edition, Vol.  22, p.  328.—  Ed. 
d K.  Marx  and F. Engels, "Preface  to the 1872  German Edition  of the 
Manifesto  of the Communist Party" (present edition, Vol.  23, pp.  174-75).— Ed. 

=====第547页=====
519 
[PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET 
LUDWIG FEUERBACH AND THE END 
OF CLASSICAL GERMAN PHILOSOPHY3] 
In the preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
Economy, Berlin, 1859, Karl Marx relates how the two of us in 
Brussels in the year 1845 decided "to set forth together our 
conception" — the materialist conception of history which was 
elaborated mainly by Marx—"as opposed to the ideological one of 
German philosophy, in fact to settle accounts with our former 
philosophical conscience. The intention was carried out in the 
form of a critique of post-Hegelian philosophy. The manuscript,6 
two large octavo volumes, had long ago reached the publishers in 
Westphalia when we were informed that owing to changed 
circumstances it could not be printed. We abandoned the 
manuscript to the gnawing criticism of the mice all the more 
willingly since we had achieved our main purpose—self-
clarification."0 
Since then more than forty years have elapsed and Marx died 
without either of us having had an opportunity of returning to the 
subject. We have expressed ourselves in various places regarding 
our relation to Hegel, but nowhere in a comprehensive, coherent 
account. To Feuerbach, who after all in some respects forms an 
intermediate link between Hegelian philosophy and our concep­
tion, we never returned. 
In the meantime the Marxian world outlook has found 
adherents far beyond the boundaries of Germany and Europe and 
a See this volume, pp. 353-98.— Ed. 
b K. Marx and F. Engels, The German Ideology.—Ed. 
c K. Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (present edition, 
Vol. 29, p. 264).— Ed. 

=====第548页=====
520 Frederick Engels 
in all the literary languages of the world. On the other hand, 
classical German philosophy is experiencing a kind of rebirth 
abroad, especially in England and Scandinavia, and even in 
Germany itself people appear to be getting tired of the pauper's 
broth of eclecticism which is ladled out in the universities there 
under the name of philosophy. 
In these circumstances a short, coherent account of our relation 
to Hegelian philosophy, of how we proceeded, as well as of how 
we departed, from it, appeared to me to be increasingly necessary. 
Equally, a full acknowledgement of the influence which Feuer-
bach, more than any other post-Hegelian philosopher, had upon 
us during our Sturm und Drang period, 425 appeared to me to be an 
undischarged debt of honour. I therefore willingly seized the 
opportunity when the editors of the Neue Zeit asked me for a 
critical review of Starcke's book on Feuerbach. My contribution 
was published in that journal in the fourth and fifth numbers of 
1886 and appears here in revised form as a separate publication. 
Before sending these lines to press I have once again ferreted 
out and looked over the old manuscript of 1845-46. The section 
dealing with Feuerbach is not completed. The finished portion 
consists of an exposition of the materialist conception of history 
which proves only how incomplete our knowledge of economic 
history still was at that time. It contains no criticism of Feuerbach's 
doctrine  itself;  for the present purpose, therefore, it was useless. 
On the other hand, in an old notebook of Marx's I have found the 
eleven theses on Feuerbach printed here as an appendix. 3 These 
are notes hurriedly scribbled down for later elaboration, absolutely 
not intended for publication, but invaluable as the first document 
in which is deposited the brilliant germ of the new world outlook. 
London, February 21, 1888  Frederick Engels 
First published  in F. Engels, Ludwig Printed according  to the  book 
Feuerbach  und der  Ausgang  der  klassischen 
deutschen Philosophie, Stuttgart,  1888 
a K. Marx, "Theses  on  Feuerbach". — Ed. 

=====第549页=====
521 
PROTECTION AND FREE TRADE* 
PREFACE TO THE PAMPHLET: KARL MARX, 
SPEECH ON THE QUESTION OF FREE TRADE «26 
Towards the end of 1847, a Free Trade Congress was held at 
Brussels.427 It was a strategic move in the Free Trade campaign 
then carried on by the English manufacturers. Victorious at home, 
by the repeal of the Corn Laws in 1846,428 they now invaded the 
continent in order to demand, in return for the free admission of 
continental corn into England, the free admission of English 
manufactured goods to the continental markets. At this Congress, 
Marx inscribed himself on the list of speakers; but, as might have 
been expected, things were so managed that before his turn came 
on, the Congress was closed. Thus, what Marx had to say on the 
Free Trade question, he was compelled to say before the 
Democratic Association of Brussels, an international body of which 
he was one of the vice-presidents.429 
The question of Free Trade or Protection being at present on 
the order of the day in America, it has been thought useful to 
publish an English translation of Marx' speech, to which I have 
been asked to write an introductory preface. 
"The system of protection," says Marx, "was an artificial means 
of manufacturing manufacturers, of expropriating independent 
laborers, of capitalizing the national means of production and 
subsistence, and of forcibly abbreviating the transition from the 
* Preface (translated by the author) to the English edition of Marx's speech on 
the question of free trade, being published in New York (German by E. Bern­
stein and K. Kautsky, Appendix II to Marx's Poverty of  Philosophy,  Stuttgart, Dietz, 
p. 188 ff.). Since this preface is intended primarily for an American audience, 
the German policy on protective tariffs could be mentioned only in passing. 
However, the author will doubtless soon find an occasion to deal with the ques­
tion specifically with respect to Germany. [Engels' note to the German translation.] 

=====第550页=====
522 Frederick Engels 
medieval to the modern mode of production."* Such was 
protection at its origin in the seventeenth century, such it 
remained well into the nineteenth century. It was then held to be 
the normal policy of every civilized state in Western Europe. The 
only exceptions were the smaller states of Germany and Switzer­
land— not from dislike of the system, but from the impossibility of 
applying it to such small territories. 
It was under the fostering wing of protection that the system of 
modern industry—production by steam-moved machinery—was 
hatched and developed in England during the last third of the 
eighteenth century. And, as if tariff-protection was not sufficient, 
the wars against the French Revolution helped to secure to 
England the monopoly of the new industrial methods. For more 
than twenty years English men-of-war cut off the industrial rivals 
of England from their respective colonial markets, while they 
forcibly opened these markets to English commerce. The secession 
of the South American colonies from the rule of their European 
mother-countries, the conquest by England of all French and 
Dutch colonies worth having, the progressive subjugation of India, 
turned the people of all these immense territories3 into customers 
for English goods. England thus supplemented the protection she 
practised at home, by the Free Trade she forced upon her possible 
customers abroad; and, thanks to this happy mixture of both 
systems, at the end of the wars,b in 1815, she found  herself,  with 
regard to all important branches of industry, in possession of the 
virtual monopoly of the trade of the world. 
This monopoly was further extended and strengthened during 
the ensuing years of peace. The start which England had obtained 
during the war, was increased from year to year; she seemed to 
distance more and more all her possible rivals. The exports of 
manufactured goods in ever growing quantities became indeed a 
question of life and death to that country. And there seemed but 
two obstacles in the way: the prohibitive or protective legislation of 
other countries, and the taxes upon the import of raw materials 
and articles of food in England. 
Then the Free Trade doctrines of classical political economy— 
of the French physiocrats430  and their English successors, Adam 
Smith and Ricardo —became popular in the land of John Bull. 
* Karl Marx, Capital. London: Swan Sonnenschein Co., 1886 [1887], p. 782. 
a In the German translation: "turned all these countries".— Ed. 
b The reference is to the Napoleonic Wars of 1796-1814.— Ed. 

=====第551页=====
Protection and Free Trade 523 
Protection at home was needless to manufacturers who beat all 
their foreign rivals, and whose very existence was staked on the 
expansion of their exports. Protection at home was of advantage 
to none but the producers of articles of food and other raw 
materials, to the agricultural interest, which, under then existing 
circumstances in England, meant the receivers of rent, the landed 
aristocracy. And this kind of protection was hurtful to the 
manufacturers. By taxing raw materials it raised the price of the 
articles manufactured from them; by taxing food, it raised the 
price of labor; in both ways, it placed the British manufacturer at 
a disadvantage as compared with his foreign competitor. And, as 
all other countries sent to England chiefly agricultural products, 
and drew from England chiefly manufactured goods, repeal of the 
English protective duties on corn and raw materials generally, was 
at the same time an appeal to foreign countries, to do away with, 
or at least, to reduce, in return, the import duties levied by them 
on English manufactures. 
After a long and violent struggle, the English industrial 
capitalists, already in reality the leading class of the nation, that 
class whose interests were then the chief national interests, were 
victorious. The landed aristocracy had to give in. The duties on 
corn and other raw materials were repealed. Free Trade became 
the watchword of the day. To convert all other countries to the 
gospel of Free Trade, and thus to create a world in which England 
was the great manufacturing centre, with all other countries for its 
dependent agricultural districts, that was the next task before the 
English manufacturers and their mouthpieces, the political 
economists. 
That was the time of the Brussels Congress, the time when 
Marx prepared the speech in question. While recognizing that 
protection may still, under certain circumstances, for instance in 
the Germany of 1847, be of advantage to the manufacturing 
capitalists; while proving that Free Trade was not the panacea for 
all the evils under which the working class suffered, and might 
even aggravate them; he pronounces, ultimately and on principle, 
in favor of Free Trade. To him, Free Trade is the normal 
condition of modern capitalistic production. Only under Free 
Trade can the immense productive powers of steam, of electricity, 
of machinery, be fully developed; and the quicker the pace of this 
development, the sooner and the more fully will be realized its 
inevitable results: society splits up into two classes, capitalists here, 
wage-laborers there; hereditary wealth on one side, hereditary 
poverty on the other; supply outstripping demand, the markets 

=====第552页=====
524 Frederick Engels 
being unable to absorb the ever growing mass of the productions 
of industry; an ever recurring cycle of prosperity, glut, crisis, 
panic, chronic depression and gradual revival of trade, the 
harbinger not of permanent improvement but of renewed 
overproduction and crisis; in short, productive forces expanding 
to such a degree that they rebel, as against unbearable fetters, 
against the social institutions under which they are put in motion; 
the only possible solution: a social revolution,3 freeing the social 
productive forces from the fetters of an antiquated social order, 
and the actual producers, the great mass of the people, from 
wage-slavery. And because Free Trade is the natural, the normal 
atmosphere for this historical evolution, the economic medium in 
which the conditions for the inevitable social revolutionb will be 
the soonest created,—for this reason, and for this alone, did Marx 
declare in favor of Free Trade. 
Anyhow, the years immediately following the victory of Free 
Trade in England seemed to verify the most extravagant 
expectations of prosperity founded upon that event. British 
commerce rose to a fabulous amount; the industrial monopoly of 
England on the market of the world seemed more firmly 
established than ever; new iron works, new textile factories arose 
by wholesale; new branches of industry grew up on every side. 
There was, indeed, a severe crisis in 1857, but that was overcome, 
and the onward movement in trade and manufactures soon was in 
full swing again, until in 1866 a fresh panic occurred, a panic, this 
time,  which seems to mark a new departure in the economic 
history of the world. 
The unparalleled expansion of British manufactures and 
commerce between 1848 and 1866 was no doubt due, to a great 
extent, to the removal of the protective duties on food and raw 
materials. But not entirely. Other important changes took place 
simultaneously and helped it on. The above years comprise the 
discovery and working of the Californian and Australian gold 
fields 431 which increased so immensely the circulating medium of 
the world; they mark the final victory of steam over all other 
means of transport0; on the ocean, steamers now superseded 
sailing vessels; on land, in all civilized countries, the railroad took 
a The German translation has "social transformation" instead of "social 
revolution".— Ed. 
b The German translation has here "this inevitable solution".— Ed. 
c Instead of the last phrase the German translation has: "they represent a 
general transformation of the means of transport".— Ed. 

=====第553页=====
Protection and Free Trade 525 
the first place, the macadamized road the second; transport now 
became four times quicker and four times cheaper. No wonder 
that under such favorable circumstances British manufactures 
worked by steam should extend their sway at the expense of 
foreign domestic industries based upon manual labor. But were 
the other countries to sit still and to submit in humility to this 
change, which degraded them to be mere agricultural appendages 
of England, the "workshop of the world"? 
The foreign countries did nothing of the kind. France, for 
nearly two hundred years, had screened her manufactures behind 
a perfect Chinese wall of protection and prohibition, and had 
attained in all articles of luxury and of taste a supremacy which 
England did not even pretend to dispute. Switzerland, under 
perfect Free Trade, possessed relatively important manufactures 
which English competition could not touch. Germany, with a tariff 
far more liberal than that of any other large continental country, 
was developing its manufactures at a rate relatively more rapid 
than even England. And America was, by the civil war of  1861,432 
all at once thrown upon her own resources, had to find means 
how to meet a sudden demand for manufactured goods of all 
sorts,  and could only do so by creating manufactures of her own 
at home. The war demand ceased with the war; but the new 
manufactures were there, and had to meet British* competition. 
And the war had ripened, in America, the insight that a nation of 
thirty-five millions, doubling its numbers in forty years at most, 
with such immense resources, and surrounded by neighbors that 
must be for years to come chiefly agriculturalists, that such a 
nation had the "manifest destiny"433 to be independent of foreign 
manufactures for its chief articles of consumption, and to be so in 
time of peace as well as in time of war. And then America turned 
protectionist. 
It may now be fifteen years ago, I travelled in a railway carriage 
with an intelligent Glasgow merchant, interested, probably, in the 
iron trade. Talking about America, he treated me to the old Free 
Trade lucubrations: "Was it not inconceivable that a nation of 
sharp business men like the Americans should pay tribute to 
indigenous iron masters and manufacturers, when they could buy 
the same, if not a better article, ever so much cheaper in this 
country?" And then he gave me examples as to how much the 
Americans taxed themselves in order to enrich a few greedy iron 
masters. "Well," I replied, "I think there is another side to the 
question. You know that in coal, water-power, iron and other ores, 
cheap food, home-grown cotton and other raw materials, America 

=====第554页=====
526 Frederick Engels 
has resources and advantages unequalled by any European 
country; and that these resources cannot be fully developed except 
by America becoming a manufacturing country. You will admit, 
too, that nowadays a great nation like the Americans cannot exist 
on agriculture alone; that that would be tantamount to a 
condemnation to permanent barbarism and inferiority; no great 
nation can live, in our age, without manufactures of her own. 
Well, then, if America must become a manufacturing country, and 
if she has every chance of not only succeeding, but even 
outstripping her rivals, there are two ways open to her: either to 
carry on, for let us say fifty years, under Free Trade an extremely 
expensive competitive war against English manufactures that have 
got nearly a hundred years' start; or else to shut out, by protective 
duties, English manufactures, for say twenty-five years, with the 
almost absolute certainty that at the end of the twenty-five years 
she will be able to hold her own in the open market of the world. 
Which of the two will be the cheapest and the shortest? That is the 
question. If you want to go from Glasgow to London, you can take 
the parliamentary train434 at a penny a mile and travel at the rate 
of twelve miles an hour. But you do not; your time is too valuable, 
you take the express, pay twopence a mile and do forty miles an 
hour. Very well, the Americans prefer to pay express fare and to 
go express speed." My Scotch Free Trader had not a word in 
reply. 
Protection, being a means of artificially manufacturing manufac­
turers,  may, therefore, appear useful not only to an incompletely 
developed capitalist class still struggling with feudalism; it may also 
give a lift to the rising capitalist class of a country which, like 
America, has never known feudalism, but which has arrived at 
that stage of development where the passage from agriculture to 
manufactures becomes a necessity. America, placed in that 
situation, decided in favor of protection. Since that decision was 
carried out, the five and twenty years of which I spoke to my 
fellow-traveller have about passed, and, if I was not wrong, 
protection ought to have done its task for America, and ought to 
be now becoming a nuisance. 
That has been my opinion for some time. Nearly two years ago, 
I said to a protectionist American: "I am convinced that if 
America goes in for Free Trade she will in ten years have beaten 
England in the market of the world." 
Protection is at best an endless screw, and you never know when 
you have done with it. By protecting one industry, you directly or 
indirectly hurt all others, and have therefore to protect them too. 

=====第555页=====
Protection and Free Trade 527 
By so doing you again damage the industry that you first 
protected, and have to compensate it; but this compensation 
reacts,  as before, on all other trades, and entitles them to redress, 
and so on in infinitum. America, in this respect, offers us a striking 
example of the best way to kill an important industry by 
protection. In 1856, the total imports and exports by sea of the 
United States amounted to $641,604,850, of this amount, 75.2 per 
cent, were carried in American, and only 24.8 per cent, in foreign 
vessels. British ocean-steamers were already then encroaching 
upon American sailing vessels; yet, in 1860, of a total sea-going 
trade of $762,288,550, American vessels still carried 66.5 per cent. 
The civil war came on, and protection to American ship-building; 
and the latter plan was so successful that it has nearly completely 
driven the American flag from the high seas. In 1887 the total 
sea-going trade of the United States amounted to $1,408,502,979, 
but of this total only 13.8 per cent, were carried in American, 
and 86.2 per cent, in foreign bottoms. The goods carried by 
American ships amounted, in 1856, to $482,268,274; in 1860 to 
$507,247,757. In 1887 they had sunk to $194,356,746.* Forty 
years ago, the American flag was the most dangerous rival of the 
British flag, and bade fair to outstrip it on the ocean; now it is 
nowhere. Protection to ship-building has killed both shipping and 
ship-building. 
Another point. Improvements in the methods of production 
nowadays follow each other so rapidly, and change the character 
of entire branches of industry so suddenly and so completely, that 
what may have been yesterday a fairly balanced protective tariff is 
no longer so to-day. Let us take another example from the Report 
of the Secretary of the Treasury for 1887: 
"Improvement in recent years in the machinery employed in combing wool has 
so changed the character of what are commercially known as worsted cloths that 
the latter have largely superseded woollen cloths for use as men's wearing apparel. 
This change ... has operated to the serious injury of our domestic manufacturers of 
these (worsted) goods, because the duty on the wool which they must use is the 
same as that upon wool used in making woollen cloths, while the rates of duty 
imposed upon the latter when valued at not exceeding 80 cents per pound are 
35 cents per pound and 35 per cent, ad valorem,3 whereas the duty on worsted 
cloths valued at not exceeding 80 cents ranges from 10 to 24 cents per pound and 
35 per cent, ad valorem. In some cases the duty on the wool used in making 
worsted cloths exceeds the duty imposed on the finished article." 
* Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury etc., for the Year 1887, Washington, 
1887,  pp. XXVIII, XXIX. 
a In proportion to estimated value of goods.— Ed. 

=====第556页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
Thus what was protection to home industry yesterday, turns out 
to-day to be a premium to the foreign importer; and well may the 
Secretary of the Treasury2 say: 
"There is much reason to believe that the manufacture of worsted cloths must 
soon cease in this country unless the tariff law in this regard is amended" (p. XIX). 
But to amend it, you will have to fight the manufacturers of 
woollen cloths who profit by this state of things; you will have to 
open a regular campaign to bring the majority of both Houses of 
Congress, and eventually the public opinion of the country, round 
to your views, and the question is, Will that pay? 
But the worst of protection is, that when you once have got it 
you cannot easily get rid of it. Difficult as is the process of 
adjustment of an equitable  tariff,  the return to Free Trade is 
immensely more difficult. The circumstances which permitted 
England to accomplish the change in a few years, will not occur 
again. And even there the struggle dated from 1823 (Huskisson), 
commenced to be successful in 1842 (Peel's tariff),435 and was 
continued for several years after the repeal of the Corn Laws. 
Thus protection to the silk manufacture (the only one which had 
still to fear foreign competition) was prolonged for a series of 
years and then granted in another, positively infamous form; 
while the other textile industries were subjected to the Factory 
Act, which limited the hours of labor of women, young persons 
and children,436 the silk trade was favored with considerable 
exceptions to the general rule, enabling them to work younger 
children, and to work the children and young persons longer 
hours,  than the other textile trades. The monopoly that the 
hypocritical Free Traders repealed with regard to the foreign 
competitors, that monopoly they created anew at the expense of 
the health and lives of English children. 
But no country will again be able to pass from Protection to 
Free Trade at a time when all, or nearly all branches of its 
manufactures can defy foreign competition in the open market. 
The necessity of the change will come long before such a happy 
state may be even hoped for. That necessity will make itself 
evident in different trades at different times; and from the 
conflicting interests of these trades, the most edifying squabbles, 
lobby intrigues, and parliamentary conspiracies will arise. The 
machinist, engineer, and ship-builder may find that the protection 
granted to the iron master raises the price of his goods so much 
that his export trade is thereby, and thereby alone, prevented; the 
a Charles Fairchild.— Ed. 

=====第557页=====
Protection  and Free Trade 529 
cotton-cloth manufacturer might  see his way to  driving English 
cloth  out of the  Chinese  and  Indian markets,  but for the  high 
price  he has to pay for the  yarn,  on account  of protection  to 
spinners;  and so  forth.  The  moment  a branch  of national industry 
has completely conquered  the  home market, that moment 
exportation becomes  a necessity  to it.  Under capitalistic conditions, 
an industry either expands  or wanes.  A trade cannot remain 
stationary; stoppage  of expansion  is incipient ruin;  the  progress  of 
mechanical  and  chemical invention,  by  constantly superseding 
human labor,  and  ever more rapidly increasing  and  concentrating 
capital, creates  in every stagnant industry  a glut both  of workers 
and of capital,  a glut which finds  no vent everywhere, because  the 
same process  is taking place  in all  other industries. Thus  the 
passage from  a home  to an  export trade becomes  a question  of life 
and death  for the  industries concerned;  but  they  are met by the 
established rights,  the  vested interests  of others  who as yet  find 
protection either safer  or more profitable than Free Trade. Then 
ensues  a long  and  obstinate fight between Free Traders  and 
Protectionists;  a fight where,  on both sides,  the  leadership soon 
passes  out of the  hands  of the  people directly interested into those 
of professional politicians,  the  wire-pullers  of the  traditional 
political parties, whose interest  is, not a  settlement  of the  question, 
but its being kept open forever;  and the  result  of an  immense loss 
of time, energy,  and  money  is a  series  of compromises, favoring 
now one, now the  other side,  and  drifting slowly though  not 
majestically  in the  direction  of Free Trade—unless Protection 
manages,  in the  meantime,  to make itself utterly insupportable  to 
the nation, which  is just  now  likely  to be the  case  in America. 
There  is, however, another kind  of protection,  the  worst  of all, 
and that  is exhibited  in Germany. Germany,  too,  began  to feel, 
soon after  1815, the  necessity  of a  quicker development  of her 
manufactures.  But the  first condition  of that  was the  creation  of a 
home market  by the  removal  of the  innumerable customs lines 
and varieties  of fiscal legislation formed  by the  small German 
states,  in other words,  the  formation  of a  German Customs Union 
or Zollverein. 437 That could only  be done  on the  basis  of a  liberal 
tariff,  calculated rather  to raise  a common revenue than  to protect 
home production.  On no  other condition could  the  small states 
have been induced  to join. Thus  the new  German  tariff,  though 
slightly protective  to  some trades,  was, at the  time  of its 
introduction,  a model  of Free Trade legislation;  and it  remained 
so, although, ever since  1830, the  majority  of German manufac­
turers kept clamoring  for  protection.  Yet,  under this extremely 

=====第558页=====
530 Frederick Engels 
liberal  tariff,  and in spite of German domestic industries based on 
hand-labor being mercilessly crushed out by the competition of 
English factories worked by steam, the transition from manual 
labor to machinery was gradually accomplished in Germany too, 
and is now nearly complete; the transformation of Germany from 
an agricultural to a manufacturing country went on at the same 
pace,  and was, since 1866, assisted by favorable political events: 
the establishment of a strong central government, and federal 
legislature, ensuring uniformity in the laws regulating trade, as 
well as in currency, weights and measures, and, finally, the flood 
of the French milliards. Thus, about 1874, German trade on the 
market of the world ranked next to that of Great Britain,* and 
Germany employed more steam power in manufactures and 
locomotion than any European Continental country. The proof 
has thus been furnished that even nowadays, in spite of the 
enormous start that English industry has got, a large country can 
work its way up to successful competition, in the open market, 
with England. 
Then, all at once, a change of front was made: Germany turned 
protectionist, at a moment when more than ever Free Trade 
seemed a necessity for her. The change was no doubt absurd; but 
it may be explained. While Germany had been a corn-exporting 
country, the whole agricultural interest, not less than the whole 
shipping trade, had been ardent Free Traders. But in 1874, 
instead of exporting, Germany required large supplies of corn 
from abroad. About that time, America began to flood Europe 
with enormous supplies of cheap corn; wherever they went, they 
brought down the money revenue yielded by the land, and 
consequently its rent; and from that moment, the agricultural 
interest, all over Europe, began to clamor for protection. At the 
same time, manufacturers in Germany were suffering from the 
effect of the reckless overtrading0 brought on by the influx of the 
French milliards, while England, whose trade, ever since the crisis 
of 1866, had been in a state of chronic depression, inundated all 
accessible markets with goods unsalable at home and offered 
abroad at ruinously low prices. Thus it happened that German 
* General Trade of Exports and Imports added in 1874, in millions of dollars: 
Great Britain —3300; Germany—2325; France—1665; United States—1245 
millions of dollars. (Kolb, Statistik, 7th edit., Leipsic, 1875, p. 790.) a 
a In the pamphlet the figures are given in millions of thaler, and in the German 
translation, in millions of marks.— Ed. 
b The German translation adds here "and excessive speculation".— Ed. 

=====第559页=====
Protection and Free Trade 531 
manufacturers, though depending, above all, upon export, began 
to see in protection a means of securing to themselves the 
exclusive supply of the home market. And the government, 
entirely in the hands of the landed aristocracy and squirearchy, 
was only too glad to profit by this circumstance, in order to benefit 
the receivers of the rent of land, by offering protective duties to 
both landlords and manufacturers. In 1878, a highly protective 
tariff was enacted both for agricultural products and for 
manufactured goods.438 
The consequence was that henceforth the exportation of 
German manufactures was carried on at the direct cost of the 
home consumers. Wherever possible, "rings" or "trusts"a were 
formed to regulate the export trade and even production  itself. 
The German iron trade is in the hands of a few large firms, 
mostly joint stock companies, who, betwixt them, can produce 
about four times as much iron as the average consumption of the 
country can absorb. To avoid unnecessary competition with one 
another, these firms have formed a trust which divides amongst 
them all foreign contracts, and determines in each case the firm 
that is to make the real tender. This "trust," some years ago, had 
even come to an agreement with the English iron masters, but this 
no longer subsists. Similarly, the Westphalian coal mines (produc­
ing about thirty million tons annually) had formed a trust to 
regulate production, tenders for contracts, and prices. And, 
altogether, any German manufacturer will tell you that the only 
thing the protective duties do for him is to enable him to recoup 
himself in the home market for the ruinous prices he has to take 
abroad. And this is not all. This absurd system of protection to 
manufacturers is nothing but the sop thrown to industrial 
capitalists to induce them to support a still more outrageous 
monopoly given to the landed interest. Not only is all agricultural 
produce subjected to heavy import duties which are increased 
from year to year, but certain rural industries, carried on on large 
estates for account of the proprietor, are positively endowed out 
of the public purse. The beet-root sugar manufacture is not only 
protected, but receives enormous sums in the shape of export 
premiums. One who ought to know is of opinion that if the 
exported sugar was all thrown into the sea, the manufacturer 
would still clear a profit out of the government premium. 
Similarly, the potato-spirit distilleries receive, in consequence of 
a Here and below the German translation has "cartels" instead of "rings" and 
"trusts".—  Ed. 
36-1243 

=====第560页=====
532 Frederick Engels 
recent legislation, a present, out of the pockets of the public, of 
about nine million dollars3 a year. And as almost every large 
land-owner in Northeastern Germany is either a beet-root sugar 
manufacturer or a potato-spirit distiller, or both, no wonder the 
world is literally deluged with their productions. 
This policy, ruinous under any circumstances, is doubly so in a 
country whose manufactures keep up their standing in neutral 
markets chiefly through the cheapness of labor. Wages in 
Germany, kept near starvation point at the best of times, through 
redundancy of population (which increases rapidly, in spite of 
emigration), must rise in consequence of the rise in all necessaries 
caused by protection; the German manufacturer will, then, no 
longer be able, as he too often is now, to make up for a ruinous 
price of his articles by a deduction from the normal wages of his 
hands,  and will be driven out of the market.b Protection, in 
Germany, is killing the goose that lays the golden eggs. 
France, too, suffers from the consequences of protection. The 
system, in that country, has become, by its two centuries of 
undisputed sway, almost part and parcel of the life of the nation. 
Nevertheless, it is more and more becoming an obstacle. Constant 
changes in the methods of manufacture are the order of the dayc; 
but protection bars the road. Silk velvets have their backs 
nowadays made of fine cotton thread; the French manufacturer 
has either to pay protection price for that, or to submit to such 
interminable official chicanery as fully makes up for the difference 
between that price and the government drawback on exportation; 
and so the velvet trade goes from Lyons to Crefeld, where the 
protection price for fine cotton thread is considerably lower. 
French exports, as said before, consist chiefly of articles of luxury, 
where French taste cannot, as yet, be beaten; but the chief 
consumers, all over the world, of such articles are our modern 
upstart capitalists who have no education and no taste, and who 
are suited quite as well by cheap and clumsy German or English 
imitations, and often have these foisted upon them for the real 
French article at more than fancy prices. The market for those 
specialties which cannot be made out of France is constantly 
getting narrower, French exports of manufactures are barely kept 
up, and must soon decline; by what new articles can France 
a The German translation has "thirty-six million marks".— Ed. 
b The German translation has "will lose its competitiveness" instead of "will be 
driven out of the market".— Ed. 
c In the German translation the sentence begins as follows: "Large-scale 
industry calls for constant changes in the methods of production".— Ed. 

=====第561页=====
Protection and Free Trade 533 
replace those whose export is dying out? If anything can help 
here,  it is a bold measure of Free Trade, taking the French 
manufacturer out of his accustomed hothouse atmosphere and 
placing him once more in the open air of competition with foreign 
rivals. 3 Indeed, French general trade would have long since begun 
shrinking, were it not for the slight and vacillating step in the 
direction of Free Trade made by the Cobden treaty of I860,439 but 
that has well-nigh exhausted itself and a stronger dose of the same 
tonic is wanted. 
It is hardly worth while to speak of Russia. There, the protective 
tariff—the duties having to be paid in gold, instead of in the 
depreciated paper currency of the country—serves above all 
things to supply the pauper government with the hard cash 
indispensable for transactions with foreign creditors; on the very 
day on which that tariff fulfils its protective mission by totally 
excluding foreign goods, on that day the Russian government is 
bankrupt. And yet that same government amuses its subjectsb by 
dangling before their eyes the prospect of making Russia, by 
means of this  tariff,  an entirely self-supplying country, requiring 
from the foreigner neither food, nor raw material, nor manufac­
tured articles, nor works of art. The people who believe in this 
vision of a Russian Empire, secluded and isolated from the rest of 
the world, are on a level with the patriotic Prussian lieutenant who 
went into a shop and asked for a globe, not a terrestrial or a 
celestial one, but a globe of Prussia. 
To return to America. There are plenty of symptoms that 
Protection has done all it could for the United States, andc that 
the sooner it receives notice to quit, the better for all parties. One 
of these symptoms is the formation of "rings" and "trusts" within 
the protected industries for the more thorough exploitation of the 
monopoly granted to them. Now, "rings" and "trusts" are truly 
American institutions, and, where they exploit natural advantages, 
they are generally, though grumblingly, submitted to. The 
transformation of the Pennsylvanian oil supply into a monopoly by 
the Standard Oil Company 40 is a proceeding entirely in keeping 
with the rules of capitalist production. But if the sugar-refiners 
attempt to transform the protection granted them, by the nation, 
against foreign competition, into a monopoly against the home 
consumer, that is to say against the same nation that granted the 
a The last three words are omitted in the German translation.— Ed. 
b The German translation has "faithful subjects".— Ed. 
c In the German translation the end of the sentence reads: "it is time to finish 
with it".— Ed. 
36* 

=====第562页=====
534 Frederick Engels 
protection, that is quite a different thing. Yet the large sugar-
refiners have formed a "trust" which aims at nothing else.441 And 
the sugar trust is not the only one of its kind. Now, the formation 
of such trusts in protected industries is the surest sign that 
protection has done its work, and is changing its character; that it 
protects the manufacturer no longer against the foreign importer, 
but against the home consumer; that it has manufactured, at least 
in the special branch concerned, quite enough, if not too many 
manufacturers; that the money it puts into the purse of these 
manufacturers3 is money thrown away, exactly as in Germany. 
In America, as elsewhere, Protection is bolstered up by the 
argument that Free Trade will only benefit England. The best 
proof to the contrary is that in England not only the agriculturists 
and landlords but even the manufacturers are turning protection­
ists. In the home of the "Manchester school" of Free Traders,442 
on Nov. 1, 1886, the Manchester chamber of commerce discussed 
a resolution 
"that, having waited in vain forty years for other nations to follow the Free 
Trade example of England, the chamber thinks the time has arrived to reconsider 
that position." 
The resolution was indeed rejected, but by 22 votes against 21! 
And that happened in the centre of the cotton manufacture, i.e., 
the only branch of English manufacture whose superiority in the 
open market seems still undisputed! But, then, even in that special 
branch inventive genius has passed from England to America. The 
latest improvements in machinery for spinning and weaving cotton 
have come, almost all, from America, and Manchester has to adopt 
them. In industrial inventions of all kinds, America has distinctly 
taken the lead, while Germany runs England very close for second 
place. The consciousness is gaining ground in England that that 
country's industrial monopoly is irretrievably lost, that she is still 
relatively losing ground, while her rivals are making progress, and 
that she is drifting into a position where she will have to be 
content with being one manufacturing nation among many, 
instead of, as she once dreamt, "the workshop of the world." It is 
to stave off this impending fate that Protection, scarcely disguised 
under the veil of "fair trade" and retaliatory tariffs, is now 
invoked with such fervor by the sons of the very men who, forty 
years ago, knew no salvation but in Free Trade. And when English 
manufacturers begin to find that Free Trade is ruining them, and 
ask the government to protect them against their foreign 
a The German translation has here "through the protective tariffs".— Ed. 

=====第563页=====
Protection and Free Trade 535 
competitors, then, surely, the moment has come for these 
competitors to retaliate by throwing overboard a protective system 
henceforth useless, to fight the fading industrial monopoly of 
England with its own weapon, Free Trade. 
But, as I said before, you may easily introduce Protection, but 
you cannot get rid of it again so easily. The legislature, by 
adopting the protective plan, has created vast interests, for which 
it is responsible. And not every one of these interests—the various 
branches of industry—is equally ready, at a given moment, to face 
open competition. Some will be lagging behind, while others have 
no longer need of protective nursing. This difference of position 
will give rise to the usual lobby-plotting, and is in itself a sure 
guarantee that the protected industries, if Free Trade is resolved 
upon, will be let down very easy indeed, as was the silk 
manufacture in England after 1846. That is unavoidable under 
present circumstances, and will have to be submitted to by the 
Free Trade party so long as the change is resolved upon in 
principle. 
The question of Free Trade or Protection moves entirely within 
the bounds of the present system of capitalist production, and has, 
therefore, no direct interest for us Socialists who want to do away 
with that system. Indirectly, however, it interests us, inasmuch as 
we must desire the present system of production to develop and 
expand as freely and as quickly as possible; because along with it 
will develop also those economic phenomena which are its 
necessary consequences, and which must destroy the whole 
systema  : misery of the great mass of the people, in consequence of 
overproduction; this overproduction engendering either periodical 
gluts and revulsions, accompanied by panic, or else a chronic 
stagnation of trade; division of society into a small class of large 
capitalists, and a large one of practically hereditary wage-slaves, 
proletarians, who, while their numbers increase constantly, are at 
the same time constantly being superseded by new labor-saving 
machinery; in short, society brought to a deadlock, out of which 
there is no escaping but by a complete remodelling of the 
economic structure which forms its basis. From this point of view, 
forty years ago, Marx pronounced, in principle, in favor of Free 
Trade as the more progressive plan, and, therefore, the plan 
which would soonest bring capitalist society to that deadlock. But 
if Marx declared in favor of Free Trade on that ground, is that 
a In the German translation the words "and which must destroy the whole 
system" are absent.— Ed. 

=====第564页=====
536 Frederick Engels 
not a reason for every supporter of the present order of society to 
declare against Free Trade? If Free Trade is stated to be 
revolutionary, must not all good citizens vote for Protection as a 
conservative plan? 
If a country nowadays accept Free Trade, it will certainly not do 
so to please the Socialists. It will do so because Free Trade has 
become a necessity for the industrial capitalists. But if it should 
reject Free Trade, and stick to Protection, in order to cheat the 
Socialists out of the expected social catastrophe, that will not hurt 
the prospects of Socialism in the least.3 Protection is a plan for 
artificially manufacturing manufacturers, and therefore also a plan 
for artificially manufacturing wage-laborers. You cannot breed the 
one without breeding the other. The wage-laborer everywhere 
follows in the footsteps of the manufacturer; he is like the 
"gloomy care" of Horace, that sits behind the rider, and that he 
cannot shake off wherever he go.b You cannot escape fate; in 
other words you cannot escape the necessary consequences of your 
own actions. A system of production based upon the exploitation 
of wage-labor, in which wealth increases in proportion to the 
number of laborers employed and exploited, such a system is 
bound to increase the class of wage-laborers,0 that is to say, the 
class which is fated one day to destroy the system  itself.  In the 
meantime, there is no help for it: you must go on developing the 
capitalist system, you must accelerate the production, accumula­
tion, and centralization of capitalist wealth, and, along with it, the 
production of a revolutionary class of laborers/ Whether you try 
the Protectionist or the Free Trade plan will make no difference 
in the end, and hardly any in the length of the respite left to you 
until the day when that end will come. For long before that day 
will protection have become an unbearable shackle to any country 
aspiring, with a chance of success, to hold its own in the world 
market. 
Written in April and early May 1888 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, No. 7, 
July 1888 and also in the pamphlet 
K. Marx, Free Trade, Boston, 1888 
a The German translation has "then nobody will be cheated more than  itself" 
instead of "that will not hurt the prospects of Socialism in the least".— Ed. 
b Horace, Carminum. III. 1.— Ed. 
c In the German translation the end of the sentence reads: "and thus to exacerbate 
a class antagonism which will one day destroy the entire system".— Ed. 
d In the German translation the word "revolutionary" is absent, and the 
sentence ends as follows: "located outside official society".— Ed. Reproduced from the pamphlet 
collated with Die Neue Zeit 

=====第565页=====
537 
[LETTER TO THE EDITORS OF THE LABOUR ELECTOR] 
Seeing the constant interest you take in the questions raised with 
regard to the coming International Working Men's Congress, I 
hope you will allow a Frenchman and a Member of the so-called 
Marxist Organisation of France (Agglomération Parisienne), to say 
a few words in reply to a circular published in the Bulletin of the 
Paris Labour Exchange and reproduced in English, in Justice of 
April 27th. 
Now the Paris Labour Exchange is an out and out Possibilist 
institution. They have got hold of it with the help of the 
Opportunist and Radical Members444 of the Paris Town Council, 
and every trades union which dares openly oppose Possibilist 
principles and tactics, is at once excluded. This above mentioned 
circular, though issued in the name of 78 Paris Trades Unions, is 
therefore quite as much a Possibilist production as if issued by the 
Possibilist Committee themselves. 
This circular calls upon "all the working class organisations of 
France, without distinction of the shades of Republican or Socialist 
opinion," to join in the Possibilist Congress. Now this seems fair 
enough. And as our section of the French Socialists has driven the 
Possibilists entirely out of the provinces, so much so that they 
dared not attend their own Congress at Troyes, as soon they 
heard that we were to be admitted, and as our organisations in the 
provinces are by far more numerous than all the Possibilist 
organisations in France put together, no doubt we should have the 
majority of French delegates even in this Possibilist Congress, if a 
fair basis of representation was secured. But there's the rub. The 
Possibilist Committee have made heaps of regulations for their 
Congress, but this most important point is never mentioned. 

=====第566页=====
538 Frederick Engels 
Nobody knows whether each group is to send one, two, or more 
delegates, or whether the number of delegates is to be regulated 
by the number of members in each group. Now, as the Possibilists 
are acknowledged to be strongest in Paris, they might send two or 
three delegates for each group, where we, in our simplicity, send 
only one. They may manufacture as many delegates as they like. 
They have them ready at hand in Paris, and need merely 
nominate them. And thus, with all this apparent fairness, the 
French section of the Congress may be turned into a packed set of 
Possibilists, who might treat us as they liked, unless we had an 
appeal to the Congress. 
For this reason alone we could not give up the sovereignty of 
the Congress with regard to all its internal concerns, if, indeed, 
that first and fundamental principle could be given up. It is not 
quite forgotten in London yet, I believe, that the Parliamentary 
Committee,445 last November, made it pretty clearly understood 
that they had hired the room, and that the Congress446 was there 
at their sufferance—and we do not want to have that repeated in 
Paris. 
Written in late April 1889 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Elector, 
vol. I, No. 18, May 4, 1889 

=====第567页=====
539 
[THE RUHR MINERS' STRIKE OF 1889] 
The German miners' strike is an immense event for us. Like the 
miners in England in the Chartist times, the colliers of Germany 
are the last to join the movement, and this is their first start. The 
movement began in the Westfalian coalfield in the North—a 
district producing 45 million tons annually, and not yet  half-
developed, coal having been bored at a depth of 500 yards. These 
miners—hitherto good subjects, patriotic, obedient, and religious, 
and furnishing some of the finest infantry for the VII. army corps 
(I know them well, my native place is only 6 or 7 miles south of 
the coalfields), have now been thoroughly aroused by the 
oppression of their capitalists. While the mines—almost all joint 
stock concerns—paid enormous dividends, the real wages of the 
men were constantly being reduced, the nominal weekly wages 
were kept up, in some cases even raised in appearance, by forcing 
the men to work enormous overtime—in place of single shifts of 
8 hours they worked from 12 to 16 hours, thus making from 9 to 
12 shifts weekly. Truck shops,448 disguised under the name of 
"Co-operative" shops, prevailed. Cheating, on the quantity of coal 
got by rejecting whole truckfuls of coal as being bad or not 
properly filled, was the rule. Well, since last winter, the men have 
given notice several times that they would strike unless this was 
remedied, but to no purpose, and at last they did strike, after 
having given due notice of their intention, and the owners lie 
when they maintain the contrary. In a week 70,000 men were out, 
and the masters had to feed the strike, for they paid wages once a 
month only, and always kept one month's wages in hand which they 
now had to fork out to the strikers. The masters were thus caught in 
their own net. Well, the men sent that celebrated deputation to the 

=====第568页=====
540 Frederick Engels 
Emperor3—a snobby, conceited coxcomb of a boy—who received 
them with a threatening speech; if they turned towards the social 
democrat and reviled the authorities, he would have them shot 
down without mercy.449  (That had in fact been tried already at 
Bochum, where a sublieutenant, a lad of 19, ordered his men to 
fire on the strikers, most of them fired in the air.) But all the 
same, the whole empire trembled before these men on strike. The 
military commander of the district b went to the spot, so did the 
Home Secretary,0 and everything was tried to bring the masters 
round to make concession. The Emperor even told them to open 
their pockets, and said in a council of ministers "My soldiers are 
there to keep order, but not to provide big profits to the 
mine-owners." 
Well, by the intervention of the Liberal Opposition (who have 
lost one seat in Parliament after another by the workmen passing 
over to us) a compromise was effected, and the men returned to 
work. But no sooner were they in than the masters broke their 
word, discharged some of the ringleaders (though they had agreed 
not to do so), refused arranging for overtime by agreement with 
the men, as agreed upon, etc. The strike threatened to break out 
again, but the matter is still in suspense, and, I am sure, the 
Government, who are in a devil of a funk, will make them give in 
at least for a time. Then the strike spread to Coalfield No. II. and 
III. This district has been kept, so far, free from Socialist 
contagion, as every man who went there to agitate, when caught in 
the meshes of the law, got as many years' imprisonment as he 
would have got months' anywhere else in Germany. The 
Government alone made concessions to the men, but whether 
these will suffice remains to be seen. Then the men in the Saxon 
Coalfield, and in the two Siberian0 Coalfields, still further east, 
took up the tune, so that in the last three weeks there have been at 
least 120,000 colliers on strike in Germany, and from them the 
Belgian and Bohemian miners caught the infection, while in 
Germany a number of other trades who had prepared strikes for 
this spring season, have also left work.450 Thus there is no doubt 
the German colliers have joined their brethren in the struggle 
against capital, and as they are a splendid body of men, and 
almost all have passed through the army, they form an important 
addition to our ranks. Their belief in emperor and priest has been 
a William IL— Ed. 
b E. Albedyll.— Ed. 
c E. Herrfurth.— Ed. 
d Should read: "Silesian".— Ed. 

=====第569页=====
The Ruhr Miners' Strike of 1889 541 
shattered, and whatever the Government may do, no Government 
can give satisfaction to the men without upsetting the capitalist 
system — and that the German Government neither can nor will 
attempt. It is the first time that the Government had to pretend to 
observe an impartial position in a strike in Germany: so its 
virginity in that respect has gone for ever, and both William and 
Bismarck had to bow before the array of 100,000 working men on 
strike. That alone is a glorious result. 
Written in late May 1889 Reproduced from the magazine 
First published in The Labour Leader, 
vol. I, No. 5, June 1889 

=====第570页=====
542 
POSSIBILIST CREDENTIALS 
The partisans of the Possibilist Paris Congress—the unmistake-
able Mr. Smith Hedingley in the Star, Mr. H. Burrows and Mrs. 
Besant in the weekly Press—are repeating over and over again 
that their Congress was a really representative one, while the 
Marxist Congress contained people who represented only them­
selves, and for that reason dared not accept the challenge of the 
Possibilists to show them their credentials. The English delegates 
to the Marxist Congress will no doubt seek, and find, an 
opportunity to prove the untruth of the charges brought against 
them; so we may for the present dismiss that part of the subject, 
and merely observe that the Possibilists could hardly offer a 
greater insult to the Marxist Congress than to ask it to ignore the 
process of the verification of its own credentials, completed as far 
back as the second (or third?) day, and to submit their credentials 
to a fresh examination; while the Possibilists, in their resolution on 
the subject, carefully avoided engaging themselves to an examina­
tion of their credentials by the Marxists. 
That the above is the correct view of the matter, and that the 
Possibilists, much more than the Marxists, had reason to show 
their credentials to none but friends, was proved by the 
observations of Dr. Adler, in the Marxist Congress, of what he 
had learnt about the "Austrian" Possibilist delegates. As the thing 
is characteristic of the way in which the Possibilists manufactured 
truly representative delegates, it deserves reproduction. 
In the Possibilist list of delegates we find under "Austria" the 
following bodies represented: — "Bakers Union of Vienna," "Fed­
eration of Upper Austria and Salzburg," "Federation of Working-
men of Bohemia-Moravia, and Silesia." Now Dr. Adler, who has 

=====第571页=====
Possibilist Credentials 543 
during the last three years, with wonderful energy, tact, and 
perseverance, reorganised the Socialist movement in Austria, and 
who knows every workmen's society in every town in Austria, told 
the Congress that these various societies, whatever may be their 
other merits, have one fatal defect: they do not exist. 
When it became known in Paris that the Marxist Congress had 
met on the Sunday, and that there were delegates from Austria, 
there came to it on the Monday two Austrians and saw Dr. Adler. 
They told him they were bakers, for some time past working in 
Paris;  that a Hungarian baker, of the name of Dobosy, had 
engaged them as "delegates" for a workingmen's congress; was 
this the same congress? Adler questioned them and found out that 
they were engaged for the Possibilist Congress, for which they had 
cards of membership; that they had told the people who had 
engaged them that they represented absolutely nobody but 
themselves, that they were told that did not matter, Austria being 
a despotic country, regular credentials were not required; that 
they now found the true Austrian delegates were at the other 
Congress; what were they to do? The Austrian delegates told them 
they had no business to play at delegates at any Congress. Well, 
they arranged for another interview. They came again a day or 
two after, assisted at the meeting of the Marxist Congress, and 
then declared they saw themselves they must get out of this false 
position, but how? They were told to return their credentials. 
They had none. Then return your cards of membership. This 
they promised to do, and returned to say they had done so. 
This is a sample of what the Possibilists and their English 
partisans call "strictly representative." And the imposing list of 
Hungarian societies with names so well hidden under misprints 
that only with a few of them is the pretended locality recognizable, 
are, according to the true Hungarian delegates at the Marxist 
Congress, equally non-existent outside the wonderland of Possibil­
ist fancy. Indeed, the concoction here is too flagrant. "Circles of 
Social Study and Federation of Croatia, Slavonia, Dalmatia, 
Trieste, and Fiume"—this pompous title bears the stamp of its 
Parisian origin too conspicuously. And to think that behind all this 
there are not even the—three tailors of Tooley Street!452 
We are further told that it is absolutely false that the Possibilist 
Congress was a mere Trades Unions Congress. Mr. Herbert 
Burrows is quite indignant at such a calumny; with the exception 
of a few English Trades Unionists "the whole of the delegates" 
were revolutionary Socialists, and as such represented their 
respective societies. Well, to give but one example, what does El 

=====第572页=====
544 Frederick Engels 
Socialista, of Madrid (26th July) say of the Spanish Possibilist 
delegates? That "they say they represent 20,000 Socialists, when 
they are but delegates of societies in which there is room for the 
Carlist 453 as well as for the revolutionary Socialist" — entirely 
non-political clubs, in fact, what is called, in England, Trades 
Unions. 
Written in early August 1889 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Elector, 
vol. II, No. 32, August 10, 1889 

=====第573页=====
545 
[APROPOS OF THE LONDON DOCKERS' STRIKE] 
I envy you your work in the Dock Strike. It is the movement of 
the greatest promise we have had for years, and I am proud and 
glad to have lived to see it. If Marx had lived to witness this! If 
these poor down-trodden men, the dregs of the proletariat, these 
odds and ends of all trades, fighting every morning at the dock 
gates for an engagement, if they can combine, and terrify by their 
resolution the mighty Dock Companies, truly then we need not 
despair of any section of the working class. This is the beginning 
of real life in the East End, and if successful will transform the 
whole character of the East End. There—for want of  self-
confidence, and of organisation among the poor devils grovelling 
in stagnant misery—lasciate ogni speranza.* ... If the dockers get 
organised, all other sections will follow... It is a glorious movement 
and again I envy those that can share in the work. 
Written between August 20 and 26, 1889 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Elector, 
vol. II, No. 35, August 31, 1889 
"All hope abandon..." (Dante, Divine Comedy, Inferno, c. Ill, v. 5).— Ed. 

=====第574页=====
546 
THE ABDICATION OF THE BOURGEOISIE 
Of all the national bourgeoisies, it is undoubtedly the English 
one that has up to now preserved the keenest sense of class, i.e., 
sense of politics. Our German bourgeoisie is stupid and cowardly; 
it has not even been able to seize and hold onto the political power 
the working class won for it in 1848; in Germany the working class 
must first sweep away the remnants of feudalism and of 
patriarchal absolutism, which our bourgeoisie was duty-bound to 
eradicate long ago. The French bourgeoisie, the most mercenary 
and pleasure-seeking of all, is blinded to its future interests by its 
own greed for money; it lives only by the day; in its frenzied thirst 
for profit it plunges itself into the most ignominious corruption, 
declares that income tax is socialist high treason, can find no way 
of countering any strike other than with infantry salvoes, and thus 
manages to bring about a situation where in a republic with 
universal suffrage the workers are left with hardly any other 
means of victory than violent revolution. The English bourgeoisie 
is neither as greedily stupid as the French, nor as pusillanimously 
stupid as the German. During the period of its greatest triumphs 
it has constantly made concessions to the workers; even its most 
dyed-in-the-wool contingent, the conservative landowning and 
finance aristocracy, was not afraid to give the urban workers 
suffrage on such a scale that it is purely the fault of the workers 
themselves that they have not had 40 to 50 representatives of their 
own in Parliament since 1868. And since then the entire 
bourgeoisie—the Conservatives and the Liberals combined—has 
extended this wider suffrage to the rural areas as well, has roughly 
equalled out the size of the constituencies and thereby placed at 
least another thirty constituencies at the disposal of the working 

=====第575页=====
The Abdication of the Bourgeoisie 547 
class.  Whereas the German bourgeoisie has never had the ability to 
lead and represent the nation as its ruling class, whereas the 
French proves daily—and just again at the elections456—that it has 
completely lost this ability—and yet there was a time when it 
possessed that ability to a higher degree than any other middle 
class—the English bourgeoisie (into which the so-called aristocracy 
has been absorbed and assimilated) exhibited until recently a 
certain talent for doing justice to its position as leading class at 
least to some degree. 
This now seems to be changing more and more. 
Everything connected with the old government of the City of 
London — the constitution and the administration of the City 
proper—is still downright medieval. And this includes also the 
Port of London, the leading port in the world. The WHARFINGERS, the 
LIGHTERMEN and the WATERMEN3 form regular guilds with exclusive 
privileges and in part still don medieval costumes. These 
antiquated guild privileges have in the past seventy years been 
crowned with the monopoly of the dock companies, and thereby 
the whole huge Port of London has been handed over for ruthless 
exploitation to a small number of privileged corporations. And 
this whole privileged monstrosity is being perpetuated and, as it 
were, made inviolable through an endless series of intricate and 
contradictory Acts of Parliament through which it was born and 
raised, and in such a manner that this legal labyrinth has become 
its best rampart. But while these corporations presume on their 
medieval privileges in dealing with ordinary traders and make 
London the most expensive port in the world, their members have 
become regular bourgeois, who besides fleecing their customers, 
exploit their workers in the most despicable manner and thus 
profit simultaneously from the advantages of medieval guild and 
modern capitalist society. 
Since, however, this exploitation took place within the 
framework of modern capitalist society, it was, despite its medieval 
cloak, subject to the laws of that society. The big swallowed the 
small or at least chained them to their triumphal chariot. The big 
dock companies became the masters of the guilds of the 
wharfingers, the lightermen and the watermen, and thereby of the 
whole Port of London, thus opening up the prospect of unlimited 
profits for themselves. This prospect blinded them. They squan­
dered millions on stupid installations; and since there were several 
a In the original these English words are given in parentheses after their 
German equivalents.— Ed. 
37-1243 

=====第576页=====
548 Frederick Engels 
such companies, they engaged in a competitive war, which cost 
further millions, produced more senseless structures and pushed 
the companies to the brink of bankruptcy, until finally they came 
to terms two years ago. 
In the meantime the London trade had passed its peak. Le 
Havre, Antwerp, Hamburg and, since the new sea canal had been 
built, also Amsterdam, drew a growing share of the traffic that 
had formerly centred on London. Liverpool, Hull and Glasgow 
also took their share. The newly built docks remained empty, 
dividends dwindled and partly disappeared altogether, shares 
dropped, and the dock managers, arrogant, purse-proud snobs, 
stubborn and spoilt by the good old times, were at their wits' end. 
They did not want to admit the true reasons for the relative and 
absolute decline in the traffic of the Port of London. And these 
reasons, insofar as they are of a local character, are purely and 
simply their own arrogant perversity and its cause, the privileged 
position, the medieval, long outdated constitution of the City and 
Port of London, which by right should be in the British Museum, 
next to the Egyptian mummies and the Assyrian stone monsters. 
Nowhere else in the world would such folly be tolerated. In 
Liverpool, where similar conditions were taking shape, they were 
nipped in the bud and the entire port constitution was moder­
nised. But in London traders surfer because of it, grumble 
and—submit to it. The bourgeoisie, the bulk of whom have to pay 
the costs of these fatuities, yield to this monopoly, even if 
unwillingly, but yield just the same. They no longer have the 
energy to shake off this demon that in time threatens to stifle the 
living conditions of all of London. 
Then the dock workers' strike breaks out.457 It is not the 
bourgeoisie robbed by the dock companies that rebel, it is the 
workers exploited by them, the poorest of the poor, the lowest 
layer of the East End proletarians, who fling down the gauntlet to 
the dock magnates. And then, at last, the bourgeoisie realise that 
they too have an enemy in the dock magnates, that the striking 
workers have taken up the struggle not only in their own interests, 
but indirectly also in the interests of the bourgeois class. That is 
the secret of the public sympathy for the strike and of the 
unprecedentedly generous money contributions from bourgeois 
circles. But thus far and no further. The workers went into action 
to the accompaniment of acclamation and applause from the 
bourgeoisie; the workers fought the battle to the end and proved 
not only that the proud dock magnates could be defeated but by 
their struggle and victory also stirred up public opinion to such an 

=====第577页=====
The Abdication of the Bourgeoisie 549 
extent that the dock monopoly and the feudal port constitution 
are no longer tenable and will soon really have to move to the 
British Museum. 
The job should have been done by the bourgeoisie long ago. 
They were unable or unwilling to do it. Now the workers have 
taken it in hand and now it will be done. In other words, in this 
case the bourgeoisie have renounced their own part in favour of 
the workers. 
Now a different picture. From the medieval Port of London we 
move on to the modern cotton spinneries of Lancashire. We 
presently find ourselves at a juncture where the cotton harvest of 
1888 is exhausted and that of 1889 has not yet come onto the 
market, that is, speculation in raw materials has the best prospects 
at present. A rich Dutchman called Steenstrand has, with other 
cronies, formed a "ring" to buy up all the available cotton and to 
boost prices accordingly. The cotton spinners can retaliate only by 
cutting consumption, that is, by shutting down their mills for 
several days a week or altogether, until the new cotton is in sight. 
They have been trying to do this for six weeks. But now as on 
previous occasions it refuses to work. This is because many of the 
spinners are so heavily indebted that a partial or complete 
standstill would push them to the brink of ruin. Others even want 
the majority to stop and thereby to boost the price of cotton yarn; 
while they themselves intend to continue operating and to profit 
from the higher yarn prices. A good ten years' experience has 
shown that there is only one way to enforce a shut-down of all 
cotton mills—no matter for what ultimate purpose—namely, by 
introducing a wage cut of, say, 5 per cent. Then there is a strike, 
or a lockout by the mill-owners themselves, and then, in the 
struggle against the workers, absolute unity prevails among the 
mill-owners, and the machines are brought to a standstill even by 
those who do not know whether they will ever be able to set them 
going again. 
As things stand, a wage cut is not advisable today. But how 
otherwise can a general closure of the mills be brought about, 
without which the spinners will for about six weeks be delivered, 
bound hand and foot, to the speculators? By a step which is 
unique in the history of modern industry. 
The mill-owners, through their central committee, "semi­
officially" approach the Central Committee of the Workers' Trade 
Unions with a request that the organised workers in the common 
interest, force the obstinate mill-owners to shut down by organising 
strikes. Messrs mill-owners, admitting their own inability to take 
37* 

=====第578页=====
550 Frederick Engels 
concerted action, ask the once so hated workers' trade unions 
kindly to use coercion against them, the mill-owners, so that the 
mill-owners, induced by bitter necessity, should finally act in 
concert, as a class, in the interests of their own class. They have to 
be forced to do so by the workers, for they themselves are unable 
to bring this about! 
The workers consented. And the workers' threat alone sufficed. 
In 24 hours the "ring" of cotton speculators was smashed. This 
shows what can be done by the mill-owners, and what by the 
workers. 
Thus,  here, in the most modern of all modern large-scale 
industries, the bourgeoisie proves to be just as incapable of 
asserting its own class interests as in medieval London. And what 
is more, it openly admits it, and by turning to the organised 
workers with the request that they force through a major class 
interest of the mill-owners against the will of mill-owners 
themselves, it not only abdicates, but recognises in the organised 
working class its successor, which is called upon to rule and is 
capable of doing so. It proclaims itself that even if every single 
mill-owner is able to manage his own mill, it is the organised 
workers alone who are now able to take the management of the 
entire cotton industry into their own hands. And this means, in 
plain language, that the only occupation left to the mill-owners is 
to become paid business managers in the service of the organised 
workers. 
F. Engels 
Written between late September and Printed according to the news-
early October 1889 paper 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, 
No. 40, October 5, 1889 

=====第579页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第580页=====

=====第581页=====
553 
[ON THE ASSOCIATION OF THE FUTURE] 
In essence, associations—whether naturally evolved or created— 
have hitherto existed for economic ends, but these ends have been 
concealed and buried beneath ideological matters of secondary 
importance. The ancient polis, 459 the medieval town or guild, the 
feudal confederacy of landowning nobility—all had secondary 
ideological aims which they hallowed and which in the case of the 
patrician body of consanguinity and the guild arose from the 
memories, traditions and models of gentile society no less than in 
that of the ancient polis. The capitalist commercial companies are 
the first to be wholly rational and objective—but vulgar. The 
association of the future will combine the rationality of the latter 
with the old ones' concern for the social welfare of all, and thus 
fulfil its purpose. 
Written in 1884 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, Published in English for the first 
Part 1, Moscow, 1937 time 

=====第582页=====
554 
ON THE PEASANT WAR 
Reformation—Lutheran and Calvinist —bourgeoisie's revolution 
No. 1, in which Peasant War is the critical episode. Dissolution of 
feudalism, along with the development of towns, both decentralis­
ing, absolute monarchy therefore a virtual necessity for holding 
together the nationalities. Had to be absolute, precisely because of 
the centrifugal nature of all the elements. Absolute not to be 
understood in the vulgar sense, however: constantly at odds partly 
with the Estates, partly with rebellious feudal lords and towns; the 
Estates nowhere abolished; thus better described as an Estate 
monarchy (still feudal, decaying feudal and embryonic bourgeois). 
Victory of revolution No. 1, which was much more European 
than the English one, and became European much more quickly 
than the French one, in Switzerland, Holland, Scotland, Eng­
land—to a certain extent in Sweden, too, already [under] 
G[ustavus] Vasa, and Denmark, here not until 1660 in orthodox, 
absolutist form. 
I.a Causes in Germany. History from beginning. Germany 
broken after the heroic age of the migration of peoples. Only 
restored from France, by Charlemagne. Hence Roman empire 
a In the manuscript the text marked "I" by Engels is placed after that marked 
"II".—Ed. 

=====第583页=====
On the Peasant War 555 
idea. Renewed by Otto. More non-Germans than Germans. Ruin 
of Germany by this policy—of pillaging the Italian cities—under 
the Hohenstaufens. Thus fragmentation confirmed—excepto casu 
revolutionise Development from interregnum461 to 15th century. 
Rise of the towns. Decay of feudalism never perfected in Germany 
under pressure from the princes (the emperor as sovereign 
against, as emperor for the imperial knights). Gradual emancipa­
tion of the peasants, until setback in 15th century. Germany 
materially on a par with the other countries of the day.—Crucial 
that in Germany because of provincial fragmentation and long-term 
freedom from invasion the need for national unity not so strong as in 
France (the Hundred Years' War), Spain, which had just been 
reconquered from the Moors, Russia, which had just driven out the 
Tatars, England (Wars of the Roses),462 and that even the emperors 
of the day so shabby. 
II. With the Renaissance in its European guise based on general 
decay of feudalism and rise of the towns. Then absolutist national 
monarchies—everywhere except in Germany and Italy. 
III. Character of the Reformation as sole possible, popular 
expression of universal aspirations, etc. 
Written at the end of 1884 Printed according to the manu­
script First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels 
Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 Published in English for the first 
time 
a Save in the case of revolution.— Ed. 

=====第584页=====
556 
[ON THE DECLINE OF FEUDALISM 
AND THE EMERGENCE OF NATIONAL STATES] 
While the wild battles of the ruling feudal nobility filled the 
Middle Ages with their clamour, the quiet work of the oppressed 
classes had undermined the feudal system throughout Western 
Europe, had created conditions in which less and less room 
remained for the feudal lord. To be sure, the noble lords still 
carried on their mischievous ways in the country, tormenting the 
serfs,  living high on their sweat, demolishing their crops under 
horses' hooves, raping their wives and daughters. But towns had 
sprung up all around; in Italy, Southern France, on the Rhine, old 
Roman municipia464 had risen from their ashes; elsewhere, 
particularly in the heart of Germany, new creations; always ringed 
by protective walls and ditches, fortresses far stronger than the 
nobility's castles, because pregnable only by a large army. Behind 
these walls and ditches evolved the medieval handicrafts (burgher 
guild and pretty small), the first capitals accumulated, the need 
arose for traffic between the towns themselves and with the rest of 
the world, and, with this need, gradually the means to protect this 
traffic. 
In the fifteenth century the burghers of the towns had already 
become more indispensable to society than the feudal nobility. 
True,  agriculture was still the occupation of the vast majority of 
the population, and thus the main branch of production. But the 
few isolated free peasants who here and there withstood the 
arrogant behaviour of the nobility were sufficient proof that the 
main ingredient in farming was not the nobles' indolence and 
extortion, but the peasant's labour. And then the needs of the 
nobles, too, had increased and changed to such an extent that the 
towns had become indispensable even to them; after all, they 

=====第585页=====
On the Decline of Feudalism 557 
procured their only instrument of production, their armour and 
weapons, from the towns! Native cloth, furniture and jewellery, 
Italian silks, Brabant lace, Nordic furs, Arabian perfumes, fruit 
from the Levant, Indian spices—everything apart from soap— 
they bought from the town dwellers. International trade of a kind 
had developed; the Italians travelled the Mediterranean and, 
beyond that, the Atlantic coasts as far as Flanders; the Hanseatic 
merchants still controlled the North Sea and the Baltic in the face 
of mounting competition from the Dutch and the English. 
Communication was maintained by land between the northern and 
southern centres of the maritime traffic; the routes along which 
this communication took place passed through Germany. While 
the nobility became increasingly superfluous and an ever greater 
obstacle to development, the burghers of the towns became the 
class that embodied the further development of production and 
trade, of culture and of the social and political institutions. 
All these advances in production and exchange were, in point of 
fact, by today's standards, of a very limited nature. Production 
remained enthralled in the form of pure guild crafts, thus itself 
still retaining a feudal character; trade remained within the limits 
of European waters, and did not extend any further than the 
coastal towns of the Levant, where the products of the Far East 
were acquired by exchange. But small-scale and limited though the 
trades—and hence the trading burghers—remained, they were 
sufficient to overthrow feudal society, and at least they continued to 
move forward, whereas the nobility stagnated. 
But then the burghers of the towns had a mighty weapon with 
which to oppose feudalism: money. Money had scarcely found any 
place in the archetype feudal economy of the early Middle Ages. 
The feudal lord obtained from his serfs everything that he 
needed; either in the form of labour or in finished products; the 
women spun and wove the flax and wool and made the clothes; 
the men sowed the fields; the children minded the lord's livestock, 
collected for him wild fruits, birds' nests and straw; besides that, 
the whole family had to supply corn, fruit, eggs, butter, cheese, 
poultry, young livestock and much else. Every feudal form was 
self-sufficient; even military services were exacted in products; trade 
and exchange did not exist, money was superfluous. Europe had 
been reduced to such a low level, had begun all over again to such an 
extent that at that time money had much less of a social function than 
a purely political one: it was a means of paying  taxes,  and was chiefly 
acquired through robbery. 
All this had now changed. Money had again become a universal 

=====第586页=====
558 Frederick Engels 
means of exchange, and consequently its volume had increased 
considerably; the noble could no longer do without it either, and 
having little or nothing to sell, since robbery was also not quite so 
easy now, he eventually had to make up his mind to borrow from 
the usurer among the burghers. Long before the castles of the 
knights were breached by the new artillery they had been 
undermined by money; in fact, gunpowder was merely a  bailiff,  as 
it were, in the service of money. Money was the burghers' 
greatest political leveller. Wherever a personal relationship was 
superseded by a money relationship, a payment in kind by 
payment in money, a bourgeois relationship took the place of a 
feudal one. Admittedly, in the countryside the old brutal natural 
economy continued to exist in the great majority of cases; but 
there were already whole districts where, as in Holland, in 
Belgium, on the Lower Rhine, the peasants paid the lord money 
instead of labour service and tributes in kind, where lords and 
bondsmen had already taken the first decisive step towards 
becoming landowners and tenants, where even in the countryside 
the political institutions of feudalism were thus losing their social 
basis. 
The extent to which the feudal system had, by the end of the 
fifteenth century, already been undermined and eaten away on 
the inside by money is strikingly illustrated by the thirst for gold 
that seized Western Europe at this time. It was gold the 
Portuguese sought on the African coast, in India, throughout the 
Far East; gold was the magic word which drove the Spaniards 
across the Atlantic Ocean to America; gold was the first thing the 
white man enquired about the moment he set foot on a newly 
discovered shore. But this urge to set off on adventures to far-off 
places in search of gold, no matter how much it manifested itself 
in feudal and semi-feudal forms at the beginning, was nevertheless 
in its very roots incompatible with feudalism, whose foundation 
was agriculture and whose campaigns of conquest were essentially 
aimed at the acquisition of  land.  Moreover, shipping was a 
decidedly bourgeois trade which has stamped its anti-feudal 
character on all modern navies too. 
In the fifteenth century the feudal system was thus in utter 
decline throughout Western Europe; everywhere towns with 
anti-feudal interests, with their own laws and with an armed 
citizenry had wedged their way into feudal areas, bringing the 
feudal lords under their sway, in part already socially, through 
money, and here and there also politically; even in country areas 
where agriculture had flourished because of particularly favoura-

=====第587页=====
On the Decline of Feudalism 559 
ble conditions the old feudal ties began to dissolve under the 
influence of money; only in newly conquered lands such as 
Germany east of the Elbe, or in otherwise backward tracts far 
from the trade routes, did the old rule of the nobility continue to 
prosper. But everywhere—in the towns and in the country 
alike—there had been an increase in the elements among the 
population whose chief demand was to put an end to the constant, 
senseless warring, to the feuds between the feudal lords which 
made internal war permanent even when there was a foreign 
enemy on their native soil, to that state of incessant, utterly 
pointless devastation that had persisted throughout the Middle 
Ages.  Still too weak themselves to impose their will, these elements 
found strong support at the apex of the whole feudal system—in 
the monarchy. And this is the point where the consideration of 
social relations leads us to those of the state, where we make the 
transition from economics to politics. 
Out of the confusion of peoples that characterised the earliest 
Middle Ages, there gradually developed the new nationalities, a 
process whereby, it will be recalled, in most of the former Roman 
provinces the vanquished assimilated the victor, the peasant and 
townsman assimilated the Germanic lord. Modern nationalities are 
thus also the product of the oppressed classes. Menke's district 
map of central Lorraine* gives a clear picture of the ways in 
which fusion took place here, boundary demarcation there. One 
need only follow the boundary line between Romance and 
German placenames on this map to be convinced that this 
linguistic boundary between Belgium and Lower Lorraine coin­
cides in the main with that which existed between French and 
German as recently as a hundred years ago. Here and there one 
finds a narrow, disputed area where the two languages are 
struggling for predominance; but on the whole it is clear what is 
to remain German and what is to remain Romance. The Old Low 
Franconian and Old High German form of most placenames on 
the map shows, however, that they belong to the ninth century, to 
the tenth at the latest, and hence that the boundary had already 
been essentially drawn towards the end of the Carolingian age. On 
the Romance side, particularly close to the linguistic boundary, 
there are now mixed names, made up of a German personal name 
and a Romance placename, e.g. west of the Maas near Verdun: 
* Spruner-Menke, Hand-Atlas für die Geschichte  des Mittelalters und der neueren Zeit, 
3rd ed., Gotha, 1874, Map No. 32. 

=====第588页=====
560 Frederick Engels 
Eppone curtis, Rotfridi curtis, Ingolini curtis, Teudegisilo-villa, 
today Ippécourt, Récourt la Creux, Amblaincourt-sur-Aire, Thier-
ville.  These were Franconian manor houses, small German 
colonies on Romance soil, which sooner or later succumbed to 
Romanisation. In the towns and in scattered rural areas there were 
stronger German colonies that retained their language for some 
time to come; it was from one of these, for example, that The Lay 
of Ludwig 465 originated at the end of the ninth century; but the 
fact that prior to this a large proportion of the Franconian lords 
had been Romanised is proved by the oath formulas of the kings 
and magnates of 842, in which Romance already appears as the 
official language of France. 466 
Once their boundaries had been fixed (disregarding subsequent 
wars of conquest and annihilation, such as those against the Slavs 
of the Elbe ) it was natural for the linguistic groups to serve as 
the existent basis for the formation of states; for the nationalities 
to start developing into nations. The rapid collapse of the mixed 
state of Lotharingia468 shows how powerful this element was as 
early as the ninth century. True, linguistic boundaries and 
national frontiers were far from coincident throughout the Middle 
Ages;  but every nationality except perhaps Italy was represented 
by a separate big state in Europe, and the tendency to form 
national states, which becomes increasingly clear and deliberate, 
constitutes one of the Middle Ages' most considerable levers of 
progress. 
In each of these medieval states the king now constituted the 
head of the entire feudal hierarchy, a head with whom the vassals 
were unable to dispense and against whom they were at the same 
time in a state of permanent rebellion. The basic relation of the 
whole feudal system—the granting of land in return for the 
delivery of certain personal services and dues—provided, even in 
its original and simplest form, plenty of material for strife, 
especially when so many people had an interest in picking 
quarrels. So what was to be expected in the later Middle Ages, 
when the conditions of vassalage in every country formed an 
inextricable tangle of rights and duties that had been granted, 
withdrawn, renewed once more, forfeited, amended or subjected 
to new conditions? For part of his lands, Charles the Bold, for 
instance, was the Emperor's vassal, for others the King of France's 
vassal; on the other hand, the King of France, his liege lord, was 
simultaneously in certain areas the vassal of Charles the Bold, his 
own vassal; how were conflicts to be avoided? Hence these 
centuries of alternation between the vassals' attraction towards the 

=====第589页=====
On the Decline of Feudalism 561 
royal centre, which alone could protect them from outsiders and 
from one another, and the repulsion away from the centre into 
which that attraction was continually and inevitably transformed; 
hence the incessant struggle between kings and vassals, whose 
desolate din drowned out all else during this long period when 
robbery was held to be the only source of income worthy of a free 
man; hence that endless, constantly regenerated cycle of betrayal, 
assassination, poisoning, treachery and every conceivable vileness 
that, concealed behind the poetical name of chivalry, never ceased 
to speak of honour and loyalty. 
That in this general turmoil the monarchy was the progressive 
element is perfectly obvious. It stood for order amid disorder, the 
nation in the process of formation as opposed to disintegration 
into rebellious vassal states. Any revolutionary elements that 
formed beneath the surface of feudalism were as dependent on 
the monarchy as the monarchy on them. The alliance between the 
monarchy and the burghers dates from the tenth century; often 
interrupted by conflicts, just as nothing else followed a steady 
course during the Middle Ages, it was renewed, becoming firmer 
and more powerful each time, until it helped the monarchy to 
ultimate victory, and to show its gratitude the monarchy subju­
gated and plundered its ally. 
Kings and burghers alike found a powerful support in the rising 
estate of lawyers. With the rediscovery of Roman law came the 
division of labour between the priests, the legal advisers of the 
feudal age, and the non-clerical law scholars. These new lawyers 
were from the very outset essentially a bourgeois estate; but the 
law they studied, purveyed and practised was by its nature 
essentially anti-feudal and in certain respects bourgeois. Roman 
law is the classic legal expression of the day-to-day relations and 
conflicts of a society in which pure private property dominates, so 
much so that no subsequent legislation has ever been able to 
improve on it in any major respect. But the bourgeois property of 
the Middle Ages still had a heavy admixture of feudal restrictions, 
and consisted, for example, very largely of privileges; to that 
extent, then, Roman law was a long way ahead of the bourgeois 
conditions of the time. Subsequent historical development of 
bourgeois property could proceed, however, only in one way: it 
was bound to turn into pure private property, and this is what 
happened. But this development was bound to find a powerful 
lever in Roman law, which already contained in a finished form all 
that the bourgeoisie of the later Middle Ages aspired to, albeit 
unconsciously as yet. 

=====第590页=====
562 Frederick Engels 
Though Roman law in many individual cases provided a pretext 
for even greater oppression of the peasants by the nobility, for 
instance when the peasants were unable to adduce any written 
proof of their exemption from otherwise customary burdens, it 
does not alter the matter. Even without Roman law, the nobility 
would have found such pretexts, and indeed found them daily. At 
any rate, it was a tremendous advance when a legal system came 
into force that knew absolutely nothing of feudal relations and 
fully anticipated modern private property. 
We have seen how the feudal nobility started to become 
superfluous in economic terms, indeed a hindrance, in the society 
of the later Middle Ages—how it already stood in the way, 
politically, of the development of the towns and the national state 
which was then only possible in a monarchist form. In spite of all 
this, it had been sustained by the fact that it had hitherto 
possessed a monopoly over the bearing of arms: without it no wars 
could be waged, no battles fought. This, too, was to change; the 
last step would be taken to make it clear to the feudal nobles that 
the period in which they had ruled society and the state was now 
over, that they were no longer of any use in their capacity as 
knights—not even on the battlefield. 
Opposing the feudal economy with an army that was itself 
feudal, in which the soldiers were bound by closer ties to their 
immediate liege lord than to the command of the royal 
army—this obviously meant going round in a vicious circle, 
without achieving any advance. From the beginning of the 
fourteenth century the kings strove to free themselves of this 
feudal army and create an army of their own. From this time on 
we find in the armies of the kings a constantly growing proportion 
of recruited or hired troops. At first they were chiefly infantry, 
comprising the scum of the towns and runaway serfs, Lombards, 
Genoese, Germans, Belgians, etc., who were employed for 
occupying towns and for siege duties, but in the beginning could 
scarcely be used on the battlefield. But towards the end of the 
Middle Ages we also find knights entering the service of foreign 
princes as mercenaries with their retinues gathered together the 
devil knows how, thus demonstrating the irrevocable collapse of 
feudal warfare. 
The fundamental condition for an efficient infantry arose 
simultaneously in the towns and in the free peasants, wherever the 
latter were still to be found or had re-formed. Until then the 
knights with their retinue, likewise mounted, had been not so 
much the core of the army as the army  itself;  the baggage-train of 

=====第591页=====
On the Decline of Feudalism 563 
attendant, serf infantrymen did not count, appearing in the open 
field merely in order to run away or to loot. As long as the golden 
age of feudalism lasted, until the end of the thirteenth century, 
the cavalry fought and decided every battle. From that time on 
things changed, and moreover in various points simultaneously. 
The gradual disappearance of serfdom in England created a 
sizeable class of free farmers, either landowners (yeomen) or 
tenants, and thus the raw material for a new type of infantry, 
skilled in the use of the bow, the English national weapon at the 
time.  The introduction of these archers, who always fought on 
foot whether they travelled on horseback or not, gave rise to a 
major change in the tactics of English armies. From the fourteenth 
century onwards the English knights preferred to fight on foot 
where the terrain or other circumstances rendered this approp­
riate.  Behind the archers, who started the battle and softened up 
the enemy, the massed array of dismounted knights awaited the 
enemy attack or the right moment to advance, while only part of 
them remained on horseback in order to facilitate the decisive 
encounter by attacks on the flanks. The then unbroken series of 
English victories in France469 were largely due to the restoration of 
a defensive element in the army, and were for the most part just 
as much defensive battles with offensive retaliation as Wellington's 
in Spain and Belgium.470 With the adoption of new tactics by the 
French—possible since Italian mercenary crossbowmen had as­
sumed the functions of the English archers in their case—the 
triumphant progress of the English was at an end. Also at the 
beginning of the fourteenth century, the infantrymen of the 
Flemish towns had dared—often successfully—to confront the 
French knights in open battle, and Emperor Albrecht, by his 
attempt to betray the autonomous Swiss peasants to the Archduke 
of Austria, who was he  himself,  had provided the impetus for the 
formation of the first modern infantry with a European reputa­
tion.471 In the victories of the Swiss over the Austrians, and 
particularly over the Burgundians, heavily armed cavalry— 
mounted and dismounted—succumbed once and for all to the 
infantry, the feudal army to the beginnings of the modern army, 
the knight to the burgher and free peasant. And the Swiss, to 
establish from the outset the bourgeois character of their republic, 
the first independent republic in Europe, immediately turned their 
fame as warriors to cash. All political considerations faded away: 
the cantons turned into recruiting offices to drum up mercenaries 
for the highest bidder. The recruitment drive also made its way 
around other places, in Germany in particular; but the cynicism of 
38-1243 

=====第592页=====
564 Frederick Engels 
a government which only seemed to exist in order to sell off its 
native people remained unequalled until surpassed by German 
princes in the years of greatest national humiliation. 
Then, also in the fourteenth century, gunpowder and artillery 
were brought over to Europe via Spain by the Arabs. Until the 
end of the Middle Ages hand guns remained unimportant, which 
is understandable, since the bows of the English archers at Crécy 
had as great a range as the smoothbore rifles of the infantry at 
Waterloo and were perhaps more accurate—though lacking the 
same effect. 472 Field guns were also still in their infancy; on the 
other hand, heavy guns had already breached the free-standing 
walls of the knights' castles on many occasions, demonstrating to 
the feudal nobility that gunpowder marked the end of their rule. 
The spread of book printing, the revival of the study of classical 
literature, the entire cultural movement which had been gathering 
strength and becoming more widespread ever since 1450473—all 
these factors aided the bourgeoisie and the monarchy in their 
fight against feudalism. 
The combined action of all these causes, strengthened year after 
year by their increasing interaction on one another, which tended 
more and more in the same direction, was crucial to the victory 
over feudalism in the second half of the fifteenth century, not yet 
for the bourgeoisie, but certainly for the monarchy. All at once the 
monarchy gained the upper hand throughout Europe, as far as 
the distant lands adjoining it that had not passed through the 
feudal state. On the Iberian peninsula two of the Romance 
language peoples there united to form the Kingdom of Spain, and 
the Provencal-speaking Aragonese empire submitted to standard 
Castilian3; the third people joined its linguistic area (with the 
exception of Galicia) with the Kingdom of Portugal, the Iberian 
Holland, turning their back on the interior and demonstrating 
their right to a separate existence through its activity at sea. 
In France Louis XI finally managed, after the demise of the 
Burgundian middle kingdom,474 to establish national unity rep­
resented by the monarchy on the then much curtailed French 
territory to such an extent that his successor0 was already able to 
interfere in Italian quarrels475 and this unity was only once called 
into question for a short time, by the Reformation. 
England had at last given up its quixotic wars of conquest in 
France, which in the long run would have bled it dry; the feudal 
a Aragon and Castile united in 1479.— Ed. 
b Charles VIII.— Ed. 

=====第593页=====
On the Decline of Feudalism 565 
nobility sought recompense in the Wars of the Roses,477 and got 
more than they had bargained for: they wiped each other out, and 
brought the House of Tudor to the throne, whose royal power 
exceeded that of all its predecessors and successors. The Scandina­
vian countries had long since achieved unity; after its unification 
with Lithuania,478 Poland was approaching its heyday, with the 
power of its monarchy as yet undiminished; even in Russia the 
subjugation of the princelings and the shedding of the Tatar yoke, 
had gone hand in hand and were finally sealed by Ivan III.a In 
the whole of Europe there were only two countries in which the 
monarchy, and the national unity that was then impossible without 
it, either did not exist at all or existed only on paper: Italy and 
Germany. 
Written at the end of 1884 Printed according to the manu­
script First published, in Russian, in the journal 
Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 6, 1935 Published in English for the first 
time 
a In 1480.— Ed. 
38* 

=====第594页=====
[CHARTIST AGITATION] 
CHRONOLOGICAL TABLE 
Melbourne —September  '41,  Whig : 
1838.  August  6. 
September  17. 
December  13. 
20. 
1839.  January  15. 
" 21, 22. 
February  5. 
March  16. 
April  1. Meeting  in  Birmingham (speakers:  Att-
wood, Scholefield,  F. O'Connor)  to peti­
tion the  House  of Commons  to make  the 
People's Charter law.b 
Chartist meeting  in New  Palace Yard, 
Westminster.0 
Royal proclamation that torchlight meet­
ings and  armed assemblies illegal. 
Meeting of the  ANTI-CORN  LAW  LEAGUE  in 
Manchester. 
ANTI-CORN  LAW  meeting in Birmingham: 
Chartist resolution  CARRIED,  that universal 
suffrage takes priority.— In Leeds  UNSUC­
CESSFUL. 
ANTI-CORN  LAW  meetings [in] Manchester 
and Edinburgh. 
In the  Queen's Speech Chartists 
threatened with  the law. 
Chartist  CONVENTION  AT  CROWN  AND  ANCHOR. 
PHYSICAL FORCE PROCLAIMED  BY O'Connor AND 
Harney. 
Meeting  in  Edinburgh TO  SUPPORT  minis­
ters. The  Chartists  won and  threw  the 
a The  date when  the  Melbourne Whig Cabinet fell.—  Ed. 
b In the  manuscript this sentence  is crossed  out by a  vertical line.— Ed. 
c In the  next three dates  in the  manuscript some  of the  words  are  crossed 
out.—  Ed. 

=====第595页=====
Chartist Agitation 567 
LORD  PROVOST  out of the  CHAIR  AND  CARRIED 
THEIR  RESOLUTION. 
April  29.  Chartist  RIOTS  in Llanidloes.—The Char­
tists in control  of the  town  for a  while. 
(In Newport shortly before, John Frost 
removed from  the  MAGISTRACY.) 
May 8. H. Vincent arrested  FOR INCITING  TO  RIOT  at 
Newport. (Ministerial crisis— replâtrage. 3) 
" 13. The  rest  of the  Chartist  CONVENTION  (thus 
the petty bourgeois  out)  removed  to 
Birmingham. 50,000  men  received  and 
led through  the  city. Manifesto passed 
immediately  at the  first session:  TO  WITH­
DRAW  ALL THEIR  MONEY  FROM  BANKS, TO  DEAL  EXCLU­
SIVELY  WITH CHARTISTS  AND TO  HAVE  A SACRED 
MONTH480  AND TO  ARM.—  F. O'Connor  de­
mands that  the  petition  to the  Queenb  to 
appoint  a Chartist ministry should  be 
presented peacefully  by  500,000  men 
armed with rifles. 
May  25.  Meeting  in  Kersal Moor.  F.  O'Connor 
says he  came because  the  meeting  had 
been declared illegal  by the  magistracy. 
June  14.  Attwood presents  the  Chartist Petition, 
1,280,000 signatures.  URGENCY REFUSED  BY 
235:46. 
" 18.  Grote's  MOTION  ON BALLOT  rejected 333:216. 
July 4. Chartist  RIOTS  in Birmingham, Bull Ring 
meeting broken  up by  police  and  army. 
Secretary  of the  CONVENTION0  arrested. 
The  CONVENTION  protests. 
" 15.  Bull Ring riots again, procession through 
the town, looting, several shops burnt 
down. Army called  out,  NO  LOSS  OF LIFE. 
" 18.  Llanidloes  RIOTERS  SENTENCED  TO IMPRISONMENT. 
" 20.  RIOTS  [in] Newcastle. 
August  2. Vincent  & Co.  sentenced  to  imprison­
ment  AT Monmouth. 
" 3. Birmingham  RIOTERS TRIED,  3 sentenced to 
death, but  REPRIEVED. 
a Here: patching up.— 
b Victoria.—  Ed. 
c William Lovett.—  Ed. Ed. 

=====第596页=====
568 Frederick  Engels 
August  6. Chartist  CONVENTION,  now in  Arundel  Cof­
fee House, London, decides  to postpone 
the SACRED MONTH  set for  August  12  owing 
to lack  of preparation,  but on the 12th 
the TRADES  which  can are to  take  2-3  days 
off and to  hold processions  and  meetings 
ON THE  PRESENT AWFUL STATE OF.THE COUNTRY. 
11. St.  Paul's Church  [in  London]  and the 
Manchester  OLD  CHURCH  occupied  by 
Chartists during  the  sermon, which  did 
not lead  to anything. 
" 12.  Manchester, Macclesfield, Bolton,  etc.  At­
tempt  to go  through with  the  three-day 
SACRED MONTH.  Feeble  and  unsuccessful. 
" 15.  Chester  ASSIZES.  J. R.  Stephens'  TRIAL  for 
UNLAWFUL  MEETING  AND  EXCITING  TO  RIOT  AT Cot­
ton Tree, Hyde. That  was the  meeting 
where  the  volleys were fired.— 
18 MONTHS  Knutsford. 
" 27.  PARLIAMENT  PROROGUED. 
30. Nouveau replâtrage ministeriell 
September 14.  DISSOLUTION  OF CHARTIST  NATIONAL  CONVENTION. 
" 20. F.  O'Connor  ARRESTED,  Manchester,  SEDI­
TION. 
" 23.  Ebenezer Elliott accuses  the  Chartists  of 
being Tory agents (Sheffield). 
November  4. Newport  RIOTS.  The  HILL  MEN  under Frost 
and Williams march  on the  town, meet 
up at Tredegar Park with Jones' column 
(from Pontypool)  and  attack  the  soldiers, 
who had  already been summoned  (to 
protect  the  assembled magistrates). Skir­
mish.  9 dead  are  left lying there, others 
... and the  wounded carried  off.  Frost 
arrested  the  next morning.  The  soldiers 
commanded  by a  lieutenant! Williams 
apprehended soon  after.—TRIAL  De­
cember 31-January  8. According  to one 
witness  the  Welsh Mail  to  Birmingham 
was to be  stopped,  and its  non-arrival  was 
to be the  signal  to strike  in the  Midlands 
a New  ministerial  patch-up.—  Ed. 

=====第597页=====
Chartist Agitation 569 
and the  North. Frost, Williams  and  Jones 
sentenced  to death,  TRANSPORTED FOR LIFE. 
1840.  January  13.  Resumption  of  ANTI-CORN  LAW  agitation 
with  BANQUET  and  meeting  in Manchester. 
" 16.  Parliament opened. 
March  . The  ministry twice defeated  in the  HOUSE 
OF COMMONS.  Start of the  BLASPHEMY PROSECU­
TIONS  by HOME SECRETARY'S COMMITTEE. 
" 17. F.  O'Connor  TRIED  at York  ASSIZE.  NOW 
DEFERRED. 
" 25. Meeting of the  ANTI-CORN  LAW  LEAGUE. 
Palace Yard. Resolution  PASSED. 
" 31. To  date total  of  ANTI-CORN  LAW  petition 
signatures only 980,352. 
April  8. Bronterre O'Brien, Liverpool  ASSIZES,  18 
MONTHS IMPRISONMENT  FOR  SEDITION. 
" 11. F.  O'Connor  18  MONTHS  IN York Castle  FOR 
LIBEL,  treated like  a common criminal 
(F. O'Connor's letter April  20). 
August  4. Lord Ashley  CARRIES ADDRESS TO CROWN  a on 
child labour (thus only because  of  LIBER­
ALS' weakness!) 
" 11.  Parliament closed. 
November  6. Hetherington condemned  for  BLASPHEMY, 
SENTENCE  DEFERRED. 
1841.  January  21.  RADICAL MEETING AT  Leeds  for  unity with  the 
Chartists.  But  only agreed  on  UNIVERSAL 
SUFFRAGE,  not on the  other points  of the 
Charter. 
" 26.  Parliament opened. 
February 16.  MINISTRY DEFEATED BY  31 OUT  OF 223. 
April  29.  ANTI-CORN  LAW  MEETINGS  in Deptford,  in 
vain,  in  Leeds actually broken  up by 
Chartists. Russell wishes  to  tinker with 
CORN  LAWS. 
May 7.  MINISTRY DEFEATED  36 OUT OF  598. 
" 25.  Duncombe presents Chartists' petition 
(amnesty),  1,300,000  signatures,  the  ANTI-
CORN  LAW  only 474,448. 
a Queen Victoria.— Ed. 

=====第598页=====
570 Frederick Engels 
June  2. 
" 4. 
" 23. 
August  19. 
» 28. 
October  7. 
November  10. 
December  29. 
1842.  January  7. 
February  1. 
" 2. 
" 3. 
" 9. 
March  11. 
May 2. ANTI-CORN  LAW  meeting [in] Manchester 
attacked  in vain  by  Chartists. 
Peel's NO  CONFIDENCE  IN MINISTRY:  312 for, 
311 against dissolution. 
Hetherington versus Moxon.  BLASPHEMY 
against Shelley.  GUILTY. 
Parliament opened after  the  elections. 
Tory majority. 
Melbourne ministry brought down,  MAJORI­
TY—91  out of  629.  Peel. 
Peel Ministry—until July  1846. 
Parliament closed. 
GREAT  DISTRESS  IN  MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS 
Leeds, Paisley, Glasgow, Bradford, Not­
tingham,  etc. 
Trade Convention  in  Derby,  for  FREE 
TRADE. 
Bankruptcies  in Glasgow. 
CHARTIST  CONVENTION  in Glasgow, F. O'Con­
nor there. 
ANTI-CORN  LAW Meeting broken up by 
Chartists  in  Southampton with Tory 
help? 
ANTI-CORN  LAW  Bazar in Manchester. 
Parliament opened. 
Peel proposes the  SLIDING SCALE  20/- at 51/-
corn price,  1/- at  73/-  corn price.3 
Peel's budget—tariffs  of  £1,200,000 
abolished, particularly  on raw  materials 
and semi-manufactures.  INCOME  TAX. The 
SLIDING  SCALE  becomes law  (ROYAL ASCENT) 
April  29. 
Chartist Petition with 3,317,702 signa­
tures carried  to Parliament  in procession 
from Lincoln's  Inn  Fields.  Had to be 
taken  to  pieces because  the  door  too 
small. Duncombs demands that  the  Peti­
tion should  be heard  by  COUNCIL AT THE BAR. 
49:287. 
a From  the  maximum duty  of 20s.  at the  price  of 51s.  and  lower  per  quarter  to 
the minimum duty  of Is. at the  price  of 73s. and  higher  per  quarter.—  Ed. 

=====第599页=====
Chartist Agitation 571 
May  25. Meeting  in Stockport  ON DISTRESS. POOR RATES 
risen from £2,628  in 1836/37  to £7,120; 
over  V2 the  spinners ruined; over 3,000 
houses empty (Stockport  TO  LET);  in 
Heaton Norris  V4 of the  houses empty 
and 1,000  OCCUPANTS RELIEVED  BY  PARISH. 
June  1.  STRIKE  OF  COLLIERS  in Dudley  DISTRICT. 
" 3.  Large meeting  of  UNEMPLOYED  in Glasgow, 
ending  in a  BEGGING PROCESSION  through  the 
town. 
In Ireland  PROVISION RIOTS,  in Ennis  a ship 
carrying flour looted,  in  Cork futile 
assault  on the  POTATO MARKET. 
" 7.  Ashley introduces  a FACTORY BILL, RESTRICT­
ING WOMEN'S AND CHILDREN'S LABOUR  IN MINES  AND 
FACTORIES. 
June  25.  Leeds Mercury says 4,025  FAMILIES,  = 1/s of 
the town's population receiving  POOR  RE­
LIEF.  Great  "DISTRESS"  everywhere. 
" 28.  Peel's tariff through  the  Commons. 
July 4 through  the  Lords  2ND READING. 
July 1.  DEBATE  ON  DISTRESS.  NO result, as usual. In 
Ireland  AGRARIAN OUTRAGES  all the time. 
" 2.  FOOD RIOTS  [in] Dumfries, several meal-
mongers'  shops looted. 
" 5.  ANTI-CORN  LAW  CONFERENCE  in London. 
Bright's  threatening speech. Reports that 
in Sheffield 10,000  PEOPLE  IN  EXTREME DIS­
TRESS,  in Wolverhampton  62  blast fur­
naces idle, in Stockport the  POOR RATE  of 
2/- in the £  produces only £3,600, 
whereas  in 1839 l/8d. had  produced 
£5,000.  More  POOR RATE  3/4d. in the £ and 
almost  daily meetings  of workers  and 
SHOPKEEPERS  TO SEE WHAT  TO DO. Burslem great 
agitation,  MILITARY CALLED  OUT. 
" 5.  FREETRADE CONFERENCE  [in] Sheffield. RE­
VEREND  W. Bailey: IT  WAS NOT  WORDS WHICH 
WOULD MOVE PARLIAMENT, BUT FORCE,  a GENTLEMAN 
is reported  to  have spoken  of  Peel's 
assassination,  etc. 
" 11. Villiers'  MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF WHOLE HOUSE 
TO CONSIDER CORN LAWS  rejected,  117:231. 

=====第600页=====
572 Frederick  Engels 
July 18. 
August  1. 
12. 
15. 
17. 
18. 
24. 
September  5. 
" 30. 
October  6. 
December  9. 
" 31. 
1843.  January  9. 
" 26. 
February  11. At the  same time several attempts  on the 
Queen's life  and  Peel's protective  law 
against causing  a nuisance  to the  Queen: 
transportation  and the  [colonies]. 
Meetings  in  Liverpool, Manchester, 
Leeds  ON DISTRESS,  deputation  to Peel  to do 
something before  the  closing  of  Parlia­
ment. 
STRIKE  of the  COAL  and  IRON MINERS,  Airdrie 
and Coatbridge, immediately followed  by 
the Glaswegians,  FOR  ADVANCING WAGES. 
Ashton  AND  Oldham  STRIKE—Manchester 
RIOTS. 
Parliament closed. 
Delegate Trades Meeting  [in]  Man­
chester— peaceful. 
Proclamation  by the  Chartist  NATIONAL 
EXECUTIVE  (in  contrast)—warlike. 
"THE PACIFICATION  OF THE  NORTH ISCOMPLETED." 
White (George)  in  Birmingham despite 
the police, despite warrant goes with 
guard  to  meetings  and  speaks. 
York  AND  Lancaster  SPECIAL ASSIZES,  some 
156  RIOTERS  TRIED. 
Stafford  SPECIAL ASSIZES  FOR  RIOTERS. 
F. O'Connor arrested  FOR  EXCITING  TO SEDITION 
in Manchester,  etc., at  meetings  in 
August. 
Cobden announces  at  Manchester meet­
ing that  the  League intends  to  raise 
£50,000. 
The quaint city  COMMON COUNCIL  votes  for 
FREE TRADE  IN CORN. 
REVENUE  FOR  QUARTER SHOWS DECREASE 
£940,062. 
O'Connell announces  REPEAL481  for  this 
year—hence renewed agitation. 
ANTI-CORN  LAW  WEEKLY MEETING,  Wilson an­
nounces renewed agitation, 400,000 
TRACTS SENT  OUT  LAST WEEK,  3  TONS MORE  TO­
MORROW. 
Parliament opened. 

=====第601页=====
Chartist Agitation 573 
February  13. 
23. 
March  1. 
15. 
/larch 24, 
>> 31, 
April 27, 
May 9. 
" 24. 
June  8. 
" 10. 
" 15. 
July 19. 
" 25. 
August  15. 
24. Ld. Howick's motion  for  COMMITTEE  OF 
WHOLE  HOUSE  ON DISTRESS.  Debate till  17,  then 
defeated,  301:191.  Cobden threatening 
towards Peel. 
Walter's motion  for  easing  the  POOR LAW, 
during which  it emerged that  the  Gov­
ernment  has  been implementing  the new 
POOR  LAW with increasing severity. 
TRIAL  OF F. O'Connor  and Co. in  Lancas­
ter. O'Connor guilty  and  many others, 
nOW RESERVED  ON  POINT  OF  LAW. 
From today weekly  MEETINGS  of the  ANTI-
CORN  LAW  LEAGUE  in Drury Lane Theatre 
resumed. 
FACTORY  BILL READ  2ND  TIME.482 
Revenue  a/c  rising,  but  still below last 
year  (EXCEPT  NEW  INCOME  TAX). 
Irish Arms Bill,483  as many arms bought 
up there. 
Villiers'  CORN  LAW  Motion, after  5 evening 
debates, defeated 381:125. 
Peel declares that  he  intends  to oppose 
REPEAL  absolutely. 
Richard Arkwright's  WILL PROVED— 
£8,000,000. 
MONSTER  REPEAL MEETING  [in] Kilkenny— 
300,000  men. 
Rebecca  RIOTS  in Wales484  BEGAN: ABOLITION 
OF TURNPIKES,  OF  TITHES  AND  COMMUTED RENT 
CHARGES,  CHURCH RATE AND NEW POOR LAW. 
REPEAL  MEETING  [in] Ennis — 500,000 MEN. 
EDUCATIONAL  CLAUSES 5—IN FACT BILL ABAN­
DONED  on account of opposition of the 
DISSENTERS486  (petition over 2,000,000 sig­
natures). 
(All  REPEAL MAGISTRATES  in Ireland dismissed 
up to now.) 
Still over  a week's debate Smith O'Brien's 
MOTION  FOR  INQUIRY INTO DISTRESS  in Ireland 
defeated 243:164. 
Bright  M.P.  FOR Durham City. 
MONSTER  REPEAL MEETING  [at] Tara Hill. 
Parliament closed. 

=====第602页=====
574 Frederick Engels 
September  28. 
October  1. 
7. 
10. 
" 14. 
" 21 
" 23 
" 26 
November  8 
1844.  January  1 
January  15. 
February  1. 
" 6. 
" 12. 
1845.  June  6. Rebecca  in  Wales  continuing.—OUTRAGES 
in Ireland.—Threat  to  withhold rent 
payment,  CUTTING CROPS,  etc. 
ANTI-CORN-LAW  agitation  in  London  re­
sumed with meeting  in  Covent Garden 
Theatre. 9,000,000  TRACTS  distributed  in 
previous year. 
REPEAL  MONSTER MEETING  in Mullaghmust. 
[in] Clontarf 
banned  BY PROCLAMATION. 
ROYAL  COMMISSION  TO  INQUIRE INTO  Rebecca 
CAUSES. 
O'Connell accused—still  no  point formu­
lated,  but  QUIT UNDER BAIL  TO APPEAR NEXT TERM 
TO ANSWER  ANY  CHARGE  BY  ATTORNEY GENERAL. 
ANTI-CORN-LAW  VICTORY  AT  CITY LONDON ELEC­
TION:  Pattison  OVER  Baring. 
COUNCIL  AT  HALL  in  Dublin opened.— 
O'Connell  now  "PEACEFUL"! 
TRIALS  OF Rebecca—heavy sentences (Car­
diff). 
O'Connell finally charged. 
Marquis  [of]  Westminster goes over  to 
the  ANTI-CORN  LAW  LEAGUE.  Many  ANTI-
CORN  LAW and  PRO-CORN  LAW  MEETINGS  held 
throughout  the  country. 
O'Connell's  TRIAL.  Sentenced, confirmed 
on May 24 by  QUEENS BENCH.48  12  MONTHS. 
Parliament opened. 
New  FACTORY BILL  (not  passed previous 
year). 
REVEREND  Oastler freed after  3 years  in 
debtors gaol. 
FACTORY  ACT,  LAW. 
Railway speculation  and  autumn potato 
blight. 
July '46-February  '62.  Russell 
1847.  July  28.  Elections.  F.  O'Connor  and  Walter 
elected  in  Nottingham. 

=====第603页=====
Chartist  Agitation 575 
December  7. F. O'Connor's motion  to investigate  how 
the Union with Ireland  had  been made 
and what  it had  achieved, 23:255. 
1848.  March  13.  Chartist Demonstration  [on]  Kennington 
Common. Jones spoke forcefully.  In Ire­
land Young Ireland488 revolutionary,  de­
manding arms.  At  Trafalgar Square 
meeting, March  6,  ostensibly about 
INCOME  TAX,  police knocked down, 
strengthened  to 500 men, new  ROW  in the 
evening.—On  the 6th  RIOT  in Glasgow  by 
UNEMPLOYED,  some looting, military called 
out, but the  mass dispersed without 
shooting. 
Similar  in Edinburgh  and  Liverpool. 
April 1.  RIFLE CLUBS  formed in Ireland. 
" 4.  NATIONAL  CHARTIST  CONVENTION  in London, 
demonstration  for the 10th. E.  Jones  for 
FIGHTING.  B. O'Brien  for  waiting until  the 
people stronger than  the law. 
" 6. F.  O'Connor's motion  to pardon Frost, 
Williams  and  Jones defeated  91:23. 
" 7. A  GAGGING ACT 489 against inflammatory 
speeches introduced  by Grey. 
" 10.  Kennington Common.  The  Chartists  in 
processions  to Kennington Common  to 
assemble there  and  thence  on to the 
HOUSE  OF COMMONS  with  the  MONSTER  petition. 
250,000  SPECIAL  CONSTABLES.—4,300  soldiers 
to Kennington.—  On Saturday evening 
SPLIT  over arming:  B.  O'Brien  for, F. 
O'Connor against.  B. O'Brien withdraws 
with his  LOT.  The  demonstration fell FLAT, 
the march  to Westminster abandoned, 
and F. O'Connor handed over  the  peti­
tion that evening  in the  usual  way. 
" 13.  Debate  on the  petition, instead  of 
5,706,000 signatures, said  to be  only 
1,975,496, including much nonsense. 
May 16.  CHARTIST  NATIONAL CONVENTION BREAKS  UP. 
" 27.  John Mitchel  14  YEARS TRANSPORTATION.— 
RIOTS  in Clarkenwell Green  and  Bethnal 

=====第604页=====
576 Frederick Engels 
Green, nothing significant, because  of 
this  CONVICTION  of Chartists and Re­
pealers.490 
June  GOLD EXCITEMENT  IN CALIFORNIA. 
" 6. Jones and 3 others  COMMITTED  FOR  SEDITION. 
" " O'Connell's  REPEAL ASSOCIATION BROKEN  UP. 
" 11.  Great precautions  in  London against 
Chartist insurrection: bank, mint, govern­
ment offices, Thames steamers full  of 
soldiers. Parliament moreover pro­
visioned. 
" 12.  Chartist demonstration  a failure  it seems, 
very pitiful. 
June. Insurrection.3 
July 7. Jones and 5 others 2 years and  BOUND OVER 
AFTERWARDS. 
" 22.  Russell demands suspension  OF  habeas 
corpus491  in Ireland,  BILL  introduced. 
" 25.  Smith O'Brien's attempt  at  insurrec­
tion.—  [On  the]  29th Smith O'Brien  ap­
prehended. 
August 8. Berkeley's  BALLOT MOTION CARRIED AGAINST 
GOVERNMENT  86:81. 
" 14.  Chartists' rising  [in]  Ashton under Lyne. 
MIDNIGHT  ATTACK AGAINST TOWN HALL  with 
pistols  and  lances—one  POLICEMAN  shot— 
broken  up. 
" 15. 14  Chartist leaders arrested  in Manches­
ter for  INCITING  TO RISE  IN ARMS. 
" 16. 18  Chartist leaders arrested  in  London, 
Orange Street,  armed;  others  in  Moor 
Street. Allegedly they were  due to  strike 
during  the  night.  Lot of  ammunition 
seized. 
" 25.  TRIAL  of the London Chartists, 26th,  TRIAL 
of Manchester Chartists. Condemned  to 
2 YEARS HARD LABOUR. 
" 26.  TRIAL  of those arrested  on  August  16 in 
London—TRANSPORTATION  FOR  LIFE. 
a Of the  Paris workers  on June 22-25, 1848.—  Ed. 

=====第605页=====
Chartist Agitation 577 
1852.  June 8. F. O'Connor gets up to silly tricks in 
HOUSE  OF COMMONS,  arrested  by SERGEANT AT 
ARMS,  taken to madhouse. 
1855.  August 30. 
1856.  May 3. tF. O'Connor in Notting Hill. 
Amnesty for Frost, Williams and Jones 
and the other transported Irish pris­
oners. 
1869.  January 26. 
Written in August 1886 tErnest Jones, 50. 
First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels 
Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第606页=====
578 
[PLAN OF CHAPTER FOUR OF THE PAMPHLET 
THE ROLE OF FORCE IN HISTORY] 
1. 1848. Postulate of national states. Italy, Germany, Poland, 
Hungary. 
2. Bonaparte's enlightened policy of conquest: nationhood in 
exchange for compensation. Italy. 
3. Against this, [Prussian] army reorganisation. Conflict. Bismarck. 
Policy not original. 
4. Position in Germany. Unity: 1. through revolution, 2. through 
Austria, 3. through Prussia (Customs' Union). 
5. War [of] 1864 and 1866. Revolutionary means. 
6. Bismarck's best years—until 1870. 
7. French War.3 Empire. Annexation of Alsace-Lorraine. Russia 
the arbitrator. 
8. Bismarck at the end—turns reactionary, feeble-minded. Kultur­
kampf 492 (civil marriage). Protective tariffs and agrarian alliance 
with bourgeois.—Colonial swindles. Slandering of Bismarck.— 
Anti-Socialist Law. 493—Suppression of coalition.—Social re­
form.— Militarism because of annexation of Alsace.—The 
Junker [in Bismarck] comes to the fore for the lack of other 
ideas. 
Written between the end of 1887 and Printed according to the manu-
March 1888 script 
First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Published in English for the first 
Archives, Vol. X, Moscow, 1948 time 
a This point also includes the notes written on the same sheet and crossed out 
by Engels presumably after he had used them in his work, "1. Methods of warfare. 
Contribution, franc-tireurs, [Thefts of] clock, thrashing. Severity of Junkers' 
revenge from above. 2. Overthrow of the Empire. 3. Hats off to Paris! 4. Milliards and 
Alsace-Lorraine."— Ed. 

=====第607页=====
579 
PLAN OF THE FINAL SECTION 
OF CHAPTER* FOUR OF THE PAMPHLET 
THE ROLE OF FORCE IN HISTORY 
I. 3 classes: two lousy, one of them decaying, the other on the 
ascent, and workers who only want bourgeois  FAIR PLAY. 
Manoeuvring between the latter two therefore the only 
proper way—perish the thought! Policy: To strengthen state 
power in general and to make it financially independent 
in particular (nationalisation of the railways, monopolies), 
police state and regional principles of justice. 
"Liberal" and "National", the dual nature of 1848, still in 
evidence in Germany of 1870-88. 
Bismarck had to rely on the Reichstag and the people, and 
this called for complete freedom of the press, speech, 
association and assembly, just for orientation. 
II. 1. Structure [of the a) Economic—ill-conceived curren-
Empire] cy law main achievement already, 
b) Political—restoration of the 
police state, and anti-bourgeois 
judicial laws (1876), poor copy of 
the French version.—  Legal  un­
certainty.—Culminated in the 
Imperial Court. 1879. 
2. Lack of ideas a) Kulturkampf. The Catholic 
proved by playing priest is no gendarme or police-
around and slan- man. Jubilation by the bour-
dering Bismarck. geoisie—hopelessness—going to 
Bismarck's party Canossa.494 Only rational result— 
sans phrase.  civil marriage! 
3'>-  12 ,J, 

=====第608页=====
580 Frederick Engels 
3. Swindles and crash. His involvement. Wretchedness of 
conservative Junkers, who are just as dishonourable as the 
bourgeoisie. 
4. [Bismarck's] complete transformation into a Junker. 
a) Protective tariffs, etc., coalition of 
bourgeois and Junkers, with the 
latter taking the lion's share. 
b) Attempts at a tobacco monopoly 
defeated in 1882. 
c) Colonial swindles. 
5. Social policy a la a) Anti-Socialist Law and crushing 
Bonaparte. of workers' associations and 
funds, 
b) Social reform crap. 
III. 6. Foreign policy. Threat of war, effect of annexation. 
Increase in strength of army. Septennate.495 In due 
course, a return to the pre-1870 year group to maintain 
superiority for a few more years. 
IV. Result: a) A domestic situation which collapses with the 
death of those two3: no empire without emperor! 
Proletariat driven to revolution; an unpre­
cedented growth in social-democracy on the 
repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law—chaos, 
b) Overall outcome—a peace worse than war at best; 
or else a world war. 
Written between late December 1887 and Printed according to the manu-
March 1888 script 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 1, Published in English for the first 
No. 26, 1895-96 time 
a Bismarck and William I.— Ed. 

=====第609页=====
581 
[NOTES  ON MY JOURNEY 
THROUGH AMERICA  AND  CANADA] 
Primitiveness.  "CIVILISED COUNTRY."3 
Furniture.— Manners—Boston cabs. Hotel organisation,  STAGE 
COACHES,  17th-century travel. Alongside hypermodern features— 
even  in rooms. Window fastenings—roller blinds—keys—double 
locks. 
Country  of unexpected contrasts: more railways than roads  and 
the latter  appalling—GOOD  PLANK  ROAD—ELEVATED  RAILWAYS  above  and 
dreadful pavement below—log cabins  but  carpets  and  pianos 
inside—indeed, even  the  bourgeois Yankees  and the  feudal 
Canadians alongside them—the idyllic Hoboken  and  insects close  to 
New York. 
Publicness  of life,  in contrast  to England. Only bedrooms 
private,  and  even these scarcely  so (fanlights, ventilation).—  HALL, 
OFFICE,  WRITING  ROOM,  LADIES'  PARLORS;  heaters make  it unnecessary  to keep 
rooms closed even  in winter,  and so it  does  not  exist.  LOAFING  ABOUT  in 
the hotels. 
Greeks  in Rome  in the  last days  of the  republic. 
Religion—their theory,  to be  grasped historically. GO-AHEAD 
NATION—pushing  past,  not  being able  to see  anyone walking  or 
standing  in front  of them. Even  in Boston,  and  worst there  on 
account  of the  narrow streets—women  too. 
Spitting—privies—hypocrisy about drink  not  only  in PROHIBITION 
STATES—nobody  drinks  in public—prudery—ROOSTER  and  ROACHES. 
Opposite  to Canada.—French Canadians really detached from 
France  by the  Revolution  and  have preserved  the  feudalism 
guaranteed  by the  conquest—they  are  going  to  ruin—Falls 
opposite Niagara497—empty houses, bridges, etc.—Emigration  to 
a The  words  in English  are  written  in the  margin.— Ed. 
39* 

=====第610页=====
582 Frederick  Engels 
New England, where they replace the Chinese.—English Canadians 
also slow, even in Toronto much dilapidation. 
The Americans unable to enjoy. 
The Americans unable to walk—either rush or  loaf. 
Provincials.* 
Foundation the old solid petty bourgeois, small townsman and 
small peasant of the 17th-18th centuries. He is everywhere 
unmistakable with his wooden fashion, but also forms the solid 
foundation amidst wild speculation, just like the Swiss, to whom a 
certain resemblance. 
Obtrusiveness of American manners: Doctor, City of Berlin}1 
Get up early. 
New York—harbour—beauty.— Natural setting for the centre 
of capitalist production—and how this destiny is fulfilled. First 
evening impression, dazzling, pavements, dirt, noise, horrible. By 
day even more ugliness—telegraph poles, overhead railways, signs 
crossways, company signs, architecture hidden, throngs of people, 
carriages,  TRAMS  and ELEVATED far above London, ugly, disfigured, 
everywhere advertisements, obtrusiveness. Croupier type. Haggard 
appearance of the people, even the women. Shops dazzling 
compared with London, and in greater numbers. This the gateway 
to the promised land. Ghastly noises at sea and on land. Noise 
from the carts, one makes more than ten in Europe. All aesthetics 
trampled underfoot as soon as momentary profit comes in view. 
Horses like the people: elements of a good stock, not yet ready. 
Mostly lighter than in England—in Canada, on the other hand, 
thoroughly English type. 
Résumé: capitalist production is overexploitation. Adirondacks 
forest devastation—nowhere else timber forest either (Isle of 
Gnats perhaps excepted). 
Railways poor, slow, stopping train, delay and wait in Buffalo, 
incomprehensibly long halt at the stations; few trains per day; long 
bends,  hence the long carriages (cf. street corner tracks in New 
York—ELEVATED),  rolling, due to elasticity of the beams and the 
trembling, sea-sickness. 
a This word is written in the margin.— Ed. 
b The name of the steamer in which Engels travelled to America.— Ed. 

=====第611页=====
Notes on My Journey Through America and Canada 583 
Americans no nation. 5-6 different types, held together by the 
need for cohesion forged in the Civil War,498 and the feeling that 
they have in them the making of the greatest nation of the 20th 
century. 
Genuinely capitalist3: 
Business is concluded in a strictly businesslike manner. No tips. 
Anyone who gives them in situations where we would consider 
them unavoidable is then thoroughly exploited as a GREENHORN. 
The parvenu—national character. 
Educated persons commonly display great self-possession, others 
at least show confidence and ASSURANCE to the point of import­
unity. 
Written in the latter half of September Printed according to the manu-
1888 script 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Published in English for the first 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, time 
Moscow, 1981 
a These words are written in the margin.— Ed. 

=====第612页=====
584 
[IMPRESSIONS OF A JOURNEY ROUND AMERICA] 
We generally imagine America to be a new world—new not 
merely with regard to the time of its discovery, but also in all its 
institutions, far ahead of us olde-worlde sleepy Europeans in its 
scorn for everything hereditary and traditional, a world, newly 
built from scratch on virgin soil, by modern men on purely 
modern, practical, rational principles. And the Americans do their 
part in strengthening this view of ours. They look down with 
contempt on us as dubious, impractical people, enmeshed in all 
sorts of received prejudices, who go in fear of everything new, 
whereas they, THE  MOST  GO-AHEAD  NATION, 3 examine every new proposal 
for improvement simply for its practical utility and, having once 
recognised it as possible, introduce it immediately, indeed almost 
overnight. But in America everything ought to be new, rational, 
practical—that is, everything ought to be different from what it is 
with us. 
I first met a large number of Americans on the steamer City of 
Berlin. They were mostly very nice people, ladies and gentlemen, 
more accessible than the English, at times somewhat blunt in their 
speech, but otherwise rather like the better dressed people 
anywhere else. What, however, set them apart was a strangely 
petty-bourgeois bearing—not that of the timid, uncertain German 
petty bourgeois, nor that of the English; a bearing which, by virtue 
of the great assurance with which it presented itself as if it were 
quite natural, showed itself to be an inherited quality. The 
younger ladies, in particular, left the impression of a certain 
a In the manuscript this English phrase is given in parentheses after its German 
equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第613页=====
Impressions of a Journey Round America 585 
naivety such as is found in Europe only in smaller towns; when 
striding resolutely, almost fiercely across the deck, arm in arm, or 
on the arm of a man, they had the very same springy gait and 
held down their skirts when threatened by the wind with the same 
demure grip as innocent young things from the country back 
home. They reminded me mostly of Swedish girls—they were big 
and robust like them, too—and I expected them to curtsey at any 
moment, as Swedish women do. My American fellow travellers 
had also received their share of the physical and intellectual 
clumsiness which is the universal hereditary trait of the Germanic 
race and had not shaken it off at all. In short, my initial 
impression of the Americans was by no means one of national 
superiority over the Europeans, by no means that of a totally new, 
modern national type, but on the contrary that they were people 
who still clung on to inherited petty-bourgeois habits which are 
considered outdated in Europe, that we Europeans contrast with 
them in this connection as the Parisians with the provincials. 
When I entered my first bedroom in New York, what did I 
find? Furniture of the quaintest old style imaginable, chests of 
drawers with brass rings or hoops as handles on the drawers, such 
as was the fashion in the early years of the century, and in Europe 
are still found only in the country; alongside them, more recent 
styles after the English or French pattern, but even these were also 
dated enough and mostly in the wrong place; nothing new since 
the huge rocking chair, which described an arc of 240 degrees, 
went out of fashion again. And thus everywhere, the chairs, tables 
and cupboards mostly look like the heirlooms of past generations. 
The carriages on the New York streets have such an outdated 
appearance that at first glance one believes no European farm 
would still have in its possession a hand-cart of such a model. 
True,  on closer observation one finds that these carriages are 
much improved and most expediently equipped, furnished with 
excellent suspension and extremely lightly built out of very strong 
wood; but for all these improvements the old-fashioned model 
remained intact. In London, right up to the early 40s, there were 
cabs which people boarded from the rear and where they sat on 
the right and the left opposite one another, as in an omnibus; 
since 1850 they have disappeared; yet in Boston, as far as I know 
the only American city where cabs are in common use, these 
boneshakers still flourish to this day. The American inns of today, 
with their luxurious furnishings and their hundreds of rooms, 
show in their entire AMERICAN PLAN that they have grown out of the 
remote farmhouses in sparsely populated areas, which even today 

=====第614页=====
586 Frederick Engels 
occasionally offer travellers board and lodging for payment—I 
shall return to this point—and hence display peculiarities which 
appear to us to be not simply strange, but downright quaint. And 
so on. 
But anyone who wishes to savour the pleasure of a journey such 
as one had to endure in Europe at the time of the Thirty Years' 
War500 should head for an American mountain district and travel 
to the end of the last railway line and take the stagecoach further 
out into the wilderness. The four of us made such a trip to the 
Adirondacks and have seldom laughed as much as we did on the 
roof of that coach. An old boneshaker of an indescribable model, 
compared with which the famous Prussian carriages from the year 
dot seem the height of splendour, with seats—quite in keeping— 
for six to nine people up on the roof and the box, that was the 
conveyance. As for the road, I beg your pardon, it wasn't a road, 
one could hardly even call it a path; two deeply rutted tracks in 
the sandy soil, uphill, downhill.3 
Written in late September 1888 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, 
Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 

=====第615页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第616页=====

=====第617页=====
589 
[TO THE EDITORS OF TO-DAY] 
[Draft] a 
To the British Publishing Co. 
Sir (or Gentn) 
In reply to your letter of the — I beg to say that since my last I 
have compared your article with the original Le Capital. 
I find that it is a very imperfect translation of Ch. XXIII (23) 
Réproduction simple, and that the translator has made very 
important mistakes in consequence of want of sufficient acquain­
tance, partly with the leading ideas of Le Capital, partly with 
French grammar. 
It must appear to me very unfair that a single chapter should be 
taken out of the middle of a closely-reasoned scientific work and 
without a word of introduction be presented to the public. 
When it comes to the publishing of translations of entire 
chapters of my father's works, the question of copyright crops up. 
Please do not forget that I am responsible for their share of that 
copyright to other people and to my father's memory for the way 
his works are done into English. Upon this point I reserve all my 
rights. 
However I will permit you to publish another chapter in your 
next issue, on condition that you head it with a few lines stating 
1) That the last was Ch. 23 and the present is Ch. so and so, 
out of Le Capital, published in Paris 1872. 502 
2) That the translation is yours; and 
3) That you inform me which further chapters you intend to 
translate after which I shall consider whether I can give you my 
a The draft was written in Engels' hand on behalf of Eleanor Marx-Aveling.— 
Ed. 

=====第618页=====
590 Appendices 
permission to do so, which will very materially depend upon the 
character of the translation  itself. 
Your allusion to a poem of V. Hugo is entirely irrelevant, 
considering that it is well known that V. Hugo could not write a 
line of English and that my father has been an English author for 
more than thirty years. 
Written in the latter half of April 1883 Reproduced from the manuscript 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Published in English for the first 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, time 
Moscow, 1980 

=====第619页=====
591 
FROM HERMANN LOPATIN'S LETTER 
TO MARIA OSHANINA503 
London, September 20, 1883 
...I must let you know the result of my first meeting with Engels, 
because I think some of his opinions will be pleasing for you. 
We talked a great deal about Russian matters, about how the 
cause of our political and social revival is likely to proceed. As was 
to be expected, our views were in total agreement; each of us kept 
finishing off the ideas and phrases of the other. He too believes 
(like both Marx and myself) that the task of a revolutionary party 
or a party of action in Russia at the present time lies not in 
propagating the new socialist ideal and not even in striving to 
realise this by no means fully elaborated ideal with the help of a 
provisional government composed of our comrades, but in 
directing all forces towards 1) either forcing the Tsar to convene a 
Zemsky Sobor,504 2) or by means of intimidating the Tsar, etc., 
causing profound disorder that would result in the convening of 
the Sobor or something similar. He believes, as I do, that such a 
Sobor would inevitably lead to a radical, not only political but also 
social reorganisation. He believes in the tremendous significance 
of the electoral period, in the sense of incomparably more 
successful propaganda than all books and whispered communica­
tions.  He regards a purely liberal constitution without profound 
economic restructuring as impossible, and therefore does not fear 
this danger. He believes that enough material for the restructuring 
of society on new principles has accumulated in the real conditions 
of the people's life. Of course, he does not believe in the 
instantaneous realisation of communism or anything like that, but 
only of that which has already matured in the life and heart of the 
people. He believes that the people will find themselves eloquent 
spokesmen to express their needs and aspirations, etc. He believes 

=====第620页=====
592 Appendices 
that no forces will be capable of halting this reorganisation, or 
revolution, once it has begun. Thus one thing only is important: to 
smash the fatal force of stagnation, to knock the people and 
society for a moment out of the state of inertness and immobility, 
to cause disorder which will force the government and the people 
to set about internal restructuring, which will stir up the calm 
popular sea and arouse the attention and enthusiasm of the whole 
people for the cause of a full social reorganisation. And the results 
will show themselves, precisely those results which are possible, 
desirable and practicable for the time in question. 
All this is devilishly  brief,  but I cannot write in any more detail 
at the moment. Moreover all this may not be entirely to your 
liking, so I will hasten to convey to you with literal accuracy other 
opinions of his which are most flattering to the Russian 
revolutionary party. They are as follows: 
"Everything now depends on what is done in the immediate 
future in St. Petersburg, to which the eyes of all thinking, 
far-seeing and perspicacious people in the whole of Europe are 
now turned." 
"Russia is the France of the present century. The revolutionary 
initiative of a new social reorganisation legally and rightly belongs 
to it." 
"...The collapse of Tsarism, which will destroy the last bastion of 
monarchism in Europe and put an end to Russia's 'aggressiveness', 
Poland's hatred of it and a great deal more, will lead to a 
completely different combination of powers, smash Austria to 
smithereens and arouse in all countries a powerful impetus for 
internal reorganisation." 
"...It is unlikely that Germany will decide to take advantage of 
the Russian disorders and move its forces into Russia to support 
the Tsar. But if it did do so, all the better. It would mean the end 
of its present government and the beginning of a new era. 
Annexation by it of the Baltic provinces is pointless and 
impracticable. Such seizures of opposite (?) or adjoining narrow 
littorals and bits of land, and the resultant ludicrous configura­
tions of states, were possible only in the sixteenth and seventeenth 
centuries, but not now. Moreover it is no secret to anyone that the 
Germans constitute an insignificant reactionary minority there." (I 
am adding this point for Y.P.a in view of her ultra-patriotic 
opinions on this point.) 
a Yulia Petrovna—the pseudonym of Galina Chernyavskaya-Bokhanovskaya.— 
Ed. 

=====第621页=====
Appendices 593 
"Both Marx and I find that the Committee's letter to 
Alexander III505 is positively excellent in its political essence and 
calm tone. It shows that there are people with a statesmanlike cast 
of mind in the ranks of the revolutionaries." 
May I hope that all this is sufficiently flattering and pleasing for 
you and that you will thank me for these lines? Do you remember 
that I said Marx himself had never been a Marxist? Engels told me 
that during the struggle of Brousse, Malon and Co. with the 
others, Marx used to joke: "All I know is that J am not a 
Marxist !"... 506 
First published in Osnovy teoretitiieskogo Printed according to the book 
sotsializma i ikh prilozheniye k Rossii, Gene­
va March 1893 Translated from the Russian 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第622页=====
594 
THE INSURRECTION OF MAY 1849 
The insurrection of May 1849, which roused the Rhenish 
provinces and South Germany to revolt, was provoked by the 
refusal of most of the governments of the small states to accept 
the constitution approved by the National Assembly at Frankfurt. 
This Assembly never had any real power and, to make matters 
worse, had neglected to take the necessary steps to acquire some; 
once it had finished its constitution on paper it lost the last 
remains of its moral power. Although rather romantic, the 
constitution was the sole banner to rally around to try to launch a 
new movement, even if it meant not implementing it after the 
victory. 
The rising started in Dresden on 3 May; a few days later it 
spread to the Bavarian Palatinate and the Grand Duchy of Baden. 
The Grand Dukea hastened to flee as soon as he had seen the 
troops fraternising with the people. 
The Prussian Government, which had crushed the revolutionary 
movement in November 1848, disarmed Berlin and placed Prussia 
under a state of siege, became the protector of all the governments 
of the other states. It immediately sent troops to Dresden who, 
after four days of fighting and heroic resistance, defeated the 
insurgents. ' 
But to subdue the Palatinate and the Duchy of Baden an army 
was needed: in order to form it, Prussia had to call the Landwehr 508 
to arms. At Iserlohn (Westphalia) and Elberfeld (Rhenish Prus­
sia) men refused to march. Troops were sent. The towns 
a Leopold.— Ed. 

=====第623页=====
Appendices 595 
barricaded themselves and repulsed them. Iserlohn was taken 
after two days of fighting. Elberfeld offering no opportunities for 
resistance, the insurgents, about a thousand in number, resolved 
to force a way through the troops surrounding them and to reach 
the south in full revolt. They were cut to pieces, and their 
commander, Mirbach, was taken prisoner; nevertheless, a large 
number of insurgents, aided by the populace of the countryside, 
did manage to get through to the south. Engels was Mirbach's 
aide-de-camp; but the latter, before putting his plan into action, 
sent him on a mission to Cologne, which was in the hands of the 
Prussian army. The truth is that Mirbach did not want to have this 
known communist in his corps, lest he should scare the bourgeois 
of the country which he intended to pass through. 
In the meantime the rising spread throughout the south of 
Germany; but as in Paris in 1871 the revolutionaries committed 
the fatal blunder of not attacking. The troops of the surrounding 
small states were demoralised and looking for an excuse to join 
the insurrection: at that time they were determined not to fight 
against the people. The insurgents could have got the population 
to rise up and join them by announcing that they were going to 
the rescue of the Frankfurt Assembly, surrounded by Prussian and 
Austrian troops. Engels and Marx, after the suppression of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, went to Mannheim to propose to the 
leaders of the movement that they should march on Frankfurt. 
They refused to listen to them. They pleaded as an excuse that 
the troops were disorganised by the flight of their former officers, 
that they were short of ammunition, etc. 
Whereas the insurgents remained with shouldered arms, the 
Prussians, united with the Bavarians and reinforced by the troops 
of the small states, which the insurgents could have won over with 
greater daring, advanced in forced marches on the rebellious 
areas.  The reactionary army, 36,000 men strong, cleared the 
Palatinate in a week of the 8-9,000 insurgents who were occupying 
it: it must be said that the two fortresses of the country had 
remained in the hands of reaction. The revolutionary army fell 
back on the Baden troops comprising roughly 10,000 men of the 
line and 12,000 irregulars. There were four general engagements: 
the reactionary forces were only victorious thanks to their 
numerical superiority and to the violation of Württemberg 
territory, which allowed them to turn the revolutionary army's 
flank at the decisive moment. After six weeks of fighting in the 
open country the remains of the rebel army had to take refuge in 
Switzerland. 
40-1243 

=====第624页=====
596 Appendices 
During this last campaign Engels was aide-de-camp to Colonel 
Willich, commander of a corps of communist irregulars. He took 
part in three engagements and in the final decisive battle of the 
Murg. Colonel Willich, having fled to the United States, died with 
the rank of general, which he won during the war of secession. 509 
This stubborn resistance in open country, mounted by a few 
thousand insurgents with no organisation and almost without 
artillery against a skilfully disciplined Prussian army, shows what 
our friends, the socialists beyond the Rhine, will be able to achieve 
the day the revolutionary clarion call rings out in Europe. 
Written in mid-November 1885 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Le Socialiste, Novem­
ber 21, 1885 Translated from the French 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第625页=====
597 
LAWYERS' SOCIALISM510 
The medieval world view was essentially theological. The unity 
of the European world, though actually non-existent on the inside, 
was established against outside forces, the common Saracen 
enemy, by Christianity. The unity of the West European world, 
which comprised a group of nations developing in constant 
interaction, was epitomised by Catholicism. This theological 
epitome was not merely an idea. It really existed, not only in the 
Pope, its monarchical focus, but above all in the Church. The 
Church was organised on feudal and hierarchical lines and, 
owning about a third of the land in each country, occupied a 
position of tremendous power within the feudal system. With its 
feudal landholdings, the Church was the actual link between the 
different countries, and the Church's feudal organisation gave a 
religious blessing to the secular feudal system of government. 
Besides, the clergy was the only educated class. It was therefore 
natural that Church dogma formed the starting-point and basis of 
all thought. Everything—jurisprudence, science, philosophy—was 
pursued in accordance with it, from the angle of whether or not 
the contents were in keeping with Church doctrine. 
But in the bosom of the feudal system there developed the 
power of the bourgeoisie. A new class emerged to oppose the big 
landowners. Above all, the burghers were exclusively producers of, 
and traders in, commodities, while the feudal mode of production 
essentially rested on the direct consumption of products produced 
within a limited circle—consumption partly by the producers 
themselves, partly by the recipients of feudal tributes. The 
Catholic world view, tailored as it was to feudalism, was no longer 
adequate for this new class and its conditions of production and 
40* 

=====第626页=====
598 Appendices 
exchange. Nevertheless, it, too, continued for some time to be 
ensnared in the toils of the prevailing omnipotent theology. From 
the thirteenth to the seventeenth century, all the reformations and 
the ensuing struggles waged in the name of religion were, 
theoretically speaking, no more than repeated attempts by the 
bourgeoisie, the urban plebeians and the peasantry that rose in 
rebellion together with them, to adapt the old, theological world 
view to the changed economic conditions and position of the new 
class.  But this did not work. The religious banner was raised for 
the last time in England in the seventeenth century, and scarcely 
fifty years later the new world view that was to become the 
classical one of the bourgeoisie emerged undisguised in France: the 
legal world view. 
It was a secularisation of the theological world view. Dogma, 
divine law, was supplanted by human law, the Church by the 
State. The economic and social relations, which people previously 
believed to have been created by the Church and its dogma— 
because sanctioned by the Church—were now seen as being 
founded on the law and created by the State. Because the 
exchange of commodities on the level of society and in its fully 
developed form, i.e. based on the granting of advances and credit, 
results in complex contractual relations and thus requires univer­
sally valid regulations, which can only be provided by the 
community—legal norms laid down by the State—people im­
agined that these legal norms did not arise from the economic 
facts of life but from their formal stipulation by the State. And 
because competition, the basic form of intercourse between free 
commodity producers, is the greatest equaliser, equality before the 
law became the bourgeoisie's main battlecry. The fact that the 
struggle of this new rising class against the feudal lords and the 
absolute monarchy, which then protected them, had to be, like any 
class struggle, a political struggle, a struggle for control over the 
State, and had to be waged for the sake of legal demands, helped to 
consolidate the legal world view. 
But the bourgeoisie produced its negative complement, the 
proletariat, and with it a new class struggle, which broke out even 
before the bourgeoisie had completely won political power. Just as 
the bourgeoisie, in its day, in the struggle against the nobility, 
continued for a time to labour under the burden of the theological 
world view, which had been handed down to it, so the proletariat 
initially adopted the legal outlook from its adversary and sought 
weapons therein to use against the bourgeoisie. Like their 
theoretical champions, the first proletarian parties remained firmly 

=====第627页=====
Appendices 599 
on the juridical "legal foundation"—only they constructed a legal 
foundation different from that of the bourgeoisie. On the one 
hand, the demand for equality was extended to include social as 
well as legal equality; on the other hand, from Adam Smith's 
propositions that labour is the source of all wealth, but that the 
product of labour must be shared by the worker with the 
landowner and the capitalist, the conclusion was drawn that this 
division was unjust and should either be abolished altogether or at 
least modified in favour of the workers. But the feeling that 
leaving the matter on the purely juridical "legal foundation" 
would not at all make it possible to eliminate the evils created by 
the bourgeois capitalist mode of production, notably that based on 
modern, large-scale industry, led the greatest thinkers among even 
the early socialists—Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen—to abandon 
the juridical and political domain altogether and declare all 
political struggle fruitless. 
The two views were equally incapable of precisely and fully 
expressing the striving of the working class for emancipation, a 
striving stemming from the obtaining economic situation. The 
demand for equality, just like that for the full fruits of one's 
labour, became entangled in insoluble contradictions as soon as 
they were to be legally formulated in detail, leaving the heart of 
the matter, the transformation of the mode of production, more 
or less untouched. The rejection of political struggle by the great 
Utopians was simultaneously a rejection of class struggle, i.e. of the 
only course of action open to the class whose interests they 
championed. Both views overlooked the historical background to 
which they owed their existence; both appealed to the emotions— 
one to the sense of justice, and the other to the sense of humanity. 
Both clothed their demands in pious wishes that left unanswered 
the question as to why they had to be implemented at this pre­
cise moment, and not a thousand years earlier or later. 
Stripped of all property in the means of production as a result 
of the transformation of the feudal into the capitalist mode of 
production and constantly reproduced by the mechanism of the 
capitalist mode of production in this hereditary state of property-
lessness, the working class cannot adequately express its condition 
in terms of the legal illusion of the bourgeoisie. It can only fully 
perceive this condition itself if it views things as they really are, 
without legally tinted spectacles. And it was enabled to do this by 
Marx with his materialist conception of history, with the proof that 
all of people's legal, political, philosophical, religious, etc., ideas 
ultimately derive from their economic conditions, from the way in 

=====第628页=====
600 Appendices 
which they produce and exchange products. This set out the 
world view corresponding to the conditions of proletarian life and 
struggle; the workers' lack of property could only be matched by a 
corresponding lack of illusions. And this proletarian world view is 
now spreading throughout the world. 
Understandably, the struggle between the two world views 
continues; not only between proletariat and bourgeoisie, but also 
between free-thinking workers and those still dominated by the 
old tradition. On the whole, ordinary politicians here use the 
customary arguments to defend the old view. But there are also 
so-called scholarly lawyers, who have made legal sophistry a 
profession of their own.* 
Until now these gentlemen have considered themselves too 
refined to deal with the theoretical aspect of the labour movement. 
We should therefore be extremely grateful that a real professor of 
law, Dr. Anton Menger, at last deigns to give a "closer dogmatic 
elucidation" of the history of socialism from the viewpoint of the 
"philosophy of law".** 
In fact the socialists have hitherto been barking up the wrong 
tree.  They have neglected the very thing that mattered most. 
"Not until socialist ideas are detached from the interminable economic and 
philanthropic discussions ... and transformed into down-to-earth legal terms" 
(p. Ill), not until all the "politico-economic frippery" (p. 37) is done away with, can 
the "legal treatment of socialism ... the most important task of the contemporary 
philosophy of law" [p. Ill] be taken in hand. 
Now, "socialist ideas" are concerned precisely with economic 
relations, above all the relation between wage labour and capital, 
and, this being so, these economic discussions would appear, after 
all, to amount to more than mere detachable "frippery". 
Moreover, political economy is a science, so called, and a 
somewhat more scientific one than the philosophy of law at that, 
* See the article by Fr. Engels on " Ludwig Feuerbach" in the Neue Zeit IV, p. 206 
[see this volume, p. 393]: "It is among professional politicians, theorists of public law 
and jurists of private law that the connection with economic facts gets well and 
truly lost. Since in each particular case the economic facts must assume the form of 
juristic motives in order to receive legal sanction; and since, in so doing, 
consideration has, of course, to be given to the whole legal system already in 
operation, the juristic form is, in consequence, made everything and the economic 
content nothing. Public law and private law are treated as separate spheres, each 
having its own independent historical development, each being capable of, and 
needing, a systematic presentation by the consistent elimination of all innate 
contradictions." 
** Dr. Anton Menger, Das Recht auf den vollen Arbeitsertrag in geschichtlicher 
Darstellung, Stuttgart, Cotta, 1886, X, p. 171. 

=====第629页=====
Appendices 601 
being concerned with facts and not with mere ideas, like the latter. 
But this is a matter of total indifference to the professional lawyer. 
For him, economic research stands on a par with philanthropic 
rhetoric. Fiat justitia, pereat rnundus.* 
Furthermore, the "politico-economic frippery" in Marx—and 
this is what our lawyer finds hardest to swallow—is not simply 
economic research. It is essentially historical. It demonstrates the 
course of social development, from the feudal mode of production 
of the Middle Ages to the advanced capitalism of today, the 
demise of earlier classes and class antagonisms and the formation 
of new classes with new conflicts of interest manifesting them­
selves, inter alia, in new legal demands. Even our lawyer seems to 
have a faint glimmering of this, discovering on p. 37 that today's 
"philosophy of law ... is essentially nothing more than a replica of the state of 
the law as handed down by history", which could be "termed the bourgeois 
philosophy of law" and "alongside which a philosophy of law of unpropertied  classes  of the 
people has emerged in the shape of socialism". 
But if this is so, what is the cause? Where do the "bourgeois" 
and the "unpropertied classes of the people" come from, each 
possessing a specific philosophy of law corresponding to its class 
position? From the law, or from economic development? What else 
does Marx tell us but that the views of law held by each of the 
large social classes conform with their respective class positions? 
How did Menger get in among the Marxists? 
Yet this is but an oversight, an inadvertent acknowledgement of 
the strength of the new theory which the stern lawyer let slip, and 
which we shall therefore simply record. On the contrary, when 
our man of law is on his home, legal ground, he scorns economic 
history. The declining Roman Empire is his favourite example. 
"The means of production were never so centralised," he tells us, "as when half 
the African province was in the possession of six people ... never were the 
sufferings of the working classes greater than when almost every productive worker 
was a slave. Neither was there at that time any lack of fierce criticism of the 
existing social order—particularly from the Church Fathers—which could rival the 
best socialist writings of the present; nevertheless, the fall of the Western Roman 
Empire was not followed by socialism, for instance, but—by the medieval legal 
system" (p. 108). 
And why did this happen? Because 
"the nation did not have a clear picture of the future order, one free of all 
effusiveness". 
a Let justice be done, though the world perish (a dictum attributed to Emperor 
Ferdinand I of Austria (1556-64). See J. Manlius, Loci Communes, II, p. 290V—Ed. 

=====第630页=====
602 Appendices 
Mr. Menger is of the opinion that during the decline of the 
Roman Empire the economic preconditions for modern socialism 
were in existence; it was simply its legal formulation that was 
lacking. Because of this, it was feudalism, and not socialism, that 
took over, making a nonsense of the materialist conception of 
history! 
\Vhat the lawyers of the declining Roman Empire had formed 
so neatly into a system was not feudal law but Roman law, the law 
of a society of commodity producers. Since Mr. Menger operates 
on the assumption that the legal idea is the driving force of 
history, he now makes the quite preposterous demand on the 
Roman lawyers that, instead of the legal system of existing Roman 
society, they should have delivered the very opposite—"a clear 
picture, free of all effusiveness", of an imaginary social system. So 
that is Menger's philosophy of law, applied to Roman law! But 
Menger's claim that the economic conditions had never been so 
favourable to socialism as under the Roman Emperors is 
downright horrendous. The socialists that Menger seeks to 
disprove see the guarantee of socialism's success in the develop­
ment of production  itself.  On the one hand, the development of 
large-scale machine-based enterprises in industry and agriculture 
makes production increasingly social, and the productivity of 
labour enormous; this necessitates the abolition of class distinctions 
and the transfer of commodity production in private enterprises 
into direct production for and by society. On the other hand, the 
modern mode of production gives rise to the class which 
increasingly gains the power for, and interest in, actually carrying 
through this development: a free, working proletariat. 
Now compare the conditions in imperial Rome, where there was 
no question of large-scale machine-based production, either in 
industry or in agriculture. True, we find a concentration of 
land ownership, but one would have to be a lawyer to equate this 
with the development of labour performed socially in large 
enterprises. For the sake of argument, let us present Mr. Menger 
with three examples of landownership. Firstly, an Irish landlord 
who owns 50,000 acres tilled by  5,000  tenants in smallholdings 
averaging 10 acres; secondly, a Scottish landlord who has turned 
50,000 acres into hunting grounds; and thirdly, an immense 
American farm of 10,000 acres, growing wheat on a large 
industrial scale. No doubt he will declare that in the first two cases 
the concentration of the means of production has advanced five 
times as far as in the last. 
The development of Roman agriculture during the imperial age 

=====第631页=====
Appendices 603 
led, on the one hand, to the extension of pastoral farming over 
vast areas and the depopulation of the land; on the other, to the 
fragmentation of the estates into smallholdings which were handed 
over to colons and became miniature enterprises run by dependent 
small farmers, the forerunners of the serfs, thus establishing a 
mode of production that already contained the ggrm of the 
medieval one. And it was for this reason among others, esteemed 
Mr. Menger, that the Roman world was superseded by the 
"medieval legal system". No doubt there were, at various times, 
large-scale agricultural enterprises in individual provinces, but 
there was no machine production with free workers—it was a 
plantation economy that used slaves, barbarians of widely differing 
nationalities, who often could not understand one another. Then 
there were the free proletarians: not working proletarians but the 
Lum/)£nproletarians. Nowadays society increasingly depends on the 
labour of the proletarians and they are becoming increasingly 
essential to its continued survival; the Roman Lumpenproletarians 
were parasites who were not merely useless but even harmful to 
society, and hence lacked any effective power. 
But to Mr. Menger's way of thinking, the mode of production 
and the people were apparently never so ripe for socialism as they 
were in the imperial age! The advantage of steering well clear of 
economic "fripperies" is obvious. 
We shall allow him the Church Fathers, since he says nothing as 
to wherein their "criticism of the existing social order ... could 
rival the best socialist writings of the present". We are indebted to 
the Church Fathers for not a little interesting information about 
Roman society in decline, but as a rule they never engaged in 
criticism, being content simply to condemn it, and they often did it 
in such strong terms that the fiercest language of the modern 
socialists, and even the clamour of the anarchists, seem tame in 
comparison. Is this the "superiority" to which Mr. Menger refers? 
With the same contempt for historical fact that we have just 
observed, Menger states on p. 2 that the privileged classes receive 
their income without personal services to society in return. So the fact 
that ruling classes in the ascendant phase of their development 
have very definite social functions to perform, and for this very 
reason become ruling classes, is quite unknown to him. While 
socialists recognise the temporary historical justification for these 
classes, Menger here declares their appropriation of surplus 
product to be theft. Therefore, it must come as a surprise to him 
to find on pp. 122 and 123 that these classes are daily losing more 
and more of the power to protect their right to this income. That 

=====第632页=====
604 Appendices 
this power consists in the performance of social functions and 
vanishes at a later stage of development with the demise of these 
functions is a complete enigma to this great thinker. 
Enough. The worthy professor then proceeds to deal with 
socialism from the point of view of the philosophy of law, in other 
words, to reduce it to a few brief legal formulas, to socialist "basic 
rights",  a new edition of human rights for the nineteenth century. 
Such basic rights have, of course, 
"little practical effect", but they are "not without their uses in the scientific 
sphere" as "slogans" (pp. 5, 6). 
So we have already sunk to the point where we are only dealing 
with slogans. First the historical context and content of this mighty 
movement are eliminated to make way for mere "philosophy of 
law", and then this philosophy of law is reduced to slogans which, 
it is admitted, are not worth a rap in practice! It was certainly 
worth the trouble. 
The worthy professor now discovers that the whole of socialism 
can be reduced, legally speaking, to three such slogans, three basic 
rights.  These are: 
1. the right to the full proceeds of one's labour, 
2. the right to a livelihood, 
3. the right to work. 
The right to work is only a provisional demand, "the first 
clumsy formula wherein the revolutionary demands of the 
proletariat are summarised" (Marx), 3 and thus does not belong 
here.  Yet he overlooks the demand for equality, which dominated 
all of French revolutionary socialism, from Babeuf to Cabet and 
Proudhon, but which Mr. Menger will hardly be able to formulate 
legally, although (or perhaps because) it is the most legalistic of all 
the demands mentioned. We are thus left with a quintessence 
consisting of the meagre propositions 1 and 2, which, to cap it all, 
are mutually contradictory. Menger finally realises this on p. 27, 
but it in no way prevents every socialist system from having to live 
with them (p. 6). But it is quite evident that cramming widely 
differing socialist doctrines from widely differing countries and 
stages of development into these two "slogans" is bound to 
adulterate the entire exposé. The peculiarity of each individual 
doctrine—what actually constitutes its historical importance—is 
not merely cast aside as a matter of secondary importance; it is 
a K. Marx, The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850, present edition, Vol. 10, 
pp. 77-78.— Ed. 

=====第633页=====
Appendices 605 
actually rejected as quite wrong because it diverges from the 
slogan and contradicts it. 
The work we discuss deals only with No. 1, the right to the full 
proceeds of one's labour. 
The worker's right to the full proceeds of his labour, that is, 
each individual worker's right to his specific proceeds, is only 
found in this strict sense in the doctrine of Proudhon. To demand 
that the means of production and the products should belong to 
the workers as a whole is quite a different matter. This demand is 
communist and, as Menger discovers on p. 48, goes beyond 
demand No. 1, which causes him a good deal of embarrassment. 
Consequently, one moment he has to place the communists under 
No. 2, and the next he has to twist and turn basic right No. 1 
until he can fit them in there. This occurs on p. 7. Here it is 
assumed that even after commodity production has been abolished 
it nevertheless continues to exist. It seems quite natural to 
Mr. Menger that even in a socialist society exchange values, i.e. 
commodities for sale, are produced and the prices of labour 
continue to exist—in other words, that labour power continues to 
be sold as a commodity. The only point which concerns him is 
whether the historically inherited prices of labour will be 
maintained in a socialist society with a surcharge, or whether there 
ought to be 
"a completely new method of determining the prices of labour". 
The latter would, in his opinion, shake society even more 
severely than the introduction of the socialist social system  itself. 
This confusion of concepts is understandable as on p. 94 our 
scholar talks about a socialist theory of value, imagining, as others 
have done before him, that Marx's theory of value is supposed to 
provide a yardstick for distribution in the society of the future. 
Indeed, on p. 56 it is stated that the full proceeds of labour are 
nothing definite, as they can be calculated according to at least 
three different standards, and eventually, on pp. 161, 162, we are 
told that the full proceeds of labour constitute the "natural 
principle of distribution" and are only possible in a society with 
common property but individual use—that is, a society not today 
proposed as an ultimate goal by a single socialist anywhere! What 
an excellent basic right! And what an excellent philosopher of the 
law for the working class! 
In this way Menger has made it easy for himself to give a 
"critical" presentation of the history of socialism. Three words I'll 
tell you of import great, and even though they are not on 

=====第634页=====
606 Appendices 
everyone's lips,a they are quite sufficient for the matriculation 
examination that is being carried out with the socialists here. So 
step this way, Saint-Simon, over here, Proudhon, come on, Marx 
and whatever you are called: Do you swear by No. 1, or No. 2, or 
No. 3? Now quick into my Procrustean bed, and if anything 
overhangs, I'll chop it off, as economic and philanthropic 
fripperies! 
The point at issue is simply in whom the three basic rights 
foisted onto socialism by Menger are first to be found: whoever is 
the first to come up with one of these formulas is the great man. 
Understandably enough, it is impossible to do such a thing without 
dropping a few ridiculous clangers, the would-be learned ap­
paratus notwithstanding. He believes, for example, that to the 
Saint-Simonists the oisifs denote the owning classes and the 
travailleurs, the working classes (p. 67), in the title of Saint-Simon's 
work Les oisifs et les travailleurs. — Fermages,  loyers, intérêts, salaires 
(The Idle and the Workers.— Farm Rents, Rents, Interest, 
Wages) , b where the absence of profit alone should have taught him 
better. On the same page Menger himself quotes a key passage 
from the Globe, the organ of Saint-Simonism, which, alongside the 
scholars and the artists, lavishes praise on the industriels, i.e. the 
manufacturers, (as opposed to the oisifs) as mankind's benefactors 
and which simply demands the abolition of the tribute to the oisifs, 
that is, the rentiers, those who are in receipt of farm rent, rent and 
interest. In this list, profit is again excluded. In the Saint-Simonist 
system the manufacturer occupies a prominent position as a 
powerful and well-paid agent of society, and Mr. Menger would 
do well to study this position more closely before continuing his 
treatment of it from the point of view of the philosophy of law. 
On page 73 we are told that in the Contradictions économiques 
Proudhon had, "albeit rather obscurely", promised "a new solution 
of the social problem", while retaining commodity production and 
competition. What the worthy professor still finds rather obscure in 
1886,  Marx saw through as early as in 1847, demonstrating that it 
was actually an old idea, and predicting the bankruptcy that 
Proudhon in fact suffered in 1849. 511 
But enough of this. Everything we have discussed up to now is 
only of secondary concern to Mr. Menger, and also to his 
audience. If he had only written a history of right No. 1, his book 
a Paraphrase of two lines from Schiller's poem "Die Worte des Glaubens". — Ed. 
b Headline of an article by B. P. Enfantin published in Le Globe, No. 66, 
March 7, 1831.— Ed. 

=====第635页=====
Appendices 607 
would have disappeared without a trace. The history is only a 
pretext for writing the book; the purpose of that book is to drag 
Marx down. And it is only read because it deals with Marx. For a 
long time now it has not been so easy to criticise him—ever since 
an understanding of his system has gained wider currency and the 
critic has no longer been able to count on the ignorance of his 
audience. There is only one option: in order, to drag Marx down, 
his achievements are attributed to other socialists in whom no one 
is interested, who have vanished from the scene and who have no 
political or scientific importance any longer. In this way they hope 
to dispose of the founder of the proletarian world view, and 
indeed the world view  itself.  Mr. Menger undertook the task. 
People are not professors for nothing. They want to make their 
mark, too. 
The matter becomes quite simple. 
The present social order gives landowners and capitalists a 
"right" to part—the bulk—of the product produced by the 
worker. Basic right No. 1 says that this right is a wrong and the 
worker should have the whole proceeds of his labour. This takes 
care of the entire content of socialism, unless basic right No. 2 
comes into the picture. So whoever first said that the present right 
of those who own the soil and the other means of production to 
part of the proceeds of labour is a wrong is the great man, the 
founder of "scientific" socialism] And these men were Godwin, Hall 
and Thompson. Leaving out all the interminable economic frip­
peries and getting to the legal residue, Menger finds nothing but 
the same assertion in Marx. Consequently Marx simply copied 
these old Englishmen, particularly Thompson, and took care to 
keep quiet about his source. The proof has been adduced. 
We give up any attempt to make this hidebound lawyer 
understand that nowhere does Marx demand the "right to the full 
proceeds of labour'', that he makes no legal demands of any kind at 
all in his theoretical works. Even our lawyer seems to have a faint 
inkling of this when he reproaches Marx for nowhere giving 
"a thorough presentation of the right to the full proceeds of labour" (p. 98). 
In Marx's theoretical studies legal right, which always merely 
reflects the economic conditions prevalent in a specific society, is 
only considered as a matter of purely secondary importance; his 
main concern is the historical justification for certain conditions, 
modes of appropriation and social classes in specific ages, the 
investigation of which is of prime importance to anyone who sees 
in history a coherent, though often disrupted, course of develop-

=====第636页=====
608 Appendices 
ment rather than, as the eighteenth century did, a mere muddle 
of folly and brutality. Marx views the historical inevitability of, and 
hence the justification for, the slave-owners of classical times, the 
feudal lords of the Middle Ages, etc., as the lever of human 
development for a limited historical period. He thereby also 
recognises the temporary historical justification for exploitation, 
for the appropriation of the product of labour by others. Yet at 
the same time he demonstrates that not only has this historical 
justification disappeared, but that the continued existence of 
exploitation in any form, far from furthering social development, 
is daily impeding it more and more and involving it in increasingly 
violent collisions. Menger's attempt to force these epoch-making 
historical investigations into his narrow, legalistic Procrustean bed 
only goes to show his total inability to understand things that go 
beyond the narrowest legal horizon. Basic right No. 1, as 
formulated by him, does not exist for Marx at all. 
But here it comes! 
Mr. Menger has discovered the term "SURPLUS VALUE" in Thomp­
son. No doubt about it—Thompson is the discoverer of surplus 
value, and Marx a wretched plagiarist: 
"In Thompson's views one immediately recognises the mode of thinking, indeed 
even the forms of expression, that are later found in so many socialists, particularly 
Marx and Rodbertus" (p. 53). 
Thompson is therefore undeniably the "foremost founder of 
scientific socialism" (p. 49). And what does this scientific socialism 
consist in? 
The view "that rent and profits on capital are deductions which the owners of 
land and capital make from the full proceeds of labour, is by no means peculiar to 
socialism, as many representatives of bourgeois political economy, e.g. Adam Smith, 
proceed from the same opinion. Thompson and his followers are original only in so far 
as they regard rent and profit on capital as wrongful deductions that conflict with 
the worker's right to the full proceeds of his labour" (pp. 53-54). 
Thus scientific socialism does not consist in discovering an 
economic fact—according to Menger, this had already been done 
by earlier economists—but simply in declaring this fact wrongful. 
That is Mr. Menger's view of the matter. If the socialists had really 
made it so easy for themselves, they could have packed up long 
ago, and Mr. Menger would have been spared his legal-
philosophical clanger. But that's what happens when you reduce a 
movement in world history to legal slogans that fit in your 
waistcoat pocket. 
But what about the surplus value stolen from Thompson? The 
facts of the matter are as follows: 

=====第637页=====
Appendices 609 
In his Inquiry into the Principles of Distribution of Wealth etc. 
(Chapter 1, section 15), Thompson considers 
"what proportion of the products of their labour ought the labourers to pay" 
("OUGHT",  literally "are obliged", hence "ought to pay under the law") "for the use of 
the articles, called capital, to the possessors of them, called capitalists". The capitalists 
say that "without this capital, in the shape of machinery, materials, etc., mere labour 
would be unproductive; and therefore it is but just that the labourer should pay for 
the use of that". And Thompson continues: "Doubtless, the labourer must pay for the 
use of these, when so unfortunate as not himself to possess them; the question is, how 
much of the products of his labour  OUGHT3  to be subtracted for their use" (p. 128 of 
the Pare edition of 1850). 
This certainly does not sound at all like the "right to the full 
proceeds of labour". On the contrary, Thompson finds it quite 
acceptable that the worker should forfeit part of the proceeds of 
his labour for the use of the borrowed capital. The question for 
him is simply how much. Here there are "two measures, the 
worker's and the capitalist's". And what is the worker's measure? 
It is 
"the contribution of such sums as would replace the waste and value of the 
capital, by the time it would be consumed, with such added compensation to the 
owner and  SUPERINTENDENT  of it, as would support him in equal comfort with the 
MORE  ACTIVELY  EMPLOYED0 productive labourers". 
Thus,  then, is the worker's demand, according to Thompson, 
and anyone who does not "immediately recognise the mode of 
thinking, indeed even the forms of expression" from "Marx" 
would be mercilessly failed in Mr. Menger's philosophy-of-law 
examination. 
But surplus value—what about surplus value? Patience, dear 
reader, we are almost there. 
"The measure of the capitalist would be the additional value produced by the 
same quantity of labour, in  consequence  of the use of the machinery or other capital; the 
whole of such surplus value to be enjoyed by the capitalist for his superior intelligence 
and skill in accumulating and advancing to the labourers his capital, or the use of 
it" (Thompson, p. 128). 
This passage, taken literally, is utterly incomprehensible. No 
production is possible without the means of production. But the 
means of production are here assumed to be in the form of 
capital, i.e. in the possession of capitalists. So if the worker 
a The English word "ought" is given after the quotation, which is in 
German.— Ed. 
b The English words "superintendent" and "more actively employed" are given 
after their German equivalents in the text.— Ed. 

=====第638页=====
610 Appendices 
produces without the "use of machinery or other capital", he is 
attempting the impossible; he does not in fact produce anything at 
all. But if he does produce with the use of capital, then his entire 
product would be what is called surplus value here. So let's read 
on. On p. 130 Thompson has the same capitalist say: 
"Before the invention of machinery, before the accommodation of workshops, 
or factories, what was the amount of produce which the unaided powers of the 
labourer produced? Whatever that was, let him still enjoy... To the maker of the 
buildings or the machinery, or to him who by voluntary exchange acquired them, 
let all the surplus value of the manufactured article go, as a reward", etc. 
Here Thompson's capitalist is simply expressing the manufactur­
ers' everyday illusion that the working hour of the worker 
producing with the aid of machinery, etc., produces a greater 
value than the working hour of the simple artisan before the 
invention of machinery. This notion is fostered by the extraordinary 
"surplus value" pocketed by the capitalist who breaks into a field 
hitherto held by manual labour, with a newly invented machine on 
which he and perhaps a few other capitalists have a monopoly. In 
this case, the price of the hand-made product determines the 
market price of the entire output of this sector of industry; the 
machine-made product might cost a mere quarter of the labour, 
thus leaving the manufacturer with a "surplus value" of 300 per 
cent of his cost price. 
Naturally, the general spread of the new machine soon puts 
paid to this sort of "surplus value"; but then the capitalist notices 
that as the machine-made product comes to determine the market 
price and this price progressively falls to the real value of the 
machine-made product, the price of the hand-made product also 
falls and is thus forced down below its previous value, so that 
machine labour still produces a certain "surplus value" compared 
with manual labour. Thompson places this fairly common 
self-deception in the mouth of his manufacturer. How little he 
shares it  himself,  however, he expressly states immediately before 
this, on p. 127: 
"The materials, the buildings, the wages, can add nothing to their own value. 
The additional value proceeds from labour alone." 
We must beg our reader's indulgence when we point out 
especially for Mr. Menger's edification that this "additional value" 
of Thompson's is by no means the same as Marx's surplus value 
but the entire value added to the raw material by labour, that is, 
the sum total of the value of the labour power and surplus value 
in the Marxian sense. 

=====第639页=====
Appendices 611 
Only now, after this indispensable "economic frippery", can we 
fully appreciate the audacity with which Mr. Menger says on 
p. 53: 
"In Thompson's view ... the capitalists consider ... the difference between the 
worker's necessities of life and the real proceeds of their labour, rendered more 
productive by machinery and other capital expenditure, to be  SURPLUS  (or 
ADDITIONAL)  VALUE,3 which must fall to the owners of land and capital." 
This purports to be the "free" German rendering of the 
passage that we quoted above from Thompson, p. 128. But all 
that Thompson's capitalist is referring to is the difference between 
the product of THE  SAME  QUANTITY  OF LABOUR,3 according to whether the 
work is performed with or without the use of capital: the 
difference between the product of the same quantity of labour 
performed manually or with the help of machines. Mr. Menger 
can only smuggle in "the worker's necessities of life" by totally 
falsifying Thompson. 
To sum up: The "surplus value" of Thompson's capitalist is not 
Thompson's "surplus" or "additional value"; much less is either 
of them Mr. Menger's "surplus value"; and least of all is any of 
the three Marx's "surplus value". 
But that does not bother Mr. Menger in the slightest. On p. 53 
he continues: 
"Rent and profit on capital are therefore nothing but deductions which the 
owners of land and capital are able to make from the full proceeds of labour, to 
the detriment of the worker, by virtue of their legal position of power" — the whole 
substance of this sentence is already found in Adam Smith—and then he 
triumphantly exclaims: "In Thompson's views one immediately recognises the mode 
of thinking, indeed even the forms of expression, that are later found in so many 
socialists, particularly Marx and Rodbertus." 
In other words, Mr. Menger came across the term SURPLUS (or 
ADDITIONAL) VALUE in Thompson, only managing to conceal by means 
of an outright misrepresentation that in Thompson the term is 
used in two totally different senses, which again are both totally 
different from the sense in which Marx uses the term surplus 
value [Mehrwert]. 
This is the entire substance of his momentous discovery! What a 
pitiful result when set against the grandiose proclamation in the 
preface: 
"In this work I shall present proof that Marx and Rodbertus borrowed their 
principal socialist theories from older English and French theorists, without giving 
the sources of their views." 
a The English words are given after their German equivalents in the text.— Ed. 
41-1243 

=====第640页=====
612 Appendices 
How miserable the comparison that precedes this sentence now 
seems: 
"If anyone had 'discovered' the theory of the division of labour thirty years 
after the publication of Adam Smith's work on the wealth of nations, or if a writer 
today sought to present Darwin's theory of evolution as his own intellectual 
property, he would be considered either an ignoramus or a charlatan. Only in the 
social sciences, which almost entirely lack an historical tradition, are successful 
attempts of this kind conceivable." 
We shall disregard the fact that Menger still believes Adam 
Smith "discovered" the division of labour, while Petty had fully 
developed this point as long as eighty years before Adam Smith. 
What Menger says about Darwin, however, now rather rebounds 
on him. Back in the sixth century B. C, the Ionian philosopher 
Anaximander put forward the view that man had evolved out of a 
fish, and this, it will be recalled, is also the view of modern 
evolutionary science. Now if someone were to stand up and 
maintain that the mode of thinking and indeed the forms of 
expression of Darwin could be recognised in Anaximander and 
that Darwin had done nothing more than plagiarise Anaximander 
carefully concealing his source, he would be adopting exactly the 
same approach to Darwin and Anaximander as Mr. Menger 
adopts to Marx and Thompson. The worthy professor is right: 
"only in the social sciences" can one count on the ignorance that 
makes "successful attempts of this kind conceivable". 
But as he places so much emphasis on the term "surplus value", 
regardless of the concept associated with it, let us divulge a secret 
to this great expert on the literature of socialism and political 
economy: not only does the term  "SURPLUS  PRODUCE"  occur in Ricardo 
(in the chapter on wages), 3 but the expression "plus-value", 
alongside the "mieux-value" employed by Sismondi, is commonly 
used in business circles in France, and has been used as far back as 
anyone can remember, to designate any increase in value that does 
not cost the owner of the commodities anything. This would seem 
to make it doubtful whether Menger's discovery of Thompson's 
discovery (or rather Thompson's capitalist's discovery) of surplus 
value will be recognised even by the philosophy of law. 
However, Mr. Menger is not finished with Marx yet, by any 
means. Just listen: 
"It is characteristic that Marx and Engels have been misquoting this fundamental 
work of English socialism" (viz. Thompson) "for forty years" (p. 50). 
a D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, pp. 90-115.— 
Ed. 

=====第641页=====
Appendices 613 
So Marx —not content with hushing up his secret Egeria for 
forty years—also has to go and misquote her! And not just once, 
but for forty years. And not only Marx, but Engels too! What an 
accumulation of premeditated villainy! Poor Lujo Brentano, who 
has been hunting in vain for twenty years for just one single 
misquotation by Marx, and during this witch-hunt has not only 
burnt his own fingers but has brought ruin upon his gullible 
friend Sedley-Taylor of Cambridge 512—kick  yourself,  Lujo, for 
not finding it! And in what does it consist, this horrendous 
falsification that has been stubbornly pursued for forty years, is 
"characteristic" into the bargain, and, to cap it all, is given the 
character of a treacherous plot by Engels' malicious forty-year-long 
complicity? 
"...misquoting for forty years by giving its year of publication as 18271" 
When the book had appeared as early as 1824! 
"Characteristic", indeed—of Mr. Menger. But that is far from 
being the only—listen here, Lujo! — the only misquotation by 
Marx and Engels, who seem to practise misquotation professional­
ly— perhaps even on the move? In the Misère de la philosophie 
(1847) Marx got Hodgskin mixed up with Hopkins, and forty years 
later (nothing less than forty years will satisfy these wicked men) 
Engels commits the same offence in his preface to the German 
translation of the Misère. 513 With his eagle eye for printer's errors 
and slips of the pen it really is a loss to mankind that the good 
professor did not become a printer's proofreader. But no—we 
must take back this compliment. Mr. Menger is no good at reading 
proofs, either; for he, too, commits slips of the pen, that is to say, 
he misquotes. This happens not only with English titles but also 
with German ones. He refers, for instance, to "Engels' translation 
of this work", i.e. the Misere. According to the title page of the 
work the translation was not by Engels. In the preface in question 
Engels quotes the passage from Marx mentioning Hopkins 
verbatim: he was thus obliged to reproduce the error in his 
quotation in order not to misquote Marx. But these people simply 
cannot do anything right for Mr. Menger. 
But enough of these trivia in which our philosopher of law takes 
such delight. It is "characteristic" of the man and the likes of him 
that he feels obliged to show he has read two or three more books 
than Marx had "forty years ago", in 1847, even though he became 
familiar with the entire literature on the subject through Marx in 
the first place—nowhere does he quote a single English author 
not already quoted by Marx, apart from perhaps Hall and 
4!* 

=====第642页=====
614 Appendices 
world-famous people like Godwin, Shelley's father-in-law. A man 
who has the titles of all the books quoted by Marx in his pocket 
and all the present facilities and amenities of the British Museum 
at his disposal and is unable to make any discovery in this field 
apart from the fact that Thompson's DISTRIBUTION appeared in 
1824,  and not 1827, really should not brag about his bibliographi­
cal erudition. 
The same applies to Mr. Menger as to many other social 
reformers of our day: grand words and negligible deeds, if any. 
He promises to demonstrate that Marx is a plagiarist—and shows 
that one  word,  "Mehrwert" [surplus value], had been used before 
Marx, though in a different sense! 
The same holds for Mr. Menger's legal socialism. In his preface, 
Mr. Menger declares that in the 
"legal treatment of socialism" he sees the "most important task of the 
philosophy of law of our time.... Its correct handling will substantially contribute 
to ensuring that the indispensable amendments of our legal system are effected by 
way of a peaceful reform. Only when the ideas of socialism are transformed into 
sober legal concepts will the practical politicians be able to acknowledge how far the 
existing legal system needs reforming in the interests of the suffering masses."3 
He intends to set about this transformation by presenting 
socialism as a legal system. 
And what does this legal treatment of socialism amount to? In 
the "Concluding Remarks" he says: 
"There can surely be no doubt that the formation of a legal system that is fully 
dominated by these fundamental legal concepts" (basic rights 1 and 2) "can only be 
a matter of the distant future" (p. 163). 
What appears to be the most important task of "our time" in 
the preface is assigned to the "distant future" at the end. 
"The necessary changes" (in the existing legal system) "will take place by way of 
prolonged historical development, just as our present social system eroded and 
destroyed the feudal system over the centuries, until all that was needed was one blow 
to completely eliminate it" (p. 164). 
Fine words, but what place is there for the philosophy of law if 
society's "historical development" brings about the necessary 
changes? In the preface it is the lawyers who determine the course 
taken by social development; now that the lawyer is about to be 
taken at his word, his pluck deserts him and he mutters something 
about historical development, which does everything on its own. 
"But does our social development advance towards realising the right to the full 
proceeds of one's labour or the right to work?" 
a A. Menger, Das Recht auf den vollen Arbeitsertrag..., p. III.— Ed. 

=====第643页=====
Appendices 615 
Mr. Menger declares that he does not know. How ignominiously 
he now abandons his socialist "basic rights". But if these basic 
rights cannot coax a dog away from the hearth, if they do not 
determine and realise social development but are determined and 
realised by it, why go to all the trouble of reducing socialism to the 
basic rights? Why all the bother of stripping socialism of its 
economic and historical "fripperies", if we are to find out in 
hindsight that these "fripperies" are its real substance? Why only 
tell us at the end that the whole study is utterly pointless, since the 
objective of the socialist movement cannot be perceived by turning 
the ideas of socialism into sober legal concepts but only by 
studying social development and its motive forces? 
Mr. Menger's wisdom ultimately amounts to declaring that he 
cannot say which direction social development will take, but he is 
sure of one thing: "the weaknesses of our present social system 
should not be artificially exacerbated" (p. 166) and, to make it 
possible to preserve these "weaknesses", he recommends—free 
trade and the avoidance of further indebtedness on the part of the 
State and the local communities! 
This advice is the sole tangible result of Mr. Menger's 
philosophy of law, which presents itself with such fuss and 
self-praise. What a pity that the worthy professor does not let us 
into the secret of how modern states and local communities are 
supposed to manage without "contracting national and local 
debts".  If he should happen to know the secret, let him not keep 
it to himself forever. It would certainly pave his way "to the top" 
and a ministerial portfolio a good deal faster than his achieve­
ments in the "philosophy of law" ever will. 
Whatever reception these achievements may find in "high 
places", we believe we can safely say that the socialists of the 
present and the future will make Mr. Menger a gift of all his basic 
rights,  or at any rate will refrain from disputing his right to the 
"full proceeds of his labour". 
This does not mean to say, of course, that the socialists will 
refrain from making specific legal demands. An active socialist party 
is impossible without such demands, like any political party. The 
demands that derive from the common interests of a class can only 
be put into effect by this class taking over political power and 
securing universal validity for its demands by making them law. 
Every class in struggle must therefore set forth its demands in the 
form of legal demands in a programme. But the demands of every 
class change in the course of social and political transformations, 
they differ from country to country according to the country's 

=====第644页=====
616 Appendices 
distinctive features and level of social development. For this 
reason, too, the legal demands of the individual parties, for all 
their agreement on ultimate goals, are not entirely the same at all 
times and for every nation. They are an element subject to change 
and are revised from time to time, as may be observed among the 
socialist parties of different countries. When such revisions are 
made, it is the actual conditions that have to be taken into account, 
it has not, however, occurred to any of the existing socialist parties 
to construct a new philosophy of law out of its programme, nor is 
this likely ever to happen in the future. At any rate, Mr. Menger's 
achievements in this field can only have a deterrent effect. 
That is the only useful thing about his little book. 
Written November-beginning of De- Printed according to the journal 
cember 1886 
Published in English in full for the 
First published in Die Neue Zeit, No. 2, first time 
1887 

=====第645页=====
617 
TO THE EDITORS 
OF THE NEW YORKER VOLKSZEITUNG 5 
In your article concerning mea  in the Volkszeitung of March 2 b 
you maintain 
"that Aveling is said to have submitted a bill which contained items that a 
labour agitator, who must know that the donations0 raised to finance agitation 
come almost entirely out of the pockets of hard-working labourers, really should 
not present". 
Passing over all the minor points and restricting my reply to the 
one main point, I wish to state: 
The weekly bills submitted by me to the Executive contained all 
my expenses, that is to say both those chargeable to the Party and 
others to be met by me personally. I had made it clear to the 
Executive in advance and in the most unambiguous way—first in 
a verbal agreement with the treasurer, R. Meyer, and then in 
several letters—that all the purely personal expenses were to be 
defrayed by me in return for the $366.00 ($3 per day) guaranteed 
to me by the Executive, and that I left it entirely up to the 
Executive to decide which items of expenditure should be passed 
on to the party, and which items should be charged to me 
personally. 
I never expected—even less demanded—that any of these 
personal items of expenditure should be paid for "out of the 
pockets of hard-working labourers", and indeed none of them 
have been. For further information about this I refer you to my 
a Edward Aveling, on behalf of whom this letter was written.— Ed. 
b "Affaire Aveling noch einmal", New Yorker Volkszeitung, No. 52, March 2, 
1887.—  Ed. 
c The New Yorker Volkszeitung has "money".— Ed. 

=====第646页=====
618 Appendices 
enclosed circular of February 26 to the sections,515 to the 
publication of which I can no longer object after what has 
occurred. 
In addition I would point out that a printing error has crept 
into your article. My reply to your article of January 12a was dated 
not "Feb. 1887" but January 26, 1887, and was sent off to you on 
the same day that article came to my notice. 
With social-democratic greetings.b 
Edward Aveling 
London, March 16, 1887 
First published in the New Yorker Volks- Printed according to the manu-
zeitung, No. 76, March 30, 1887 scrpit collated with the newspaper 
text 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a "Aveling und die Sozialisten", New Yorker Volkszeitung, No. 10, January 12, 
1887.—  Ed. 
b This phrase is omitted in the text published in the newspaper.— Ed. 

=====第647页=====
619 
ENGELS' AMENDMENTS 
TO THE PROGRAMME OF THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
SOCIALIST FEDERATION516 
Wage-workers of all Countries—Unite! 
THE NORTH OF ENGLAND SOCIALIST FEDERATION 
(FOUNDED IN NORTHUMBERLAND, MAY, 1887) 
PRINCIPLES3 
The North of England Socialist Federation has been formed to 
educate and organize the people to achieve the economic 
emancipation of labour. 
While fully sympathising with and helping every effort of the 
wage-earners to win better conditions of life under the present 
system, the Socialist Federation aims at abolishing the Capitalist 
and Landlord class, as well as the wage-working class, and forming 
// the workers of society // all members of  society  into a Co-operative 
Commonwealth. 
An employing class monopolising all the means of getting and 
making wealth, and a wage-earning class compelled to work 
//primarily// for the profit of these employers, is a system of 
tyranny and slavery. 
The antagonism of these two classes //brings about// manifests 
itself in fierce competition — for employment amongst the workers 
and for markets amongst the capitalists. This //gives rise to class 
hatred and class strife // divides the nation against  itself,  forms it into 
two hostile camps, and destroys real independence, liberty, and 
happiness. 
The present system gives ease and luxury to the idlers, toil and 
poverty to the workers, and degradation to all; it is essentially 
unjust and should be abolished. And it can be abolished, now that the 
productiveness of labour has become so vast that no extension of markets 
can absorb its overflowing produce, the very superabundance of the means 
a The words crossed out by Engels are given in double oblique lines, and the 
text added by him is printed in italics.— Ed. 

=====第648页=====
620 Appendices 
of life and of enjoyment thus becoming the cause of stagnation of trade, 
want of employment and consequent misery of the toiling millions. 
Our aim is to bring about a Socialist System which will give 
healthy and useful labour to all, ample wealth and leisure to all, 
and the truest and fullest freedom to all. 
All are invited to help the Socialist Federation in this great 
cause. Adherents shall acknowledge truth, justice, and morality as 
the basis of their conduct towards each other and towards all men. 
They shall acknowledge no rights without duties: no duties 
without rights. 
Written between June 14 and 23, 1887 Reproduced from the Principles 
with amendments in Engels' hand First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, Published in English for the first 
Part 1, Moscow, 1937 time 

=====第649页=====
Wage-workits of all  Countries—Unite  ! 
THE NORTH OF ENGLAND 
SOCIALIST  FEDERATION. 
(FOUNDED  IN tfohTui:MitKKi.ANi>, MAY, 1887.) 
PRINCIPLES. 
Tho North of England Socialist Federation ha« been formed to educate and 
organize the people to achieve tbo economic émancipa lit m of labour. 
While fully Sympathien g with ami ht-lping t-verv «'ffort of tho wage -earner* 
to win hotter conditions of life under the pn-m-m *>*U'in, tht* Styiajfot_fr>fl fr »-
tioa aims at ahuliiihiug tho Capital^t and landlord classjaiid ïurmUig£ïW 
worktrajof toriety into a Co-operative Coium« »wealth. 
An i ï»plo> mg cla-a in<m<>ifolMi)£all the nu*an* of getting and making wealth; 
and a wuyti^iimiiu: das* compelled lo work^rimarilv for the profit of these 
employers, is a stt-toui if t.irunny and shivery. _____„_„.. 
Th« antagonism of the*e two ela-.rtes|brinns ahottgnVree competition—for 
einphnmeut am-ug-t the work<-rd ami for înirktits amount the capitalist*. 
Thistgivt:« r:^ ,j to eis^ hatred »uni class strife aad destroys r*al iudependg] 
liberty, and happiness. ^—--
Thc presfttit vj«feni  KIT«*  ease and luxury to Ihe idlfcrs, toil aud jioverty to 
tho «.irkt-ra, ami drgriul itwa t o all ; it ia essentially nujaat and should J» . 
abolished. ——————~ 
Oar HI n in to bring about a Socialist System which will Rive healthy and 
useful labour to all, ample wealth and leisure to all, and the truest and fulleat 
freedom to all. 
AH are hotted to help tho Botialiat Federation in this great cane«. Ad­
here nu shall acknowledge truth, jtwttce, and morality a« the basis of their 
conduct to ward  d each other and towards all men.  Th«  y abult acknowledge  KO 
mania  WITHOUT DCTLKO: WO PUTU*» WITHOUT BIGHT**. 
PROGRAMME. 
The Socialist Federation seek« to gain it» cuds by working on the following 
lines:— 
(1) Forming and helping other Socialist bodies to form a Nntioual and 
International ttocialibt Labour Party. 
(2) Strivitigto eonqner political po»erb\ promoting the elwtiou of HoeialiH» 
to Parliament, Local government«, School lloatds, ami other ad­
ministrative bodies. 
(3) Htlping Trade Unionism, Co-operation, and every genuine movement 
for the good of the worker*. 
(4) Promoting a scheme for the National and International Federation at 
Labour. •~/v 
\ 
AU who agree with tbese objects are invited to become members. 
For Kulcs sei 1 otber bkle. 
Programme of the North of England Socialist Federation with Engels' amendments 

=====第650页=====

=====第651页=====
623 
TO THE EDITOR OF JUSTICE517 
Dear Comrade.—The Press has already announced that four 
German Socialists — Bernstein, Motteler, Schlueter and Tauscher, 
editors and publishers of the Zurich Sozial Demokrat, —have been 
expelled from Switzerland by the Federal Council of that country 
for "having abused the hospitality extended to them." This severe 
measure must appear all the more surprising, as the paper in 
question, during the eight years of its existence, has always 
carefully refrained from attacks upon Switzerland and Swiss 
institutions, and as its language generally has never been more 
moderate than during the last few months. 
The official text of the order of expulsion giving the reasons 
upon which the Federal Council bases it, is now before us, and 
these reasons are surprising indeed. The Federal Council would 
make us believe that its attention was first called to the Sozial 
Demokrat, not by anything published by that paper  itself,  but by a 
comic paper, printed in the same office in January, 1887, of which 
only one number was bought! And yet the Sozial Demokrat from 
the first day of its publication had been watched with the greatest 
and most constant attention by the German authorities, and, at 
their request by the Swiss authorities. 
The Federal Council having thus become aware of the necessity 
of watching the Sozial Demokrat, now found out, as it tells us, that 
this paper "was written in a generally violent language offensive to 
the authorities of the German Empire." That is to say, the paper 
did not proclaim actual and forcible resistance against the State 
power in Germany, much less in Switzerland. It merely stigmatised 
as such and called by their proper names, the infamies committed 
in Germany by the authors of the Anti-Socialist Law and their 

=====第652页=====
624 Appendices 
executive tools. That, however, is "abuse of hospitality" in a 
republic, which itself celebrates year by year in hundreds of 
commemorative festivals the homicidal act of William Tell, and 
brags of the asylum it offers to refugees of all nations. 
In consequence of this violent language, we are further 
informed, an official warning was administered to the Sozial 
Demokrat, which, however, had not the desired effect. "Certainly 
the editors henceforth took care to avoid coarsely offensive 
expressions." But they declined "to change anything in the 
fundamental programme of the paper," and moreover they 
"reproduced articles which appeal to force, though accompanied 
by commentaries intended to make people believe in the 
moderation of the paper  itself."  To prove this latter grave offence, 
the Federal Council states that on April 7th, 1888, the Sozial 
Demokrat reprinted certain resolutions passed in 1866—twenty-
two years ago!—by 500 Germans in Zurich, resolutions calling 
upon the German people of that day to rise in arms against their 
government. In 1866 not one of the 500 Germans present at that 
meeting in Zurich was molested by the Federal Council on account 
of these resolutions. But if in 1888 the Sozial Demokrat merely 
states these facts, that is sufficient to expel from Switzerland four 
men connected with that paper. 
Altogether the reasons given are ridiculous. But the fact is the 
Federal Council dared not state the real reasons for its actions: 
that Bismarck and Puttkamer, his home secretary, are furious at 
the German Social-Democrats in Switzerland having succeeded in 
unmasking a set of spies and agents provocateurs sent out by the 
German police in order to manufacture evidence to enable the 
government to demand the prolongation, and with increased 
stringency, of this Socialist Coercion Bill. The expulsion is 
Puttkamer's revenge for the defeat inflicted upon him by the 
Socialist members in the Reichstag and by the Sozial Demokrat, 
and the Federal Council acts as Puttkamer's humble servant. The 
expulsion of our comrades means the extension of the German 
Socialist Coercion Act to Switzerland; it means that the 
dynamitards of the Russian police will henceforth enjoy in Zurich 
the same official protection that is extended to them in Berlin. 
The only country in Europe where a right of asylum may still be 
said to exist is England. No doubt Bismarck will try, as he has 
done before now, to draw England within the nets of his 
international political police and to place German Socialists, in 
England too, under his "petty state of siege." Will there be 
English statesmen prepared to meet him half way? If so, let us 

=====第653页=====
Appendices 625 
hope that English working men will know how to stop their 
government from playing the same abject and cowardly part now 
played by the Swiss Federal Council. 
I am, dear comrade, yours fraternally, 
Karl Kautsky 
Written on April 25 or 26, 1888 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the newspaper Justice, 
No. 224, April 28, 1888 

=====第654页=====
626 
INTERVIEW GIVEN BY FREDERICK ENGELS 
TO THE NEW YORKER VOLKSZEITUNG 518 
Question: Is socialism in England moving forward — that is, do the English 
working men's organisations accept the socialist critique of economic development 
more readily than they used to, and do they aspire—to any extent worth 
mentioning—to the "ultimate aims" of socialism? 
Engels: I am quite satisfied with the progress of socialism and 
the workers' movement in England; but this progress mainly 
consists in the development of the proletarian consciousness of the 
masses. The official workers' organisations, the trade unions, which 
were threatening in places to become reactionary, are obliged to 
limp along behind, like the Austrian Landsturm. 519 
Question: What is the position in this respect in Ireland? Is there anything 
there—apart from the national question — that could arouse hope among socialists? 
Engels  : A pure socialist movement cannot be  expected  from Ireland for 
quite a long time yet. First people want to become small landowning 
farmers, and when they are, along comes the mortgage and ruins 
them all over again. Meanwhile that is no reason why we shouldn't 
help them to free themselves from their landlords—that is, to 
make the transition from a semi-feudal to a capitalist condition. 
Question: What is the attitude of the English workers to the Irish movement? 
Engels: The masses are for the Irish. The organisations, like the 
workers' aristocracy in general, follow Gladstone and the liberal 
bourgeois, and go no further than they. 
Question: What do you think about Russia? That is, how far have you modified 
your view—which you and Marx expressed some six years ago when Ia was in 
a Theodor Cuno, the representative of the New Yorker Volkszeitung. —Ed. 

=====第655页=====
Appendices 627 
London—that because of the nihilist, terrorist successes of the day the impulse for 
a European revolutionary movement would probably come from Russia?3 
Engels: On the whole I am still of the opinion that a revolution 
or even just the convocation of some kind of national assembly in 
Russia would revolutionise the whole European political situation. 
But today this is no longer the most obvious possibility. To make 
up for it, we have a new William. b 
To the question of how he would characterise the present 
European situation, Engels answered: "I have not seen a 
European paper for seven weeks now, so I am in no position to 
characterise anything that is going on over there." 
This concluded the discussion. 
First published in the New Yorker Volks- Printed according to the news-
zeitung, No. 226, September 20, 1888 paper 
a Marx and Engels expressed this idea in the "Preface to the Second Russian 
Edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party" (see present edition, Vol. 24).— Ed. 
h William II.—Ed. 
42-1243 

=====第656页=====

=====第657页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第658页=====

=====第659页=====
631 
NOTES 
Engels' works on the early history of the Germans relate to his study of the 
early stages in the development of society. They laid the basis for the historical 
materialist explanation of the origin of classes and the state and made a major 
contribution to the research into the history of the formation of European 
peoples. 
These manuscripts were not published during the author's lifetime. Engels 
used part of the material he had collected in the essay "The Mark" (see present 
edition, Vol. 24, pp. 439-56). 
During his work on the manuscript Engels may have changed his initial 
plan. The material relating to point 2 ("The District and Army Structure") of the 
draft plan, published here, is missing in the manuscript On the Early History of  the 
Germans and is evidently used in the second chapter of The Frankish Period directly 
linked with the first manuscript. That Engels departed from his initial plan is also 
proved by the fact that The Franconian Dialect (see this volume, pp. 81-107), 
originally planned as a note, was transferred to The Frankish Period and elaborated 
as its component part. 
The headings of the first three chapters of Engels' manuscript On the Early 
History of the Germans ("Caesar and Tacitus", "The First Battles Against Rome" 
and "Progress Until the Migration Period") were supplied by the editors 
according to Engels' draft plan; the heading of the fourth chapter ("Note: The 
German Peoples") is given in the manuscript by Engels  himself. 
On the Early History of the Germans was first published in Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, Part I, Moscow, 1937 and in the 
language of the original in Friedrich Engels, Zur Geschichte und Sprache der 
deutschen Frühzeit. Ein Sammelband. Besorgt vom Marx-Engels-Lenin Institut beim 
ZK des SED, Berlin, 1952, S. 37-94. 
Passages from this work were published in English for the first time in: 
Marx, Engels, On Literature and Art, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976, 
pp. 187-88 and 212-14 and in full in Marx, Engels, Pre-Capitalist Socio-Economic 
Formations. A Collection, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1979, pp. 298-360. 
The dating of the draft plan, as of the works themselves, is given according to 
MEGA2, Abt. I, Bd. 25, S. 988-89. 
In this volume, these works have been arranged according to the dates on 
which Engels completed them. p. 3 

=====第660页=====
632 Notes 
2 In the nineteenth century the term Aryans referred to the peoples using 
Indo-European languages. Nowadays the term is applied to the tribes and peoples 
speaking Indo-Iranian languages. p. 8 
3 Herodotus Halicarnassensis, Historiae, Book II, Chapter 33 and Book IV, 
Chapter 49. Most of the Greek and Latin sources are quoted by Engels from 
Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit, published by v. G. H. Pertz, 
J. Grimm, etc., Vol. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1849. p. 9 
4 Periodos oder Über den Ozean, a work by Pytheas of Massilia, has not been 
preserved and is only known from references by other ancient authors.p. 10 
5 The great migration of peoples (Völkerwanderung) —a conventional name for 
mass intrusions of the Germanic, Slavic, Sarmatian and other peoples into the 
territory of the Roman Empire in the 4th-7th centuries, which led to the 
collapse of the Western Roman Empire and the transition from slavery to 
feudalism throughout the Roman Empire. p. 11 
6 See Note 1. p. 19 
7 Proconsul—an office introduced in Ancient Rome in 327 B.C. Originally the 
proconsul discharged military duties outside Rome, but after the provinces 
were formed he acted as governor and military commander there (propraetor 
in minor provinces). p. 24 
8 Germany received Roman law in the 15th and 16th centuries. Here, as in the 
rest of Europe, Roman law originated from Digests (or Pandects), the main part 
of the Byzantine codification of Roman law promulgated under Emperor 
Justinian in 533 (Corpus iuris civilis). Digests mainly cover private law 
regulating property, family, hereditary and liability relations, as well as criminal 
and procedural law. p. 25 
9 Lictor—a minor official in Ancient Rome. p. 25 
10 General Yorck, who in 1812 commanded a Prussian auxiliary corps of the 
Napoleonic army in Russia, concluded the Tauroggen Convention with the 
Russian Command on December 30, 1812, pledging to take no part in the 
fighting against the Russian army for two months. 
In the Battle of Leipzig between the allied Russian, Austrian, Prussian and 
Swedish forces and the army of Napoleon I (October 16-19, 1813), the Saxon 
Corps, which fought in the ranks of Napoleon's army, at a crucial moment 
suddenly went over to the other side and turned its guns against the French. 
p. 29 
11 This refers to the mutiny in the mercenary army of the Spanish King Philip II, 
which occupied the Netherlands, in the summer and autumn of 1576. The 
soldiers revolted because they had not been paid for a number of years. 
p. 30 
12 The reference is to the insurrection of the Illyrian tribes (A.D. 6-9) sparked off by 
oppression on the part of the Roman administration, and unbearable taxes. It 
swept over Dalmatia and Pannonia, that is the whole of Illyricum. The 
insurgents killed Roman soldiers and merchants, attacked Macedonia and 
threatened Italy. Fifteen Roman legions were brought together to suppress the 
insurrection which was not quelled until the August of A.D. 9, following three 
military expeditions under the command of Tiberius and Germanicus. p. 30 

=====第661页=====
Notes 633 
13 The reference is to the Roman fortification which owes its name to the 
Germanic tribe of Angrivarians who lived on both banks of the Weser, north of 
the Cherusci and south of the Saxons. p. 31 
14 This refers to the ancient burial place which was discovered near the town of 
Hallstatt in Southwest Austria in 1846 and gave the name to the archaeological 
culture of the tribes inhabiting the southern part of Central Europe in the period 
of the early Iron Age (c. 900-400 B.C.). p. 33 
15 The reference is to the Agri Decumates (tithe lands). These lands, lying between 
the right bank of the Upper Rhine and the Danube, were annexed to the 
Roman Empire in A.D. 83 under Domitian and distributed among the Roman 
veterans and Gauls. p. 34 
16 The events described by Engels are mentioned in: Carl Fredrik Wiberg, Der 
Einfluß der klassischen Völker auf den Norden durch den Handelsverkehr, Hamburg, 
1867,  p. 115 and Hans Hildebrand, Das heidnische Zeitalter in Schweden, 
Hamburg, 1873, p. 182. p. 38 
17 This refers to Leges barbarorum (laws of the barbarians)—codes of law which 
originated between the 5th and 9th centuries and were, in the main, a written 
record of the customary or prescriptive law of the various Germanic tribes. 
p. 42 
18 Alamannic law (Lex Alamannorum)—a code of common law of the Alamanni, 
one of the ancient Germanic tribes. It dates back to the period between the end 
of the 6th and 8th centuries and reflects the transition from the gentile and 
tribal system to early feudalism. Smiths are mentioned in Chapter LXXIV, 5. 
p. 42 
19 Bavarian law (Lex Baiuvariorum)—a code of common law of the Bavarians, a 
Germanic tribe. It dates back to the mid-8th century and, distinct from 
Alamannic law, reflects a later stage in the development of the Germanic 
tribes,  when the Mark community was disintegrating and feudalism just 
emerging. Punishment for theft is mentioned in Chapter IX, 2. p. 42 
20 Frisian law (Lex Frisionum)—a code of common law of the ancient Germanic 
tribe of Frisians (8th cent.). It contains passages borrowed from Alamannic law 
and certain revised enactments of the Frankish kings. p. 42 
21 Salic law (Lex Salica)—a code of common law of the Salian Franks, used by the 
greater part of the population of the Frankish state. Compiled in the early 6th 
century on the orders of King Clovis (481-511), it was supplemented and 
revised under his successors. Salic law reproduces various stages of ancient 
judicial procedure and is an important historical document showing the 
evolution of Frankish society from the primitive communal system to the 
emergence of feudal relations. p. 42 
22 The grand army (grande armée) —the name given in 1805 to the group of the 
armed forces of the French Empire operating in the main theatres of the 
Napoleonic wars. Besides French troops, it included contingents from various 
countries conquered by Napoleon (Italy, Holland, the German states and 
Poland). p. 46 
23 Pliny's work Bellorum Germaniae libri is not extant. p. 46 
24 The Carolingians—the dynasty of kings and emperors (from 800) in the 
Frankish state (751-10th cent.), which got its name from Charlemagne. The 

=====第662页=====
634 Notes 
policy pursued by the Carolingians was conducive to the growth of feudalism in 
Western Europe, accelerated the enserfment of the peasantry, strengthened the 
economic and political position of big landowners and led to the consolidation 
of central authority. p. 48 
25 In the first book of his Natural History Pliny lists the works by Roman and 
Greek authors whom he quotes, Strabo and Plutarch among them. p. 56 
26 Engels' manuscript The Frankish Period was not published during his lifetime. 
The manuscript has two parts; the first part includes two chapters: "The 
Radical Transformation of the Relations of Landownership under the 
Merovingians and Carolingians" and "The District and Army Structure". The 
second part of the manuscript bears the title "Note: The Franconian Dialect". 
Each part is a complete whole. All headings are given in conformity with Engels' 
manuscript. 
The Frankish Period was first published in full ("The Franconian Dialect" 
was published earlier, see Note 47) in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian 
Edition, Vol. XVI, Part I, Moscow, 1937, and in the language of the original 
in: Friedrich Engels, Zur Geschichte und Sprache der deutschen Frühzeit. Ein 
Sammelband. Berlin, 1952, S. 97-152. 
The Frankish Period (without "Note: The Franconian Dialect") was 
published in English for the first time in: Marx, Engels, Pre-Capitalist 
Socio-Economic Formations. A Collection, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1979. 
p. 58 
27 The Merovingians—the first royal dynasty in the Frankish state (457-751), 
which got its name from its legendary founder Merovaeus. The policy pursued 
by the Merovingians promoted the rise of feudal relations among the Franks. 
For the Carolingians, see Note 24. p. 58 
28 The terms the "Mark system" and "Mark" are explained in G. L. von Maurer, 
Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-,  Dorf-  und Stadt-Verfassung der öffentlichen 
Gewalt, Munich, 1854, pp. 5 and 40. 
For more details about the "Mark", see present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 439-56. 
p. 58 
29 See Note 17. p. 59 
30 Antrustions—warriors under the early Merovingians (see Note 27); evidently 
descendants of the gentile nobility. p. 61 
31 Major-domo (Lat. major domus)—the highest official in the Frankish state under 
the Merovingians (see Note 27). Originally the major-domo was appointed by 
the king and was in charge of the palace. As feudalism advanced and royal 
power was weakened the functions of major-domos were extended; they 
became the biggest landowners and concentrated state power in their hands. 
Most powerful of all were the major-domos from the Pepinide clan — Pepin of 
Heristal (687-712), Charles Martel (715-741) and Pepin the Short (741-751) 
who became the first king (751-768) of the Carolingian dynasty (see Note 24). 
p. 61 
32 The Saxons defeated the Frankish army at Mount Siintel on the right bank of 
the Weser (782). 
For more than two centuries, from around 560, the Avars made 
innumerable raids on the territory of the Frankish state. In 796 the joint forces 
of the Franks and the southern Slavs destroyed the Avars' central fortification 
in Pusta-Ebene. 

=====第663页=====
Notes 635 
The Arabs, who conquered Spain at the beginning of the 8th century, 
invaded Southern Gaul in 720. In the Battle of Poitiers (732) Charles Martel 
defeated the Arabs and put an end to their incursions into Europe. p. 62 
33 See Note 24. p. 62 
34 The Franks were converted to Christianity in 496 during the reign of Clovis I 
(481-511). The adoption of Christianity and alliance with the Catholic 
episcopate secured Clovis the support of the clergy and goodwill towards the 
Franks on the part of the Catholic Gauls and Romans. p. 62 
35 Capitularies—royal legislative acts and ordinances of the early Middle Ages (the 
Carolingian dynasty—8th-10th cent.). The Aachen Capitulary (Capitulare duplex 
Aquisgranense a. 811), which noted the wholesale seizure of peasant lands by 
ecclesiastical and secular feudal lords, is a major source on the history of the 
Frankish state. The full Latin text of the Aachen Capitulary is quoted by Paul 
Roth in Geschichte des Beneficialwesens von den ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte 
Jahrhundert, Erlangen, 1850, p. 253, Note 31. p. 63 
36 The information quoted by Engels is taken from the 9th-century polyptych 
(record of landed property, population and incomes) of Saint-Germain-des-Prés 
Monastery. For the first time this record was published with commentaries by the 
French historian Guérard, under the title Polyptique de l'abbé Irminon, vols I-II, 
Paris,  1844. Engels is quoting from Paul Roth's book Geschichte des Beneficialwe­
sens..., Erlangen, 1850, p. 251. 
Details on the landed property of the monasteries of St. Denis, Luxeuil and 
St. Martin de Tours are also taken from Roth's book. p. 64 
37 Colons were bondsmen of the Carolingian feudal lord on whose land they lived; 
colons had no right to abandon their plots which were in their hereditary use. 
Lites—a semi-free stratum among the Franks and Saxons. They occupied 
an intermediate position between free-holders and slaves. p. 64 
38 In response to an appeal by Pope Stephen II, Pepin the Short undertook two 
campaigns to Italy (in 754 and 756) against the Langobardian King  Aistulf.  Part 
of the lands he conquered Pepin ceded to the Pope and this laid the foundation 
of the Papal States (756). p. 66 
39 This refers to the second synod in Lestines (743) which endorsed the 
secularisation of Church lands in favour of the state as effected under Charles 
Martel. p. 66 
40 The risings of the Alamanni were suppressed by Pepin the Short (in 744) and 
Carloman (in 746), and after this their duchy was destroyed. The Thuringians 
won independence in 640. 
Charlemagne's wars against Saxony, which was conquered and annexed to 
the Frankish state, lasted for more than 30 years (from 772 to 804). During this 
period the Saxons twice (in 782 and 792) rose in revolt against their 
conquerors. p. 67 
41 The growing discord in the family forced Louis the Pious, Charlemagne's son 
and successor, to divide the empire among his heirs on three occasions (in 817, 
829 and 837); this led to the internal wars that continued till his death and 
ended in the political disintegration of the empire. In 843, following Louis' 
death, his sons concluded in Werden a treaty on a new division of the empire. The 
Werden treaty virtually laid the foundation of France, Germany and Italy—three 
modern states of Western and Central Europe. p. 67 

=====第664页=====
636 Notes 
42 Formulas were models for drawing up legal deeds and transactions relating to 
property and other matters in the Frankish state between the end of the 6th 
and the end of the 9th centuries. Several collections of such formulas have 
survived to this day. That quoted by Engels is included in the collection 
Formulae Turonenses vulgo Sirmondicae dictae. Engels may have taken it from 
Roth's book Geschichte des Beneficialwesens..., p. 379, Note 51. p. 73 
43 In his description of Charlemagne's Capitularies (Capitulare a. 847, Capitulare 
a. 813, Capitulare a. 816) Engels makes use of the material in Paul Roth's 
Geschichte des Beneficialwesens..., pp.  380-81,  notes 58 and 61. p. 74 
44 The reference is to the Annales Bertiniani, an important source on the history 
of the Carolingian empire. The Annales, which owe their name to St. Bertin 
Monastery in France, are a chronicle covering the period from 741 to 882 and 
consisting of three parts written by different authors. The Annales advocate the 
interests of the French Carolingians and support their claim to the territory of 
the East Frankish kingdom. The Annales Bertiniani were published in the 
well-known series Monumenta Germaniae historica. 
Engels' description of the Annales Bertiniani is based on Roth's Geschichte 
des Beneficialwesens..., p. 385, Note 81. p. 75 
45 This refers to the rising of free and semi-free Saxon peasants-freelings and lites 
or the Stellinga (from Stellinger —Sons of the Old Law), which took place in 
841-843 and was directed against the feudal order in Saxony. p. 81 
46 Charlemagne was crowned Roman Emperor in 800. p. 81 
47 Engels' manuscript The Franconian Dialect remained unfinished and was not 
printed during the author's lifetime. It was first published by the Institute of 
Marxism-Leninism in Friedrich Engels, Der fränkische Dialekt, Moskau, 1935 
(OpH^pHx 3HreAbc, 0paHKCKuü duajieKm, MocKBa, 1935), the German and 
Russian given parallel. 
Here it is published in English for the first time. p. 81 
48 Hêliand, a literary monument of the ancient Saxon language dating back to the 
9th century, is an abridged version of the Gospel. Its author was presumably a 
monk from the Werden Monastery on the Ruhr. 
Two manuscripts of the Hêliand are extant: one originating in Munich 
(dating back to the 9th century); the other named after Cotton, an English 
collector of antiquities, dates back to the 10th and 11th centuries. The title of 
the manuscript, which literally means Saviour, was provided by the German 
linguist Johann Schmeller in 1830. The Hêliand was first published by Moritz 
Heyne in 1866 in Bibliothek der ältesten deutschen Litteratur-Denkmäler. Vol. II. 
Altniederdeutsche Denkmäler, Part I. p. 81 
49 The Werden tax registers {Die Freckenhorster Heberolle) got their name from 
the monastery in Freckenhorst, a town to the southeast of Münster. They were 
published by Moritz Heyne in Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler, Paderborn, 
1867,  pp. 65-82. p. 84 
50 The reference is to the glosses, i.e. explanation of obscure and unusual words, 
which the Dutch philologist Justus Lipsius copied in 1599 from the 9th-century 
manuscript of the psalms. The Lipsius Glosses (Glossae Lipsianae) were published 
by Moritz Heyne in Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler, Paderborn, 1867, 
pp. 41-58. p. 84 

=====第665页=====
Notes 637 
51 The Paderborn  records,  relics of local law relating to the 10th and 11th centuries, 
were published in 1831-32 by the German historian Paul Wigand in Archiv für 
Geschichte und Alterthumskunde Westphalens, Vol. 5, Lemgo, 1831, and in Die 
Provinzialrechte der Fürstenthümer Paderborn und Corvey in Westphalen, vols 2 and 3, 
Leipzig, 1832. p. 85 
52 This refers to the rendering of the Gospel made by Otfrid, a monk from 
Weissenburg, between 863 and 871. Otfrid's Gospel (Liber Evangeliorum domini 
gratia theotisce conscriptus) is one of the first relics of ancient German literature. 
Its language is regarded as a southern variety of the Rhenish Franconian 
dialect. 
Engels quotes Otfrid's Gospel according to Jacob Grimm's Deutsche 
Grammatik, Part 1, 2nd ed., Göttingen, 1822, pp. 874-76 and 894. p. 86 
53 The reference is to the manuscript dating back to the end of the 8th or the 
beginning of the 9th century and expressing a formula of the baptismal vow 
(Taufgelöbnis). Engels quotes this manuscript according to Kleinere altnieder­
deutsche Denkmäler, published by Moritz Heyne. Paderborn, 1867, p. 85. 
p. 86 
54 In 1234, in the battle of Altenesch, the combined forces of the Count of 
Oldenburg, other princes and of Archbishop of Bremen defeated the Eastern 
Frisians, who lived between the Weser and the Jade, and annexed their lands to 
Oldenburg. p. 87 
55 The reference is to the bourgeois revolution of 1566-1609 in the Netherlands. 
It combined the national liberation war against absolutist Spain with the 
anti-feudal struggle and ended in victory in the north of the country (now the 
territory of the Netherlands) where the first bourgeois republic in Europe was 
formed. p. 87 
56 Manneken-Pis—a statue of the boy crowning the ancient fountain in Brussels, the 
work of Jérôme Duquesnoy, a Flemish sculptor of the 17th century. p. 90 
57 A reference to the Topographische Special-Karte von Deutschland, published by 
Gottlob Daniel Reymann, continued by C. W. von Oesfeld and F. Handtke, 
Glogau, n.d. Engels made use of separate sheets designated by the name of the 
principal town and the number of the corresponding square or section of the map. 
p. 96 
58 Hand-Atlas für die Geschichte des Mittelalters und der neueren Zeit, 3. Aufl. von Dr. 
K. v. Spruner's Hand-Atlas, neu bearbeitet von Dr. Th. Menke. Gotha, 1880. 
The geographical data which Engels refers to at various points in his work 
are taken mainly from Map 32 (Deutschland's Gaue. II. Mittleres Lothringen). 
p. 96 
59 On September 27, 1856, soon after Georg Weerth's death, Engels wrote to 
Marx about his firm intention to write an obituary and have it published in one 
of the Berlin newspapers (see present edition, Vol. 40, p. 72). However, this 
proved impossible in the reactionary situation of the 1850s. 
Engels fulfilled his intention 27 years later. The essay about the 
revolutionary poet that appeared in the newspaper Sozialdemokrat on June 7, 
1883 was entitled "Song of the Apprentices" by Georg Weerth (1846). In the 
Second Russian Edition of the Works and in the editions in other languages 
that followed the title of the article was changed in conformity with its 
subject-matter. 
The essay was published in English for the first time in K. Marx and 
F. Engels, Literature and Art, International Publishers, New York, 1947. 
p. 108 

=====第666页=====
638 Notes 
60 Between December 1843 and April 1846 Weerth was a clerk at the Bradford 
branch of the textile firm Passavant and Co. 
From April 1846 Weerth was employed by the Hamburg trade firm 
Emanuel und Sohn with offices in England (Bradford), France, the Nether­
lands and Belgium. p. 109 
61 In this article devoted to an historical and linguistic analysis of the last book of 
the New Testament, The Revelation of St. John the Divine or The Apocalypse, 
Engels examines questions relating to the history of early Christianity. He had 
dealt with some of the same problems previously in the article "Bruno Bauer 
and Early Christianity" (see present edition, Vol. 24); later, in 1894, Engels 
analysed them more thoroughly in the article "On the History of Early 
Christianity" (present edition, Vol. 27). p. 112 
62 The Tübingen school, comprising a group of liberal German Protestant 
theologians, was founded in 1830 by Ferdinand Christian Baur, a professor at 
Tübingen University. (As distinct from the group of Tübingen theologians that 
existed in the last quarter of the 18th century, it is sometimes called the 
neo-Tübingen school.) Its adherents engaged in a critical study of ancient 
Christian literature, notably the New Testament. Without essentially abandon­
ing the confines of Christian theology, they were the first to inquire into the 
sources of the New Testament. At the beginning of his philosophical career 
David Strauss also belonged to the Tübingen school, but subsequently his 
criticism became much more radical. The school disintegrated by the 1860s. 
Engels gave a detailed description of this school in his article "On the 
History of Early Christianity" (present edition, Vol. 27). p. 112 
63 The Stoics—disciples of philosopher Zeno of Citium, who taught at the Stoa 
(Painted Porch) in Athens. Hence the name of this one of the principal schools 
of Hellenistic and Roman philosophy founded in the late 4th and early 3rd 
centuries B.C. Among its followers were such ancient philosophers as Seneca 
(1st cent. A.D.), Philo of Alexandria (1st cent. A.D.) and Marcus Aurelius (2nd 
cent. A.D.). 
The Stoics sought to corroborate the inner independence of human 
personality, yet at the same time they displayed an extreme sense of resignation 
towards the surrounding world and made no attempts to change it. Stoicism 
introduced a strict division of philosophy into logic, physics and ethics. It exerted a 
considerable influence on the formation of the Christian religion. p. 113 
64 Ferdinand Benary gave a course of lectures in Berlin University and 
simultaneously published them in the Jahrbücher für wissenschaftliche Kritik that 
appeared in Berlin (Nos. 17-20 and 30-32 for 1841). p. 115 
65 See also Engels' article "On the History of Early Christianity" (present edition, 
Vol. 27). p. 116 
66 This Preface to the Manifesto of the Communist Party (see present edition, Vol. 6, 
pp. 477-519) was written for the third German authorised edition, the first to 
appear after Marx's death. 
It was published in English for the first time in Marx K. and Engels F., 
Manifesto of the Communist Party, Modern Books, London, 1929. p. 118 
67 Engels wrote this article for the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat on the first 
anniversary of Marx's death. 
This article was published in English for the first time in Marx K. and 

=====第667页=====
Notes 639 
Engels F., Selected Works, Vol. 2, Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign 
Workers in the USSR, Moscow-Leningrad, 1936. p. 120 
68 Referring here and below to the Code Napoleon, Engels meant the entire system 
of bourgeois law as represented by five codes (civil, civil procedure, commercial, 
criminal and criminal procedure) promulgated in 1804-10 during Napoleon's 
reign. These codes were introduced into the regions of Western and 
South-Western Germany conquered by France and remained in force in the 
Rhine Province even after its incorporation into Prussia in 1815. p. 123 
69 The Prussian Law (Das Allgemeine Landrecht für die Preussischen Staaten) was 
promulgated in 1794. It included civil, commercial, credit, maritime and 
insurance law as well as criminal, ecclesiastical, state and administrative law, and 
endorsed the obsolete legal standards of semi-feudal Prussia. To a large extent 
the Prussian Law remained in force until the introduction of the civil code in 
1900.  p. 123 
70 After the March 1848 Revolution Gustav Adolph Schloff  el, a German 
democratic student, began to publish the Volksfreund newspaper in Berlin. On 
April 19, in its issue No. 5, the newspaper carried two of his articles in which 
he attacked private property and defended the rights of the working people. 
For this Schlöffel was brought before a court of law and sentenced to six 
months' imprisonment in a fortress on a charge of incitement to revolt. 
p. 123 
71 The reference is to the Camphausen-Hansemann liberal ministry formed in 
Prussia on March 29, 1848. p. 124 
72 Engels is referring to the articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung devoted to a 
critique of the French and Berlin National Assemblies. Some of these articles were 
written by Marx (see present edition, vols 7, 8); Engels summarised this critique in 
his work Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (see present edition, 
Vol. 11, p. 79). p. 125 
73 On February 24, 1848 Louis Philippe was overthrown in France. 
On February 24 (March 7), 1848, having received news of the victory of the 
February Revolution in France, Nicholas I ordered a partial mobilisation in 
Russia in preparation for the struggle against the revolution in Europe. 
p. 126 
74 A series of articles "Die schlesische Milliarde" written by Wilhelm  Wolff,  a 
friend and associate of Marx and Engels, appeared in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Nos. 252, 255, 256, 258, 264, 270-72 and 281 between March 22 and 
April 25, 1849. In 1886 these articles with some changes were published as a 
separate pamphlet with Engels' Introduction (see this volume, pp. 341-51). A 
detailed analysis of these articles is given by Engels in his work "Wilhelm 
Wolff"  (see present edition, Vol. 24). p. 127 
75 On June 13, 1849, the Party of the Mountain organised in Paris a peaceful 
protest demonstration against the despatch of French troops to Italy to restore 
the power of the Pope in Rome and consolidate French influence in that 
country. The proposed troop despatch was a violation of the French constitution 
which prohibited the use of the army against the freedom and independence of 
other nations. 
The vacillations and indecision of its leaders led to the demonstration's 
failure, and it was dispersed by government troops. Many leaders of the 
Mountain were arrested and deported or were forced to emigrate from France. 

=====第668页=====
640 Notes 
The Legislative Assembly adopted a number of laws suppressing democratic 
rights.  p. 128 
76 Concerning Engels' part in the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849, see The 
Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (present edition, Vol. 10, 
pp. 147-239). p. 128 
77 The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State is one of Engels' most 
important works. It is based on a detailed synopsis made by Marx in 1880-81 of 
Lewis H. Morgan's book, Ancient Society or Researches in the Lines of Human 
Progress from Savagery, Through Barbarism to Civilization, London, 1877. Marx's 
synopsis contained his critical notes, his own propositions and also some factual 
material taken from other sources. Engels assumed that Marx had planned to 
write a special work on the history of mankind in the early period of its 
development using Morgan's book as a basis. Having acquainted himself with 
Marx's synopsis and Morgan's book, Engels deemed it necessary to write such a 
work, regarding it as the fulfilment of Marx's behest. On March 24, 1884 
Engels wrote to Karl Kautsky: "Actually I am indebted to Marx for it and can 
incorporate his notes" (see present edition, Vol. 47). In his work on the book, 
Engels made use of almost all Marx's notes, pointing this out in every case, and 
also of the structure of Marx's synopsis, which differed from that of Morgan's 
book. Engels relied, particularly in the first three chapters, on the factual 
material from Morgan's observations of the life of the North American Indians 
and in several cases on his arguments and conclusions; he also employed 
information provided by other scholars about peoples at the same stage of 
development. In chapters IV-VI, in addition to the information from Morgan's 
book, Engels used a number of specialised works on ancient history. 
Chapters VII and VIII are based exclusively on Engels' own studies of the 
early history of the Germans (see this volume, pp. 6-107). Chapter IX, the last 
one, contains conclusions drawn by Engels  himself. 
The first edition of The Origin of the Family appeared early in October 1884 
in Zurich, since it was impossible to publish the book in Germany given the 
Anti-Socialist Law. The two editions that followed (in 1886 and 1889) were 
published in Stuttgart without any changes. Polish, Romanian, Italian, Danish 
and Serbian translations were issued in the latter half of the 1880s. 
The fourth edition of the book, with considerable addenda and certain 
changes made by Engels on the basis of the latest findings in the field of 
archaeology, ethnography and anthropology, appeared in 1891. In this volume 
all the essential differences in reading occurring in the 1884 and 1891 editions are 
given in footnotes. 
The first English edition of the book appeared in 1902. p. 129 
78 Marx's synopsis of Morgan's book was first published in Russian translation in: 
Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. IX, Moscow, 1941, and later in Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 45, Moscow, 1975. The first publication in 
the languages of the original appeared in The Ethnological  Notebooks  of Karl Marx. 
Translated and edited, with an introduction by Lawrence Krader, Assen, 
1972. 
All references in the text of the present volume are given according to this 
edition. p. 131 
79 Pueblo  (Sp.—  people, population) is the name of the four linguistic groups of 
Indian tribes who lived on the territory of New Mexico (now the South-Western 
part of the USA). Originally the Spanish conquerors applied this name to five-

=====第669页=====
Notes 641 
or six-storey fortress-like houses inhabited by Indian communities; later this 
name was also applied to the inhabitants of these unusual villages. The Pueblo 
culture had its heyday in the 12th and 13th centuries. p. 137 
80 This letter of Marx's is not extant. Engels mentions it in his letter to Karl 
Kautsky of April 11, 1884 (see present edition, Vol. 47). p. 147 
81 The reference is to the libretto of the operatic tetralogy Ring of the Nibelungs 
(Der Ring des Nibelungen) composed by Richard Wagner, the subject of which 
was taken from the Scandinavian epic Edda and the German epic Nibelungen­
lied. 
The Nibelungenlied is the ancient German heroic epic based on myths and 
lays.  Written versions of the song appeared only in the 13th-16th centuries. 
The Nibelungenlied penetrated into Scandinavia (6th-8th cent.) where it found 
reflection in the songs of Edda. 
The events that accompanied the great migration of peoples (see Note 5), 
notably the invasion of Europe by the Huns (5th cent.), served as the historical 
basis of the Nibelungenlied, though its final character owed more to the 
conditions of life in Germany in the 12th century. p. 147 
82 The Ogisdrekka (Lokasenna) is a song from the first part of The Elder Edda, known 
as Songs about Gods. The Ogisdrekka describes the quarrel between Loki, the god of 
fire, and other gods at a feast given by the sea giant Ogir. 
The Elder Edda is a collection of epic poems and songs about the lives and 
deeds of the Scandinavian gods and heroes. It has come down to us in a 
manuscript dating back to the 13th century, discovered in 1643 by the Icelandic 
Bishop B. Sveinsson. p. 147 
83 Asa and Vana—gods in Scandinavian mythology. 
The Ynglinga Saga is the first of the 16 sagas in the book about Norwegian 
kings (from ancient times to the 12th century) entitled Heimskringla. It was 
written by Snorri Sturluson, an Icelandic poet and chronicler, in the first half 
of the 13th century. p. 148 
84 According to this system each tribe was divided into two or four marriage 
classes (sections). Marriage was allowed only between certain specified pairs of 
these classes. Children born of this marriage belonged to the third marriage 
class which was part of the tribe including either a maternal or a paternal 
marriage class. Such a division restricted marriages between close relatives. 
p. 151 
85 Wright's letters found in Morgan's archives were published in the magazine 
American Anthropologist. New Series, Vol. 35, No. 1, 1933. p. 158 
86 Saturnalian feasts were held annually in Ancient Rome in honour of Saturn, the 
god of agriculture. They began on December 17, after the harvest, and were 
accompanied by carnivals and festivals, with the entire population taking part, 
including slaves who were allowed to sit at the table alongside free citizens. The 
cult of fertility presupposed the freedom of sexual intercourse during 
Saturnalian feasts. p. 159 
87 This refers to the decision which King Ferdinand V of Spain, acting as mediator 
between peasants and seigniors, took under the pressure of the insurgent 
peasants of Northern Catalonia in 1484. 
The decision is known as the Guadalupe decree after the name of the 
monastery in Estremadura, where, on April 21, 1486, the King met authorised 
representatives of the peasants and the landlords. The decree granted the 

=====第670页=====
642 Notes 
peasants personal freedom, but for the right to keep land holdings they had to 
pay their landlords high redemption fees. The decree abolished the jurisdiction 
of the landlords and several humiliating feudal practices. A number of 
burdensome duties had to be redeemed. p. 161 
88 The Pravda of Yaroslav, or the Ancient Pravda, is the first part of the Russian 
Pravda, the code of laws of ancient Rus. It appeared in the first half of the 11th 
century and is associated with the name of Prince Yaroslav the Wise of Kiev. 
The Pravda is based on the common law of the Eastern Slavs in the period of 
early feudalism and reflects the social and economic relations of the 11th and 12th 
centuries. p. 167 
89 The Dalmatian Laws, or the Poljica Statute, were in force in Poljica, a historical part 
of Dalmatia, up to the beginning of the 19th century. The first articles of the 
Statute were drawn up in the first half of the 15th century. The document reflects 
the norms of the criminal, civil and procedural law as well as the social and 
economic relations existing in the communities of Poljica in the 15th-18th 
centuries. p. 167 
90 Engels may have taken the information on family communities in France from 
M. M. Kovalevsky's book Tableau des origines et de l'évolution de la famille et de la 
propriété, Stockholm, 1890. p. 168 
91 Calpullis —a territorial community of the Aztecs (ancient Mexico) based on the 
common ownership of land. Part of the land was assigned to individual families 
each of which embraced several generations inhabiting a common dwelling and 
constituted a household community. p. 168 
92 The Helots, part of the agricultural population of Ancient Sparta subjugated by 
the Dorians, belonged to the state and were attached to the land owned by the 
Spartiates —a class of citizens of Ancient Sparta enjoying full civil rights. Helots 
could be neither sold nor killed; they owned the means of production and 
worked on their plots of land. p. 172 
93 The hierodules—temple slaves and attendants in Ancient Greece and the Greek 
colonies. In many places, including Asia Minor and Corinth, the female temple 
slaves were engaged in prostitution. p. 174 
94 This refers to the troubadour poetry of Provence (Southern France) between 
the end of the 11th and the beginning of the 13th centuries. p. 177 
95 Engels is referring to the nine poems that have survived from the lyrical cycle 
attributed to Wolfram von Eschenbach and written in the Tagelieder genre, as 
well as his epic poem Parzival and two unfinished poems Titurel and Willehalm. 
p. 178 
96 Daphnis and Chloe—heroes of the ancient Greek novel (2nd-3rd century); no 
information concerning its author, Longus, is extant. p. 184 
97 Gutrun (Kudrun)—a German epic poem of the 13th century. It has survived in 
a manuscript dating back to the 16th century and was not discovered until the 
beginning of the 19th century. p. 185 
98 The reference is to the conquest of Mexico by Spanish conquistadors in 
1519-21.  p. 196 
99 New Mexicans—see Note 79. p. 200 
100 The main works written by Georg Ludwig Maurer are: Einleitung zur Geschichte 
der Mark-, Hof-,  Dorf-  und Stadt-Verfassung und der öffentlichen Gewalt, Munich, 

=====第671页=====
Notes 643 
1854;  Geschichte der Markenverfassung in Deutschland, Erlangen, 1856; Geschichte 
der Fronhöfe, der Bauernhöfe und der Hofverfassung in Deutschland, vols I-IV, 
Erlangen, 1862-63; Geschichte der Dorfverfassung in Deutschland, vols I-II, 
Erlangen, 1865-66; Geschichte der Städteverfassung in Deutschland, vols I-IV, 
Erlangen,  1869-71.  p. 202 
101 The "Neutral Nations" was the name of a 17th-century tribe related to the 
Iroquois which lived on the northern shore of Lake Erie. It was given this 
name by the French colonists because it remained neutral in the war between 
the Iroquois proper and the Hurons. The war ended in victory for the Iroquois 
in 1651. p. 203 
102 In January 1879, the British troops invaded Zululand (South Africa) with the 
aim of conquering this country. On January 22, the Zulu army under 
Cetschwayo (Cetywayo) defeated the colonialist troops near Isandhlwana, 
inflicting heavy losses. It was only after the arrival of fresh reinforcements that 
the British troops succeeded in finally defeating the Zulus in the summer of 
1879. 
In 1881, the Nubians, Arabs and other nationalities of the Sudan rose up 
against the British colonialists, Turkish and Egyptian authorities and native 
feudal lords. The uprising was led by Mohammed Ahmed, who proclaimed 
himself "Mahdi" (saviour). On November 5, 1883, the ten-thousand-strong 
expeditionary corps under General Hicks was defeated and routed by the 
insurgents near the town of El Obeid. The uprising lasted till 1898-99. 
p. 203 
103 The reference is to Demosthenes' speech in court, Against Eubulides (LVII), in 
which he mentions the ancient custom of laying to rest only persons of the 
given gens in gentile burial places. p. 205 
104 This passage written in Marx's synopsis in German is a concise summary of 
Morgan's following argument: 
"Although these [Grote's] observations seem to imply that they [the Grecian 
gentes] are no older than the then existing mythology ... in the light of the facts 
presented, the gentes are seen to have existed long before this mythology was 
developed—before Jupiter or Neptune, Mars or Venus were conceived in the 
human mind" (Lewis H. Morgan, Ancient Society, London, 1877, p. 228). 
p. 206 
105 In the passage which Engels quotes from Marx's synopsis, part of the quotation 
(from the words "The system of consanguinity" to "the relationships of all the 
members of a gens to each other" and from the words "This fell into desuetude" 
to "a purely fictitious, fanciful creation of the brain") is a slightly abridged version 
of Morgan's text (Lewis H. Morgan, Ancient Society, pp. 233-34). 
p. 208 
106 See Note 79. p. 212 
107 Thetes, the fourth, and lowest, class of Athenian citizens, were admitted to civil 
offices by the law on lower electoral qualifications adopted in 477 B.C. 
p. 219 
108 The reference is to the metoikos, or aliens who settled in a Greek city state (polis). 
Being personally free, they were denied political rights, could not marry Athenian 
citizens and, as a rule, could not own real estate and land on the territory of the 
city state where they settled. The metoikos were obliged to have "patrons" from 
among the Athenian citizens, to pay a special tax to the state and serve in the army. 
43-1243 

=====第672页=====
644 Notes 
In the 5th-4th centuries B.C. the metoikos formed a considerable part of the urban 
population in Attica and played an important role in its economic life, particularly 
in trade. p. 220 
109 The reference is to the reforms carried out by Cleisthenes in 510-509 B.C. 
They deprived the gentile nobility of its supremacy in governing Athens and 
abolished the last remnants of the gentile constitution, since the population was 
now divided according to the territorial principle, and not according to the 
gentile principle as before. The reforms increased the importance of the urban 
population; many metoikos (see Note 108) and freedmen who engaged in trade 
and handicrafts received civic rights. p. 220 
110 Pisistratus, who belonged to an impoverished aristocratic family, usurped power 
in Athens in 560 B.C. and established a dictatorial regime, becoming a tyrant. 
This regime existed with intervals (Pisistratus was twice driven out of Athens and 
returned again) until his death in 527 B.C., and then up to 510 B.C. when his 
son Hippius was banished and the slave-owning democracy headed by 
Cleisthenes won the day in Athens. Pisistratus' efforts to defend the interests of 
small and medium landowners and penalise the gentile aristocracy did not give 
rise to any serious changes in the political structure of the Athenian state. 
p. 222 
111 The Laws of the Twelve Tables (Leges duodecim tabularum) were enacted in 
451-450 B.C. by the Committee of Decemvirs. Originally the laws were carved 
on ten tables, later two more tables were added. The laws preserved remnants 
of the gentile system and reflected the social relations of Ancient Rome, 
referring mainly to civil and criminal law and legal procedure. They were used 
as the basis for the further development of Roman civil law. p. 223 
112 The reference is to the battle in Teutoburg Forest (A.D. 9) fought between the 
Germanic tribes led by the Cherusci chief Arminius in revolt against Rome and 
the Roman legions commanded by Quintilius Varus. The Roman troops were 
routed and their general killed. p. 223 
113 This refers to the end of the rule of Appius Claudius, head of the Committee 
of Decemvirs which enacted the Laws of the Twelve Tables in 451-450 B.C. (see 
Note 111). However, abuses of power on the part of Appius Claudius led to an 
insurrection by the plebeians; he was arrested and died in prison. 
The Second Punic War (218-201 B.C.) was one of the three wars between 
Rome and Carthage, the two largest slave-owning states of antiquity. Rome 
sought to abolish Carthage's domination of trade in the Western Mediterranean 
and indeed defeated it. p. 224 
114 The reference is to the comparative tables of ancient and modern measures 
and also of monetary units, given at the end of A. Dureau de la Malle's 
Economie politique des Romains, Vol. I. p. 230 
115 At several points in this and the next chapters Engels makes use of his unfinished 
works "On the Early History of the Germans" and "The Frankish Period" (see 
this volume, pp. 6-107) and the article "The Mark" (see present edition, Vol. 24, 
pp. 439-56). p. 232 
116 The conquest of Wales by the English was completed in 1283. However, Wales 
retained its autonomy and was united with England in the mid-16th century. 
p. 232 
117 In 1869-70 Engels devoted himself to a major work on the history of Ireland, 

=====第673页=====
Notes 645 
but failed to complete it (see present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 145-85 and 283-314 
and also Marx and Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1978, pp. 306-56, and Marx-Engels Archives, Russian edition, Vol. X, 
Moscow, 1948, pp. 157-248). Simultaneously with the study of Celtic history 
Engels analysed the old Welsh laws. p. 232 
118 In September 1891 Engels toured Scotland and Ireland. p. 234 
119 A reference to the rebellion of the Scottish highlanders in 1745 caused by 
oppression and eviction from the land carried out in the interests of the 
Anglo-Scottish landed aristocracy and bourgeoisie. Part of the nobility in the 
Scottish Highlands, who supported the claims of the overthrown House of 
Stuart to the English Crown (the official aim of the insurgents was to enthrone 
Charles Edward, the grandson of James II), took advantage of the discontent 
among the highlanders. The suppression of the rebellion put an end to the 
clan system in the Scottish Highlands and resulted in further evictions. 
p. 235 
120 See Note 5. p. 236 
121 See Note 18. p. 236 
122 Burgundian law (Lex Burgundionum)—a code of legislative acts promulgated by 
the Burgundian kings in the second half of the 5th and the beginning of the 
6th century. It regulated the major aspects of the life of Burgundian society 
and its relations with the Gallic and Roman population. p. 236 
123 The Hildebrand Song (Hildebrandslied) — an 8th-century German epic poem, of 
which only a few passages have survived. p. 237 
124 The Völuspa (Vision of the Seeress)—the best-known song from The Elder Edda (see 
Note 82), depicting the history of the world from its creation to the final 
desctruction—the "Twilight of the Gods"—and its second birth—the triumph of 
peace and justice. p. 238 
125 In 69-70, Claudius Julius Civilis, chief of the Batavians, who lived at the Rhine 
estuary and were allied with the Romans, led an insurrection against Rome. It 
was joined by other Germanic peoples and some of the Gauls. The insurrection 
was sparked off by the growing taxes, increased levies to the army and the 
abuse of power by Roman officials. Initially the insurgents achieved considera­
ble success. The Gaulish aristocracy, however, continued to support Rome, and 
this spelled defeat for the insurgents. The insurrection was quelled, but the 
Batavians were freed from taxes. p. 240 
126 Codex Laureshamensis (Lorch Capitulary)—a collection of the copies of letters 
patent and privileges belonging to the Lorch Monastery which was founded in 
the latter half of the 8th century in the Frankish state. A large feudal estate in 
South-Western Germany, it was located close to the town of Worms. The 
collection was compiled in the 12th century and is an important historical 
document on the system of peasant and feudal landownership in the 8th-9th 
centuries. p. 242 
127 See Note 5. p. 244 
128 The reference may have been to the defeats which the retinues of Odoacer, the 
founder of the first barbarian kingdom on the territory of Italy, suffered from 
the Ostgoth leader Theodoric in the battles of Aquileja and Verona in 489. As 
a result of these defeats Odoacer lost power in Italy and was killed, p. 245 
43" 

=====第674页=====
646 Notes 
129 The reference is to the provinces which were part of the Roman state. 
p. 247 
130 Benefices—plots of land bestowed as rewards—were a transitional form of 
holding, on the road to feudal ownership. This form of remuneration became 
common practice in the Frankish state following Charles Martel's reform on 
benefices in the 730s. Gradually the beneficiaries succeeded in turning these 
life-long grants into fiefs, or hereditary feudal estates. A detailed description of 
the role which the system of benefices played in the development of feudalism is 
given by Engels in his unfinished work The Frankish Period (see this volume, 
pp. 58-81). p. 252 
131 Gau counts (Gaugrafen) —royal officers appointed to administer districts or 
counties in the Frankish state. They were invested with judicial power, collected 
taxes and led the troops during military campaigns. For their service they 
received one-third of the royal income collected in the given county and were 
rewarded with landed estates. Gradually the counts became feudal seigneurs 
endowed with sovereign powers, particularly after 877, when the office was 
formally proclaimed hereditary. p. 252 
132 See Note 37. p. 252 
133 See Note 37. p. 253 
134 Angariae—compulsory services performed by residents of the Roman Empire, 
who were obliged to supply carriers and horses for state transports, p. 253 
135 The reference is to the economic organisation of vast estates owned by 
Charlemagne. It was established by the so-called Capitulary on Royal Estates 
(capitulare de villis) promulgated in about 800. Special attention was given to 
more effective control over the fulfilment of numerous obligations imposed 
on the peasants working on such estates, as well as to the preservation of the 
estates themselves and of profits received from them. All this testified to the 
growth of feudalism in Frankish society. p. 254 
136 Commendation—an act by which a peasant commended himself to the 
"patronage" of a small landowner or a small landowner to the "patronage" of 
a powerful feudal lord in accordance with the established practice (military and 
other services for the benefit of the "patron", the transfer to him of a plot 
of land in return for a conventional holding). This meant the loss of personal 
freedom for the peasants and made small landowners vassals of the powerful 
feudal lords. This practice, widespread in Europe from the 8th and 9th 
centuries onwards, led, on the one hand, to the transformation of the peasants 
into serfs and, on the other, to the consolidation of the feudal hierarchy. 
p. 254 
137 The Hildebrand Song —see Note 123. 
The Battle of Hastings took place on October 14, 1066 between the troops of 
William, Duke of Normandy, which invaded England, and the Anglo-Saxon 
army of King Harold. The poorly armed Anglo-Saxons were defeated and 
King Harold killed. In December 1066 William took London, was crowned 
King of England and came to be known as William the Conqueror, p. 262 
138 Dithmarschen—a district in the south-west of present-day Schleswig-Holstein. It 
was remarkable for its peculiar historical development; in particular, up to the 
second half of the 19th century there were still survivals of patriarchal customs 

=====第675页=====
Notes 647 
and the communal system was preserved among the peasants even after the 
conquest by Danish and Holstein feudal lords in the 16th century. p. 269 
139 Engels wrote this introductory note for the 1884 edition of Marx's Wage Labour 
and Capital (see present edition, Vol. 9, pp. 197-228); in 1891 Engels 
incorporated it into his Introduction to the new edition of this work by Marx 
(see present edition, Vol. 27). 
This note was published in English for the first time in K. Marx, Wage 
Labour and Capital, Modern Press, London, 1885. p. 277 
140 Yhe  German Workers' Society  was  founded  by  Marx  and  Engels  in Brussels  at 
the end of  August  1847, its aim  being  the  political education  of the  German 
workers  who  lived  in Belgium  and  dissemination  of the  ideas  of scientific 
communism among them. With Marx, Engels  and their followers  at its  head, 
the Society became  the  legal centre  of the  revolutionary proletarian forces  in 
Belgium.  Its  most active members belonged  to the  Communist League.  The 
Society played  an  important part  in  founding  the  Brussels Democratic 
Association  (see  Note  193).  After  the  February  1848  revolution  in France,  the 
Belgian authorities arrested  and  banished many  of its  members.  p. 277 
141 Engels' letters written between August and October 1884 show that he did a great 
deal of work in preparing Marx's Poverty of  Philosophy  for publication in German. 
(The book was written and published in French in 1847 and was not republished 
in full during Marx's lifetime.) Engels edited the translation made by Eduard 
Bernstein and Karl Kautsky and supplied a number of notes to it. 
The first German edition of Marx's book appeared in the second half of 
January 1885 and, a little earlier, at the beginning of January, Engels published 
his Preface in the magazine Die Neue Zeit under the title "Marx und 
Rodbertus". It was also included in the second German edition of the book 
which appeared in 1892 with a special preface written by Engels (see present 
edition, Vol. 27). p. 278 
142 Marx wrote the statement about the break with Der Social-Demokrat on 
February 18, 1865 and sent it to Engels, who fully endorsed it and returned it 
to Marx with his signature; on February 23, 1865 Marx sent the statement to 
the editors of the newspaper. This was occasioned by Schweitzer's series of 
articles Das Ministerium Bismarck in which he expressed overt support for 
Bismarck's policy of unifying Germany under Prussian supremacy. Marx took 
measures to make Schweitzer publish the statement. It was published in many 
papers, among them the Barmer Zeitung and Elberfelder Zeitung on Feb­
ruary 26. Schweitzer was forced to publish this statement in Der Social-
Demokrat, No. 29, March 3, 1865 (see present edition, Vol. 20, p. 80). p. 278 
143 xhe reference is to Engels' Preface to the first German edition of Vol. II of 
Marx's Capital, which Engels completed on May 5, 1885 (see present edition, 
. Vol. 36). p. 279 
144 See the anonymous pamphlet: The Source and Remedy of the National Difficulties, 
deduced from principles of political economy, in a letter to Lord John Russell, London, 
1821. 
For more details about the pamphlet see Engels' Preface to Vol. II of 
Marx's Capital (present edition, Vol. 36). p. 279 
145 Engels is referring to the second edition of Ricardo's book On the Principles of 
Political Economy, and Taxation, London, 1819, pp. 32-46, where the author 
divided the text into sections. p. 282 

=====第676页=====
648 Notes 
146 xhe reference is to the people who took part in publishing the literary legacy 
of Rodbertus-Jagetzow, in particular his work Das Kapital. Vierter socialer Brief 
an von Kirchmann, Berlin, 1884; the publisher of this work and the author of 
the introduction to it was Theophil Kozak; the preface was written by the 
German vulgar economist Adolf Wagner. p. 283 
147 Engels is referring to the preface to K. Rodbertus-Jagetzow's work, Das 
Kapital. Vierter socialer Brief an von Kirchmann, Berlin, 1884, pp. VII-VIII, in 
which Adolf Wagner wrote: "Rodbertus evinces here such a power of abstract 
thinking as is possessed only by the greatest masters." p. 284 
148 § 110 of the German Imperial Criminal Code promulgated in 1871 stipulated a 
fine of up to 600 marks or imprisonment for a term of up to 2 years for a 
public appeal in writing to disobey the laws and decrees operating in the 
German Empire. p. 290 
149 The second French edition of The Poverty of Philosophy, which was being 
prepared by Marx's daughter Laura Lafargue, appeared in Paris only after 
Engels' death, in 1896. p. 291 
150 Engels wrote this article on January 25, 1885 for Der Sozialdemokrat. About the 
same time he sent a letter to Paul Lafargue describing the same facts and 
expressing the same ideas more concisely and in somewhat different terms (see 
present edition, Vol. 47). Lafargue passed this letter on to Jules Guesde who 
drew on it in writing his article published as a leader in Cri du Peuple, No. 461 
on January 31, 1885. Guesde quoted a long passage from Engels' letter without 
naming him, just saying that he had received this letter from London from 
"one of the veterans of our great social battles". The article was reprinted in 
the Polish socialist press and in the USA. p. 292 
151 On January 13 (1), 1885, Russia and Prussia exchanged notes on extradition of 
persons accused of criminal offences against the monarchs of the contracting 
parties or members of their families, as well as of persons found guilty of 
manufacturing or storing explosives. p. 292 
152 Olga Novikova, a Russian journalist who lived in London in 1876 and 1877, took 
an active part in the campaign against the attempts by Disraeli's Conservative 
government to involve Britain in the war against Russia on the side of 
Turkey. She had contacts with the ruling circles of Russia and support among the 
members of the British Liberal Party, Gladstone in particular. The campaign, 
which swept both Britain and Russia, helped to prevent Britain entering the war. 
Engels is referring to Olga Novikova's article "The Russianization of 
England". p. 292 
153 Engels wrote this article for the magazine The Commonweal; later he translated it 
into German and had it published in Die Neue Zeit (June 1885). Subsequently he 
incorporated it into the Appendix to the 1887 American edition of The Condition 
of the Working-Class in England (see this volume, pp. 399-405) and in 1892 into the 
prefaces to the English and the second German editions of this work (see present 
edition, Vol. 27). p. 295 
154 The reference is to the movement for the repeal of the Corn Laws introduced 
in the interests of the English landed aristocracy as far back as the 15th 
century. The maintenance of high import tariffs on corn in order to maintain 
high prices on the home market prevented the growth of capitalist profit. 
In 1838 the Manchester factory owners Cobden and Bright founded the 
Anti-Corn Law League, which demanded lower corn tariffs and unlimited 

=====第677页=====
Notes 649 
freedom of trade for the purpose of weakening the economic and political 
power of the landed aristocracy and reducing agricultural workers' wages. The 
battle over the Corn Laws ended with their repeal in 1846. p. 295 
155 Evidently, it was not John Bright who said this but his followers. See: 
"Anti-Corn-Law Agitation" in The Quarterly Review, Vol. 71, No. 141, London, 
1843,  p. 273. p. 295 
156 The People's Charter containing the demands of the Chartists was published on 
May 8, 1838 in the form of a Bill to be submitted to Parliament. It consisted of 
six points: universal suffrage (for men of 21 years of age and over), annual 
elections to Parliament, secret ballots, equal constituencies, abolition of property 
qualifications for parliamentary candidates, and salaries for M.P.s. In 1839 and 
1842,  petitions for the Charter were rejected by Parliament. p. 295 
157 The reference is to the Chartists' peaceful march to Parliament planned for 
April 10, 1848, in order to hand in the third petition concerning the People's 
Charter. The government, however, prohibited the demonstration and took 
steps to prevent it by concentrating military units in the capital and mobilising a 
whole army of "special constables" from among the bourgeoisie. Many of the 
Chartist leaders wavered, abandoned their intention of staging the march and 
persuaded those who had assembled to disperse. p. 296 
158 The reference is to the Reform Bill which was finally passed by the British 
Parliament in June 1832. The Reform Act of 1832 consisted of three acts 
adopted for England and Wales on June 7, for Scotland on July 17, and for 
Ireland on August 17, 1832. It was directed against the political monopoly of 
the landed and finance aristocracy and enabled the industrial bourgeoisie to be 
duly represented in Parliament. The proletariat and the petty bourgeoisie, the 
main forces in the struggle for the reform, remained disfranchised, p. 296 
159 See Note 154. • p. 296 
160 The expression the "workshop of the world", first used with regard to England 
by Benjamin Disraeli in his speech to the House of Commons on March 15, 
1838,  was current in the 19th century. p. 296 
161 The reference is to the factory legislation that appeared in England in the first 
third of the 19th century in connection with the factory system of the capitalist 
mode of production and the struggle of the proletariat for legislative regulation 
of working conditions. The first Factory Acts (1802, 1819, 1833, 1844) limited 
the employment of child labour in the textile industry. The Act of 1833 
introduced a special office of factory inspectors who had the right to supervise 
the operation of factory legislation and the right to penalise manufacturers 
violating the Factory Acts. Of great importance was the Act of 1847 which 
limited the working day of women and children employed in the textile 
industry to ten hours. p. 297 
162 The Reform of 1867 granted the franchise in towns to all house-owners, 
lease-holders and tenants residing in the same place not less than a year and 
paying a rent of not less than £10. The property qualification for voters in the 
counties was lowered to £12 rent per year. Voting rights were also granted to a 
section of the industrial workers. 
The Reform of 1884 extended the provisions of the 1867 Reform to rural 
areas,  and voting rights were granted to a section of rural population. As a 

=====第678页=====
650 Notes 
result of the two reforms, the number of electors, however, comprised just 13 
per cent of the country's total population. The rural and urban poor and 
women were still deprived of voting rights. p. 297 
163 The British Association for the Advancement of Science was founded in 1831 and 
continues to exist to this day. It publishes accounts of its annual meetings in the 
quarterly magazine The Advancement of Science. p. 300 
164 On December 2, 1851 Louis Bonaparte carried out a coup d'état by dissolving 
the Legislative Assembly. 
On January 14, 1852 a new constitution was introduced which conferred all 
state power upon the President, elected for ten years; the composition and 
legislative functions of the Council of State, the Legislative Corps and the 
Senate were placed under his direct control. This constitution in fact restored 
the regime of the empire in France. On December 2, 1852 the Second Republic 
was abolished and the Prince-President was formally proclaimed Emperor of 
the French under the name of Napoleon III. Thus the coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851 had led to the establishment of the Bonapartist Second 
Empire in France. p. 302 
165 The pamphlet, Karl Marx vor den Kölner Geschwornen. Prozeß gegen den Ausschuß 
der rheinischen Demokraten wegen Aufrufs zum bewaffneten Widerstand, appeared 
early in October 1885 as the second instalment of the "Social-Democratic 
Library" published in German, first in Zurich, and later in London (1885-
90). The pamphlet reprinted the newspaper reports on the trial from the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nos. 226 and 231-33 of February 19, 25, 27 and 28, 1849. 
p. 304 
166 This expression was used in the royal proclamation of March 21, 1848, in 
which Frederick William IV declared his readiness to stand "at the head [an 
die Spitze] of the whole fatherland in order to save Germany". During the 
campaign for the unification of Germany this expression was used to describe 
Prussia's intention to unite the country under its supremacy. p. 305. 
167 The trial of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung began on February 7, 1849. Karl Marx, 
editor-in-chief, Frederick Engels, co-editor, and Hermann  Korff,  responsible 
publisher, were tried by a Cologne jury court. They were accused of slandering 
Chief Public Prosecutor Zweiffel and calumniating the police officers who 
had arrested Gottschalk and Anneke, in the article "Arrests" published in the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 35, July 5, 1848 (see present edition, Vol. 7, 
pp. 177-79). Marx's and Engels' defence counsel at the trial of February 7 
was Karl Schneider II. The jury acquitted the defendants. For Marx's and 
Engels' speeches at this trial see present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 304-22. p. 306 
168 The Kreuz-Zeitung's party—a name given from 1851 to the end of the 19th 
century to the extreme Right wing of the Prussian Conservative Party grouped 
round the Neue Preussische (Kreuz-) Zeitung. p. 307 
169 The reference is to the formation of the North German Confederation under 
Prussian supremacy. As a result of the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, Austria and 
the South-German states remained outside the Confederation (see Note 171). 
The victory of Prussia in the Franco-Prussian War led to the national unification 
of Germany and the foundation of a German Empire in which the Prussian 
monarchy played the leading role. p. 307 
170 The National Liberal Party, formed in the autumn of 1866 after a split in the 

=====第679页=====
Notes 651 
Party of Progress (see Note 401), was the mainstay of an alliance between the 
Junkers and the bourgeoisie and advocated struggle for civil equality and 
bourgeois-democratic freedoms. 
The policy of the National Liberals showed that the German liberal 
bourgeoisie had capitulated to Bismarck's government. Following the introduc­
tion of Bismarck's half-hearted reforms, the National Liberal Party actively 
supported the policy of colonial expansion, the military build-up and 
suppression of the working-class movement. It continued its existence until the 
November 1918 Revolution in Germany. p. 307 
Engels is referring to the steps taken by Prussia on the eve of the 
Austro-Prussian War of 1866: on June 8, Prussian troops invaded the Duchy of 
Holstein which, according to the treaty between Prussia and Austria, was under 
Austrian jurisdiction and belonged to the German Confederation. Following a 
decision by the member-states of the German Confederation, initiated by 
Austria, to mobilise the federal army, Prussia declared its withdrawal from the 
Confederation and on June 16 began hostilities against Saxony, Hanover, the 
Electorate of Hesse, and Nassau, all members of the Confederation. On 
June 17, Austria declared war on Prussia. 
The German Confederation (Deutscher Bund) was an ephemeral union of 
German states formed by decision of the Congress of Vienna in June 1815 and 
originally comprised 35 absolutist feudal states and 4 free cities. The central 
body of the German Confederation was the Federal Diet which consisted of 
representatives of the German states. Though it had no real power, it was 
nevertheless a vehicle of feudal and monarchical reaction. For all practical 
purposes the Confederation sealed Germany's political and economic fragmen­
tation and retarded its development. 
The German Confederation ceased to exist during the Austro-Prussian War 
of 1866. p. 307 
The reference is to the military and diplomatic steps which Bismarck's 
government took in connection with the Austro-Prussian War of 1866. 
In October 1865, Bismarck conducted unofficial negotiations with 
Napoleon III in Biarritz, seeking to secure France's neutrality in the war he 
was planning. Questions under discussion concerned a possible return to Italy 
of Venetia, then belonging to Austria, as well as territorial concessions to 
France at the expense of the Rhine provinces and other territories. These talks 
resulted in the conclusion on April 8, 1866 of a treaty on an offensive and 
defensive alliance between Prussia and Italy. The treaty provided for Italy to 
attack Austria only after Prussia had started the war. If Prussia's attack did not 
follow within three months, the treaty was to be invalid. 
In July 1866, on Bismarck's initiative, a Hungarian legion was formed in 
Silesia under the command of General Klapka. The aim of the legion, which 
consisted of Hungarian émigrés and prisoners-of-war, was to invade Hungary 
during the war. However, Klapka's legion, soon after crossing the frontier early 
in August 1866, was recalled and disbanded in connection with the end of the 
war. 
After trie conclusion of the Prague Peace Treaty on August 23, 1866, 
Prussia annexed (on September 20) the Kingdom of Hanover, the Electorate of 
Hesse-Kassel, the Duchy of Nassau and the city of Frankfurt am Main, which 
had fought on Austria's side. p. 307 
The Constitution of the North German Confederation (the Confederation 
included 19 states and 3 free cities) was approved on April 17, 1867 by the 

=====第680页=====
652 Notes 
Constituent Reichstag of the Confederation (it held sessions between Feb­
ruary 24 and April 17, 1867) and reaffirmed Prussia's de facto domination. 
The Prussian King was proclaimed President of the Confederation and 
Commander-in-Chief of the federal armed forces; he was also put in charge of 
foreign policy. The legislative powers of the Confederation's Reichstag, which 
was elected by universal suffrage, were extremely limited: the laws it adopted 
became valid only after approval by the Federal Council and endorsement by the 
President. This constitution later became the basis for the Constitution of the 
German Empire. Saxony, which fought on Austria's side in the Austro-Prussian 
War of 1866, was forced after the war to become a member of the North 
German Confederation and then submit to this constitution. 
The treaties of Tilsit were signed on July 7 and 9, 1807 by Napoleonic 
France and Russia and Prussia, members of the fourth anti-French coalition. 
The treaty imposed harsh terms on Prussia, which lost nearly half its territory 
to the German states dependent on France, was made to pay indemnities, and 
had its army reduced. p. 307 
A reference to the Anti-Socialist Law, or Exceptional Law against  the Socialists (Gesetz 
gegen die gemeingefährlischen Bestrebungen der Sozialdemokrate), introduced by 
Bismarck's government with the support of a majority in the Reichstag on 
October 21, 1878 for the purpose of combatting the socialist and working-class 
movement. The law deprived the Social-Democratic Party of Germany of its 
legal status; it prohibited all its organisations, workers' mass organisations and 
the socialist and workers' press, decreed confiscation of socialist literature, and 
subjected Social-Democrats to repression. The Social-Democratic Party, how­
ever, with the active assistance of Marx and Engels, managed to gain the upper 
hand over both the opportunist and "ultra-left" elements within its ranks. By 
correctly combining illegal work with utilising all legal possibilities the Party 
considerably increased and extended its influence among the masses while the 
Anti-Socialist Law was in force. The law was abrogated on October 1, 1890. For 
Engels' appraisal of it see his article "Bismarck and the German Working Men's 
Party" (present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 407-09). p. 308 
The reference is to the American War of Independence (1775-83). On July 4, 
1776 the Declaration of Independence was passed by the delegates of 13 North 
American colonies at a Congress in Philadelphia. The Declaration proclaimed 
secession from England and the formation of an independent republic—the 
United States of America. It formulated such bourgeois-democratic principles 
as freedom of the individual, equality before the law, sovereignty of the people, 
and exerted a major influence on the European revolutionary movement and 
the French Revolution in particular. However, the democratic rights pro­
claimed were from the very start violated by the American bourgeoisie and 
plantation owners, who excluded the common people from political life and 
preserved slavery. p. 308 
In 1611, the Polish Diet adopted a decision on the unification of the Duchy of 
Prussia with Brandenburg under Hohenzollern rule. This was done despite the 
opposition of a group of deputies who supported Poland's rights to East 
Prussia. However, the Duchy of Prussia remained a territory held in fee by 
Poland. This decision was implemented in 1618 when the Elector of 
Brandenburg, Johann Sigismund, received the Duchy of Prussia in fee from 
the Polish King in return for his promise to take part in the war against 
Sweden. Under the Wielawa-Bydgoszcz Treaty of 1657 Poland finally 
renounced its supreme rights to the Duchy of Prussia in favour of 
Brandenburg. p. 309 

=====第681页=====
Notes 653 
177 On October 8-10, 1801, France and Russia signed a secret convention on the 
regulation of territorial issues in Rhenish Germany in favour of Napoleonic 
France, using as a pretext the need to compensate those German states whose 
possessions on the left bank of the Rhine had been seized by France during its 
wars against the first and second coalitions. This convention found reflection in 
the Russo-French declaration of June 3, 1802, under which 112 German states 
(nearly all ecclesiastical possessions and imperial towns) with a total population 
of three million were handed over to Bavaria, Württemberg and Baden, which 
were dependent on Napoleonic France, and also to Prussia. Formally this was 
done under the terms of a resolution adopted by what was known as the 
Imperial Deputation, a commission made up of representatives of the states 
incorporated in the German Empire and elected by the Imperial Diet in 
October 1801. The resolution was adopted on February 25, 1803 after long 
discussions and under pressure from France and Russia. p. 309 
178 Under the terms of the Peace Treaty signed by France and Austria at 
Pressburg (Bratislava) on December 26, 1805, Bavaria and Württemberg, which 
took part in the war waged by Napoleonic France against the third coalition, 
were granted the status of independent kingdoms. Baden, which also fought on 
France's side, became an independent grand duchy in 1806 after the Holy 
Roman Empire ceased to exist. p. 309 
179 Engels is quoting the Prussian officer, Prince Felix Lichnowski, who spoke on 
the Polish question in the Frankfurt National Assembly on July 26, 1848 (see 
also present edition, Vol. 7, p. 369). p. 310 
180 Engels wrote this letter on the advice of Nikolai Danielson who had informed 
him of the opportunity to have Marx's unpublished letter to the editors of the 
Otechestvenniye Zapiski printed in the magazine Severny Vestnik (see present 
edition, Vol. 24, pp. 196-201). However, Marx's letter did not appear in that 
magazine either and was first published in Russian in 1886 in Geneva in Vestnik 
Narodnoi Voli, No. 5 and in the Russian legal journal Yuridichesky Vestnik in 
October 1888. p. 311 
181 Engels wrote this work as an introduction to the third German edition of 
Marx's pamphlet Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (see 
present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 395-457) and had it published first in the 
newspaper Sozialdemokrat, Nos. 46, 47 and 48 of November 12, 19 and 26, 
1885,  and also in the book K. Marx, Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess 
zu Köln. Neuer Abdruck mit Einleitung von Friedrich Engels und Dokumenten, that 
appeared late in November 1885. Besides Marx's pamphlet, the book also 
contained The Communist Trial in Cologne, the fourth appendix to Marx's Herr 
Vogt (see present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 305-11), Marx's Epilogue to the second 
German edition of the pamphlet (see present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 51-54) and 
Addresses of the Central Authority to the League, March and June 1850 (see 
present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 277-87 and 371-77). p. 312 
182 Wermuth, Stieber, Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des 19. Jahrhunderts, Berlin, 
Part I, 1853, Part II, 1854. The appendices to Part I of the book which 
expounded the "history" of the workers' movement in the form of instructions 
for the police carried several documents of the Communist League which had 
fallen into the hands of the police. Part II (the "Black List") contained detailed 
information about people connected with the working-class and democratic 
movement. p. 312 
183 Engels may have had in mind the book by G. Adler, Die Geschichte der ersten 

=====第682页=====
654 Notes 
sozialpolitischen Arbeiterbewegung in Deutschland, Breslau, 1885. In his letter to 
August Bebel, dated October 28, 1885, Engels writes the following: "Kautsky 
has given me Adler's very superficial book which is largely based on Stieber; I 
shall help him write a review" (see present edition,Vol. 47). The critical analysis 
of this book, which Karl Kautsky wrote on the basis of Engels' comments, was 
published in the magazine Die Neue Zeit in February 1886. Engels' remarks on 
Adler's book are to be found in Marx-Engels-Jahrbuch, 2., Berlin, 1979. 
p. 312 
184 Babouvism—one of the trends of Utopian egalitarian communism based on the 
ideas of natural right. Founded at the close of the 18th century by François 
Noël Babeuf (Gracchus). Babouvism played a very important role in shaping 
the socialist views of secret revolutionary societies in the 1830s and 1840s. 
p. 313 
185 Société des saisons (Society of the Seasons)—a secret revolutionary organisation 
that existed in Paris between 1837 and 1839. It was founded by Auguste 
Blanqui, Armand Barbes and Martin Bernard with the aim of overthrowing the 
bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe, proclaiming a republic and implement­
ing revolutionary egalitarian ideas. An uprising on May 12, 1839 in Paris, in 
which revolutionary workers played the leading part, had been planned by the 
Society of the Seasons; it was suppressed by troops and the National Guard. 
p. 313 
186 Karl Schapper was arrested immediately after the uprising of May 12, 1839 
and deported from France after serving seven months in prison; Heinrich 
Bauer continued his revolutionary activity in Paris, was arrested in De­
cember 1841 and also deported. p. 313 
187 The reference is to the Frankfurter Attentat (the Frankfurt Attempt). On 
April 3, 1833, in response to the police measures undertaken by the Federal 
Diet, a group of conspirators, mainly students, attempted to seize Frankfurt am 
Main, overthrow the Diet and proclaim a republic. But the conspirators only 
managed to take possession of the guard house for a short time, following 
which they were dispersed by troops. p. 313 
188 Yhe reference is to the march by revolutionary émigrés and members of the 
"Young Italy" society, organised by Mazzini in February 1834 with a view to 
inciting a republican uprising in Piedmont. A detachment of insurgent émigrés 
of various nationalities under the command of Ramorino invaded Savoy from 
Switzerland but was defeated by Piedmontese troops. p. 313 
189 Demagogues in Germany were the participants in the students' opposition 
movement after the liberation of the country from Napoleonic rule. The name 
became current after the Karlsbad Conference of Ministers of the German 
States in August 1819, which adopted a special resolution on the persecution of 
the demagogues. p. 313 
190 The German Workers' Educational Society in London was founded in February 
1840 by Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll and other leaders of the League of the 
Just (in the 1850s the Society had its premises in Windmill Street, Soho). After 
the reorganisation of the League of the Just in the summer of 1847 and the 
founding of the Communist League, the latter's local communities played a 
leading role in the Society. In 1847 and 1849-50 Marx and Engels took an 
active part in the Society's work, but on September 17, 1850 they and a 

=====第683页=====
Notes 655 
number of their followers withdrew because the Willich-Schapper sectarian and 
adventurist faction had temporarily increased its influence in the Society and 
caused a split in the Communist League. Later Schapper realised the errors of 
his ways and took steps towards a reconciliation with Marx. The resultant 
weakening of sectarian influence made it possible for Marx and Engels to 
resume their work in the Educational Society in late 1850. In 1918, the Society 
was closed down by the British Government. p. 314 
191 The reference is to the latter half of 1840 when Weitling returned to Paris 
after a propaganda trip to Germany begun in the spring of 1839. He made a 
short visit to Geneva in the summer of 1840 and again came back to Paris. In 
May 1841 Weitling settled in Switzerland for good. p. 315 
192 See Note 140. p. 319 
193 The  Democratic Association, founded on September 27, 1847 in Brussels, united 
proletarian revolutionaries, mainly German refugees and advanced bourgeois 
and petty-bourgeois democrats. Marx and Engels took an active part in its 
establishment. On November 15, 1847 Marx was elected its Vice-President (the 
President was Lucien Jottrand, a Belgian democrat) and under his influence it 
became a centre of the international democratic movement. During the 
February 1848 revolution in France, the proletarian wing of the Brussels 
Democratic Association sought to arm the Belgian workers and to intensify the 
struggle for a democratic republic. However, when Marx was expelled from 
Brussels in March 1848 and the most revolutionary elements were repressed by 
the Belgian authorities, its activity assumed a narrow, purely local character and 
in 1849 the Association ceased to exist. p. 319 
194 The motto was changed at the First Congress of the Communist League in 
June 1847. p. 322 
195 Engels reproduces the main points of the "Demands of the Communist Party 
in Germany" (see present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 3-7) which were written by Marx 
and himself in Paris between March 21 and 24, 1848. This document was 
discussed by members of the Central Authority, who approved and signed it as 
the political programme of the Communist League in the revolution that broke 
out in Germany. In March it was printed as a leaflet, for distribution among 
revolutionary German émigré workers who were about to return home. The 
leaflet soon reached members of the Communist League in other countries, 
notably German émigré workers in London. 
Early in April, the "Demands" were published in several democratic 
German papers. p. 323 
196 The reference is to the German Workers' Club, founded in Paris on March 8-9, 
1848,  on the initiative of the Communist League leaders. The leading role in it 
belonged to Marx. The Club's aim was to unite the German émigré workers in 
Paris,  explain to them the tactics of the proletariat in a bourgeois-democratic 
revolution and also to counter the attempts of the bourgeois and petty-
bourgeois democrats to stir up the German workers by nationalist propaganda 
and make them join the adventurist march of volunteer legions into Germany. 
The Club was successful in arranging the return of German workers one by 
one to their own country to take part in the revolutionary struggle there. 
p. 324 
197- From May 3 to 9, 1849 Dresden, the capital of Saxony, was the scene of an 
armed uprising caused by the refusal of the King of Saxony to approve the 

=====第684页=====
656 Notes 
Imperial Constitution drafted by the Frankfurt National Assembly. The 
insurgents, among whom the workers played a prominent part in fighting on 
the barricades, gained control of a considerable section of the city and formed 
a provisional government headed by the radical democrat Samuel Tzschirner. 
An active part in the uprising was played by Mikhail Bakunin, the Russian 
revolutionary, Stephan Born and Richard Wagner, the composer. The uprising 
was suppressed by Saxon and Prussian troops. p. 325 
198 The Sonderbund —a separatist union of the seven economically backward 
Catholic cantons of Switzerland formed in 1843 to resist progressive bourgeois 
reforms and to defend the privileges of the Church and the Jesuits. 
p. 325 
199 The Workers' Fraternity was suppressed in all the states belonging to the 
German Confederation in mid-1850. But some of its groups in North and 
South Germany existed until 1852. 
Following the defeat of the Dresden uprising Born fled to Switzerland. 
p. 326 
200 See Note 75. p. 326 
201 Joseph Moll was mortally wounded in the stomach (not in the head) during the 
encounter at the Rothenfels Bridge on the River Murg on June 29, 1849. 
p. 326 
202 The French Party of Order formed in 1848 was a coalition of monarchist 
groups: the Legitimists (supporters of the Bourbon dynasty), the Orleanists 
(supporters of the Orleans dynasty) and the Bonapartists. It was the party of 
the conservative big bourgeoisie. From 1849 until the coup d'état of 
December 2, 1851 it held sway in the Legislative Assembly of the Second 
Republic. p. 327 
203 Early in May 1851 Peter Nothjung was sent on a tour of Germany as an 
emissary of the Cologne Central Authority of the Communist League. On May 
10 he was arrested in Leipzig. The documents seized from him enabled the 
authorities of Prussia and other German states to arrest more League members. 
p. 328 
204 The Battle of Murfreesboro, on the Stone River (Tennessee), took place between 
December 31, 1862 and January 2, 1863, and ended in the defeat of the 
Confederate army. This was one of the first victories won by the North over 
the slave-owning states. p. 328 
205 The reference is to the Willich-Schapper sectarian group that seceded from the 
Communist League after the split of September 15, 1850 and formed an 
independent organisation with its own Central Committee. By its activities it 
helped the Prussian police uncover the illegal communities of the Communist 
League in Germany and gave it a pretext for fabricating evidence in a trial 
against the prominent leaders of the Communist League in Cologne in 1852. 
On the Sonderbund see Note 198. p. 329 
206 See Note 174. p. 329 
207 This is an extract from Engels' letter to Paul Lafargue. The complete text of 
the letter has not been traced. 
Engels wrote this letter in connection with the first ballot to the French 
Chamber of Deputies, held on October 4, 1885 amidst general discontent with 
the home and foreign policy pursued by the party of moderate bourgeois 

=====第685页=====
Notes 657 
republicans (the so-called opportunists, see Note 208) who had been in power 
since 1879. 
During this period the country's economic situation had deteriorated (state 
budget deficit, growing taxes and increased borrowing, etc.); the promises 
given during the election campaign, such as the abolition of the Senate, 
separation of the Church from the state, introduction of progressive income tax, 
and others, were not kept; colonial adventures caused discontent among the 
popular masses; many of the party's leaders were exposed as corrupt. All this 
brought victory to the monarchists in the first ballot. The French Socialists 
regarded this as their own defeat and Lafargue wrote about it to Engels on 
October 7 and 11. Engels deemed it necessary to explain the situation to them 
and did so in his letter of which an extract was published in the newspaper of 
the French Workers' Party. 
Similar ideas expressed by Engels in his letter to Eduard Bernstein of 
October 8, 1885 (see present edition, Vol. 47) were utilised in the leading 
article of the Sozialdemokrat, No. 42, October 15, 1885. 
The letter was published in English for the first time in: Frederick Engels, 
Paul and Laura Lafargue,  Correspondence,  Vol. I, Foreign Languages Publishing 
House, Moscow, 1959, pp.  310-11.  p. 331 
208 The opportunists—this name was applied to the party of moderate bourgeois 
republicans in France after its Left wing split away from it in 1881 to form the 
Radical Party headed by Georges Clemenceau. 
The name, proposed by the journalist Henri Rochefort, derived from the 
words of Party leader Léon Gambetta that reforms should be carried out "at an 
opportune time". p. 331 
209 The reference is to the Orleanists, the Bonapartists and the Legitimists. See 
also Note 202. p. 331 
21° The expression "the best of the republics" ("Voici la meilleure de 
république") is attributed to La Fayette, who used it on July 31, 1830 when the 
members of the Paris Municipal Commission fulfilling the functions of the 
Provisional Government after the overthrow of Charles X had a meeting 
with Louis Philippe, the Duke of Orleans, who had been proclaimed King of 
France. p. 332 
2U Since at the elections of October 4, 1885, most of the candidates did not receive 
the required number of votes, a second ballot was fixed for October 18. It 
brought victory to the deputies from the party of moderate republicans 
(opportunists) (see Note 208) and the Radical Party (see Note 212). The 
Chamber of Deputies numbered 382 republicans, among them 180 radicals 
and 202 monarchists. p. 332 
212 The radicals—a parliamentary group that emerged from the party of 
moderate republicans (opportunists, see Note 208) in the 1880s-90s. The 
radicals relied mainly on the petty bourgeoisie and partly on the middle 
bourgeoisie and championed such bourgeois-democratic demands as a single-
chamber parliamentary system, separation of the Church from the state, 
introduction of progressive income tax, limitation of the working day and 
solution of some other social problems. In 1901 the group acquired official 
status as the Republican Party of Radicals and Radical Socialists (Parti 
républicain radical et radicalsocialiste). p. 332 
213 See Note 210. p. 333 

=====第686页=====
658 Notes 
214 In this article Engels is making a critical analysis of the English translation of 
the first and part of the second sections of Chapter I, Vol. I of Marx's Capital 
(see present edition, Vol. 35), printed in the magazine To-day, Vol. 4, No. 22, 
October 1885, pp. 429-36. The translation was the work of Henry Hyndman, 
leader of the Social-Democratic Federation, who wrote under the pseudonym 
John Broadhouse. After the appearance of Engels' article, Hyndman continued 
to publish his translation; altogether seven chapters and the greater part of the 
eighth chapter of Vol. I were printed in To-day up to May 1889. The full 
English translation of Vol. I of Capital, done by Samuel Moore and edited by 
Engels, appeared in 1887. p. 335 
215 Engels is referring to Capital, Vol. II, Chapter XII (see present edition, 
Vol. 36). p. 336 
216 See present edition, Vol. 35 (Chapter I). Here Engels translates the expression 
"in der bürgerlichen Gesellschaft" as "in civil society"; in the French authorised 
edition of 1872-75 and in the 1887 English edition edited by Engels this 
expression is translated differently: "in the bourgeois society". p. 339 
2!7 Engels wrote this article as part two of his Introduction to the separate edition 
of Wilhelm Wolff's series of articles on the condition of the Silesian peasants 
(see Note 74) published on his (Engels') initiative. Part one of the Introduction 
comprised a considerably abridged version of Engels' article "Wilhelm  Wolff" 
printed in 1876 (see present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 129-71). p. 341 
218 The reference is to the Teutonic Order—a German Catholic Order of Knights 
founded in 1190 during the Crusades. The Order had vast possessions in 
Germany, and in the 13th-14th centuries it conquered extensive territories 
between the Lower Vistula and the Niémen (East Prussia). During the 15th 
century the Order gradually declined and lost a considerable part of its 
possessions; in 1525 the Order ceased to exist as a state. Only small areas 
scattered throughout Germany remained in its possession until the beginning 
of the 19th century. p. 342 
219 Hereditary copyholders—dependent peasants living in Germany, Bohemia and 
the Kingdom of Poland in the 13th-15th centuries. They enjoyed personal 
freedom, and had to pay quit-rent (in money or in kind) to the landlord for 
using their plots of land. p. 343 
220 The Thirty Years' War (1618-48) — a European war, in which the Pope, the 
Spanish and Austrian Habsburgs and the Catholic German princes rallied 
under the banner of Catholicism and fought the Protestant countries Bohemia, 
Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the Netherlands and a number of 
Protestant German states. The rulers of Catholic France — rivals of the 
Habsburgs — supported the Protestant camp. Germany was the main battle 
arena and the object of plunder and territorial claims. The Peace of 
Westphalia (1648) sealed the political dismemberment of Germany. 
At the Battle of Jena (October 14, 1806) the French army, commanded by 
Napoleon, routed the Prussian army, thus forcing Prussia to surrender. 
p. 345 
221 Dreschgärtner, Häusler, Instleute —categories of landless peasants in Germany, 
who,  in their status, were close to day-labourers. These peasants were obliged 
to render the landlord all kinds of services in return for a roof over their 
heads,  a tiny plot of land and, sometimes, meagre remuneration in kind and 
money. p. 345 

=====第687页=====
Notes 659 
222 See Note 35 and also this volume, p. 74. p. 346 
223 T0 supply the Prussian state with material resources and ensure the 
recruitment of soldiers Frederick II of Prussia promulgated a number of laws, 
among them the Statute on the Peasants of 1764, which proscribed the eviction 
of the peasants from their plots of land. However, these laws were 
implemented only to a very small extent. p. 346 
224 At Mollwitz (Mahijowice, Silesia) Frederick II's army defeated the Austrians on 
April 10, 1741, during the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48). 
On September 1-2, 1870, the Châlon Army of the French was routed by the 
Germans near Sedan. The Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 brought about the 
collapse of the Second Empire in France. p. 346 
225 The reference is to the decrees of February 14, 1808, of March 27 and April 8, 
1809 and of January 9, 1810. The decree of April 8, 1809 stated that abolition 
of personal hereditary dependence should not be interpreted as releasing the 
peasants from their feudal obligations. p. 347 
226 In the Battle of Waterloo fought on June 18, 1815, the Anglo-Dutch and 
Prussian forces commanded by the Duke of Wellington and Blücher defeated 
Napoleon's army. p. 347 
227 The Seven Years' War (1756-63) — a war between the Anglo-Prussian and the 
Franco-Russo-Austrian coalition. The war was caused by the conflict of interests 
among the feudal absolutist powers (Prussia, Austria, Russia and France) and 
the colonial rivalry between France and Britain. It resulted in the expansion of 
the British colonial empire at the expense of the French possessions and in the 
growth of Russia's might; Austria and Prussia more or less retained their 
pre-war frontiers. p. 347 
228 Ackernahrung —a plot of land sufficient to maintain a peasant family. 
p. 347 
229 Thaler—a silver coin equal to about three marks; it appeared in the 16th 
century in Bohemia and circulated in the 19th century in all North German 
states as well as in Prussia and Saxony. p. 348 
230 The expression state of intelligence, often used in an ironical sense, originates 
from a phrase in Hegel's opening lecture in Heidelberg University in October 
1816.  p. 348 
231 Scheffel —dry measure used in different German states. Its size varied up to 
1872.  p. 348 
232 Engels is referring to the two tables from August Meitzen's book Der Boden und 
die landxvirthschaftlichen Verhältnisse des Preußischen Staates nach dem Gebietsum-
fange vor 1866, Vol. I, Berlin, 1868. The first table sums up the results of the 
redemption operations from 1816 to 1848; the second table those from 1816 to 
the end of 1865. p. 350 
233 This is one of the fundamental works of Marxism. It reveals the relationship 
between Marxism and its philosophical predecessors as represented by Hegel 
and Feuerbach, the prominent exponents of German classical philosophy, and 
provides a systematic exposition of the fundamentals of dialectical and 
historical materialism. The work was originally published in Die Neue Zeit, the 
theoretical journal of the German Social-Democratic Party; in 1888 it appeared 
as a pamphlet for which Engels wrote a special preface (see this volume, 
pp. 519-20). The supplement to this edition contained Marx's Theses on 
44-1243 

=====第688页=====
660 Notes 
Feuerbach, published for the first time. In 1889, the St. Petersburg journal 
Severny Vestnik, Nos 3 and 4, carried a Russian translation of Engels' work 
entitled The Crisis of the Philosophy of Classical Idealism in Germany. The author's 
name was not mentioned, and the text contained many additions and 
digressions. It was signed G. L. (the initials of the translator—G. Lvovich). 
In 1890 Engels' work was translated into Polish. In 1892 the Emancipation of 
Labour group in Geneva published the full Russian translation of this work by 
Georgy Plekhanov; the same year it was translated into Bulgarian. In 1894 the 
Paris journal Ère nouvelle, Nos 4 and 5 published the French translation by 
Laura Lafargue edited by the author. The second (stereotype) German edition 
appeared in 1895. There were no other editions of this work during Engels' 
lifetime. 
The work was published in English for the first time in 1903 by Kerr 
Publishers, USA, under the title The Roots of Socialist Philosophy. p. 353 
234 The reference is to Heinrich Heine's Zur Geschichte der Religion und Philosophie 
in Deutschland, originally published in French translation in the Paris Revue des 
deux mondes in March-December 1834. 
In his work Heine draws a parallel between the development of German 
philosophy and the events of the French Revolution of 1789. In conclusion he 
says:  "Our philosophical revolution is concluded. Hegel has closed its great 
circle.... Such methodical people as we are had to begin with the Reformation; 
only after that could we occupy ourselves with philosophy, and only after its 
consummation could we pass on to political revolution." p. 357 
235 Engels is quoting here, in a slightly changed form, a passage from Hegel's 
preface to Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts (p. XIX), which reads: "What is 
rational is real and what is real is rational." p. 358 
236 The term positive religion was used by Hegel in his Philosophy of Religion where 
he says: "that it is revealed, is positive religion in the sense that it has come to 
man from without, has been given to him" ("daß sie geoffenbart ist, positive 
Religion sei, in dem Sinne, daß sie dem Menschen von Außen gekommen, 
gegeben worden" (See Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion, 
Vol. II, Part 3, 2nd ed., Stuttgart, 1928, p. 198.) p. 364 
237 xhe reference is to German, or "true", socialism which was widespread in 
Germany in the 1840s, mostly among petty-bourgeois intellectuals. The "true 
socialists"— Karl Grün, Moses Hess, Hermann Kriege — substituted the senti­
mental preaching of love and brotherhood for the ideas of socialism and 
denied the need for a bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany. Marx and 
Engels criticised this trend in The German Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5), 
Circular Against Kriege, German Socialism in Verse and Prose and Manifesto of the 
Communist Party (ibid., Vol. 6). p. 365 
238 xhe planet referred to is Neptune, discovered on September 23, 1846 by the 
German astronomer Johann Galle. p. 368 
239 xhis passage is quoted in C. N. Starcke, Ludwig Feuerbach, Stuttgart, 1885, 
p. 166. The quotation was taken from K. Grün, Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem 
Briefwechsel und Nachlaß sowie in seiner Philosophischen Charakterentwicklung, 
Vol. II, Leipzig and Heidelberg, 1874, p. 308. p. 369 
240 xhe phlogiston theory was formulated in 1703 by Georg Stahl, a German 

=====第689页=====
Notes 661 
physician and chemist, who asserted that all combustible materials and base 
metals contained a substance called phlogiston which was emitted during 
combustion. Towards the end of the 18th century this hypothesis was disproved 
by Antoine Lavoisier, but it played a considerable role in the development of 
chemistry as a science. p. 370 
241 The deists recognise the idea of God as the rational creator of the universe, but 
deny God's interference in nature and social life. p. 373 
242 See Note 236. p. 375 
243 The state religion— Culte de l'Etre suprême —was decreed by the Convention on 
May 7, 1794 during the Jacobine dictatorship. Its creed was a powerful 
supreme being and the immortality of the soul. The new religion was needed, 
on the one hand, to stop the de-Christianisation of the population connected 
with the dissemination of the cult of reason rejected by believers, and, on the 
other, to strengthen the ideological influence of the authorities upon the 
masses. The cult disappeared together with the Jacobine dictatorship, p. 376 
244 "The school-master of Sadowa"—an expression first used by Oskar Peschel, 
editor of the Augsburg journal Ausland, in his article "Die Lehren der jüngsten 
Kriegsgeschichte", published in No. 29 of that journal on July 17, 1866, and 
then widely employed by German journalists, especially after the Prussian 
victory at Königgrätz in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 (the Battle of 
Sadowa), the implication being that the Prussian victory was to be attributed to 
the superiority of the Prussian system of public education. p. 380 
245 The Council of Nicaea—the first ecumenical council of the Christian Bishops of 
the Roman Empire, convened by Emperor Constantine I in the town of Nicaea 
(Asia Minor) in 325. The Council formulated the Nicene Creed and made it 
obligatory for all Christians. Non-recognition of it was punishable as a state 
offence. p. 394 
246 The Albigenses—a religious sect that existed in the 12th and 13th centuries in 
Southern France (notably in Provence and Toulouse) and in Northern Italy. 
This movement took the form of a "heresy", being directed against the power 
and doctrine of the Catholic Church, and against the secular power of the 
feudal state. Its adherents were called Albigenses because the city of Albi was 
one of the sect's main centres. p. 395 
247 Thg reference is to the revolution of 1688 (the overthrow of the House of 
Stuart and the enthronement of William III of Orange), following which (1689) 
the constitutional monarchy was consolidated in England on the basis of a 
compromise between the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie. p. 396 
248 From the 1620s political and religious repressions of Huguenots (Calvinist 
Protestants) intensified, and in 1685 Louis XIV revoked the Edict of Nantes 
which had been enacted by Henry IV in 1598 and granted Huguenots religious 
freedom and considerable political independence. After the revocation of the 
Edict of Nantes several hundred thousand Huguenots left France. p. 396. 
249 The reference is to the German Empire which was founded in January 1871 
under the supremacy of Prussia and did not include Austria. p. 397 
250 This article was occasioned by the first English edition of Engels' work The 
Condition of the Working-Class in England (see present edition, Vol. 4, 
pp. 295-596), then in preparation in the USA. Originally Engels intended to 

=====第690页=====
662 Notes 
use it as a Preface or Afterword to this edition, but the publication of the book 
was considerably delayed because Engels could not find a publisher at the time. 
He therefore deemed it necessary to write a new preface (see this volume, 
pp. 434-42) and use this article as an Appendix. In 1892 Engels included 
almost the whole of this article in the Prefaces to the English and second 
German editions of his work (see present edition, Vol. 27). p. 399 
251 See Note 154. p. 400 
252 The discovery of rich gold deposits in California in 1848 and in Australia in 
1851 greatly influenced the economic development of Europe and America. 
p. 400 
253 The  truck-system—the payment of workers in goods. Engels described this 
system in his work The Condition of the Working-Class in England (see present 
edition, Vol. 4, pp. 470-71). The Truck-Act prohibiting the truck-system was 
adopted in 1831, but many factory owners violated it. 
The Ten Hours' Bill, which applied to women and children only, was passed 
by the British Parliament on June 8, 1847. p. 400 
254 "kittle Ireland"—a district in the southern suburbs of Manchester, inhabited 
mainly by Irish workers; a detailed description of it is given by Engels in The 
Condition of the Working-Class in England (present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 360-62). 
The "Seven Dials"—seven radial streets in the heart of London at that time 
inhabited mainly by workers. p. 401 
255 Under the cottage-system the factory owners leased dwellings to the workers on 
harsh conditions: rent was deducted from wages (for details see present edition, 
Vol. 4, pp. 471-72). p. 402 
256 The reference is to a strike of over 10,000 coal-miners in Pennsylvania (USA) 
between January 22 and February 26, 1886. Blast and coke furnace workers 
demanding higher wages and better working conditions managed to secure 
some of their demands. 
On the colliers' strike of 1844 in Northern England see present edition, 
Vol. 4, pp. 541-47. p. 402 
257 Engels wrote this letter in response to a request by the French Socialists that he 
express publicly his solidarity with them on the occasion of the 15th 
anniversary of the Paris Commune. The letter was read out at a meeting in 
commemoration of the Commune on March 18, 1886 and published in Le 
Socialiste on March 27, 1886 under the title "Lettre d'Engels". 
This letter was published in English for the first time in Frederick Engels, 
Paul and Laura Lafargue,  Correspondence,  Vol. I, Foreign Languages Publishing 
House, Moscow, 1959, pp. 406-07. p. 406 
258 The reference is to the 1884 elections to the Reichstag, when, under the 
conditions of the Anti-Socialist Law (see Note 174), the German Social-
Democratic Party polled about 550,000 votes, and doubled its representation to 
24 members. p. 407 
259 Until 1885 France was divided into "small constituencies", each sending one 
representative to the Chamber of Deputies. In June 1885, on the initiative of 
moderate bourgeois republicans, a system of voting by department lists was 
introduced. Under this system, which operated until 1889, small constituencies 
were combined to form larger ones each corresponding to a department. Now 
a voter received a ballot paper with the names of candidates from different 

=====第691页=====
Notes 663 
parties, but he was obliged to vote for a total number of candidates to be 
elected, one deputy from 70,000 people. A deputy was considered elected in the 
first ballot provided he had received an absolute majority of votes; a relative 
majority was sufficient in the second ballot. p. 407 
260 On February 11, 1886, the workers' deputies in the French Parliament made an 
interpellation concerning the government's actions against the miners' strike in 
Decazeville (see Note 263). Engels regarded this as the formation of the 
socialist group in the Chamber of Deputies. p. 407 
261 Engels wrote this Statement because he feared McEnnis would not be able to 
interpret his words correctly. He asked Sorge to have it published in one of the 
American socialist papers if the interview should appear in the press (see 
Engels' letter to Friedrich Sorge dated April 29, 1886, present edition, Vol. 47). 
p. 408 
262 The reference is to the Freycinet Government (January 7-December 3, 1886) 
consisting mostly of radicals and moderate republicans, as distinct from the 
majority of the previous cabinets, to which, as a rule, radicals were in 
opposition. p. 409 
263 In late January 1886 more than 3,000 workers of Decazeville (south of France) 
went on strike. The reason was their cruel exploitation by the capitalists of the 
Aveyron Company of coal-mines and foundries; the government despatched 
troops to Decazeville. The strike continued till mid-June and evoked a broad 
response throughout the country; under its impact a small workers' group was 
formed in the Chamber of Deputies which came out in defence of the workers' 
economic demands. p. 409 
264 The reference is to the by-election to the Chamber of Deputies in Paris on 
May 2, 1886, when the socialist candidate Ernest Roche received 100,795 votes. 
p. 409 
265 This article is a letter written by Engels to Paul Lafargue on October 25, 
1886 (see present edition, Vol. 47), with slight abridgements and editorial 
changes. Engels wrote this letter in reply to Lafargue's request for his opinion 
on the situation in the Balkans and the course the foreign policy of the 
European powers would take in connection with the growing rivalry between 
Tsarist Russia and the Austro-Hungarian monarchy. This article is the only one 
Engels wrote for the press in the 1880s on questions of foreign policy. The 
German translation of the article was published in the New York paper Sozialist 
on November 20 and 27 and December 4, 1886. It was also translated into 
Romanian and printed in the magazine Revista Sociala, No. 2, December 1886; 
an abridged version of the article was published in German translation in the 
newspaper Sozialdemokrat on December 12, 1886. p. 410 
266 The Preliminary Peace Treaty between Russia and Turkey, which put an end to 
the Russo-Turkish War of 1877-78, was concluded on March 3 (February 19), 
1878 in San Stefano (near Constantinople). The Treaty envisaged the creation 
of an autonomous Bulgarian principality nominally dependent on Turkey, state 
independence for Serbia, Montenegro and Romania as well as their territorial 
expansion, etc. The Treaty considerably strengthened the position of Russia in 
the Balkans which caused a sharp reaction on the part of Great Britain and 
Austria-Hungary, including a show of military force (e.g. the despatch of 
English warships to the Sea of Marmara and other measures). This forced 
Russia to agree to the convocation of an international congress for the purpose 

=====第692页=====
664 Notes 
of revising the treaty, since it affected "general European" problems. The 
representatives of Russia, Great Britain, Austria-Hungary, Turkey, Germany, 
France and Italy took part in the congress which was held in Berlin between 
June 13 (1) and July 13 (1), 1878. The Berlin Treaty signed at this Congress 
radically changed the provisions of the San Stefano Treaty to the detriment of 
Russia and the Slavs of the Balkan Peninsula. The territory of self-governing 
Bulgaria, stipulated by the San Stefano Treaty, was cut more than twice; an 
autonomous province known as "Eastern Rumelia", which remained under the 
power of the sultan, was formed at the expense of Bulgarian regions lying 
south of the Balkan Ridge; the territory of Montenegro was substantially 
curtailed. The Berlin Treaty endorsed the return to Russia of the part of 
Bessarabia severed from it in 1856, and at the same time sanctioned the 
occupation of Bosnia and Herzegovina by Austria-Hungary. The decisions of 
the Berlin Congress turned the Balkans into the hotbed of conflict which led to 
the outbreak of the First World War. p. 410 
267 The suppression of the Polish national insurrection was followed, in 1795, by 
the third partition of Poland between Austria, Prussia and Russia, and the final 
abolition of the Polish state. By decision of the Vienna Congress (1814-15) the 
Kingdom of Poland was formed within the Russian Empire. It incorporated the 
greater part of lands seized by Prussia and Austria during the third partition of 
Poland. p. 410 
268 Engels is referring to the reprisals instituted by the Tsarist government against the 
members of the Narodnaya Volya (People's Will) organisation in the early 1880s, 
which practically destroyed it. 
Nihilism—a system of views held in the 1860s by the progressive-minded 
Russian intellectuals of different social estates. The Nihilists refused to 
recognise the dominant ideology and morality, rejected religion and demanded 
freedom of the personality. In West European writing, the term was applied to 
participants in the Russian revolutionary movement of the 1870s and 1880s, 
notably the Narodnaya Volya members. p. 411 
269 xhe reference is to the occupation of Egypt by Great Britain as a result of the 
Anglo-Egyptian War of 1882. 
In the 1870s, capitalising on the financial difficulties facing the Egyptian 
government, above all, its considerable foreign debt, England and France, its 
principal creditors, established financial control over the country. This led to 
the growth of the national liberation movement and attempts to shake off 
foreign dependence in the early 1880s. In the summer of 1882, Great Britain 
provoked a conflict with Egypt and launched military operations which 
terminated in September 1882. To all intents and purposes, Egypt was turned 
into a British colony, although on paper it was still part of the Ottoman 
Empire. As a result of Britain's actions, its relations with France deteriorated. 
p. 411 
270 In September 1885, an uprising of Bulgarian patriots took place in Eastern 
Rumelia. The Turkish governor was overthrown. Rumelia was reunited with 
Bulgaria. p. 412 
271 The reference is to the Austro-Prussian War of 1866, which ended in victory 
for Prussia (see also notes 171 and .172). The principal theatre of operations 
was Bohemia (Cechy). 
Engels compares this campaign with the military operations conducted by 
Bulgaria in the war against Serbia, which began on November 14 (2), 1885. 

=====第693页=====
Notes 665 
The war was triggered off by the attempt of Serbia, instigated by Austria-
Hungary, to reverse the results of the unification of Eastern Rumelia and the 
Bulgarian Principality that had taken place in September 1885. In the first 
month of the war, Bulgarian troops defeated the Serbian army and soon 
entered Serbia. Under pressure from Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria called a halt 
to the advance of its troops. The frontiers of the united Bulgaria were 
confirmed by the Bucharest Peace Treaty of 1886. p. 412 
272 Greeting Alexander III on May 13 (25), 1886, on his return to Moscow from 
the Crimea, the city mayor Alexeyev said, "Our faith is strengthening that the 
cross of Christ will shine on St. Sophia" (he meant St. Sophia's Cathedral in 
Constantinople). p. 413 
273 Slavophilism—a trend in Russian social thought in the 1840s-60s, which 
advocated a special path of historical development for Russia, one differing 
fundamentally from that of Western Europe. 
Engels is referring here to those representatives of Russian society who in 
the 1880s championed active use of the slogan of Slavic unity in the foreign 
policy pursued by the Tsarist autocracy. 
On the Nihilists, see Note 268. p. 413 
274 The reference is to the political crisis of 1886-87 in Bulgaria. After the 
deposition of the Prince of Battenberg and the establishment of the Regency in 
August 1886, the Russian government sent General Kaulbars to Burgaria on a 
special mission to prepare the ground for the election of a Russian candidate to 
the Bulgarian throne. The mission failed, however, partly because of the stand 
taken on the Bulgarian issue by West European powers headed by Britain. 
Kaulbars was recalled, and diplomatic relations between Russia and Bulgaria 
were broken off in November 1886. p. 414 
275 The Orleanists were supporters of the Orleans dynasty which held power in 
France during the July monarchy (1830-48). They upheld the interests of the 
financial aristocracy and the big industrial bourgeoisie and were members of 
the so-called Party of Order (see Note 202). p. 416 
276 Part of this article was published in English for the first time in K. Marx 
and F. Engels, On Literature and Art, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1978, 
pp. 406-07. p. 418 
277 The reference is to the republican insurrection in Baden, led by the 
petty-bourgeois democrats Friedrich Hecker and Gustav Struve, which was 
crushed in April 1848. p. 418 
278 On February 9, 1849, the Constituent Assembly in Rome abolished the secular 
power of the Pope and proclaimed a republic. The Roman Republic had to 
repulse attacks by the counter-revolutionary Neapolitan and Austrian troops 
and the French expeditionary corps sent to Italy in April 1849 by decision of 
President Louis Bonaparte to restore Papal power. The republic only survived 
until July 3, 1849. p. 419 
279 The reference is to the campaign for the Imperial Constitution adopted by the 
Frankfurt National Assembly on March 27, 1849 but rejected by the majority 
of German governments. In May 1849, popular uprisings in support of the 
Constitution broke out in Saxony, Rhenish Prussia, Baden and the Palatinate. 
The insurgents received no support from the Frankfurt National Assembly and 
the movement was suppressed in July 1849. Engels devoted his work The 

=====第694页=====
666 Notes 
Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution to these events (see present 
edition, Vol. 10). p. 419 
280 This refers to the events of June 5-6, 1849 in Karlsruhe, the capital of Baden. 
The radical wing of the democrats, who were discontented with the capitulatory 
policy of the Baden Provisional Government headed by Brentano, founded the 
Club of Resolute Progress in Karlsruhe on June 5, 1849. The Club suggested that 
Brentano extend the revolution beyond Baden and the Palatinate and 
introduce radicals into his government. When Brentano refused, the Club 
tried, on June 6, to force the government to comply by threatening an armed 
demonstration. But the government, supported by the civil militia and other 
armed units, proved the stronger party in the conflict. The Club of Resolute 
Progress was disbanded. p. 419 
281 The reference is to the volunteer unit of the Gymnastics Society of Hanau (in 
the vicinity of Frankfurt am Main) which took part in the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising of 1849. p. 419 
282 On September 28, 1864, an international meeting was held at St. Martin's Hall, 
Long Acre, London. It was organised by the London trade union leaders and a 
group of Paris Proudhonist workers jointly with representatives of German, 
Italian and other foreign workers then living in London, and a number of 
prominent European democratic émigrés. The meeting resolved to found an 
International Working Men's Association (later known as the First Internation­
al) and elected a Provisional Committee, which shortly afterwards constituted 
itself as the leading body of the Association. p. 422 
283 L'Alliance internationale de la démocratie socialiste (The International Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy) was founded by Mikhail Bakunin in Geneva in September 
1868.  Alongside Bakunin, its Provisional Committee comprised Brosset, Duval, 
Guétat, Perron, Zagorsky and Johann Philipp Becker. In 1868, the Alliance 
published in Geneva leaflets in French and German containing its Programme 
and Rules. Shortly afterwards, Becker broke with Bakunin. 
The Alliance incorporated a secret conspiratorial union that Bakunin had 
set up previously. 
In December 1868, the Alliance applied to the General Council requesting 
admission to the First International. The Central Bureau of the Alliance joined 
the International as its Geneva section under the name Alliance de la démocratie 
socialiste. 
In the International, the Bakuninists formed a bloc with anti-Marxian 
elements and openly campaigned against Marx and Engels, seeking to establish 
their supremacy over the international working-class movement. The Alliance 
fell apart soon after Bakunin's expulsion from the International in 1872. 
p. 422 
284 See Note 81. p. 423 
285 The reference is to the five-milliard-franc contribution imposed on France 
under the Frankfurt Peace Treaty of 1871 signed after the Franco-Prussian 
War. p. 424 
286 The reference is to the ban on the printing and distribution of socialist 
literature in Germany (Engels' work The Housing Question included). It was 
introduced under the Anti-Socialist Law passed in October 1878 (see 
Note 174). p. 425 
287 The Nueva Federaciôn Madrilena (New Madrid Federation) was formed on 

=====第695页=====
Notes 667 
July 8, 1872 by the members of La Emancipacion editorial board expelled from 
the Madrid Federation by the anarchist majority for the paper's exposure of 
the activities of the secret Alliance of Socialist Democracy (see Note 283) in 
Spain. A major part in its foundation was played by Paul Lafargue. On 
August 15, 1872, the General Council admitted the New Madrid Federation to 
the First International. 
The New Madrid Federation fought against the spread of anarchist 
influence in Spain, popularised ideas of scientific socialism, and helped 
establish the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party in 1879. p. 426 
288 During the revolution of 1848, Proudhon advanced several concrete projects of 
social and economic reforms. In very general terms, they were expounded in 
the book: P. J. Proudhon, Idée générale de la Révolution au XlX-e siècle, Paris, 
1851.  p. 427 
289 Armchair socialism (Kathedersozialismus), a trend in the German bourgeois 
political economy that emerged in the last third of the 19th century as a 
reaction to the growth of the workers' movement and the spread of scientific 
socialism in it. Its representatives advocated bourgeois reformism from 
university rostrums under the pretence of commitment to socialism. They 
asserted, among other things, that the state, specifically the German Empire, 
had a supra-class character and could be used to improve the position of the 
working class through social reforms. p. 427 
290 See Note 174. p. 428 
291 Eifel (the Rhine Province of Prussia), a mountainous area with vast swamps and 
wastelands, had a harsh climate and barren soil. Engels refers to the events of 
1882,  when, following a series of crop failures and the earlier drop in prices for 
agricultural produce, the area was struck by famine. p. 428 
292 See Note 220. p- 429 
293 The reference is to the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 and the Franco-Prussian 
War of  1870-71.  See also Note 169. p. 430 
294 This article was printed as a Preface to the American edition of Engels' work 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England which appeared in New York in 
May 1887 (see Note 250). In the same year, it was published in the author's 
German translation in Der Sozialdemokrat (June 10 and 17) under the title "Die 
Arbeiterbewegung in Amerika", as separate offprints in German and English in 
New York in July and in French translation in the Socialiste (July 9, 16 and 23). 
Even before the book appeared, the article had been translated into German 
without the author's knowledge or permission and printed in the New Yorker 
Volkszeitung in April 1887. Engels launched an official protest against this because 
he was not satisfied with the quality of the translation (see Engels to Friedrich 
Sorge, April 23, 1887, present edition, Vol. 48). p. 434 
295 Tne  reference is to the conflict between Edward Aveling and the Executive of 
the Socialist Labor Party of North America, which accused Aveling of 
overspending when touring the USA together with Eleanor Marx-Aveling and 
Wilhelm Liebknecht for the purpose of propaganda. The conflict, which lasted 
for several months, was resolved with Engels' active participation. For more 
details, see this volume, pp. 617-18. 
The Socialist Labor Party of North America was formed in 1876 at the Unity 
Congress in Philadelphia by the members of the American sections of the First 
International and other socialist organisations in the USA. Most of its members 

=====第696页=====
668 Notes 
were immigrants (chiefly Germans), who had little contact with American-born 
workers. There was a struggle inside the Party between the reformist leaders, 
who were mostly Lassalleans, and the Marxist wing headed by Marx's and 
Engels' comrade-in-arms Friedrich Adolph Sorge. The Party proclaimed as its 
programme the fight for socialism but did not become a truly revolutionary 
Marxist mass organisation owing to the sectarian policy of its leaders, who 
disregarded the need for work in the mass organisations of the American 
proletariat. p. 434 
296 See Note 256. p. 434 
297 The reference is to the general strike in the USA for an eight-hour working 
day which began on May 1, 1886 and continued for several days. The strike 
spread to the chief industrial centres, New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, 
Louisville, Saint Louis, Milwaukee and Baltimore, and ended with nearly 
200,000 workers winning shorter hours. The employers, however, soon 
launched a counter-attack. On May 4, a bomb exploded at a police station in 
Chicago, and the police seized this opportunity to use arms against workers and 
make several hundred arrests. Court proceedings were instituted and harsh 
sentences meted out to the leaders of the Chicago working-class movement. 
Four of them were hanged in November 1887. p. 435 
298 The reference is probably to John McEnnis, a reporter on the Missouri 
Republican, who visited Engels in April 1886. p. 435 
299 During the preparations for the municipal elections in New York in the 
autumn of 1886, a United Labor Party was founded to rally the workers for 
political action. The initiative was taken by the New York Central Workers' Union, 
an association of New York trade unions formed in 1882. Similar parties were 
set up in many other cities. Led by the new parties, the working class achieved 
substantial success in the elections in New York, Chicago, and Milwaukee: 
Henry George, the United Labor Party candidate for Mayor of New York, 
received 31 per cent of the vote; in Chicago, the adherents of the Labor Party 
succeeded in getting ten Party members elected to the Legislative Assembly of 
the State: one senator and nine members of the Lower Chamber. The Labor 
Party candidate to the US Congress lost by just 64 votes. In Milwaukee, the 
Labor Party's candidate was elected Mayor of the city, one candidate was 
elected to the Senate, six to the Lower Chamber of the Legislative Assembly of 
this State, and one to the US Congress. p. 435 
300 The Knights of Labor (the Noble Order of the Knights of Labor), an American 
workers' organisation founded in Philadelphia in 1869. It was a secret society 
up to 1878. Its members were mostly unskilled workers. Its aim was the 
establishment of cooperatives and organisation of mutual aid; it took part in a 
number of working-class campaigns. But its leaders in fact opposed the 
workers' participation in the political struggle and stood for class collaboration. 
They opposed the 1886 general strike, forbidding the organisation's members 
to take part in it; however, the rank and file joined in the strike. After those 
events, it began to lose its influence among the workers and disintegrated by 
the end of the 1890s. p. 437 
301 Engels wrote this letter on the occasion of the international festival of 
brotherhood held in Paris on February 19, 1887 on the initiative of a number 
of organisations of foreign socialists in France. Taking part in it were German, 
Scandinavian, Polish and Russian socialist émigrés. The purpose of the festival 
was to voice protest against the military build-up and war preparations in 

=====第697页=====
Notes 669 
Europe. Engels' letter was read out at the festival and printed in the Socialiste 
on February 26. A German translation was carried by Der Sozialdemokrat on 
March 11, by the Austrian paper Gleichheit on March 5, and by the New York 
Sozialist on March 19. p. 443 
302 Engels addressed this message of greetings to the meeting organised by the 
Federation of the Centre of the French Workers' Party on the occasion of the 
16th anniversary of the Paris Commune. It was read out at the meeting. 
p. 445 
303 The pamphlet was published on Engels' initiative as issue XXIV of The 
Social-Democratic Library. Even before the pamphlet appeared the second half 
of the introduction was published in Der Sozialdemokrat on January 15, 1888 
under the heading "Was Europa bevorsteht". p. 446 
304 On June 14, 1848, Berlin workers and craftsmen, outraged by the National 
Assembly's disavowal of the March revolution, took the arsenal by storm in an 
attempt to uphold the revolutionary gains. This action was, however, 
spontaneous and unorganised, and army reinforcements and units of the 
bourgeois civil militia were soon able to push back and disarm the people. 
p. 446 
305 The reference is to the invasion of Baden from Swiss territory by detachments 
of German republican refugees led by Gustav Struve on September 21, 1848. 
Supported by the local republicans, Struve proclaimed a German Republic and 
formed a provisional government. The insurgent detachments, however, were 
shortly afterwards scattered by the troops. Struve and other leaders of the 
uprising were imprisoned by decision of a court martial. They were released 
during another republican uprising in Baden in May 1849. p. 446 
3°6 See Note 279. p. 446 
3(>7 See Note 280. p. 446 
308 The Brimstone Gang (Schwefelbande), the name of a students' association at 
Jena University in the 1770s whose members were notorious for their brawls; 
subsequently, the expression gained wide currency. 
In 1859, Karl Vogt published a pamphlet Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine 
Zeitung (Geneva, 1859) spearheaded against Marx and his associates in the 
Communist League. Distorting the facts, Vogt referred to Marx and his 
associates as the Brimstone Gang, which he depicted as a society engaged in 
unseemly political machinations. In actual fact, a group of German refugees in 
Geneva in 1849-50, including Borkheim among its members, was jokingly 
known under the name of Brimstone Gang. Marx and his associates had no 
connection with the group, which, incidentally, was far removed from political 
activity being a harmless circle of revellers. 
In February 1860, Marx requested Borkheim to give him some information 
about the Geneva Brimstone Gang and used the latter's reply of February 12 (see 
present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 29-32) to expose Vogt and his allegations concerning 
the Brimstone Gang in his pamphlet Herr Vogt (see ibid., pp. 21-329). 
p. 447 
309 Engels is referring to the final stage of the Danish-Prussian War of 1848-50 for 
the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. Prussia entered the war on the side of 
the duchies, seeking to use the national liberation movement there to promote 
its own ends. However, the war ended in the restoration of Danish rule in 
Schleswig-Holstein. 
m. 

=====第698页=====
670 Notes 
In the autumn of 1850, the struggle between Austria and Prussia for 
supremacy in Germany was aggravated as a result of the conflict over 
Hesse-Cassel. Revolutionary actions there were used by Austria and Prussia as a 
pretext for interfering in the electorate's internal affairs, with each party 
claiming the right to suppress them. The Prussian government reacted to the 
entry of Austrian troops into Hesse-Cassel by mobilising and sending its own 
troops there in November 1850. In October 1850, Warsaw hosted a peace 
conference, as a result of which Austria and Prussia signed an agreement in 
Olmütz on November 29. Prussia yielded on the issues of Schleswig-Holstein 
and Hesse-Cassel. p. 450 
310 See Note 293. p. 450 
su See Note 220. p. 451 
312 The Role of Force in History was intended for a pamphlet of the same title that 
Engels planned to write but did not complete. It was to become Chapter 4, a 
sequel to the three chapters of Anti-Diihring devoted to a critique of the theory 
of force. Engels planned to elaborate the main ideas of the three chapters 
mentioned above using German history between 1848 and 1888 as an example 
and to make a critical analysis of Bismarck's policies. The work was begun late in 
1887 and continued into the first months of 1888 (see Engels' correspondence 
with Hermann Schlüter, head of a social-democratic publishing house, present 
edition, vols 47-48). Engels interrupted work in March 1888 and, most probably, 
never resumed it. 
After Engels' death, an envelope inscribed "The Theory of Force" was 
found in his archive. It contained the three chapters from Anti-Diihring, an 
unfinished manuscript of the fourth chapter of the planned pamphlet, a draft 
preface to it, a plan of the fourth chapter as a whole and one of its last part, 
which remained unwritten, as well as chronological notes on the history of 
Germany of the 1870s and 1880s, specifically excerpts from the book by 
C. Bulle, Geschichte der neuesten Zeit, 1815-1885, 2 ed., vols I-IV, Berlin, 1888. 
The manuscript of the unfinished chapter, the rough draft of the preface 
and part of the preparatory materials were published by Eduard Bernstein in 
the Neue Zeit magazine, Vol. 1, Nos. 22-26, 1895-96 under the heading 
"Gewalt und Oekonomie bei der Herstellung des neuen Deutschen Reichs". 
Preparing the manuscript for publication, Bernstein divided it into sections in 
his own hand, supplying each with a subtitle invented by  himself,  marking the 
notes and actually making his own insertions in Engels' text. Until recently, 
several pages (from the words "Alsace had been conquered", this volume, 
p. 491 and up to the phrase "Bismark had reached his objective", this volume, 
p. 497) were printed according to the Neue Zeit publication. Not long ago, 
when preparing Vol. 1/31 of MEGA, researchers in the GDR discovered the 
missing pages in the archive of the International Institute of Social History 
(Amsterdam). In the present edition, this text is for the first time published 
according to the manuscript, which has made possible a number of corrections 
(this volume, pp. 493 and 494). In 1896, the work was translated into French 
and appeared in the Devenir Social, Nos. 6-9, together with the three pertinent 
chapters from Anti-Diihring. In 1898, this work was published in Russian, in an 
incomplete form, in St. Petersburg by the Nauchnoye Obozreniye (Scientific 
Review),  No. 5. In 1899, it appeared in Rome in Italian as a separate edition, 
which completely followed the Neue Zeit. 
•%, 

=====第699页=====
Notes 671 
The work was published in English for the first time in: F. Engels, The Role 
of Force in History. A study of Bismarck's policy of blood and iron. Lawrence & 
Wishart, London, 1967. 
Alongside of the manuscript of the fourth chapter of the pamphlet The 
Role of Force in History, this volume also features the rough draft of its preface 
and, in the section "From the Preparatory Materials" the plan of Chapter 4 as 
a whole and the plan of its final section which throws light on the content of the 
part of the work that remained unfinished. p. 453 
313 The reference is to the meeting of the emperors of Russia and Austria and the 
King of Prussia in Warsaw in October 1850. It was called on the initiative of 
Emperor Nicholas I of Russia to regulate the relations between Austria and 
Prussia (see also Note 309). 
On the Federal Diet, see Note 171. p. 456 
314 The expression the "crazy year" ("das tolle Jahr") was first used by Johann 
Heinrich von Falkenstein in a chronicle published in 1739 to describe the 
popular unrest in Erfurt in 1509. Later, it was widely applied to the 
revolutionary year 1848. p. 456. 
315 See Note 252. p. 456 
316 The local settlement laws (Heimatgesetzgebung) established the right of citizens to 
permanently reside in a certain locality, as well as the right of impoverished 
families to receive material aid from the communities to which they belonged. 
p. 457 
317 The Prussian taler was equal to VH Mark of sterling silver; had currency in 
Prussia between 1750 and 1857. It was also recognised by North German and 
some other states. 
The gold taler, a monetary unit of the free city of Bremen which retained 
the gold standard up to 1872, as distinct from other German monetary systems. 
See also Note 229. 
The "new two-third" taler, a silver coin that had currency in North German 
states. 
Bank Mark (Mark Banko), a coin introduced by the Hamburg Bank and 
used in settling international accounts. 
Current Mark (Mark Kurant), a silver coin; from the 17th century, this was 
the name of silver money with a value of up to half a mark, as distinct from 
gold coins, small change and paper money. The 20 gulden piece and the 
24 gulden piece (Zwanzig-Guldenfuss; Vierundzwanzig-Guldenfuss), a system 
under which one Mark of sterling silver was used to mint either 20 or 
24 gulden. It was introduced in 1748 in Austria and later in the Electorate of 
Saxony and the states of Western and Southern Germany. p. 457 
318 The Wartburg festival was held on the initiative of Jena University students on 
October 18, 1817 to commemorate the tercentenary of the Reformation and 
the fourth anniversary of the Battle of Leipzig. The festival was a 
demonstration of the students' opposition to the Metternich regime. 
The Burschenschaften were German student organisations formed during the 
liberation struggle against Napoleon. They advocated the unification of 
Germany and combined progressive ideas with extreme nationalism, p. 458 
319 The Hambach festival was a political demonstration held by members of South 
German liberal and radical bourgeoisie at the Hambach Castle (in the 
Rhineland Palatinate) on May 27, 1832 to urge the unification of Germany, 

=====第700页=====
672 Notes 
constitutional reforms and the transformation of Germany into a federal 
republic. p. 458 
320 Under the Hohenstaufen dynasty (1138-1254), the Holy Roman Empire 
(founded in 962) was an unstable union of feudal principalities and free cities, 
it incorporated Germany and several other Central European states, part of Italy 
and East European regions captured by German feudal lords from the Slavs. 
p. 458 
321 Engels ironically paraphrases the refrain of Ernst Moritz Arndt's well-known 
poem "Des Teutschen Vaterland" written in 1813. Arndt's refrain is "Sein 
Vaterland muß größer sehn" (His fatherland must be greater). p. 459 
322 See Note 220. p. 459 
323 On the Peace of Westphalia, see Note 220. 
The Peace of Teschen (Silesia) between Austria, on one side, and Prussia and 
Saxony, on the other, was signed on May 13, 1779 and concluded the War of 
the Bavarian Succession (1778-79). Prussia and Austria received parts of 
Bavarian territory, and Saxony was granted financial compensation. Russia 
acted as mediator in the conclusion of the treaty, and together with France, as 
its guarantor. p. 459 
324 Silesia, part of the Austrian Empire since 1526, was seized by Prussia during 
the War of the Austrian Succession (1740-48) caused by the claims of several 
European rulers, above all, King Frederick II of Prussia, to the Habsburg 
domains, which, in default of a male heir on the death of Emperor Charles VI, 
went to his daughter, Marie Theresa. 
Initially adopting a stance of benevolent neutrality towards Prussia, France 
openly sided with the anti-Austrian coalition after Prussia's first victories over 
Austria. In that war, Frederick II twice betrayed his allies by concluding 
separate peace treaties with Austria in 1742 and 1745; in 1742, Prussia received 
the major part and, after the war, the whole of Silesia. p. 459 
325 See Note 177. p. 459 
326 The reference is to the debate on and approval by the Regensburg Imperial Diet 
of the decision proposed by France and Russia to settle territorial issues in 
Rhenish Germany (see Note 177). The Diet was the supreme body of the Holy 
Roman Empire and consisted of representatives of the German states. It was in 
session almost uninterruptedly between 1663 and 1806. p. 459 
327 See Note 171. p. 460 
328 Here Engels uses the expression " Mehrer des Reiches" which was part of the 
official title of the Holy Roman Emperors. p. 461 
329 The reference is to the secret Paris treaty of February 19 (March 3), 1859 
concluded by France and Russia. Russia undertook to adopt a "political and 
military stand which most easily proves its benevolent neutrality towards 
France", and not to object to the enlargement of the Kingdom of Sardinia in 
the event of a war between France and Sardinia, on the one hand, and Austria, 
on the other. France pledged to encourage a revision of the articles of the 
Paris peace treaty of 1856 which ended the Crimean War, since they restricted 
Russian sovereignty on the Black Sea. p. 461 
330 On December 2, 1851, Louis Bonaparte carried out a coup d'état by dissolving 
the Legislative Assembly and declared himself President of France in violation 
of the 1848 constitution. p. 461 

=====第701页=====
Notes 673 
331 The Carbonari were members of secret political societies in Italy and France in 
the first half of the 19th century. In Italy, they fought for national 
independence, unification of the country and liberal constitutional reforms. 
Louis Napoleon was a member of the Carbonari organisation in 1831. 
As special constable, Louis Napoleon approved the preventive measures 
taken against the Chartist demonstration on April 10, 1848. p. 462 
332 The so-called "nationalities principle" was advanced by the ruling circles of the 
Second Empire and extensively used by them as an ideological screen for their 
aggressive plans and adventurist foreign policy. Posing as a "defender of 
nations", Napoléon III exploited the national interests of the oppressed 
peoples to strengthen France's hegemony and extend its frontiers. The 
"nationalities principle" was designed to stir up national hatred and to turn the 
national movements, especially those of small nations, into a tool for the 
counter-revolutionary policy of the rival powers. p. 462 
333 The reference is to the French frontiers established by the Luneville peace 
treaty concluded by France and Austria on February 9, 1801 after the defeat of 
the second anti-French coalition. The treaty extended France's frontiers by 
annexing the left bank of the Rhine, Belgium and Luxemburg, and sanctioned 
its actual rule over the republics created in 1795-98: Batavia (Holland), Helvetia 
(Switzerland), Liguria (Genoa) and Cisalpine (Lombardy). p. 462 
334 Engels is referring to an attempt on the life of Napoleon III by the Italian 
revolutionary Felice Orsini on January 14, 1858. In this way Orsini hoped to 
encourage revolutionary action in Europe and advance the campaign for Italy's 
unification. The attempt failed, and Orsini was executed on March 13 of that 
year. p. 462 
335 The two monarchs, the Austrian Emperor and the Russian Tsar, took joint ac­
tion against revolutionary Hungary. In mid-June 1849, the Tsarist army entered 
Hungary to assist the Austrian counter-revolutionary forces. The intervention 
was tacitly endorsed by the ruling quarters of France and England. The 
combined forces of the Habsburgs and the Tsar suppressed the Hungarian 
revolution. p. 462 
336 The war of the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) and France against Austria, 
which lasted from April 29 to July 8, 1859, was launched by Napoleon III, who, 
under the banner of "liberating Italy" (in his manifesto on the war, he 
promised to make it "free up to the Adriatic"), sought territorial gains and 
needed a successful military campaign to shore up his regime in France. 
Piedmont's ruling circles were hoping that French support would enable them 
to unite Italy under the aegis of the Savoy dynasty. The war caused an upsurge 
of the national liberation movement in Italy. The Austrian army suffered a 
series of defeats. However, Napoleon III, frightened by the scale of the 
liberation movement in Italy, abruptly ceased hostilities. On July 11, the French 
and Austrian emperors concluded a separate preliminary peace treaty in 
Villafranca. France received Savoy and Nice. Lombardy was annexed to 
Sardinia; Venetia remained under Austria. p. 463 
337 The Basle Peace was concluded on April 5, 1795 separately between France and 
Prussia, the latter being a member of the first anti-French coalition. Prussia's 
refusal to unconditionally assist Austria against France in 1859 generally made 
a bad impression in Germany. p. 463 

=====第702页=====
674 Notes 
338 The free-hand policy (die Politik der freien Hand)—a phrase coined by the 
Prussian Foreign Minister Alexander von Schleinitz during the Austro-Franco-
Italian War of 1859, which defined Prussian policy at that time, neither to align 
with any of the warring powers nor to declare neutrality. p. 463 
339 The  Credit Mobilier, short for the Société générale du Crédit Mobilier —a French 
joint-stock bank founded in 1852 by the Péreire brothers. The bank was closely 
connected with the Government of Napoleon III and, protected by it, engaged 
in speculation. It went bankrupt in 1867 and was wound up in 1871. 
The bank's activities were described in a number of Marx's articles 
published in the New-York Daily Tribune (see present edition, Vol. 15, pp. 8-24, 
270-77 and 357-60). p. 464 
340 The Confederation of the Rhine (Rheinbund) —an association of sixteen states in 
Southern and Western Germany established in July 1806 under the protecto­
rate of Napoleon I, after the latter had defeated Austria in 1805. Later, twenty 
other states in Western, Central and Northern Germany joined the Confedera­
tion. It fell apart in 1813 after the defeat of Napoleon's army in Germany. 
p. 464 
341 After the defeat of Austria by Napoleonic France in July 1805 and the 
formation of the Confederation of the Rhine (see Note 340), which announced 
its separation from the German Empire, Francis II, Emperor of the Holy 
Roman Empire of the German Nation, who had earlier accepted the title of 
Emperor of Austria under the name of Francis I, on August 6, 1806 rejected 
the German imperial crown. The German Empire ceased to exist. p. 465 
342 The reference is to the fortresses of the German Confederation located mostly 
along the French border. Their garrisons were formed from armed units of 
major member-states, mostly Austria and Prussia. p. 466 
343 The reference is to the reactionary government of Prince Schwarzenberg 
formed in November 1848 after the defeat of the bourgeois-democratic 
revolution, which had been launched by the popular insurrection of March 13, 
1848 in Vienna. p. 466 
344 In August 1863, a conference of German princes was convened in Frankfurt-
am-Main on the initiative of Emperor Francis Joseph of Austria to discuss a 
plan for the reform of the German Confederation providing for Austrian 
supremacy. King William I of Prussia refused to attend; several minor states 
also failed to extend full support to Austria, and the conference proved 
fruitless. p. 466 
345 The term Realpolitik was used to describe Bismarck's policy, which, his 
contemporaries believed, was based entirely on cool calculation. p. 466 
346 The reference is to Frederick II's conversation with Beauvau, the French envoy 
to Berlin, not long before the War of the Austrian Succession (see Note 324). 
p. 469 
347 When territorial issues were settled by the so-called Imperial Deputation in 
1803 (see Note 177), Prussia received as compensation the secularised Münster 
bishopric and some other possessions in Western Germany. p. 469 
348 The reference is to the events of the wars waged by the third and the fourth 
coalitions of European powers against Napoleonic France. The third coalition 
was formed in 1805 and embraced Britain, Austria, Russia, Sweden and the 
Kingdom of Naples. Prussia refused to join it, declaring its neutrality, and in 

=====第703页=====
Notes 675 
November 1805 concluded a treaty with Russia pledging to act as a mediator 
between the coalition and France, and, should its efforts fail, to join the 
campaign against Napoleon. However, after Austria's defeat at Austerlitz on 
December 12, 1805, Prussia signed a treaty with France, under which it 
received the Electorate of Hanover, for certain territorial concessions on the 
Rhine. The establishment of Napoleon's rule in Western and Southern 
Germany and his action to the detriment of Prussia again prompted the latter 
to side with Russia and Britain, who were still in a state of war with France. 
The fourth coalition was formed and encompassed Britain, Russia, Prussia and 
Sweden. In October 1806, in the battles of Jena (see Note 220) and Auerstedt, 
the Prussian army was routed by French troops which then occupied Prussia. 
p. 469 
349 The Customs Union (Zollverein) of German states (initially embracing 18 states), 
which established a common customs frontier, was founded in 1834 and 
headed by Prussia. By the 1840s, the Union embraced all German states with 
the exception of Austria, the Hanseatic towns (Bremen, Lübeck, Hamburg) and 
some of the smaller states. Formed due to the need for a single German 
market, the Customs Union subsequently promoted Germany's political 
unification. It ceased to exist in 1871. p. 470 
350 Landwehr —the army reserve formed in Prussia in 1813 during the struggle 
against Napoleon. In the 1840s, it consisted of men under forty who had done 
three years of active service and not less than two years in the reserve. In 
contrast to the regular army, the Landwehr was called up only in case of 
extreme emergency (war, or threat of war). p. 471 
351 Kulturkampf —the term used to designate the campaign of the Bismarck 
government in 1871-75 against the Catholic Church and the Party of the 
Centre closely associated with it, which expressed separatist and anti-Prussian 
tendencies widespread in Western and South-Western Germany. A number of 
laws were passed for the purpose of weakening the influence of the Centre and 
the Catholic clergy which supported it. However, the Church refused to comply. 
In the second half of the 1870s and early 1880s, against the background of the 
growing workers' movement, Bismarck, seeking to unite all reactionary forces, 
effected a reconciliation with the Catholic Church; the majority of the laws 
were repealed. p. 471 
352 Here Engels has in mind the liberals who advocated the transformation of 
Germany into a federative state after the model of Switzerland, which was 
divided into self-governing cantons. p. 471 
353 The song about Burgomaster Tschech (Tschech's Attentat)—a folk satire 
mocking Frederick William IV of Prussia in the context of the abortive attempt 
on his life staged on July 26, 1844 by Heinrich Tschech, former burgomaster 
of Storkow (Prussia). 
The song about the Baroness von Droste-Fischering—a folk satire of the 
Catholic clergy mocking the tricks played by the so-called "healers" who 
operated in Trier in the 1840s. p. 471 
354 The reference is to the coup d'état in Prussia in November-December 1848. On 
November 2 of that year, the counter-revolutionary Brandenburg-Manteuffel 
government came to office; on November 8, by a royal edict, sessions of the 
Prussian National Assembly were transferred from Berlin to Branden­
burg; the majority of the Assembly, which continued meeting in Berlin, were 
dispersed on November 15 by General Wrangel's troops; the coup d'état ended 
45-1243 

=====第704页=====
676 Notes 
when on December 5, the Assembly was disbanded and a Constitution granted. 
It introduced a two-chamber system and empowered the King not only to 
revoke the chambers' decisions but also to revise some of the articles of the 
Constitution  itself.  In April 1849, Frederick William disbanded the chamber 
elected on the basis of the imposed Constitution, and on May 30 passed new 
electoral legislation which introduced a three-class voting system based on high 
property qualifications and unequal representation of the various groups of the 
population. The King managed to get the new Constitution adopted with the 
support of the majority in the new chamber of representatives, and it came into 
force on January 31, 1850. Prussia retained the upper chamber, which 
consisted mostly of representatives of the feudal nobility (chamber of the gentry). 
The Constitution gave the government the right to set up special courts to deal 
with cases of high treason. In December 1850, the Brandenburg-Manteuffel 
ministry was replaced by the Manteuffel ministry, which remained in office until 
November 1858. p. 472 
355 Since Frederick William IV of Prussia suffered from a mental illness, his 
brother, Prince William, was appointed his deputy in 1857, and regent in 
October 1858. In January 1861, following the death of the former, the Prince 
was proclaimed king under the name of William I. In November 1858, the 
Prince Regent dismissed the Manteuffel ministry and brought to power 
moderate liberals headed by Karl August Hohenzollern-Sigmaringen. The term 
of this ministry's office (up to March 1862) came to be known as "the New 
Era". However, the liberal ministry did not introduce any radical reforms and 
was replaced by a conservative cabinet headed by Prince Adolf von Hohenloe. 
In September 1862, Otto von Bismarck became Prussian Prime Minister. 
p. 472 
356 In February 1860, the lower chamber (chamber of representatives) of the 
Prussian Provincial Diet refused to approve the plan for the army's 
reorganisation proposed by the War Minister von Roon. The government 
however managed to secure from the chamber of representatives the means to 
maintain the army already in existence, and this allowed it to begin the 
reorganisation. When in March 1862 the liberal majority in the chamber 
refused to approve the military budget and demanded the establishment of a 
ministry accountable to the Provincial Diet, the government disbanded the 
latter and announced new elections. In late September 1862, Bismarck's 
ministry was formed, which in October of that year dissolved the Diet and 
launched the military reform without waiting for it to approve the expenditure. 
This constitutional conflict, as it was called, between the Prussian government 
and the bourgeois-liberal majority of the Diet was settled only in 1866, when, 
after Prussia's victory over Austria, the Prussian bourgeoisie capitulated before 
Bismarck. p. 473 
357 On Prussia's war against Denmark in 1848-50 and the mobilisation of 1850, see 
Note 309. p. 473 
358 Under the London Protocol on the integrity of the Danish monarchy, signed on 
May 8, 1852 by Russia, Austria, Britain, France, Prussia, Sweden and 
representatives of Denmark, Schleswig-Holstein and Denmark could be bound 
only by personal union. Holstein remained a member of the German 
Confederation. In 1855, a constitution was published which was valid for all 
parts of the Danish Kingdom and covered both these duchies; only in 1858, 
under pressure from the German Federal Diet, did the Danish government 

=====第705页=====
Notes 677 
agree to exclude Holstein from the provisions of the Constitution, but on 
condition that it make a contribution to national expenditure. On 
November 13, 1863, the Danish parliament approved a new constitution which 
declared the annexation of Schleswig to Denmark. p. 474 
359 The National Association (Deutscher National-Verein) was a party of the 
German liberal bourgeoisie which advocated the unification of Germany 
(without Austria) in a strong centralised state under the aegis of the Prussian 
monarchy. Its inaugural congress was held in Frankfurt in September 1859. 
After the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 and the formation of the North 
German Confederation, the National Association announced its dissolution in 
November 1867. p. 474 
360 The reference is to the Russo-Prussian convention initiated by Bismarck and 
signed on February 8 (January 27), 1863 by Russian Foreign Minister Alexan­
der Gorchakov and the Prussian representative Gustav von Alvensleben. Under 
the convention, Prussia undertook to render Tsarist Russia comprehensive 
assistance in suppressing the Polish uprising of 1863. p. 477 
361 See Note 332. p. 477 
362 The reference is to Austria's role in the Danish-Prussian War of 1848-50 (see 
Note 309), especially in its final stage, when Prussia sided with the duchies of 
Schleswig and Holstein, which were waging an armed liberation struggle 
against Danish rule. Together with Tsarist Russia and other European states, 
Austria supported Denmark and brought pressure to bear on Prussia to make 
peace. On July 2, 1850 a treaty was signed which preserved Danish supremacy 
over the duchies. Advocates of their secession continued hostilities, but Prussia 
did not support them, and the Schleswig-Holstein army was routed. In the 
winter of  1850-51,  on Austria's initiative, a commission of the German 
Confederation (see Note 171) escorted by Austrian and Prussian troops was 
sent to the duchies. The Schleswig-Holstein army was disbanded, and Danish 
rule over the duchies restored. p. 477 
363 The war of Austria and Prussia against Denmark, caused by the latter's refusal 
to give up its plans to annex Schleswig, began in February 1864 and ended in 
July with a total defeat of the Danish army. Under the peace treaty signed in 
Vienna on October 30, 1864, Denmark lost its rights to the duchies of 
Schleswig and Holstein, as well as to the small principality of Lauenburg, which 
were declared the joint possession (condominium) of Austria and Prussia. 
p. 477 
364 In the original, Engels used the term Haupt- und Staatsaktion ("principal and 
spectacular action", "main and state action"), which has a double meaning. 
First, in the 17th and the first half of the 18th century, it denoted plays 
performed by German touring companies. But this term can also denote major 
political events. p. 479 
365 The Warsaw Protocol of June 5 (May 24), 1851, signed by Russia and 
Denmark, as well as the London Protocol of May 8, 1852 (see Note 358), 
established the principle of the integrity of the Danish Crown's territorial 
possessions, including the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. p. 479 
366 The reference is to the armed intervention in Mexico by Britain, France and 
Spain in late 1861-early 1862. Its aim was to suppress the Mexican revolution 
and turn the country into a colony of the European powers. Hostilities were 
45* 

=====第706页=====
678 Notes 
conducted by the French troops, as Britain and Spain soon recalled theirs. By 
mid-1863,  the capital, Mexico City, and a number of other major centres were 
captured. Mexico was proclaimed an empire with the Austrian Archduke 
Maximilian at its head. However, the insurgents managed to win several 
important victories. The French troops sustained heavy losses and were forced 
to leave the country in early 1867. p. 479 
367 See Note 171. p. 480 
368 xhe phrase "a refreshing jolly war" ("ein frischer fröhlicher Krieg") was coined 
by the historian and writer Heinrich Leo in June 1853 in the Volksblatt für Stadt und 
Land,  No. 61 and used later also in a militarist and chauvinist context. 
p. 480 
369 The North German Confederation (Norddeutscher Bund) —a federative state 
formed in 1867 after Prussia's victory in the Austro-Prussian war to replace the 
disintegrated German Confederation (see Note 171). The North German 
Confederation included nineteen states and three free cities, which were 
formally recognised as autonomous. The Confederation ceased to exist in 
January 1871, when the German Empire was formed. p. 480 
370 Yhe reference is to Bismarck's diplomatic preparations for the Austro-Prussian 
War of 1866 (see Note 172). In early March 1866, Robert Goltz, the Prussian 
Ambassador in Paris, obtained Napoleon Ill's consent to observe benevolent 
neutrality towards Prussia in the event of it becoming involved in a war with 
Austria. Simultaneously, Bismarck conducted negotiations in Berlin to explore 
the possibility of forming a Prusso-Italian coalition spearheaded against Austria. 
The other party in the negotiations was the Italian general Giuseppe Govone, 
who was given to understand that, France being agreeable, Bismarck would not 
oppose Italy annexing the German territories lying between the Rhine and the 
Mosel. The treaty on a defensive and offensive alliance between Prussia and 
Italy signed on April 8, 1866 provided for Italy to receive Venetia in the event 
of victory over Austria. p. 480 
371 Fighting in the Austro-Prussian War of 1866 on the side of Austria were 
Saxony, Hanover, Bavaria, Baden, Württemberg, the Electorate of Hesse, 
Hesse-Darmstadt, Nassau and other member-states of the German Confedera­
tion; on the side of Prussia—Mecklenburg, Oldenburg and other North 
German states, as well as the three free cities. 
In early June 1866, Austria lodged a complaint with the Federal Diet 
against Prussia's violation of the treaty on the joint administration of the 
duchies of Schleswig and Holstein. Bismarck refused to comply with the 
decision of the Diet which, on Austria's proposal, declared war on Prussia. 
During the war, the headway made by the Prussian troops forced the Diet to 
move from Frankfurt to Augsburg, where on August 24, 1866, it announced its 
dissolution. p. 481 
372 The Austro-Prussian war ended in the signing of the peace treaty in Prague on 
August 23, 1866. 
On Prussia's annexation of three member-states of the German Confedera­
tion and one free city, see Note 172. p. 481 
373 Louis Bonaparte was nicknamed "the Little" by Victor Hugo in a speech in the 
Legislative Assembly in November 1851; the nickname became popular after 
the publication of Hugo's pamphlet Napoleon le Petit (1852). p. 481 

=====第707页=====
Notes 679 
374 In September 1866, the Prussian Chamber of Deputies voted 230 against 75 for 
the so-called indemnity bill proposed by Bismarck on exempting the 
government from responsibility for the expenditure that had not been legally 
approved at the time of the constitutional conflict (see Note 356). p. 483 
375 The Prussians defeated the Austrians on July 3, 1866 neai the village of 
Sadowa, in the vicinity of the town of Königgrätz in Bohemia. p. 483 
376 The Customs Parliament (Zollparlament) was formed following the signing of a 
treaty between Prussia and the South German states on July 8, 1867. It 
consisted of members of the North German Confederation's Reichstag and 
specially elected deputies from South German states: Bavaria, Baden, Württem­
berg and Hesse. It was to deal exclusively with trade issues and the customs 
policy. Bismarck's wish to gradually broaden its prerogatives extending them to 
political questions, met with stubborn resistance from the South German 
representatives. p. 484 
377 The river Main formed the boundary between the North German Confedera­
tion and the South German states. p. 484 
378 Under the peace treaty with Austria concluded in Vienna on October 3, 1866 
Italy, which fought on the side of Prussia in the Austro-Prussian War, annexed 
Venetia. However, as a result of Prussia's opposition, its claims to the South 
Tyrol and Trieste, the property of Austria, were not satisfied. p. 486 
379 In his despatch of August 6, 1847 to Count Apponyi in Paris, the Austrian 
Chancellor Metternich wrote "L'Italie est une expression géographique". Later 
he applied the expression to Germany as well. p. 486 
380 The London Conference of diplomatic representatives of Austria, Russia, 
Prussia, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Great Britain and Luxemburg 
on the issue of Luxemburg was held between May 7 and 11, 1867. Under the 
treaty signed on May 11, the Duchy of Luxemburg was declared neutral. 
Prussia undertook to promptly withdraw its troops from the Luxemburg 
Fortress, and Napoleon III was to renounce his claims for annexing 
Luxemburg. p. 486 
381 See Note 308. p. 487 
382 See Note 350. p. 488 
383 On August 6, 1870, in the battles of Spicheren (Lorraine) and Worth (Alsace), 
Prussian troops defeated several French corps. These victories, won at the 
initial stage of the Franco-Prussian War of  1870-71,  allowed the Prussian 
command to launch an offensive, in the course of which the French army was 
broken up into two groups and then surrounded and smashed to pieces. 
On the Battle of Sedan, see Note 224. p. 488 
384 The news of the defeat of the French army at Sedan gave rise to mass 
revolutionary action in Paris, on September 4, 1870 which led to the fall of the 
Second Empire and the proclamation of a republic. Power, however, was 
captured by bourgeois republicans. The provisional government headed by 
General Louis Trochu declared itself "the Government of National Defence" 
but, scared by the revolutionary outburst, in fact chose a policy of national 
betrayal and collusion with the enemy. p. 489 
385 T^ reference is probably to the proclamation addressed to the French nation 
on August 11, 1870 and signed by King William I of Prussia. p. 489 

=====第708页=====
680 Notes 
386 The Landsturm Statute, passed in Prussia on April 21, 1813, provided for the 
organisation of volunteer units ("francs-tireurs"), without a uniform, who were 
to carry on guerrilla warfare in the rear and on the flanks of Napoleon's army. 
All able-bodied men not in active service were urged to join the Landsturm. 
The brutalities perpetrated against the French francs-tireurs by the Prussian 
army that occupied France at the time of the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 
are described by Engels in a series of articles "Notes on the War" (see present 
edition, Vol. 22, pp. 163, 167 and 198-202). p. 489 
387 Engels is referring to the Battle of Héricourt (near Belfort) on January 15-17, 
1871 between German troops and the French Eastern Army under Charles 
Bourbaki, which advanced to the southern Vosges planning to deal a flank 
strike at the main communication line of the German army besieging Paris. 
The attacks of the Eastern Army were rebuffed by the Germans, it was 
forced to retreat to the Swiss border and was interned on that country's 
territory. In the meantime, on January 28, 1871, Bismarck and Jules Favre, a 
representative of the National Defence Government, signed a convention on the 
armistice and the capitulation of Paris. p. 490 
388 Several hundred civilians were killed and many wounded in street fighting on 
March 18, 1848 in Berlin. The insurgents took over the guarding of the Palace, 
and on the morning of March 19 forced the King to go out onto the balcony 
and bare his head before the corpses of the fallen fighters. p. 491 
389 After the signing of a convention on the armistice and the capitulation of Paris 
on January 28, 1871, the hostilities between France and Prussia were not 
resumed. On February 26, 1871, the French government headed by Thiers 
concluded a preliminary peace on the terms dictated by Bismarck. The final 
peace treaty was signed on May 10, 1871 in Frankfurt-am-Main. It confirmed 
Germany's annexation of Alsace and eastern Lorraine. Under the Frankfurt 
Treaty, the terms on which France was to pay the 5-milliard francs contribution 
were made harsher, and the German occupation of the French territory was 
prolonged. That was the cost of Bismarck's assistance to the Versailles 
government in the suppression of the Commune. p. 491 
390 See Note 220. p. 491 
391 Under the Peace of Westphalia, which concluded the European Thirty Years' 
War (1618-48), Strassburg remained incorporated in the German Empire, 
although Alsace became part of France. By order of Louis XIV issued on 
September 30, 1681, French troops occupied the city as belonging to Alsace. 
The Catholic Party of Strassburg headed by Bishop Fürstenberg hailed the 
annexation and did its best to prevent resistance to the French troops. 
p. 491 
392 Reunion chambers (Chambres de réunion) set up by Louis XIV in 1679-80 were to 
give juridical and historical grounds for France's claims to territories of 
neighbouring states, which were then occupied by French troops. p. 492 
393 See Note 337. p. 492 
394 xhe reference is to the preliminary peace treaty signed on October 5, 1735 in 
Vienna by Austria and France. It ended the War of the Polish Succession 
(1733-35) between Russia, Austria and Saxony, on the one hand, and France, 
on the other. Russia and Austria supported the claims to the Polish throne of 

=====第709页=====
Notes 681 
Elector Friedrich August of Saxony (the future King August III of Poland), 
while France promoted Stanislaus Leszczynski, Louis XV's father-in-law. Under 
the treaty, Louis XV recognised August III as King of Poland provided the 
Duchy of Lorraine was given over to Stanislaus Leszczynski. On his death, it was to 
pass over to the French crown. The terms of the preliminary treaty were 
confirmed by the Vienna Treaty of 1738. On Stanislaus Leszczynski's demise in 
1766,  Lorraine was incorporated into France. p. 492 
395 The reference is to the strong fortified position formed by North Italian 
fortresses of Verona, Legnago, Mantua and Peschiera. Engels wrote about the 
role of these fortresses as a stronghold of Austrian rule in Northern Italy in his 
works "The Austrian Hold on Italy" and "Po and Rhine" (see present edition, 
Vol. 16, pp. 183-89 and 227-29). p. 494 
396 In his speech in the Reichstag on February 6, 1888 during the discussion of the 
bill on the reorganisation of Germany's armed forces, Bismarck, who insisted 
on the need to boost the country's military might and who actually recognised 
the possibility of an anti-German coalition between France and Tsarist Russia, 
extolled Alexander Ill's policies towards Germany, counterposing them to the 
anti-German campaign launched by the Russian press. p. 495 
397 In the winter of 1886-87, Bismarck capitalised on a slight deterioration in 
relations with France and demanded that the Reichstag pass a law providing 
for a substantial increase of the army and approve a military budget for the 
next seven years. The majority of the deputies refused to approve the budget 
proposed by Bismarck and suggested a three-year budget, after which the 
Reichstag was dissolved. At the elections of February 21, 1887, a majority vote 
was received by the pro-Bismarck parties—conservatives, "free conservatives" 
(see Note 403) and National Liberals (see Note 170), who formed a so-called 
cartel. The new Reichstag approved the budget proposed by Bismarck. 
p. 497 
398 Engels is referring to the conferral of the title German Emperor on King 
William I of Prussia in Versailles on January 18, 1871. p. 497 
399 See Note 252. p. 499 
400 The reference is to the economic crisis which struck Germany in May 1873. It 
was preceded by rapid economic advance accompanied by the feverish 
establishment of new enterprises and extensive speculations. p. 499 
401 The reference is to the bourgeois-liberal Party of Progress (Fortschrittpartei), 
formed in 1861 in Prussia. It voiced the interests of petty bourgeoisie and the 
sections of middle bourgeoisie engaged in foreign trade. The party supported 
the idea of the country's unification under the aegis of Prussia, but demanded 
that a parliamentary system be established. In 1866, its Right wing split off and 
formed the National Liberal Party (see Note 170). In 1884, the men of 
Progress entered into a union with the Left wing of the National Liberal Party 
and formed the German Party of Free Thinkers (Deutsche Freisinnige Partei). 
p. 500 
402 The reference is to the General Association of German Workers (Lassalleans) 
set up by Ferdinand Lassalle in 1863, and the German Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party (the Eisenachers), whose inaugural congress took place in 
Eisenach in 1869. The former was a nationwide political organisation of the 
working class which employed mostly legal forms of class struggle. The latter 

=====第710页=====
682 Notes 
was set up with Marx's and Engels' assistance and was headed by Bebel and 
Liebknecht; it was affiliated to the First International. Despite a number of 
erroneous propositions in its programme, it pursued a revolutionary and 
proletarian line on the issue of Germany's unification and on other questions. 
At the Gotha Congress in 1875, the two trends merged into a single party, 
which up to 1890 was called the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany. 
p. 500 
403 Yhe Conservative Party (the so-called Kreuz-Zeitung's Party, see Note 168) was set 
up in 1848 and promoted the interests of the Junkers, the aristocracy, the 
generals, the Lutheran clergy and top officials. In the first years after the 
unification of Germany, it was in opposition to Bismarck's government, 
believing that Prussian supremacy in Germany was not secure enough. In 1866, 
a Free Conservative Party split off from it which expressed the interests of big 
landowners and a section of industrial tycoons, and unconditionally supported 
Bismarck. In 1876, the Party was reorganised into an all-German Conservative 
Party. p. 501 
404 See Note 170. p. 501 
405 The treaties with the South German states (Baden, Hesse, Bavaria and 
Württemberg) on their joining the North German Confederation were signed 
in November 1870. They accorded a greater measure of independence to the 
Confederation's member-states, the relevant provisions being incorporated into 
the Constitution of the German Empire of April 16, 1871. Bavaria and 
Württemberg retained the special tax on beer and spirits and special rights in 
the management of the postal and telegraphic service; Bavaria, moreover, 
retained a degree of independence in administering its army and railways. 
p. 503 
406 Under the Constitution of the North German Confederation, which came into 
force on July 1, 1867, the Reichstag, which had a right to approve the budget, 
was elected by universal suffrage. The Federal Council, whose functions were 
confined to approval of laws, consisted of representatives nominated by 
governments of all member-states of the Confederation. p. 503 
407 On the revisions of the Constitution of 1849-50, see Note 354. 
Engels uses the term Manteuffelism alluding to the constant violations of the 
Prussian Constitution that occurred under the Ministry of Otto von Manteuffel 
(1850-58). 
On the constitutional conflict, see Note 356. 
On the Battle of Sadowa, see Note 375. p. 504 
408 Under the Law on Imperial Treasury Notes of April 30, 1874, banknotes to the 
total sum of 120 million marks were issued. All member-states of the German 
Empire were obliged to exchange and withdraw their paper money from 
circulation. 
The Law on the Imperial Bank passed on March 14, 1875 regulated the 
emission operations of all banks on the territory of the German Empire. 
p. 506 
409 TI^ reference is to courts (Schöffengerichte) that sprang up in the Middle Ages 
in the part of Germany where Frankish law was in force (Westphalia, Saxony, 
cities on the Lower Rhine and Mosel). They disappeared by the 18th century 
but were resurrected after Germany's unification in 1871 as "an innately 
German institution". They consisted of a judge and two Schöffen (assessors) 

=====第711页=====
Notes 683 
who,  unlike juries, took full part in passing sentences, in other words, defined 
the extent of the punishment together with the judge as their chairman. To 
fulfil a Schöffen's functions, a person had to meet certain age, property and 
residential qualifications. p. 507 
410 See Note 69. p. 507 
411 The reference is to the Imperial Press Law of May 7, 1874. p. 507 
412 The reference is to the administrative reform of 1872 in Prussia which 
abolished landowners' hereditary rule in rural districts and introduced elements 
of local self-government: elective elders in the communities, district councils 
under the Landrats, elected in conformity with the estates system, etc. The 
purpose of the reform was to strengthen the state apparatus and to promote 
centralisation in the interests of the class of Junkers as a whole. p. 507 
413 The reference is to the local government reform in England. The Local 
Government Bill was introduced by the Salisbury government (1886-92) in 
March 1888 and approved by Parliament that August. Under the reform, the 
sheriff's functions were given over to the elective county councils in charge of 
taxation, local budgets, etc. All persons who enjoyed the right to take part in 
parliamentary elections, among them women over 30, could take part in council 
elections. p. 508 
414 See Note 351. p. 509 
415 Ultramontanism, an extremely reactionary religious and political trend in 
Catholicism, which emerged in the 15th century. Its adherents opposed the 
independence of the national churches and advocated the idea of the Pope's 
supremacy and his right to interfere in the affairs of any state. Its mounting 
influence in the second half of the 19th century led to the formation of 
Catholic parties in some of the European states and the declaration of Papal 
infallibility at the first Council of the Vatican in 1870. p. 509 
416 On September 20, 1870, troops of the Italian Kingdom entered Rome, which 
until then had been under the Pope's rule. On the basis of the plebiscite held 
on October 2 in the Papal States in which the majority voted for annexation to 
Italy, the government announced that it was henceforth incorporated into the 
Italian Kingdom. This completed the country's political unification. The Pope's 
secular rule was abolished. The Guarantee Law passed in 1871 secured the 
Pope's state sovereignty only within the boundaries of the Vatican and Lateran 
palaces and his country residence. The Pope reciprocated by excommunicating 
the instigators of the occupation of Rome, refused to recognise the Guarantee 
Law and declared himself "the Vatican prisoner". p. 509 
417 The reference is to the small groups of deputies representing the Poles and 
Alsatians in the Reichstag, as well as the so-called German-Hanover separatist 
party formed after 1866 and embracing champions of the independent 
Hanover monarchy headed by the Guelph dynasty, which had ruled there prior 
to Hanover's annexation to Prussia in 1866. p. 510 
418 See Note 312. p. 511 
419 See present edition, Vol. 25, pp.  146-71.  p. 511 
420 Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly published the Manifesto of the Communist Party on 
December 30, 1871 in an abridged form. 

=====第712页=====
684 Notes 
Le Socialiste also printed an abridged version of the Manifesto in 
January-February 1872. p. 516 
421 The first Russian translation of the Manifesto of the Communist Party appeared 
in 1869 in Geneva in the Volnaya Russkaya Tipographia (the Free Russian 
Press) publishing house, the ownership of which Herzen handed over to 
Chernetsky, a staff member, in 1867. p. 516 
422 The 1882 Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party appeared as a 
third instalment of the Social-Revolutionary Library published by Pyotr Lavrov. 
Engels made a mistake, naming Vera Zasulich as the author of the translation: 
it was the work of Georgy Plekhanov. In 1894, in an afterword to the article "On 
Social Relations in Russia" (see present edition, Vol. 27), Engels himself wrote 
that the translation was that of Plekhanov. 
Marx and Engels wrote a special preface to the 1882 edition (see present 
edition, Vol. 24). p. 516 
423 The Danish translation in question (K. Marx og. F. Engels, Det Kommunistiske 
Manifest, K0benhavn, 1885) had some omissions and inaccuracies, which was 
noted by Engels in the preface to the fourth German edition of the Manifesto 
(see present edition, Vol. 27). The French translation appeared in Le Socialiste 
between August 29 and November 7, 1885, and was reprinted as an appendix 
in the book: Mermeix, La France socialiste, Paris, 1886. The Spanish translation 
was published in the Socialista in July-August 1886, and also as a separate 
edition: Manifesto de Partido Communista par Carlos Marx y F. Engels, Madrid, 
1886.  p. 516 
424 Owenites—followers of Robert Owen, the English Utopian socialist whose ideas 
gained particularly wide currency in the 1820s-30s. According to his system for 
transforming the life of all mankind, "the communities" established on 
voluntary principles were to become a model for the development of the new 
productive forces (including the science of chemistry), the education of a new 
harmoniously developed man, and the establishment of new social relations. 
His most prominent followers were John Grey, Thomas Hodgskin, William 
Thompson and John Bray. Engels wrote in The Condition of the Working-Class in 
England: "English socialism arose with Owen" (see present edition, Vol. 4, 
p. 525). 
Fourierists—followers of Charles Fourier, the French Utopian socialist whose 
doctrine became especially widespread in the 1830s-40s. Advocating the 
establishment of a harmonious social system on the basis of the 18th-century 
materialists' ideas, Fourier admitted the presence in it of private property, 
classes and unearned incomes. He believed that the principal condition for the 
success of the new society was the growth of labour productivity that would 
secure universal wealth. 
Fourier's doctrine made a major impact on the social and philosophical 
thought in a number of countries in Europe and North America. p. 516 
425 Sturm und Drang—a literary movement which evolved in Germany in the early 
1770s and got its name from Friedrich Klinger's play of the same title. 
It conveyed the mounting general discontent with the feudal practices. 
p. 520 
This article was written by Engels in English as a preface to the American 

=====第713页=====
Notes 685 
edition of Marx's speech on the question of free trade delivered in Brussels on 
January 9, 1848 (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 450-65). Engels also looked 
through the translation of the speech made by Florence Kelly-Wischnewetzky 
and translated his preface into German. It was first published in that language 
in Die Neue Zeit, No. 7, July 1888. In the second half of August, it was 
published in the English original in The Labor Standard in New York. The 
publication of Marx's speech in pamphlet form was delayed, as many 
publishers refused to accept it, and it was not printed until September 1888 by Lee 
and Shephard Publishers, Boston. The concluding part of the article was 
also published in German in Der Sozialist (New York) on October 27, 1888. 
p. 521 
427 On the Brussels Congress on free trade, see Engels' essays "The Economic 
Congress" and "The Free Trade Congress at Brussels", present edition, Vol. 6, 
pp. 274-78 and 282-90. p. 521 
428 See Note 154. p. 521 
429 See Note 193. p. 521 
430 The physiocratic school, Physiocrats—a trend in bourgeois classical political 
economy that emerged in France in the 1750s. The Physiocrats held Nature to 
be the only source of wealth, and agriculture the only sphere of the economy 
where value was created. Although they underestimated the role of industry 
and commerce, the Physiocrats rendered an important service by shifting the 
search for the origins of surplus value from the sphere of circulation to that of 
production, thereby laying the basis for the analysis of capitalist production. 
Advocates of large-scale capitalist farming, they showed the moribund nature 
of the feudal economy and thus contributed to the ideological preparation of 
the bourgeois revolution in France. p. 522 
431 See Note 252. p. 524 
432 The reference is to the American Civil War of 1861-65. The Southern 
slave-holders rose against the Union and formed a Confederacy of the 
Southern states. The war was caused mainly by the conflict between the two 
social systems: the capitalist system of wage labour established in the North and 
the slave system dominant in the South. The Civil War, which had the nature 
of a bourgeois-democratic revolution, passed two stages in its development: the 
period of a constitutional war for maintaining the Union and the period of a 
revolutionary war for the abolition of slavery. The decisive role in the defeat of 
the Southerners was played by workers and farmers. p. 525 
433 "Manifest destiny", an expression widely used in the 19th century by the 
ideologists of the expansionist policy pursued by the US ruling quarters to 
vindicate this policy. It was first used by John O'Sullivan, editor of the U.S. 
Magazine and Democratic Review, in the July-August issue of 1845, Vol. XVII, 
p. 5. p. 525 
434 Parliamentary train—a name for third-class trains in England which, under the 
law of 1844, each railway company was obliged to run once a day at a speed of 
12 miles per hour, fares not exceeding one penny per mile. p. 526 
435 In 1823, William Huskisson became President of the Board of Trade. On his 
initiative, a series of measures were introduced in the 1820s to reorganise the 
obsolete customs system. The prohibitive duties on corn were replaced by a 

=====第714页=====
686 Notes 
sliding tariff scale, under which import duties rose or fell depending on the fall 
or rise in grain prices inside the country. 
The tariff reform of 1842 lowered customs duties on corn and other 
imported goods, but introduced income tax as a compensation for the treasury. 
p. 528 
436 The reference is to the Ten Hours' Bill of 1847, which came into force on 
May 1, 1848. In August 1850, Parliament introduced an additional factory act 
which prolonged the working day for women and adolescents to ten-and-a-half 
hours on the first five days of the week and reduced it to seven-and-a-half 
hours on Saturday. See also Note 161. p. 528 
437 See Note 349. p. 529 
438 Yhe need for a reform of the customs tariff so as to raise the duties on 
imported industrial and agricultural goods was stated by a group of Reichstag 
deputies in October 1878. In December, Bismarck submitted his initial rough 
draft of a reform to a specially established commission. The final version was 
debated in the Reichstag beginning in May 1879 and was approved on July 12 
of that year. The new customs tariff provided for a substantial increase of 
import duties on iron, machinery, textile, grain, cattle, fats, flax, timber, etc. 
p. 531 
439 The reference is to the trade agreement between Britain and France signed on 
January 23, 1860. The principal figure on the British side was free trader 
Richard Cobden. Under the agreement, France renounced its prohibitive 
customs policy and introduced duties that could not exceed 30, and later 25 
per cent of the cost of the goods. The agreement granted France the right to 
export the bulk of its goods to England tax-free. One consequence of the 
agreement was mounting competition on the home market caused by the influx 
of English goods, which provoked displeasure among the French manufactur­
ers and industrialists. p. 533 
440 The Standard Oil Company was founded by John D. Rockefeller in the state of 
Ohio in 1870 with an initial capital of $1 million. In the 1870s, the company 
dominated the refining and transportation of oil and came to control almost 
the entire US oil industry. In 1882, the company was transformed into a trust 
of the same name, operating on a capital of $75 million. Later, the Standard 
Oil grew into one of the world's largest corporations. p. 533 
441 The American Sugar Company (trust) was set up in 1887 and became the American 
Sugar Refining Company in 1891. In the first years of its existence, the trust 
came to dominate nearly all of the US sugar industry. Later, despite the 
formation of major competing companies, the trust managed to retain its 
position as the largest corporation in the branch by establishing control over 
some of its competitors and cooperating with others on a profit-sharing basis. 
p. 534 
442 The Manchester School—a trend in economic thinking which reflected the 
interests of industrial bourgeoisie. Its adherents, known as Free Traders, 
advocated freedom of trade and non-interference by the government in 
economic life. The centre of the Free Traders' activities was Manchester, where 
the movement was headed by two textile manufacturers, Richard Cobden and 
John Bright, who founded the Anti-Corn Law League in 1838. In the 1840s 
and 1850s, the Free Traders formed a separate political group which later 
constituted the Left wing of the Liberal Party. p. 534 

=====第715页=====
Notes 687 
443 This letter written by Engels (see Engels to Laura Lafargue, May 7, 1889, 
present edition, Vol. 48) in connection with the preparations for the 
international socialist congress was published in The Labour Elector on behalf of 
the French socialist Charles Bonnier, who was actively involved in the work. 
The decisive role in the convocation of the congress belonged to Marxist 
organisations, the German Social-Democratic and French Workers' parties, 
which acted under Engels' guidance. Opportunists, mostly French Possibilists 
(see Note 444) supported by the British Social-Democratic Federation, sought 
to prevent the consolidation of revolutionary Marxist forces and tried to take the 
organisation of the congress into their hands, but in vain. The International 
Socialist Workers' Congress, which took place in Paris in July 1889, highlighted 
the Marxists' victory. It paved the way for a new international proletarian 
association, the Second International. The alternative congress convened by the 
Possibilists and their allies failed to win the support of the majority of socialist 
organisations and proved a flop. p. 537 
444 Possibilism—an opportunist trend in the French socialist movement that existed 
from the 1880s to the early 20th century. It was headed by Paul Brousse and 
Benoît Malon, who in 1882 effected a split in the French Workers' Party. The 
dissenters adopted the name of the Workers' Social-Revolutionary Party. Its 
ideological foundation was the reformist theory of municipal socialism. The 
Possibilists declared the "policy of possibilities" ("la politique des possibilitées") 
their principle. In the early 20th century, they joined the French Socialist 
Party. 
On the opportunists, see Note 208. p. 537 
445 The Parliamentary Committee—the executive of the British Trade Union 
Congress (up to 1921). p. 538 
446 The International Workers' Congress was convened in London in November 
1888 by the British trade union leadership. Represented at it were trade unions 
from several European countries. p. 538 
447 This is Engels' letter to James Keir Hardie, editor of the Labour Leader 
magazine, where it was published without a heading in the "Mining Notes" 
section and supplied with the following introductory note: "The great miners' 
strike in Germany is over, and the men have succeeded in establishing their 
demand for an  8-hour  day from bank to bank. Mr. Frederick Engels, the 
eminent historian of the labour movement, and the life-long friend of the great 
Karl Marx, sends me the following interesting note on the strike." 
The Ruhr miners' strike was one of the major events in the German 
working-class movement in late 19th century. It began on May 4, 1889 in the 
Gelsenkirchen mining district and spread to the entire Dortmund area. Up to 
90,000 people were taking part at its peak. Some of the strikers were under the 
influence of Social-Democrats. The main demands of the strikers were: higher 
wages, reduction of the working day to 8 hours, and recognition of workers' 
committees. The industrialists promised to meet some of the workers' demands, 
as a result of which work was partially resumed in mid-May. However, as the 
employers went back on their word, a miners' delegates' meeting held on 
May 24 passed a decision to continue the strike. Repressive measures, on the 
one hand, and fresh promises by mine-owners, on the other, prompted the 
workers to call off the strike in early June. p. 539 
448 See Note 253. p. 539 

=====第716页=====
688 Notes 
449 A three-man delegation of the striking miners was formed through the effort 
of some of the Reichstag liberal deputies who sought to curtail the influence of 
Social-Democratic ideas on the miners and used their relatively low level of 
political awareness. The delegation was received by William II on May 14. 
p. 540 
450 In mid-May 1889, the strike movement launched by the Ruhr miners spread to 
Upper and Lower Silesia, where it involved a large part of the mines (20,000 
people) and lasted from May 14 to 24, and to Saxony, where 10,000 people 
took part in it. In the Saar area, workers at some of the mines went on strike 
on May 14-16, and by May 23, the number of strikers reached 12,000. 
Somewhat earlier, strikes began in the Wurm mining district, involving about 
8,000  men. Work was not resumed until May 31. A major miners' strike also 
took place in Bohemia, in the district of Kladno, on May 24. 
At the end of May, strikes for higher wages and, in some cases, shorter 
working hours, were held in various towns and districts of Germany. On 
May 25, about 20,000 masons went on strike in Berlin; in Freienwalde, a strike 
was launched by railway workers, and in Stettin and Königsberg, by house 
painters and carpenters. p. 540 
451 This article was occasioned by the campaign launched by the Possibilists (see 
Note 444) in France and their adherents in the Social-Democratic Federation in 
Britain in order to discredit the International Socialist Workers' Congress held 
in Paris between July 14 and 21, 1889, at which the Marxist parties of 
European countries clearly dominated. Initially, the Possibilists tried to take 
preparations for the congress into their hands and thus secure themselves a 
leading role but, having failed to do so, they convened an alternative congress 
in Paris, attended by only a few foreign delegates, their representation in most 
cases being purely fictitious. The attempt to unite the two congresses failed, 
since the Possibilist Congress made unification conditional on reverification of 
the credentials of the delegates to the Marxist congress. p. 542 
452 Three tailors of Tooley Street, a well-known phrase originating from John 
Canning, a British statesman, who said that three tailors of Tooley Street had 
addressed the House of Commons in a petition opened with the words: "We, 
the people of England". p. 543 
453 The Carlists—a reactionary clerical absolutist group in Spain uniting adherents 
of the pretender to the Spanish throne Don Carlos, the brother of 
Ferdinand VII. They relied on the army and the Catholic clergy, as well as on 
the more backward peasants in some regions of Spain. p. 544 
454 This  is an excerpt from Engels' letter apparently addressed to Eleanor Marx. 
The excerpt was printed by The Labour Elector and published in German 
translation in the New Yorker Volkszeitung on September 25, 1889 and the 
Berliner Volks-Tribüne on October 26, 1889. 
The London dockers' strike from August 12 to September 14, 1889 was a 
major event in the British working-class movement of the late 19th century. 
Taking part in it were 30,000 dockers and over 30,000 workers of other trades; 
the majority were unskilled labourers who did not belong to any trade union. 
The strikers obtained higher wages and better working conditions. The 
dockers' strike introduced more organisation into the movement: a, dockers' 
and some other unions were set up which embraced a large number 
of unskilled workers and came to be known as the New Trade Unions. 
p. 545 

=====第717页=====
Notes 689 
455 This article carried by the Sozialdemokrat aroused profound interest in the 
socialist quarters in many countries: on October 11, 1889, it was reprinted by 
the Vienna Arbeiter-Zeitung; on October 12, in a slightly abridged English 
translation, by The Labour Elector, on October 26 (with insignificant editorial 
changes and under the heading, "Was die Bourgeoisie nicht kann und was die 
Arbeiter können"), by the Berliner Volks-Tribüne, as well as by other newspapers 
in Germany and the USA. In 1890, the article was translated into Russian and 
published in the  Cou,uajit>-deM.oKpami>,  No. 1, 1890. 
This article was published in English in full for the first time in: Marx and 
Engels, Articles on Britain, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 546 
456 The reference is to the first ballot to the French Chamber of Deputies on 
September 22, 1889, when the republicans received only 215, and the various 
monarchist groups (Legitimists, Bonapartists and Boulangists), 140 seats. 
p. 547 
«7 See Note 454. p. 548 
458 Engels probably wrote this passage when working on The Origin of the Family, 
Private Property and the State. In content, it relates to the passage in Chapter IX 
of the book which deals with the survival of the gentile system in medieval 
aristocratic, patrician and peasant associations (see this volume, pp. 268-69). 
However, due to the absence of any other information, the dating of this 
fragment, written in longhand on a separate sheet, is only provisional. The title 
has been supplied by the editors. p. 553 
459 Polis (a city state)—a typical socio-economic and political organisation 
in Ancient Greece and Ancient Italy. The Greek polis emerged in the 
8th-6th cent. B.C. It included the city proper and the adjacent agricultural set­
tlements. Only its indigenous inhabitants who owned land and slaves possessed 
full civic rights. There were also free citizens who did not enjoy full rights, 
such as metoikos (see Note 108), they engaged in trades and commerce. 
p. 553 
460 Engels wrote these notes when preparing the new edition of his book The 
Peasant War in Germany. As is clear from his letters, specifically, to Friedrich 
Adolph Sorge of December 31, 1884, he intended to revise it completely 
presenting the peasant war of 1525 as "the pivot for the whole history of 
Germany" (see present edition, Vol. 47). This demanded that substantial 
historical data be added. The notes written on a separate sheet are probably a 
fragment and a draft plan for the introduction to the book. Engels' intention to 
publish a revised edition of The Peasant War in Germany was not realised. 
p. 554 
461 Interregnum—the period between 1254 and 1273 in Germany after the 
Hohenstaufen dynasty had ceased to exist. It witnessed the struggle between 
various pretenders to the Imperial crown, incessant strife between princes, 
knights and cities, and the mounting arbitrary rule of the princes in their 
estates. In 1273, Rudolf Habsburg was elected Emperor of the Holy Roman 
Empire. p. 555 
462 The Hundred Years' War—a series of wars between England and France lasting 
from 1337 to 1453. It was caused by the dispute between the two countries 
over the possession of the commercial and industrial towns of Flanders, the 
main consumer of English wool, and the English kings' claims to the French 
throne. During the war, the English managed to seize a considerable part of 

=====第718页=====
690 Notes 
France. However, as a result of a popular war against the foreign invaders, the 
English were driven out of French territory with the exception of Calais. 
The reference is to the so-called reconquista, in the course of which the 
peoples inhabiting the Peninsula recaptured the territories conquered in the 
8th-15th centuries by the Arabs and the Berbers collectively known as the 
Moors. By the mid-13th century, the Moors retained only the Emirate of 
Granada, which fell in 1492. 
The reference is to the final period of Tartar-Mongol rule in Russia, which 
lasted throughout the 13th and 15th centuries. The popular struggle against 
the invaders resulted in the formation of the Russian centralised state. This 
enabled Prince Ivan III of Muscovy to refuse to pay tribute to the Golden 
Horde in 1476. After the unsuccessful campaign against Russia undertaken by 
Khan Ahmed in 1480, the country set itself completely free from the 
Tartar-Mongol yoke. 
The Wars of the Roses (1455-85)—wars between the feudal houses of York 
and Lancaster competing for the throne, the white rose being the badge of the 
House of York, and the red one of the House of Lancaster. The wars almost 
completely wiped out the ancient feudal nobility and brought Henry VII to 
power to form a new dynasty, that of the Tudors, who set up an absolute 
monarchy in England. p. 555 
463 Engels may have written this unfinished work when he was preparing the new 
edition of The Peasant War in Germany (see Note 460). Its content shows that it 
was to serve as part of the introduction to the new edition. Engels also used his 
earlier notes on the history of Germany, namely the manuscript Varia on 
Germany (present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 599-610). The title has been supplied by 
the editors. p. 556 
464 Municipium—at the time of the Roman Republic, a city tied to Rome by a 
treaty. Municipia were of two categories, depending on the nature of the treaty 
with Rome, equal or unequal. The former usually enjoyed self-government and 
their citizens enjoyed full civil and political rights in Rome. The citizens of the 
latter did not have political rights in Rome but performed the duties of Roman 
citizens. A municipium had no permanent status. p. 556 
465 The Lay of Ludwig (Das Ludwigslied) was written in the Franconian dialect by an 
anonymous poet in the late 9th century. It is a panegyric of the West Frankish 
King Ludwig III celebrating his victory over the Normans at Sancourt in 881 
(Hausschatz der Volkspoesie, Leipzig, 1846). p. 560 
466 The reference is to the extant texts in the Old High German and the Romance 
(Old French) languages—oaths of allegiance exchanged by the East Frankish 
King Louis the German and the West Frankish King Charles the Bald, as well 
as by their vassals in Strassburg in 842. p. 560 
467 The Slavs of the Elbe (Laba)—a large group of West Slavic peoples which at the 
end of the first and beginning of the second millennium A.D. inhabited the 
territory between the Laba and its tributary, the Sala (Saale), in the West, and 
the Odra (Oder) in the East. Beginning in the 10th century, German feudal 
lords launched a systematic campaign to capture the Slavic lands and set up 
military districts, the marks, on conquered territories. Despite the resistance of 
the indigenous population, in the second half of the 12th century the Germans 
managed to capture the last free territories of the Slavs of the Elbe. Some of the 
Slavs were annihilated, some were forcibly Germanised, and others managed to 
retain their ethnic and cultural features. p. 560 

=====第719页=====
Notes 691 
468 Lotharingia (Lorraine) —a state on the left bank of the Rhine established in 855 
during the division of Emperor Lothair I's possessions and named after his son 
Lothair II, to whom it was handed over as an independent kingdom. Its 
position between the West and the East Frankish kingdom made it unstable and 
was one of the causes of the struggle for its territory. After the death of 
Lothair II in 870, Lotharingia was divided (roughly along the language 
frontier) between his brothers, the East Frankish King Louis the German and 
the West Frankish King Charles the Bald. p. 560 
469 The reference is to the English victories over the French in the Hundred Years' 
War (1337-1453) (see Note 462). p. 563 
470 The reference is to Wellington's campaign against France in the Peninsular War 
of 1808-13 and his victory at Waterloo (Belgium) on June 18, 1815. The 
best-known victories won by Wellington in Spain in the way described by 
Engels were the battles of Talavere in 1809 and of Salamanca in 1812. 
p. 563 
471 Engels is referring to the refusal of the German Emperor Albrecht I of the 
Austrian Habsburgs to recognise the freedoms of the Swiss cantons confirmed 
by his predecessor, Adolf of Hassau. In the 14th-15th centuries, in their 
continued struggle for independence, the cantons managed to defeat the troops 
of the Austrian feudal lords and to secure for Switzerland the position of a 
state free from Austrian rule and subordinate only formally to the German 
Empire. p. 563 
472 At the battle of Crécy on August 26, 1346, the English, using a combination of 
knights and archers, defeated the French army, whose main force was cavalry. 
This battle was fought during the Hundred Years' War between England and 
France (see Note 462). 
On the Battle of Waterloo, see Note 226. p. 564 
473 The reference is to the printing with movable type invented by Johann 
Gutenberg in the mid-15th century. This invention was one of the main factors 
which promoted science and literature in the 15th and 16th centuries, and 
eventually led to the growth of the productive forces throughout the world. 
p. 564 
474 The Duchy of Burgundy, which was formed in the 9th century in the basins of 
the Saône, Seine and Loire and later annexed considerable territories 
(Franche-Comté, part of Northern France, the Netherlands), became an 
independent feudal state in the 14th-15th centuries. It reached the peak of its 
might in the second half of the 15th century under Duke Charles the Bold 
(1467-77). He sought to expand his possessions and this hindered the 
formation of a centralised French monarchy. King Louis XI of France 
managed to form a coalition of the Swiss and the Lotharingians against 
Burgundy. As a result of the Burgundian wars of 1474-77, the troops of 
Charles the Bold were defeated, and he himself was killed in the Battle of 
Nancy (1477). His lands were divided between Louis XI and Maximilian of 
Habsburg, the son of the German Emperor. p. 564 
475 Capitalising on Italy's political fragmentation and the discord between the 
Italian states, King Charles VIII of France invaded Italy in 1494 and occupied 
the Kingdom of Naples. Charles VIII's campaign was the start of the Italian 
Wars (1494-1559) during which Italy was repeatedly invaded by French, 
46-1243 

=====第720页=====
692 Notes 
Spanish and German troops and became the scene of a prolonged struggle for 
supremacy in the middle Mediterranean peninsula. p. 564 
476 Here Engels has in mind the Huguenots' movement which unfolded in the 
16th century under the religious banner of Calvinism and led to the Huguenot, 
or religious wars between the Catholics and the Protestants (Huguenots), which 
continued, with interruptions, throughout the second half of the 16th century. 
They produced economic dislocation and political anarchy, which worsened the 
conditions of the masses and provoked peasant revolts. Frightened by them, the 
feudal lords and the bourgeoisie rallied round Henry of Navarre, a former 
Huguenot leader, representative of the new Bourbon dynasty, who adopted 
Catholicism and became king under the name of Henry IV. p. 564 
477 See Note 462. p. 565 
478 xhe first attempt at unification of Poland and Lithuania was made in 1385, 
when the two states concluded a dynastic Krewo Union (after Krewo Castle, 
where it was signed), which was aimed mainly at joint defence against the 
mounting aggression on the part of the Teutonic Order (see Note 218). At the 
same time, it promoted the interests of both states, which sought to expand their 
territories at the expence of Ukrainian and Byelorussian lands. In 1569, the 
Lublin Union was concluded, under which Poland and Lithuania formed a 
single state under the name of Rzecz Pospolita. Lithuania retained its 
autonomy. The Union existed up to 1795. p. 565 
479 This original research is based on materials carried by Chartist papers, Engels' 
own notes and personal reminiscences. In fact, it is a detailed synopsis of a 
work on the history of Chartism. It highlights the role of its Left wing, the 
influence on each other of Chartist agitation in England and the Irish people's 
liberation movement. Engels compiled the table at the request of the German 
socialist Hermann Schlüter to help him write a history of the Chartist 
movement. The chronology drawn up by Engels by late August 1886 probably 
provided the basis for Schlüter's book Die Chartistenbewegung in England which 
appeared in Zurich a year later. p. 566 
480 "A sacred month"—the slogan advanced by Chartists in 1839, a call for a 
general strike. p. 567 
481 The Union with England was imposed on Ireland by the English government 
after the suppression of the Irish rebellion in 1798. The Union, which came 
into force on January 1, 1801, abolished the autonomous Irish Parliament and 
made Ireland still more dependent on England. The demand for the repeal of 
the Union became widespread in Ireland from the 1820s. p. 572 
482 The reference is to the Bill moved by James Graham for discussion in the 
House of Commons on March 8, 1843. It provided for the regulation of child 
and adolescent employment in factories, specifically, reduction of children's 
working day to six and a half hours. The Bill met with strong opposition on the 
part of MPs and the various public groups, e.g., the Dissenters (see Note 486). 
Graham withdrew his motion. On the factory legislation, see also Note 161. 
p. 573 
483 An Act to amend and continue for Two Years, and to the End of the next Session of 
Parliament, the Laws in Ireland relative to the registering of Arms, and the 
Importation, Manufacture, and Sale of Arms, Gunpowder, and Ammunition was 
passed by the House of Commons in August 1843 following an upsurge 

=====第721页=====
Notes 693 
in Ireland in the movement for the repeal of the Union (see Note 481). 
p. 573 
484 Rebecca Riots—popular unrest in 1839 and 1842-43 in South Wales. They were 
triggered off by the imposition of charges at the toll-gates on the public roads. 
The name was borrowed from the Bible: "And they blessed Rebekah, and said 
unto her, Thou art our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of millions, and 
let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them" (Genesis 24: 60). Many 
participants in the movement were associated with Chartism. p. 573 
485 Educational Clauses—a component part of the Factory Bill proposed by James 
Graham (see Note 482). Under these clauses, the children living in the 
industrial regions of Great Britain were to attend school not more than three 
times a week. However, this was opposed by the Dissenters (see Note 486), who 
constituted a significant part of the population there and were against the 
teaching at schools of the Scriptures based on the dogmas of the Anglican Church. 
p. 573 
486 Dissenters were members of Protestant religious sects and trends in England 
who rejected the dogmas and the rites of the official Anglican Church. 
p. 573 
487 The Court of Queen's Bench is one of the high courts in England; in the 19th 
century (up to 1873), it was an independent supreme court for criminal and 
civil cases, competent to reconsider the decisions of lower judicial bodies. 
p. 574 
488 The Young Ireland group was formed in 1842 by the Irish bourgeois and 
petty-bourgeois intellectuals. p. 575 
489 The reference is to An Act for the Better Security of  the Crown and Government of  the 
United Kingdom introduced in the House of Commons by the Home Secretary 
George Grey and passed on April 19, 1848. p. 575 
490 Repealers—supporters of the repeal of the Anglo-Irish Union of 1801, which 
had abrogated the autonomy of the Irish Parliament. In January 1847, the 
radical elements of this movement formed an Irish Confederation. Representa­
tives of its revolutionary Left wing, who stood at the head of the national 
liberation movement, were subjected to severe repression in 1848. See also 
Note 481. p. 576 
491 The reference is to the Habeas Corpus Act of 1679. It introduced a writ of 
Habeas Corpus, the name given in the English judicial procedure to a 
document enjoining the pertinent authorities to present an arrested person 
before a court on the demand of the persons desiring to check the legitimacy 
of the arrest. The procedure does not apply to persons accused of high treason 
and can be suspended by decision of Parliament. The British authorities 
frequently made use of this exception in Ireland. p. 576 
492 See Note 351. p. 578 
493 Yhe reference is to court proceedings instituted by Bismarck in 1876-77 against 
a number of conservative journalists and politicians, who exposed his 
involvement in the stock-exchange machinations, on the charge of insulting him 
in the press. The incident revealed the mounting tension between Bismarck's 
government and the conservatives, who criticised his policies from a Right-wing 
standpoint. 

=====第722页=====
694 Notes 
On the Anti-Socialist Law, see Note 174. p. 578 
494 The expression "to go to Canossa" dates back to the humiliating pilgrimage to 
the Canossa Castle in Northern Italy undertaken by the German Emperor 
Henry IV in 1077 for the purpose of persuading Pope Gregory VII to revoke 
his excommunication. It became a current phrase after Bismarck said in the 
Reichstag in May 1872: "We shall not go to Canossa." 
In the late 1870s, needing the support of the Catholic Party of the Centre, 
because his old stronghold, the National Liberal Party (see Note 170) was losing 
its influence, Bismarck repealed nearly all anti-Catholic laws passed during the 
Kulturkampf (see Note 351) and forced the principal adherents of the 
anti-Catholic policy to retire. By using the expression "going to Canossa", 
Engels ironically alludes to Bismarck's concessions to the clerical circles in 
1878-87, which in fact amounted to giving up the  Kulturkampf.  p. 579 
495 Septennate (a seven-year period)—the German law on army credits, fixed for 
seven years ahead. It also approved an increase in the numerical strength of 
the standing army in peacetime (401,000) for the same term. p. 580 
496 Engels may have written these notes in the second half of September 1888, 
when sailing on the City of New York from America, where he had spent over a 
month (August 17 to September 19, 1888) together with Eleanor Marx-
Aveling, Edward Aveling and his friend Carl Schorlemmer. They travelled 
from New York to Boston, nearby towns, and the Niagara Falls, and took a 
voyage across Lake Ontario stopping over in Canada. Judging by the concise 
form of the notes, Engels probably intended to write an article about the trip. 
However, this plan was never carried out. The fragment "Impressions of a 
Journey Round America" (see this volume, pp. 584-86) is only the beginning of 
this work. p. 581 
497 The reference is to the establishment of a National Park near the Niagara Falls 
recounted by Engels in his letter to Laura Lafargue of September 5, 1888: 
"The State of New York bought up all the grounds (on the American side) 
about the falls, turned out all the touts, hucksters and exhortionists, and 
transformed the whole into a public park. ...And the simple fact of the 
Americans having done this compelled the Canadian government to do the 
same on their side..." (present edition, Vol. 48). p. 581 
498 The reference is to the American Civil War of 1861-65. See also Note 432. 
p. 583 
499 The  fragment is probably the beginning of Engels' proposed article on his trip 
to the United States (see Note 496). p. 584 
50° See Note 220. p. 586 
501 This is a draft reply, written by Engels on behalf of Eleanor Marx-Aveling to 
the To-Day editors over the publication (No. 1, April 14, 1883) of an English 
translation from the French of Chapter XXIII of Capital (corresponds to 
Chapter XXI of the German original). Its heading, "I.—The Serfdom of 
Work" was the editor's invention. In the letter, permission to publish the 
translation of one more chapter was made conditional on certain terms. They 
were fulfilled, as may be seen from the editorial note to the publication of 
Chapter "II.—The Lordship of Wealth" in the To-Day, No. 2, June 1883. 
"This chapter is translated from the second and third sections of Chapter X of 
the original. The selection published in our last issue was translated from 

=====第723页=====
Notes 695 
Chapter XXIII of the original. The translations are, of course, our own, and 
not those of the late Karl Marx." The sub-heading noted that the translation 
was from the French edition of 1872. p. 589 
502 The reference is to the first authorised French edition of Volume One of 
Capital. Under the agreement between Marx and publisher M. Lachâtre in 
February 1872, the work was to be published in instalments. It appeared 
between September 1872 and November 1875. When preparing this edition, 
Marx made changes and additions to nearly all parts of his work. p. 589 
503 This excerpt from the letter by Hermann Lopatin, a Russian revolutionary, to 
Maria Oshanina, a member of the Narodnaya Volya (People's Will) Executive, 
recounts his talk with Engels, naturally in his own interpretation, which bears 
the stamp of his Narodnik views based on Utopian peasant socialism and 
revolutionary democratism directed against autocracy. However, writing under 
a fresh impression from the talk, Lopatin obviously gives an accurate account 
of some of Engels' ideas. Lopatin and Engels met on September 19, 1883, 
several months after the former had escaped abroad from exile in Vologda. 
The excerpt was first published on Pyotr Lavrov's initiative and with Engels' 
permission in the book: The Foundations of Theoretical Socialism as Applied to 
Russia (in Russian), Geneva, 1893. p. 591 
504 Zemsky Sobor—a central representative institution of social estates in Russia in 
the mid-16th-late 17th centuries. Its composition, convocation and sessions were 
not strictly fixed and changed in the course of time. 
The interest in the convocation of the Zemsky Sobor at the end of the 19th 
century was evoked by hopes of limiting autocratic power and of changing the 
political system with the help of such representative institutions. p. 591 
505 The reference is to the letter addressed by the People's Will Executive to Tsar 
Alexander III on March 10, 1881 (after the events of March 1 of that year, 
when Tsar Alexander II had been assassinated by members of the organisa­
tion).  The Executive agreed to renounce violence as a means of struggle on two 
conditions: 1) a general political amnesty, and 2) convocation of representatives 
of all the Russian people "to reconsider the existing forms of state and public 
life".  The elections to the proposed Constituent Assembly were to be held on 
the basis of universal suffrage and guaranteed freedom of the press, speech, 
assembly and election manifestoes. The Executive further stated that it would 
comply with the decision of the future People's Assembly. p. 593 
506 The reference is to the Marx's ironic comment in the early 1880s on some 
sectarian and dogmatic mistakes made by the French Marxists in the struggle 
against the opportunist trend—Possibilism. Recollecting it, Engels wrote to Paul 
Lafargue on August 27, 1890 (present edition, Vol. 49) that Marx had said 
about these mistakes: "All I know is that I'm not a Marxist." p. 593 
507 This article was based on Engels' letter to Paul Lafargue of November 14, 1885 
(see present edition, Vol. 47). On November 13 Engels was requested to write it 
by Lafargue, who was preparing Engels' biography for a series on outstanding 
international socialists carried by Le Socialiste. The article was anonymously 
printed by the newspaper on November 21, 1885 as the second part of Engels' 
biography. The paper also carried Engels' portrait by Clarus sent to Engels by 
Lafargue together with the letter of November 13. 

=====第724页=====
696 Notes 
Part of this article was published in English for the first time in Marx K., 
Engels F., Writings on the Paris Commune, New York-London, 1971, p. 234. 
p. 594 
s«8 See Note 350. p. 594 
509 See Note 432. p. 596 
510 Engels thought of writing this article in October 1886, when the book by the 
Austrian bourgeois sociologist and lawyer Anton Menger, Das Recht auf den 
vollen Arbeitsertrag in geschichtlicher Darstellung, was issued. Menger attempted to 
prove that Marx's economic theory was not original and that he had allegedly 
borrowed his conclusions from English Utopian socialists of the Ricardian 
school (Thompson et al.). Unable to ignore Menger's allegations and his 
falsification of the very essence of Marx's doctrine, Engels decided to reply in 
the press. However, fearing that a personal rebuttal may serve to give this 
third-rate scholar undeserved publicity, Engels considered it expedient to 
rebuke Menger through a Neue Zeit editorial or through a book review signed 
by the magazine's editor Karl Kautsky, and enlisted Kautsky's help in writing a 
piece against Menger. At first he intended to write the main part of the text 
himself,  but fell ill and had to interrupt his work, so the piece was completed 
by Kautsky under Engels' instructions. It appeared anonymously in the Neue 
Zeit, No. 2, 1887; later, in the index to the magazine published in 1905, Engels 
and Kautsky were named as its authors. In 1904, the work was translated into 
French and printed by the Mouvement socialiste, No. 132, with Engels named as 
the author. The manuscript is not extant. Since it is impossible to ascertain 
which part of the work was written by Engels, and which by Kautsky, in the 
present edition it is published in full in the Appendices. p. 597 
511 See K. Marx, The Poverty of  Philosophy.  Answer to "The Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon (present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 105-212). 
In January 1849, Proudhon made an attempt to establish a "People's Bank" 
founded on the Utopian principles of "free" credit that he was expounding. 
The bank, through which Proudhon intended to effect peaceful social reform 
by abolishing loan interest and introducing money-free exchange based on the 
producer's receiving a full equivalent of his earned income, collapsed two 
months after its establishment. p. 606 
512 The reference is to the hostile campaign against Marx conducted in the 1870s 
by the German bourgeois economist Lujo Brentano, a leading representative 
of armchair socialism (see Note 289). He accused Marx of deliberately 
falsifying the phrase from Gladstone's speech delivered on April 16, 1863, 
which appeared on April 17 in almost all London newspaper reports of 
this parliamentary session {The Times, The Morning Star, The Daily Telegraph), 
but was omitted in Hansard's semi-official publication of parliamentary debates, 
in which the text was corrected by the speakers themselves. This gave Brentano 
a pretext for accusing Marx of unscrupulous misquotation. Marx retaliated in his 
letters to the Volksstaat editors on May 23 and July 28, 1872 (see present 
edition, Vol. 23, pp. 164-67 and 190-97). After Marx's death, the same 
accusation was made in November 1883 by the English bourgeois economist 
Taylor. It was disproved by Eleanor Marx in February and March 1884 in two 
letters to the To-Day magazine, and by Engels in June 1890 in his preface to the 
fourth German edition of Capital (see present edition, Vol. 35) and in 1891 in 
the pamphlet Brentano Contra Marx (present edition, Vol. 27). p. 613 

=====第725页=====
Notes 697 
513 This inaccuracy in Marx's book was set right by Engels in the second German 
edition of The Poverty of Philosophy published in 1892. It also gave a more 
precise wording of the quotation used by Engels in the preface to the first 
German edition (see this volume, p. 280), and the correct date of the 
publication of Thompson's book. p. 613 
514 The letter to the New Yorker Volkszeitung printed on March 30, 1887 and 
signed by Edward Aveling was written by Engels, as is seen from the rough 
copy. It was prompted by the conflict between Aveling and the Executive 
of the Socialist Labor Party of North America (see Note 295). 
p. 617 
515 The reference is to Aveling's letter of February 26, 1887 printed at the press 
and sent out to the sections of the Socialist Labor Party of North America and 
other socialist organisations. It was a detailed reply to the charges advanced 
against Aveling. p. 618 
516 Engels made the amendments to the programme of the North of England 
Socialist Federation at the request of John Lincoln Mahon, an English worker 
and socialist. In a letter to him of June 22, 1887, Engels voiced his appreciation 
of the programme, saying: "I consider it very good as a spontaneous 
working-class declaration of principles" (present edition, Vol. 48). Engels' 
amendments relate mainly to the introductory part of the programme; he 
made them on the leaflet containing the text of the programme. 
The North of England Socialist Federation—a workers' organisation set up in 
Northumberland (Northern England) on April 30, 1887 during a major 
miners' strike that lasted from late February to June 24, 1887. The organisation 
was sponsored by John Mahon, Thomas Binning, Alexander Donald, et al. 
Throughout 1887, the Federation conducted active work among the workers 
but failed to consolidate its initial success and soon ceased to exist. p. 619 
517 This letter, the original of which has recently been discovered by GDR 
researchers in the archive of the International Institute of Social History 
(Amsterdam), was written by Engels on the occasion of the expulsion from 
Switzerland, under pressure of the German authorities, of four leading editors 
and publishers of Der Sozialdemokrat, newspaper of the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party of Germany, which was published in Zurich after the 
promulgation of the Anti-Socialist Law (see Note 174). The letter was to be sent 
out to the editorial boards of various newspapers for the purpose of informing 
English readers about the real causes and circumstances of this action by the 
Swiss Federal Council. When writing the letter, Engels most probably had the 
full text of the resolution on the expulsion, which he repeatedly quotes and 
which did not appear in Der Sozialdemokrat until April 28. 
Engels apparently believed that the letter should originate with German 
Social-Democrats, and so it was despatched bearing Kautsky's signature. Apart 
from Justice, on April 28, 1888 The Commonweal, press organ of the Socialist 
League, featured a note about "an interesting letter from a comrade on this 
subject" and gave a summary of it. Publications in other English papers have not 
been found. p. 623 
518 Engels gave this interview to a representative of the New Yorker Volkszeitung on 
September 19, 1888 at the end of his tour of the USA. Unwilling to meet 
certain members of German socialist organisations in America, towards which 
he had a negative attitude, Engels travelled incognito and did his best to avoid 
any kind of contacts with the press. However, Jonas, editor of the New Yorker 

=====第726页=====
698 Notes 
Volkszeitung, who had learned about Engels' stay in New York, arranged an 
appointment for him with Theodor Cuno, former activist of the First 
International, as his representative. The interview was published by the 
newspaper without obtaining Engels' approval of the text. It was reprinted by 
the Chicagoer Arbeiter-Zeitung on September 25 and Wochenblatt der New Yorker 
Volkszeitung on September 29. Later, on October 13, it was also reprinted by 
the Sozialdemokrat. p. 626 
The Landsturm —an armed force, a second-rate militia, organised in Tyrol in 
1809.  In the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century, the Landsturm 
existed in Germany, Austria-Hungary, Holland, Switzerland and Sweden. It 
was called up in the event of national emergency (see also Note 386). p. 626 

=====第727页=====
NAME INDEX 699 
A 
Adler, Victor (1852-1918) —a founder 
and leader of the Austrian Social-
Democrats.— 542-43 
Aeschylus (525-456 B.C.)—Greek 
dramatist and tragic  poet.—171,  210 
Agassiz, Louis Jean Rodolphe (1807-
1873)—Swiss naturalist, lived in the 
USA from 1846, opponent of Dar­
winism.—160 
Agrippa, Marcus Vipsanius (c. 63-12 
B.C.)—Roman general and states­
man.—19-20, 22 
Albedyll, Emil (1824-1897)—Prussian 
general, commander of the 7th 
Corps in Münster (Westphalia) in 
1888-93.—540 
Albrecht I (c. 1255-1308)—Austrian 
duke; German Emperor from 
1298.—563 
Albrecht, Karl (1788-1844) —German 
merchant; convicted for his involve­
ment in the oppositional movement 
of "demagogues"; in 1841 he settled 
in Switzerland, where he propagated 
in a religious mystical form ideas 
close to Weitling's Utopian com­
munism.—320 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Russian Em­
peror (1801-25).—455, 490 Alexander II (1818-1881)—Russian Em­
peror (1855-81).—414, 477, 480 
Alexander HI (1845-1894)—Russian 
Emperor (1881-94).—406, 411-16, 
593 
Alexander of Macedon (Alexander the 
Great) (356-323 B.C.)—general and 
statesman of antiquity.—168 
Alexeyev, Nikolai Alexandrovich (1852-
1893)—Mayor of Moscow (1886-
93).—413 
Ammianus Marcellinus (c. 330-c. 400)— 
Roman historian, author of Rerum 
Gestarum covering the history of the 
Roman Empire from 96 to 378.—59, 
177, 199 
Anacreon—Greek lyric poet (second 
half of the 6th century B.C.).—184 
Anastasius I (c. 430-518)—Byzantine 
Emperor (491-518).—39 
Anaxandridas (6th cent. B.C.)—King of 
Sparta from 560 B.C., shared the 
throne with Aristones.— 171 
Anaximander of Miletus (c. 610-546 
B.C.)—Greek philosopher.—612 
Appian (end of the 1st cent.—c. 170)— 
Roman historian.—393 
Appius Claudius Caecus (died c. 448 
B.C.)—Roman consul.—224 
Ariovistus (1st half of the 1st cent. 

=====第728页=====
700 Name Index 
B.C.)—chief of the Germanic tribe of 
Suebi, fought against Caesar.—11, 12 
Aristides (c. 540-467 B.C.)—Athenian 
statesman and general during the 
Greco-Persian wars.—219 
Aristones (6th cent. B.C.) — King of 
Sparta (574-520 B.C.), shared the 
throne with Anaxandridas.— 171 
Aristophanes (c. 446-c. 385 B.C.)—Greek 
comic dramatist and poet.—172 
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.) —Greek philos­
opher.—212 
Arkwright, Sir Richard (1732-1792)— 
English industrialist, invented the cot­
ton spinning machine named after 
him.—573 
Arminius (Hermann, or Armin), the 
Cheruscan (18 or 16 B.C.-A.D. 19 or 
21)—leader of the resistance of Ger­
manic tribes against Roman rule, an­
nihilated a Roman army in the Teu-
toburg Forest in A.D. 9.-25-29, 31 
Arndt, Ernst Moritz (1769-1860)— 
German writer, historian and 
philologist; took part in the national 
struggle against Napoleonic rule; de­
puty to the Frankfurt National Assem­
bly (Right Centre) in 1848-49.—459 
Arnold,  Wilhelm Christoph Friedrich 
(1826-1883)—German lawyer and 
historian.—82, 95-97, 100-02 
Artaxerxes—name of the three Persian 
kings from the Achaemenian dynas­
ty: Artaxerxes I (reigned c. 465-c. 
425 B.C.), Artaxerxes II (reigned c. 
405-c.  359 B.C.) and Artaxerxes III 
(reigned c. 359-338 B.C.).—229 
Ashley (Cooper, Anthony Ashley)  (1801-
1885)—English politician, Tory 
philanthropist.—569, 571 
Asprenas (Lucius Nonius Asprenas) (c. 28 
B.C.-A.D. c. 30)—Roman statesman 
and general, fought in the wars 
against the Germans.—25, 28 
Attwood, Thomas (1783-1856)—English banker, economist and radical politi­
cian, adhered to the Right wing of 
the Chartist movement until 1839— 
566, 567 
Auerswald, Hans Adolf Erdman von 
(1792-1848)—Prussian general, 
Right-wing deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly; killed during 
Frankfurt uprising in September 
1848.—109 
Augustenburg , Friedrich (Frederick) 
(1829-1880)—Prince of Schleswig-
Holstein-Sonderburg-Augustenburg, 
pretender to the throne of Schleswig-
Holstein from 1852; Duke of Schles­
wig-Holstein under the name of 
Friedrich VIII from 1863.—478 
Augustus, Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus 
(63 B.C.-A.D. 14)—Roman Emperor 
(27 B.C.-A.D.  14).—11,  12, 18, 21, 
22, 28-31,  35, 36, 38, 116, 223, 225, 
246 
Aveling, Edward (1851-1898)—English 
socialist, writer and journalist; one of 
the translators into English of Marx's 
Capital, Volume One; member of the 
Social-Democratic Federation from 
1884;  subsequently one of the found­
ers of the Socialist League; an organ­
iser of a mass movement of unskilled 
workers and unemployed in the late 
1880s and early 1890s; husband of 
Marx's daughter Eleanor.—434, 617, 
618 
B 
Babeuf,  François Noël (Gracchus) (1760-
1797)—French revolutionary, advo­
cate of Utopian egalitarian commun­
ism, organiser of the "Conspiracy of 
Equals", executed.—604 
Bachofen, Johann Jakob (1815-1887)— 
Swiss historian and lawyer.—142, 
150, 151,  158-61,  165, 188 
Bailly, Jean Sylvain (1736-1793)— 
French astronomer, prominent in the 
French Revolution, a leader of the 
liberal constitutional bourgeoisie; as 

=====第729页=====
Name Index 701 
Mayor of Paris (1789-91) ordered 
troops to open fire on a republican 
demonstration on the Field of Mars 
(1791),  for which he was executed by 
sentence of the revolutionary tribunal 
in 1793.—126 
Bakunin, Mikhail Alexandrovich (1814-
1876)—Russian revolutionary and 
journalist, participant in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; later an 
ideologist of Narodism and anarch­
ism; opposed Marxism in the First 
International.—382, 422, 426, 449, 
516 
Bancroft, Hubert Howe (1832-1918)— 
American historian, author of several 
works on the history and ethnog­
raphy of North and Central Ameri­
ca.—146,  159, 161, 259 
Bang, Anton Christian (1840-1913)— 
Norwegian theologian, author of 
works on Scandinavian mythology 
and history of Christianity in 
Norway.—238 
Barbes, Armand (1809-1870) —French 
revolutionary, a leader of secret 
societies during the July monarchy; 
played a prominent part in the 1848 
revolution.— 313 
Baring, Thomas (1799-1873)—head of 
the bankers' house in London, Con­
servative M.P.—574 
Battenberg, Alexander, Prince of (1857-
1893)—son of the Prince of Hesse, 
in 1879-86 sat on the Bulgarian 
throne as Prince Alexander I, pur­
sued a pro-Austrian policy.—411, 
412, 414 
Bauer, Andreas Heinrich —German 
shoemaker, a leader of the League of 
the Just, member of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League; 
emigrated to Australia in  1851.— 
313, 314, 323, 327, 328 
Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882)—German 
philosopher and journalist, Young 
Hegelian.—363,  365, 381 
Baur, Ferdinand Christian (1792-
1860)—German theologian and his­torian of Christianity, professor in 
Tübingen, leader of the Tübingen 
School.—112 
Bayle, Pierre (1647-1706)—French 
sceptic philosopher, critic of religious 
dogmatism.—396 
Beauvau, Louis Charles Antoine (1710-
1744)—French marshal, sent on a 
diplomatic mission to the court of 
Frederick II of Prussia in 1740.—469 
Beck, Alexander—German tailor, 
member of the League of the Just, at 
the end of 1846 was arrested for 
involvement in the League's case; a 
witness at the Cologne Communist 
trial (1852).—315 
Becker, August (1814-1871) — German 
journalist, member of the League of 
the Just in Switzerland, adherent of 
Weitling; participant in the 1848-49 
revolution in Germany; in 1853 
emigrated to the USA where he 
contributed to democratic papers.— 
315 
Becker, Hermann Heinrich ( "Red 
Becker") (1820-1885) —German law­
yer and journalist, member of the 
Communist League from 1850; sen­
tenced to five years' imprisonment at 
the Cologne Communist trial (1852); 
in his later years a National Lib­
eral.—329 
Becker, Johann Philipp (1809-1886)— 
German revolutionary, participant in 
the democratic movement of the 
1830s-50s and the international 
working-class movement; fought as 
an officer of the Swiss army in the 
war against the Sonderbund; promi­
nent figure in the 1848-49 revolu­
tion; commanded the Baden people's 
militia during the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising of 1849; active member of 
the First International; friend and 
associate of Marx and Engels. —418-
23, 446, 447 
Becker, Wilhelm Adolf (1796-1846) — 
German historian, professor at Leip­
zig University, author of works on 
ancient history.— 206 

=====第730页=====
702 Name Index 
Beda (Bede, Venerable) (c. 673-735)— 
English historian and theologian.— 
235 
Benary, Franz Simon Ferdinand (1805-
1880) — German orientalist and an 
expert on the Bible, professor at 
Berlin University.— 115, 117 
Benedetti, Vincent, comte (1817-1900)— 
French diplomat, ambassador in Ber­
lin in 1864-70.—487 
Berends, Julius (b. 1817)—owner of a 
printing-house in Berlin, deputy to 
the Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—125 
Berkeley, Francis Henry Fitzhardinge 
(1794-1870)—British liberal politi­
cian, M.P. from 1837, advocated elec­
toral reform.—576 
Bernstein, Eduard (1850-1932) —Ger­
man Social-Democrat, journalist, 
editor of the Sozialdemokrat  (1881-
90); subsequently revisionist.—521 
Berthelot, Pierre Eugene Marcelin (1827-
1907)—French chemist and politi­
cian.—376 
Besant, Annie (1847-1933)—English 
politician, theosophist; adhered to 
the socialist movement in the 1880s-
90s.—542 
Beust, Friedrich von (1817-1899)— 
teacher and school reformer in 
Zurich.—99 
Bevan,  W.—Chairman  of the Trades 
Council in Swansea, presided at the 
Congress of trade unions held in that 
town in 1887.—515 
Bismarck-Schönhausen, Otto Eduard 
Leopold, Prince von (1815-1898)— 
statesman in Prussia and Germany, 
diplomat; ambassador to St. Peters­
burg (1859-62) and Paris (1862); 
Prime Minister of Prussia (1862-72 
and 1873-90); Chancellor of the 
North German Confederation (1867-
71) and of the German Empire 
(1871-90); carried out the unification 
of Germany; introduced Anti-
Socialist Law in 1878.—171, 271, 
272, 292, 297, 307, 316, 330, 406-08, 410, 413-15, 417, 464, 474-84, 480-
89, 491, 494-505, 508-09, 541, 
578-80 
Blanc, Jean Joseph Charles Louis (1811 -
1882)—French socialist, historian; 
member of the Provisional Govern­
ment and Chairman of the Luxem­
bourg Commission in 1848; pursued 
a policy of conciliation with the 
bourgeoisie; a leader of the petty-
bourgeois emigration in London 
from August 1848.—325, 328, 375 
Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881)— 
French revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist.—313 
Bleichroder, Gerson (1822-1893)— 
German financier, head of a big 
Berlin bank, Bismarck's private 
banker, unofficial adviser on finan­
cial matters and mediator in black 
market dealings.—272, 476, 480 
Bonaparte—see Napoleon III 
Böning, Georg (c. 1788-1849)—German 
army officer, participant in the war 
of liberation against Napoleonic rule; 
commanded a volunteer legion of 
insurgents during the 1849 Baden-
Palatinate uprising; following its sup­
pression sentenced to death by a 
Prussian court martial and executed 
by firing squad.—419 
Borkheim, Sigismund Ludwig (1825-
1885)—German journalist, demo­
crat; participant in the 1848-49 rev­
olution, emigrated after its defeat; 
London merchant from 1851, was on 
friendly terms with Marx and En-
gels.—446-50 
Born,  Stephan (real name Buttermilch, 
Simon) (1824-1898) —German type­
setter, member of the Communist 
League; leaned towards reformism 
during the 1848-49 revolution; 
turned his back on the workers' 
movement after the revolution.— 
325, 326 
Börne, Ludwig (1786-1837)—German 
critic and writer, author of Schil­
derungen aus Paris (1822 und 1823), 

=====第731页=====
Name Index 703 
adherent of Christian socialism to­
wards the end of his life.—106 
Bornstedt, Adalbert von (1808-1851)— 
German journalist, supported the ad­
venturist plan for the invasion of 
Germany by a revolutionary legion; 
member of the Communist League 
until his expulsion in March 1848; a 
secret agent of the Prussian police in 
the 1840s.—324 
Bernstein, Arnold Bernhard Karl (1808-
1849)—German democrat, a leader 
of the volunteer legion of German 
refugees in Paris (1848).—324 
Bougeart, Alfred (1815-1882)—French 
journalist of the Left, author of 
works on the history of the French 
Revolution of the late 18th cen­
tury.—126 
Boulanger, Georges Ernest Jean Marie 
(1837-1891)—French general, War 
Minister (1886-87); strove to establish 
his military dictatorship in France.— 
416 
Bourbaki, Charles Denis Sauter (1816-
1897)—French general, commanded 
the Guard and later the 18th Corps 
and the Army of the East during the 
Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71.— 
490 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in France 
(1589-1792, 1814-15 and 1815-30).— 
389 
Bracke, Wilhelm (1842-1880)—German 
Social-Democrat, one of the founders 
(1869) and leaders of Social-
Democratic Workers' Party 
(Eisenachers), associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 309 
Brandenburg, Friedrich Wilhelm, Count 
von (1792-1850)—Prussian general 
and statesman, head of the counter­
revolutionary ministry (November 
1848-November 1850).—304, 349 
Bray, John Francis (1809-1895)— 
English economist, Utopian socialist, 
follower of Robert Owen.—280, 285 
Brentano, Lorenz Peter (1813-1891) — 
Baden democrat, lawyer; deputy to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing) in 1848; headed the 
Baden Provisional Government in 
1849;  following the defeat of the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising emigrated 
to Switzerland, and then to the 
USA.—419, 447 
Brentano, Lujo (1844-1931)—German 
economist, a leading representative 
of armchair socialism.—613 
Bréquigny, Louis Georges Oudard Feudrix 
de (1714-1794)—French historian.— 
63 
Bright, John (1811-1889)—English 
manufacturer and politician, a leader 
of the Free Traders and one of the 
founders of the Anti-Corn Law 
League, M.P. from 1843.—295, 571, 
573 
Broadhouse, John—see Hyndman, Henry 
Mayers 
Brousse, Paul Louis Marie (1844-1912)— 
French socialist, physician; partici­
pant in the Paris Commune, lived in 
emigration after its suppression; close 
to the anarchists; joined the French 
Workers' Party in 1879, a leader and 
ideologist of possibilism, an oppor­
tunist trend in the French socialist 
movement.—593 
Büchner, Georg (1813-1837)—German 
dramatist and writer, revolutionary 
democrat, an organiser of a secret 
revolutionary Society of the Rights of 
Man in Giessen.—313 
Büchner, Ludwig (1824-1899)—German 
physiologist and philosopher, a vul­
gar materialist.—369 
Bückler, Johann (c. 1780-1803) — 
German robber nicknamed Hans the 
Flayer (Schinderhannes); in a 
number of literary works depicted as 
a "noble robber" and defender of 
the poor.—294 
Bugge, Elseus Sophus (1833-1907)— 
Norwegian philologist, professor in 
Christiania (now Oslo), researched 
into ancient Scandinavian literature 
and mythology.—238 

=====第732页=====
704 Name Index 
Bürgers, Heinrich (1820-1878)— 
German journalist, contributor to the 
Rheinische Zeitung (1842-43); member 
of the Cologne community of the 
Communist League, an editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848; 
member of the Central Authority of 
the Communist League from 1850; 
one of the accused at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852).—123, 328 
Burrows, Herbert (1845-1922)—English 
official, radical, a founder of the 
Social-Democratic Federation.—542, 
543 
C 
Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856)—French 
lawyer and writer, Utopian commun­
ist, author of Voyage en Icarie.—516, 
604 
Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) (c. 100-44 
B. C.)—Roman general, statesman 
and writer.—6, 10-17, 18, 29-30, 35, 
44, 53-55, 138, 139, 151, 196, 234, 
236, 241-44, 246 
Caligula (A. D. 12-41)—Roman Em­
peror (A. D. 37-41).—116 
Calvin, John (real name Jean Chauvin) 
(1509-1564)—prominent figure of 
the Reformation, founder of Calvin­
ism, a trend in Protestantism, charac­
terised by particular intolerance to­
wards Catholicism as well as other 
trends in Protestantism.—395 
Camphausen, Ludolf (1803-1890) — 
German banker, a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prussian 
Prime Minister (March-June 1848).— 
471 
Carloman (715-754)—elder son of the 
Frankish major-domo Charles Mar­
tel; ruler of Austrasia, Alamannia 
and Thuringia (741-47).—86 
Carolingians—Frankish royal dynasty 
which ruled in France (751-987), 
Germany (till 911) and Italy (till 
887).—48,  58, 62, 67, 72, 73, 74, 82 
Cavour, Camillo Benso, conte di (1810-1861)—Italian statesman, head of 
the Sardinian government (1852-59 
and 1860-61); relying on the support 
of Napoleon III pursued a policy of 
Italian unification under the suprem­
acy of the Savoy dynasty; headed 
the first government of the newly 
united Italy in 1861.—464 
Charlemagne {Charles the Great) (c. 742-
814) —Frankish King (768-800) and 
Roman Emperor (800-814).—59, 63, 
65-67,  72, 74,  76-81,  252, 254, 346, 
554 
Charles VIII (1470-1498)—King of 
France (1483-98).—564 
Charles, Archduke—see Charles Louis 
Johann 
Charles Louis Johann (1771-1847) — 
Archduke of Austria, field marshal, 
commander-in-chief in the wars with 
France (1796, 1799, 1805 and 1809), 
War Minister (1805-09).—492 
Charles Martel (c. 688-741)—Frankish 
major-domo, became actual ruler of 
the Frankish state in  715.—61,  65, 
67, 72 
Charles the Bald (823-877)—King of 
West Frankish Kingdom (840-77), 
Emperor of the Franks and King of 
Italy (875-77).—68 
Charles ("the Bold") (1433-1477) — 
Du,ke of Burgundy (1467-77).—560 
Chernyavskaya-Bokhanovskaya, Galina Fyo-
dorovna (1854-d. after 1926)— Rus­
sian revolutionary, member of the 
Narodnaya Volya (People's Will) or­
ganisation.— 592 
Chilperic I (539-584)—King of the 
Franks (561-84).—62 
Christian, Prince of Glücksburg (1818-
1906) — heir to the Danish throne 
from 1852, King of Denmark as 
Christian IX in 1863-1906.—456 
Civilis, Julius (A. D. 1st cent.)—chief 
of the Germanic tribe of Batavi; 
headed the uprising of Germanic and 

=====第733页=====
Name Index 705 
Gaulish tribes against Rome (69-70 or 
71).—240 
Claudia—Roman patrician family.— 
223 
Claudius (10 B. C.-A. D. 54)—Roman 
Emperor (41-54).—31, 116 
Clausewitz, Karl von (1780-1831)— 
Prussian general and military 
theoretician.—450 
Cleisthenes—Athenian politician, in 510-
507 B. C. carried out reforms aimed 
at abolishing the remnants of the 
gentile system and establishing a 
democracy based on slaveowner-
ship.—220 
Clemenceau, Georges (Eugène Benjamin) 
(1841-1929)—French politician and 
journalist, leader of the Radicals 
from the 1880s; Prime Minister 
(1906-09 and 1917-20).—331-33 
Clovis I (465 or 466-511)—King of the 
Salian Franks from the Merovingian 
dynasty (481-511).—95 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865)—English 
manufacturer and politician, a leader 
of the Free Traders and founder of 
the Anti-Corn Law League, M.P.— 
533, 572, 573 
Constantine I, the Great (c. 285-337)— 
Roman Emperor (306-37).—39 
Copernicus, Nicolaus (1473-1543)— 
Polish astronomer, originator of the 
heliocentric theory of the universe.— 
368 
Cosijn, Pieter Jakob (1840-1899)—Dutch 
philologist, expert on the Germanic 
languages.—84 
Cotton, Sir Robert Bruce, Bart  (1571-
1631)—English collector of ancient 
manuscripts, books, coins, etc., foun­
der of the Cottonian library transfer­
red to the British Museum on its 
foundation (1753).—82-83 
Coulanges, de—see Fustel de Coulanges 
Crassus (Marcus Licinius Crassus) 
(c. 115-53 B.C.)—Roman politician 
and general, crushed the revolt of slaves under Spartacus in 71 B.C.; 
twice consul.—11, 15 
Crawford,  Emily (1831-1915)—Irish 
journalist, Paris correspondent of sev­
eral English papers.— 484 
Cuno,  Friedrich Theodor (1846-1934)— 
socialist, active member of the Ger­
man and international working-class 
movement and of the First Interna­
tional; after the Hague Congress 
(1872) emigrated to the USA, contrib­
uted to the New Yorker Volkszei-
tung.—626 
Cunow, Heinrich Wilhelm Karl (1862-
1936)—German Social-Democrat, 
historian, sociologist and ethnog­
rapher.—168 
Cuvier, Georges Leopold Chrétien Frederic 
Dagobert, baron de (1769-1832) — 
French naturalist, author of works on 
comparative anatomy, palaeontology 
and the classification of animals.— 
141 
D 
Dahlmann, Friedrich Christoph (1785-
1860)—German historian and liberal 
politician; deputy to the Frankfurt 
National Assembly (Right Centre) in 
1848-49; author of works on the 
history of Denmark and Germany.— 
49 
Daniels, Roland (1819-1855)—German 
physician, member of the Communist 
League, defendant at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852); acquitted by 
the jury; friend of Marx and En-
gels.—329 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321) —Italian 
poet.—545 
Darwin, Charles Robert (1809-1882)— 
English naturalist, founder of the 
theory of evolution by natural selec­
tion.—118,  372, 385, 517, 612 
Dawkins, Sir William Boyd (1837-
1929) — English geologist, anthro­
pologist, palaeontologist and ar­
chaeologist; researched into the lives 

=====第734页=====
706 Name Index 
of the cave dwellers of Europe.—6, 
33 
Demosthenes (384-322 B. C.)—Athenian 
orator and statesman.—205 
Descartes, René (1596-1650)—French 
philosopher, mathematician and 
naturalist.— 368 
Dicaearchus (4th cent. B.C.) — Greek 
scholar, disciple of Aristotle, author 
of historical, political, philosophical, 
geographical and other works.—206 
Diderot, Denis (1713-1784)—French 
philosopher of the Enlightenment, 
atheist, leader of the Encyclopae­
dists.—373 
Dietigen, Joseph (1828-1888)—German 
Social-Democrat; philosopher who ar­
rived at main premisses of dialectical 
materialism independently; leather-
maker.—384 
Dio Cassius Cocceianus (c. 155-c. 235)— 
Roman historian and statesman, rep­
resentative of the Senate aristocracy, 
wrote Historia Romana running to 80 
books in  Greek.—11,  20-22, 24, 27, 
29, 47 
Diodorus Siculus (c. 80-29 B. C.)— 
Greek historian, author of Bib-
liothecae historicae.—238, 246 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus (1st cent. 
B. C.-A. D. 1st cent.)—Greek his­
torian and rhetorician, author of 
Roman Antiquities.—209 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Earl of Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881)—British statesman and 
author, a Tory leader; Prime Minis­
ter (1868, 1874-80).—410 
Domitian (Titus Flavius Domitianus) 
(A.D.  51-96) —Roman Emperor (81-
96).—32 
Domitius Ahenobarbus, Lucius (d. A.D. 
25)—Roman general and statesman; 
in the early 1st century undertook 
expeditions to Germany.—11, 22, 23 
Drusus, Nero Claudius (38-9 B. C.)— 
Roman general; headed expeditions 
against the Germans in 12-9 B. C. — 
19-21,  23, 31 Dühring, Eugen Karl (1833-1921)— 
German eclectic philosopher and vul­
gar economist, his philosophical views 
were a mixture of idealism, vulgar 
materialism, positivism and meta­
physics; a lecturer at Berlin Universi­
ty from 1863 to 1877.—511 
Duncombe, Thomas Slingsby (1796-
1861)—British radical politician; par­
ticipated in the Chartist movement in 
the 1840s; M. P. (1826-61).—569, 
570 
Dureau de la Malle, Adolph Jules Cesar 
Auguste (1777-1857)—French poet 
and historian.—230 
E 
Eccarius, Johann Georg (1818-1889)— 
German tailor, prominent figure in 
the German and international work­
ing-class movement, journalist; 
member of the League of the Just 
and later of the Communist League; 
a leader of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London, 
member of the General Council of 
the First International; subsequently 
took part in the British trade union 
movement.—320 
Edmonds, Thomas Rowe (1803-1889)— 
English economist, Utopian socialist, 
drew socialist conclusions from Ricar-
do's theory.—280 
Einhard (c. 770-840)—historian of the 
Franks, biographer of Char­
lemagne.— 61 
Eisenbart, Johann Andreas (1661-1727)— 
German physician, served as the pro­
totype of Doctor Eisenbart in Ger­
man folklore.—288 
Elliott, Ebenezer (1781-1849) —English 
poet, supporter of the Anti-Corn 
Law League; in his works described 
the hard life of the English 
workers.—568 
Eisner, Karl Friedrich Moritz (1809— 
1894) — Silesian journalist and radi­
cal politician, deputy to the Prussian 

=====第735页=====
Name Index 707 
National Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848.—125 
Engelhardt, Helvig Conrad Christian 
(1825-1881) — Danish archaeologist, 
manager of the Museum of North 
Antiquities in Flensburg. — 40 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895)—109-
11, 115, 117-19, 122-28, 131, 133, 
173, 178, 201, 213, 233, 234, 276, 
279, 280, 284, 291, 301, 303, 306-08, 
310-23,  326-28, 330-35, 337, 340, 
341, 351, 399, 401-05, 408, 409, 
422-27,  433-35, 442, 444, 445, 448, 
451, 464, 470, 471, 511, 512,  516-21, 
525-27,  535-38, 545, 550, 584-86, 
591-93,  595, 596, 600, 613, 614, 623, 
624 
Erhard(t),  Johann Ludwig Albert (born c. 
1820)—German shop assistant, 
member of the Communist League, 
one of the accused at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852), acquitted by 
the jury.—329 
Espinas, Alfred Victor (1844-1922) — 
French philosopher and sociologist, 
advocate of the theory of evolu­
tion.—144 
Euripides (c. 480-c. 406 B.C.)—Greek 
dramatist.—172 
Ewerbeck, August Hermann (1816-
1860)—German physician and man 
of letters, leader of the Paris com­
munities of the League of the Just, 
member of the Communist League 
(till 1850).—319, 328 
F 
Fabian—Roman patrician family.— 228 
Fairchild,  Charles Stebbins (1842-1924) — 
American lawyer and financier, 
Secretary of the Treasury (1887-89).— 
528 
Fecenia Hispala—Roman freed wo­
man.—225 
Ferdinand V (the Catholic) (1452-
1516)—King (1479-1504) and ruler 
(1504-16) of Castilia, King of Aragon under the name of Ferdinand II 
(1479-1516).—161 
Ferguson, Adam (1723-1816)—Scottish 
historian, philosopher and so­
ciologist.— 339 
Ferry, Jules François Camille (1832-
1893)—French lawyer, journalist and 
politician, a leader of the moderate 
republicans; member of the Govern­
ment of National Defence, Mayor of 
Paris (1870-71), Prime Minister 
(1880-81 and 1883-85).—331 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas (1804-
1872)—German philosopher.—364-
65, 367-68, 371-73, 374-82, 519, 520 
Fison, Lorimer (1832-1907) —English 
ethnographer specialising in Au­
stralia, missionary in the Fiji Islands 
(1863-71,  1875-84) and in Australia 
(1871-75 and 1884-88); author of a 
number of works on Australian and 
Fijian tribes.— 153, 155 
Flocon, Ferdinand (1800-1866)—French 
politician, journalist, democrat, an 
editor of La Réforme; member of the 
Provisional Government in 1848.— 
324 
Florus, Lucius Annaeus (2nd cent.) — 
Roman historian.—20, 21 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867)—French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist; Minister of 
Finance several times (between 1849 
and 1867), Minister of State and 
Minister of the Imperial Court (1852-
60).—476 
Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837)—French Utopian socialist.— 
179, 255, 276, 599 
Francis I (1768-1835)—Emperor of 
Austria (1804-35).—465 
Francis Joseph I (1830-1916)—Emperor 
of Austria (1848-1916).—466 
Frederick II (the Great) (1712-1786)— 
King of Prussia (1740-86).—309, 346, 
347, 459, 469, 475 
Frederick VII (1808-1863)—King of 
Denmark (1848-63).—477 
47-1243 

=====第736页=====
708 Name Index 
Frederick William (1620-1688)—Elector 
of Brandenburg (1640-88).—309, 
475 
Frederick William III (1770-1840) — 
King of Prussia (1797-1840).—346, 
347, 358, 361, 469, 473 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861)— 
King of Prussia (1840-61).—363, 491 
Freeman, Edward Augustus  (1823-
1892)—English historian, liberal, 
professor at Oxford University.—133 
Freiligrath, Ferdinand (1810-1876)— 
German revolutionary poet, member 
of the Communist League; an editor 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-
49).—110, 111, 329 
Frost, John (1784-1877)—English radi­
cal, joined the Chartist movement in 
1838;  deported for life to Australia 
for organising a miners' uprising in 
Wales in 1839, pardoned in 1856 and 
returned to England.— 567-69, 575 
Fustel de Coulanges (Numa Denis) (1830-
1889)—French historian, author of 
works on the history of antiquity and 
medieval France.—208 
G 
Gaius (Caius) (2nd cent.)—Roman 
lawyer, systematised Roman 
law.—166 
Galba, Servius Sulpicius (5 B.C.-A.D. 
69)—Roman statesman, proclaimed 
Emperor in June 68, slain by the 
Praetorian conspirators, led by Othon 
in January 69 during the rebellion of 
troops and people against his rule.— 
116 
Galle, Johann Gottfried (1812-1910)— 
German astronomer, discovered the 
planet Neptune in 1846, drawing on 
Leverrier's calculations.—368 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807-1882)— 
Italian revolutionary democrat; led 
the struggle of the Italian people for national liberation and the unifica­
tion of the country in the 1850s and 
1860s; headed the revolutionary 
march to Southern Italy; participated 
in wars against Austria (1848-49, 
1859,  1866).—307, 421, 463 
George, Henry (1839-1897)—American 
journalist, economist and politician.— 
437-39 
Germanicus (Julius Caesar Germanicus) 
(15 B.C.-A.D.  19)  —Roman general, 
made several campaigns against the 
Germans, suppressed an uprising of 
Rhenish legions in 14 B.C.—15, 28, 
31 
Gervinus, Georg Gottfried (1805-1871)— 
German historian and politician, lib­
eral; professor in Heidelberg.—470 
Gfrörer, August Friedrich (1803-1861)— 
German theologian and historian, au­
thor of works on the history of 
Christianity and the Church, for 
some time a follower of the Tübing­
en School; professor at Freiburg Uni­
versity from 1846.—112 
Giers, Nikolai Karlovich de (1820-
1895)—Russian diplomat, Minister 
for Foreign Affairs (1882-95).—414 
Gif fen, Robert (1837-1910)—English 
economist and statistician, head of 
the statistical department at the 
Board of Trade (1876-97).—299 
Giraud-Teulon, Alexis (b. 1839) —  pro­
fessor of history in Geneva.—143, 
144, 170 
Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898) — 
British statesman, Tory and later 
Peelite, a leader of the Liberal Party 
in the latter half of the 19th century; 
Prime Minister (1868-74, 1880-85, 
1886,  1892-94).—210, 292, 41.1, 626 
Godwin, William (1756-1836)—English 
writer and journalist, rationalist, one 
of the fathers of anarchism.—607, 
614 
Goegg, Amand (1820-1897)—German 
democratic journalist, member of the 
Baden Provisional Government 

=====第737页=====
Name Index 709 
(1849);  emigrated after the revolu­
tion; later member of the First Inter­
national.—328 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832)—German poet, dramatist and 
philosopher.—Ill, 148, 359, 361, 
371, 496 
Gould,  Jay (1836-1892)—American mil­
lionaire, financier who gained control 
of several large railway systems.—475 
Govone, Giuseppe (1825-1872)—Italian 
general and statesman, participated 
in the wars against Austria (1848-49, 
1859 and 1866), negotiated with Bis­
marck in April 1866, War Minister 
(1869-70).—480, 482 
Gray, John (1798-1850)—English 
economist, Utopian socialist, follower 
of Robert Owen; an author of the 
"labour money" theory.—283-85, 
289, 291 
Gregory I (the Great) (c. 540-604)— 
Pope (590-604); canonised after his 
death.—63 
Gregory of Tours (Georgius Florentins) 
(c. 540-594) — Christian priest, theo­
logian and historian; Bishop of 
Tours (from 573), canonised after his 
death.—62, 240 
Grey, Sir George (1799-1882)—British 
statesman, Whig; Home Secretary 
(1846-52, 1855-58, 1861-66) and Co­
lonial Secretary (1854-55).— 575 
Grey, Sir Henry George, Viscount Howick, 
Earl of (1802-1894)—British states­
man, Whig, Secretary of War (1835-
39), Colonial Secretary (1846-52).— 
573 
Grimm, Jacob Ludwig Carl (1785-
1863)—German philologist, author 
of a historical grammar of the Ger­
man language and of folklore adap­
tations; professor in Göttingen and 
then in Berlin.—18, 46-55, 80, 85, 
87, 99, 237 
Groben, Karl Joseph, Count (1788-
1876)—Prussian general, com­
manded a corps which took part in 
the suppression of the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; member 
of the Prussian Upper Chamber 
from 1854.—420 
Grosvenor,  Richard,  Marquis of Westmins­
ter (1795-1869) —English aristocrat, 
Whig.—574 
Grote, George (1794-1871)—English his­
torian, M.P. (1832-40), championed 
electoral reform.—205-08, 567 
Grün,  Karl Theodor Ferdinand (pen 
name Ernst von der Haide) (1817-
1887)—German journalist, "true 
socialist" in the mid-1840s, petty-
bourgeois democrat during the 
revolution of 1848-49, deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing).—365 
Guérard,  Benjamin Edme Charles (1797-
1854)—French historian.—64, 80 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and states­
man.—389 
Guntram, or Gontran (c. 525-592) — 
King of Burgundy (561-92).—62, 67 
Gustav I (Vasa) (c. 1496-1560)—King 
of Sweden (1523-60).—554 
H 
Habsburgs (or Hapsburgs)—dynasty of 
the Holy Roman emperors from 
1273 to 1806 (with interruptions), 
Austrian (1804-67) and Austro-
Hungarian emperors (1867-1918).— 
127 
Hadrian (Publius Aelius Hadrianus) (76-
138)—Roman Emperor (117-138).— 
32 
Hall, Charles (c. 1745-c. 1825)— 
English economist, Utopian social­
ist.—607,  613 
Hansemann, David Justus (1790-1864)— 
German capitalist, a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Finance 
Minister of Prussia (from March to 
September 1848).—471 
Harney, George Julian (1817-1897)—a 
leader of the Left-wing Chartists, 
47 

=====第738页=====
710 Name Index 
editor of The Northern Star, Red 
Republican and other Chartist period­
icals;  was on friendly terms with 
Marx and Engels.— 319, 512, 566 
Harring, Harro Paul (1798-1870)— 
German writer, radical, emigrated in 
1828.—319 
Hartmann, Lev Nikolayevich (1850-
1913) — Russian revolutionary, Na-
rodnik, in 1879 participated in one 
of the terrorist acts of the People's 
Will against Alexander II, after that 
he emigrated to France, then to 
Britain, and in 1881 to the 
USA.—292 
Haupt, Hermann Wilhelm (born 
c. 1831) — German business clerk, 
member of the Communist League; 
was arrested with other Cologne 
communists, gave evidence against 
them and was released before the trial; 
fled to Brazil.—328 
Hausser, Ludwig (1818-1867)—German 
historian and politician, liberal, pro­
fessor in Heidelberg.— 470 
Hecker, Friedrich Karl Franz  (1811-
1881)—German democrat, a leader 
of the Baden republican uprising in 
April 1848; after its suppression 
emigrated to Switzerland and later to 
the USA where he fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Union.—418 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.— 269, 
357-69,  371, 373, 377-78, 382-84, 
386, 388, 391, 519-20 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856) — German 
revolutionary poet.—109, 110, 357, 
493 
Henry IV (1553-1610) —King of France 
(1589-1610).—491 
Herod (73-4 B.C.)—King of Judaea 
(40-4 B.C.).—229 
Herodotus (c. 484-c. 424 B.C.)—Greek 
historian.—9, 151, 172 
Herrfurth, Ernst Ludwig (1830-1900)— 
Prussian statesman, Minister of the 
Interior (1888-92).—540 Herwegh, Georg Friedrich (1817-1875)— 
German democratic poet, an organ­
iser of the German legion in Paris in 
1848.—324 
Herzen, Alexander Ivanovich (1812-
1870)—Russian revolutionary demo­
crat, materialist philosopher and wri­
ter; emigrated in 1847.—449, 516 
Hetherington, Henry (1792-1849)— 
English printer and publisher of 
workers' papers; took part in the 
organisation of trade unions, and 
later in the Chartist movement; was 
fined for his publishing activities and 
imprisoned on a charge of blas­
phemy.—569, 570 
Heusler, Andreas (1834-1921)—Swiss 
lawyer, professor in Basle, author of 
works on Swiss and German 
law.—167 
Heyne, Moritz (1837-1906)—German 
philologist, author of several works 
on the history of the German lan­
guage; published items belonging to 
the Old German and Gothic literary 
heritage.—81-82, 89 
Hildebrand, Hans Olof (1842-1913)— 
Swedish archaeologist, historian and 
numismatist.— 38 
Hildebrannus (8th cent.)—Charles Mar-
tel's beneficiary.—67 
Hincmar (c. 806-882)—archbishop of 
Reims (France) from 845; author of 
the third part of Annales Bertiniani 
(861-82).—64, 78 
Hincmar (830-882)—archbishop of 
Lyons (France) (858-79).—68 
Hinkel, Karl (1794-1817)—German stu­
dent, participant in the opposition 
student movement for the unification 
of Germany.—458 
Hirschfeld, Karl Ulrich Friedrich Wilhelm 
Moritz von (1791-1859)—Prussian 
general, commanded a corps which 
took part in the suppression of the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising (1849).— 
420 

=====第739页=====
Name Index 711 
Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679)—English 
philosopher.— 368 
Hodgskin, Thomas (1787-1869)— 
English economist and journalist, 
Utopian socialist, drew socialist con­
clusions from the Ricardian theory.— 
280, 613 
Hoffmann von Fallersleben, August Hein­
rich (1798-1874)—German poet and 
philologist.—459 
Hohenstaufens—dynasty of the Holy 
Roman emperors (1138-1254).—458, 
555 
Hohenzollern, Leopold, Prince (1835-
1905) — pretender to the Spanish 
throne in 1870.—487 
Hohenzollerns—dynasty of electors of 
Brandenburg (1415-1701), Prussian 
kings (1701-1918) and German em­
perors (1871-1918).—124, 127, 464 
Homer—semi-legendary Greek epic 
poet to whom are attributed the Iliad 
and the Odyssey*—111, 138-39, 170, 
171, 208, 209 
Höpfner, Friedrich Eduard Alexander von 
(1797-1858)—Prussian general, 
military writer.—449-50 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-
8 B.C.)—Roman poet.—Ill, 536 
Howick—see Grey, Sir Henry George 
Howitt, Alfred William (1830-1908)— 
English ethnographer specialising in 
Australia, colonial official in Australia 
(1862-1901); author of several works 
on Australian tribes.—155 
Hugo,  Victor Marie (1802-1885) — 
French writer.—590 
Hume, David (1711-1776)—Scottish 
philosopher, historian and 
economist.— 367 
Huschke, Georg Philipp Eduard  (1801-
1886)—German lawyer, author of 
works on Roman law.— 227 
Huskisson, William (1770-1830)— 
British statesman, Tory, President of 
the Board of Trade (1823-27), re­
duced import duties on some 
goods.—528 Hyndman, Henry Mayers (pseudonym 
John Broadhouse)—English socialist, 
reformist; founder (1881) and leader 
of the Democratic Federation, which 
became Social-Democratic Federation 
in 1884.—335-40 
I 
Im Thurn, Everard Ferdinand (1852-
1932)—English colonial official, 
traveller and anthropologist.—365 
Irenaeus, St. (c. 130-c. 202)—Christian 
theologian, Greek from Asia Minor 
by birth, Bishop of Lyons from 
177.—116 
Irmino(n),  Guérard (died c. 826) — 
abbot of the Saint-Germain de Prés 
Monastery (812-17).—253 
Ivan HI (1440-1505)—Grand Duke of 
Muscovy.—565 
J 
Jacobi, Abraham (1830-1919)—German 
physician, member of the Communist 
League, defendant at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852), acquitted by 
the jury; later emigrated to the 
USA.—329 
John  VIII—  Pope (872-82).—64 
Jones, Ernest Charles (1819-1869)— 
English proletarian poet and journal­
ist, Left-wing Chartist leader; friend 
of Marx and Engels. —575-77 
Jones, William (c. 1808-1873)—English 
watch-maker, Chartist, an organiser 
of a miners' uprising in Wales in 
1839;  deported for life to Au­
stralia.—568, 569, 575, 577 
Jordanes (Jornandes, Jordanis) (born 
c. 500)—Gothic historian.— 36 
Julia gens—patrician clan in Ancient 
Rome.—236 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis) 
(born c. 60-died after 127) — Roman 
satirical poet.— 111 

=====第740页=====
712 Name Index 
K 
Kalnoky, Gustav Sigismund, Count (1832-
1898)—Austro-Hungarian statesman, 
ambassador to St. Petersburg (1880-
81), Chairman of the Imperial Coun­
cil of Ministers and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs (1881-95).—414 
Kamensky, Gavriil Pavlovich (1824-
1898)—Russian economist, agent of 
the Tsarist government abroad, sen­
tenced in his absence to imprison­
ment by a Swiss court for counter­
feiting (1872).—293 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804)—German 
philosopher.—359, 367, 368, 370, 
373, 381 
Kaulbars, Nikolai Vasilyevich (1842-
1905)—Russian general, military 
commissioner of the Tsarist govern­
ment in Bulgaria in 1886.—414 
Kautsky, Karl Johann (1854-1938) — 
German Social-Democrat; journalist, 
economist and historian, editor of 
Die Neue Zeit (1883-1917), author of 
several Marxist theoretical works; 
ideologist of Centrism among the 
German Social-Democrats and in the 
Second International.— 521 
Kaye, Sir John William (1814-1876)— 
British military historian and colonial 
official.—151 
Kelley- Wischnewetzky, Florence (1859-
1932)—American socialist, translated 
Engels' book The Condition of the 
Working Class in England into En­
glish; wife of the Russian emigre and 
socialist Lazar Wischnewetzky.—434, 
517 
Kern,  Jan Hendrik (1833-1917)—Dutch 
philologist, Orientalist and Sanskrit­
ist.— 83, 86, 89 
Kinkel, Gottfried (1815-1882)—German 
poet and democratic journalist; took 
part in the 1849 Baden-Palatinate 
uprising; sentenced to life imprison­
ment by Prussian court; in 1850 
escaped and emigrated to London, a 
leader of the petty-bourgeois re­fugees; opposed Marx and Engels. — 
328 
Klapka, György (Georg) (1820-1892)— 
general of the Hungarian revolution­
ary army (1848-49), emigrated in 
1849;  during the Austro-Prussian 
War of 1866 commanded a Hun­
garian legion organised by the Prus­
sian Government in Silesia and in­
tended for participation in the war; 
after the amnesty returned to Hun­
gary in 1867.—307, 481 
Klein,  Johann Jacob (born c. 1818-died 
between 1895 and 1897)—Cologne 
physician, member of the Communist 
League, a defendant at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852), acquitted.— 
329 
Kolb,  Georg Friedrich (1808-1884) — 
German politician, journalist and 
statistician.—530 
Kopp, Hermann (1817-1892)—German 
chemist and historian of chemistry.— 
376 
Korff,  Hermann—former Prussian army 
officer, democrat; manager of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49); 
later emigrated to the USA.— 306 
Kossuth, Laps (1802-1894)—leader of 
the Hungarian national liberation 
movement, headed the bourgeois-
democratic elements in the 1848-49 
revolution and later the Hungarian 
revolutionary government; after the 
defeat of the revolution emigrated 
first to Turkey and then to Britain 
and the USA.—328 
Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von 
(1761-1819)—German writer and 
journalist, extreme monarchist.—422 
Kovalevsky, Maxim Maximovich  (1851-
1916) — Russian sociologist, historian, 
ethnographer and lawyer; politician, 
liberal; author of a number of works 
on the history of primitive communal 
system.—165,  167, 168, 232, 236, 
241 

=====第741页=====
Name Index 713 
Kravchinsky, Sergei Mikhailovich 
(pseudonym Stepnyak) (1851-1895)— 
Russian writer and journalist, promi­
nent in the revolutionary Narodnik 
movement of the 1870s; emigrated in 
1878;  lived in England from 1884.— 
292 
Kriege, Hermann (1820-1850)—German 
journalist; "true" socialist; founder 
and editor of the New York refugees' 
newspaper Der Volks-Tribun.— 319, 
320 
Kropotkin, Pyotr Alexeyevich, Prince 
( 1842-1921 )—Russian revolutionary, 
journalist, geographer and traveller, 
a prominent figure and ideologist of 
anarchism; lived in emigration from 
1876 to 1917.—292 
Kuhlmann, Georg (b. 1812)—agent pro­
vocateur of the Austrian government; 
preached "true socialism" in the 
1840s among the German Weitlin-
gian artisans in Switzerland, using 
religious terminology and passing 
himself off as a "prophet".—320 
L 
Lacomblet, Theodor Joseph (1789-1866)— 
German historian, French by birth, 
archivist in Düsseldorf. —95 
Lafayette (La Fayette), Marie Joseph Paul 
Yves Roch Gilbert Motier, marquis de 
(1757-1834)—French general, prom­
inent figure in the French revolution, 
a leader of the moderate con­
stitutionalists (Feuillants); took part 
in the July 1830 revolution.—126 
Lamarck, Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de 
Monet, chevalier de (1744-1829)— 
French naturalist, developed the first 
complete theory of evolution in biolo­
gy, forerunner of Darwin.—371 
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de 
(1790-1869)—French poet, historian 
and politician; Foreign Minister and 
de facto head of the Provisional Gov­
ernment in 1848.—324 Lange, Christian Konrad Ludwig (1825-
1885)—German philologist and his­
torian.—227 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864)— 
German journalist and lawyer, social­
ist; took part in the democratic move­
ment in the Rhine Province (1848-
49); founder of the General Associa­
tion of German Workers (1863); an 
initiator of the opportunist trend in 
the German Social-Democratic move­
ment.—275,  515 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874)—French journalist and politi­
cian, a leader of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats; editor of La Réforme; 
Minister of the Interior in the Provi­
sional Government (February-May 
1848);  deputy to the Constituent and 
Legislative Assemblies (leader of the 
Montagnards); emigrated to England 
after the demonstration of June 13, 
1849.—328 
Leo Africanus (al-Hassan ibn-Moham-
med) (1483 or 1485-1552 or 1554)— 
Arab scholar and traveller, writer on 
Africa.—45 
Leopold Karl Friedrich (1790-1852)— 
Grand Duke of Baden (1830-52).— 
594 
Lessner, Friedrich (1825-1910)— 
German tailor; member of the Com­
munist League; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution; defendant at the 
Cologne Communist trial (1852); re­
fugee in London from 1856; member 
of the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London; member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional; friend and associate of Marx 
and Engels.— 321, 329 
Letourneau, Charles Jean Marie  (1831-
1902) — French sociologist and eth­
nographer.—143-44, 146 
Leverrier, Urban Jean Joseph  (1811-
1877)—French astronomer and 
mathematician; in 1846 computed 
the orbit of the then unknown planet 
Neptune and determined its posi­
tion.—368 

=====第742页=====
714 Name Index 
Levi, Leone (1821-1888)—English 
economist, statistician and lawyer.— 
299 
Lichnowski, Felix Maria, Prince von 
(1814-1848)—Prussian army officer, 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Right wing); killed during 
the Frankfurt uprising in September 
1848;  he was the prototype for the 
satirical characters in Heine's poem 
Atta Troll and Georg Weerth's Leben 
und Thaten des berühmten Ritters 
Schnapphahnski. —109, 310 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm (1826-1900)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment; took part in the 1848-49 rev­
olution; member of the Communist 
League; one of the founders and 
leaders of the German Social-
Democratic Party; friend and as­
sociate of Marx and Engels. —448, 
483 
Lipsius, Justus (1547-1606)—Dutch 
philologist, Latin scholar, professor in 
Jena, Cologne, Louvain and Ley-
den.—84 
Liutprand (c. 922-c. 972)—historian, 
bishop of Cremona from 961.—249 
Livy (Titus Livius) (59 B.C.-A.D. 17)— 
Roman historian.—225-26, 227 
Lochner, Georg (born c. 1824)—German 
Social-Democrat, carpenter; member 
of the Communist League and Ger­
man Workers' Educational Society in 
London; later a member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional; friend and associate of Marx 
and Engels. —321 
Longus (late 2nd cent.-early 3rd 
cent.)—Greek author.—184 
Lopatin, Hermann Alexandrovich (1845-
1918) — Russian revolutionary, Na-
rodnik, member of the General Coun­
cil of the First International; was 
arrested several times and kept in 
solitary confinement from 1897 to 1905;  one of the translators into 
Russian of Marx's Capital, Volume I; 
friend of Marx and Engels. —591-93 
Lothair I (795-855)—Roman Emperor 
(840-55), after the division of the 
Empire in 843 ruled Italy, Provence, 
and what is now Alsace and Lorraine 
and retained the title of Emperor, 
eldest son of Louis I the Pious.—67 
Louis, nicknamed the German (804-
876)—King of the East Franks (817-
43), King of Germany (843-76), third 
son of Louis I the Pious.—67 
Louis I, nicknamed the Pious (778-
840)—Frankish Emperor (814-40).— 
67, 76, 81 
Louis II (the Stammerer) (846-879)— 
King of Aquitania from 867, Frank­
ish King (877-79).—77 
Louis XI (1423-1483)—King of France 
(1461-83).—564 
Louis XIV (1638-1715)—King of France 
(1643-1715).—396, 491-92, 497 
Louis Bonaparte—see Napoleon III 
Louis Napoleon—see Napoleon III 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850)—Duke of 
Orleans, King of France (1830-48).— 
313, 332, 333 
Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans, comte de 
Paris (1838-1894)—grandson of 
Louis Philippe I, pretender to the 
French throne under the name of 
Philippe VIL— 416 
Lovett, William (1800-1877)—English 
craftsman, democrat; a leader of the 
Chartist movement (moderate wing) 
in the 1830s.—567 
Luther, Martin (1483-1546)—German 
theologian and writer, leader of the 
Reformation; founder of Protestant­
ism (Lutheranism) in Germany.— 
395 
Luxembourgs—dynasty of Holy Roman 
emperors (1308-1437, with interrup­
tions),  also ruled in Bohemia (1310-
1437) and Hungary (1387-1437).— 
485 

=====第743页=====
Name Index 715 
M 
Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Baron 
(1800-1859)—English historian and 
politician, Whig, M.P.— 308 
Macfarlane, Helen (pseudonym Howard 
Morten)—contributor to Chartist 
newspapers Democratic Review (1849-
50) and Red Republican (1850), trans­
lator of the Manifesto of the Communist 
Party into English.—512 
M(a)cLennan, John Ferguson (1827-
1881)—Scottish lawyer and his­
torian.—140, 157, 169, 192, 232 
Maine, Sir Henry James Sumner (1822-
1888) — English jurist and historian 
of law.—186 
Malon, Benoît (1841-1893)—French 
socialist, member of the First Inter­
national, member of the Central 
Committee of the National Guard 
and of the Paris Commune; after the 
Commune was defeated emigrated to 
Italy and later to Switzerland where 
he adhered to the anarchists; a 
leader and ideologist of Possibilism, 
an opportunist trend in the French 
socialist movement.—593 
Manteuffel, Otto Theodor, Baron von 
(1805-1882)—Prussian statesman; 
Minister of the Interior (1848-50), 
Prime Minister and Minister of 
Foreign Affairs (1850-58).—304, 349, 
472, 504 
Marat, Jean Paul (1743-1793)—a Jaco­
bin leader during the French Revolu­
tion.—126 
Marcianus (c. 5th cent.)—Greek geog­
rapher.—35 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus (121-180) — 
Roman Emperor (161-180), Stoic 
philosopher.—35, 38 
Marius, Gaius (c. 156-86 B.C.)— 
Roman general and statesman, consul 
(107,  104-100, 86  B.C.)—11,  30 
Maroboduus (second half of the 1st cent. 
B.C.-A.D. 37 (41))—leader of the 
Germanic tribe of Marcomanni (8 B.C-A.D. 19), brought together 
the Germanic tribes of the Rhine 
area; fought against Rome, from 
A.D.  6 maintained neutrality towards 
Rome.—12, 22, 23, 28, 34 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) 
(1814-1881) —Karl Marx's wife.—320 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883)—109-10, 118-
20, 123-28, 131, 141, 147, 150, 165, 
166, 170, 173, 176, 204-07, 211, 256, 
264, 277-83, 291, 297, 302-06, 311, 
312, 315, 317-23, 326, 328, 330, 
335-40, 364, 381-82, 403, 422, 426-27, 
433, 438, 442, 448, 464, 495, 512-13, 
515-24, 535, 545, 591, 593, 595, 599, 
601, 604, 606-14, 626-27 
Marx-Aveling, Eleanor (1855-1898)— 
took part in English and internation­
al working-class movement in the 
1880s-90s; journalist; Marx's daugh­
ter, Edward Aveling's wife from 
1884;  member of the Social-
Democratic Federation and later of 
the Socialist League; active in or­
ganising the mass movement of un­
skilled workers; an organiser of the 
dockers' strike in London in 1889.— 
434, 589 
Maurer, Georg Ludwig (1790-1872)— 
German historian, studied the social 
system of ancient and medieval Ger­
many.—78,  201, 239, 241 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872)—leader 
of the national liberation movement 
in Italy; an organiser of the Central 
Committee of European Democracy 
in London (1850).—313, 316, 328 
Meitzen, August (1822-1910)—German 
statistician, historian and economist; 
worked in statistical departments in 
Prussia and in Germany (1867-82).— 
348, 350-51 
Melbourne, William Lamb, Viscount 
(1779-1848)—English statesman, 
Whig, Home Secretary (1830-34), 
Prime Minister (1834 and 1835-
41).—566, 570 
Menger, Anton (1841-1906)—Austrian 
lawyer, professor at Vienna Universi­
ty .—600-09,  610-16 

=====第744页=====
716 Name Index 
Menke, Heinrich Theodor von (1819-
1892)—German geographer, revised 
Spruner's Hand-Atlas für die Geschich­
te des Mittelalters und der neueren 
Zeit.— 96, 559 
Mentel, Christian Friedrich (b. 1812)— 
German tailor, member of the 
League of the Just; in 1846-47 was 
imprisoned in Prussia for his involve­
ment in the League's case.— 315 
Merovingians—the first royal dynasty in 
the Frankish state, (mid-5th cent.-
751).—58,  61, 63, 65, 71, 73, 76 
Mestorf,  Johanna (1829-1909)—German 
historian and archaeologist.—  34, 37 
Mettemich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Prince von (1733-1859) — 
Austrian statesman and diplomat, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1809-21) 
and Chancellor (1821-48), an organ­
iser of the Holy Alliance.—465, 486 
Mieroslawski, Ludwik (1814-1878)— 
prominent figure in the Polish na­
tional liberation movement, took part 
in the Polish uprising of 1830-31 and 
in the 1848-49 revolution; command­
er of the revolutionary army during 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849.—420 
Mignet, François Auguste Marie (1796-
1884) —French historian.—389 
Mikhailovsky, Nikolai Konstantinovich 
(1842-1904)—Russian sociologist, 
journalist and literary critic, ideolo­
gist of the liberal Narodniks; an editor 
of the magazines Otechestvennye Zapis-
ki and Russkoye Bogatstvo.—311 
Milde, Karl August (1805-1861)— 
Silesian manufacturer, moderate lib­
eral; Minister of Trade in the Auers-
wald-Hansemann Ministry (from 
June to September 1848), President 
of the Prussian National Assembly 
(Right wing).—471 
Mirbach, Otto von (born c. 1800) — 
retired Prussian artillery officer, 
democrat; commandant of Elberfeld 
during the May 1849 uprising; emi­
grated from Germany.— 595 Mitchel, John (1815-1875) — Irish journ­
alist and historian, prominent figure 
in the Irish national liberation move­
ment, leader of the revolutionary-
democratic wing in the Young Ire­
land group; favoured union with the 
Chartists; for preparing a revolt in 
Ireland was deported to colonies in 
1848;  escaped in 1853 and emigrated 
to the USA.—575 
Moleschott, Jakob (1822-1893)—Dutch 
physiologist and philosopher; lec­
tured in Germany, Switzerland and 
Italy.—369 
Molière (real name Jean Baptist Po-
quelin) (1622-1673)—French play­
wright.— 266 
Moll, Joseph (1813-1849)—German 
watch-maker, a leader of the League 
of the Just, member of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League; 
President of the Cologne Workers' 
Association (from July to September 
1848),  member of the Rhenish Dis­
trict Committee of Democrats; killed 
in battle during the Baden-Palatinate 
uprising of 1849.—314, 321, 323, 
326 
Mommsen, Theodor (1817-1903)— 
German historian of Ancient 
Rome.—206, 225-29 
Mone, Franz Joseph (1796-1871)— 
German historian and philologist.— 
99 
Moore, Samuel (1838-1911)—English 
lawyer, member of the First Interna­
tional; translated into English Vol­
ume I of Marx's Capital (together 
with Edward Aveling) and the Ma­
nifesto of the Communist Party; associate 
of Marx and Engels. — 518 
Morgan, Lewis Henry (1818-1881)— 
American ethnographer, archaeolo­
gist and historian of primitive socie­
ty.—131-35,  139-43, 147, 152, 156, 
189-92,  194, 206, 207, 210, 211, 
213 
Morny, Charles August Louis Joseph, due 
de (1811-1865)—French politician, 

=====第745页=====
Name Index 717 
Bonapartist; an organiser of the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851; Minister 
of the Interior (December 1851-
January 1852).—476 
Moschus (mid-2nd cent. B.C.)—Greek 
poet.—184 
Motteler, Julius (1838-1907)—German 
Social-Democrat; deputy to the 
Reichstag in 1874-79; an émigré in 
Zurich and later in London at the 
time of the Anti-Socialist Law; was 
responsible for transportation of the 
Sozialdemokrat and illegal Social-
Democratic literature to Germany.— 
623 
Moxon, Edward (1801-1858)—English 
publisher; for publishing Shelley's 
poems, was brought to trial in 1840 
on a charge of blasphemy levelled by 
Hetherington; found guilty in June 
1841 but was not punished.—570 
Mülberger, Arthur (1847-1907) — 
German journalist, physician.—425 
Müllenhoff,  Karl Victor (1818-1884) — 
German philologist and historian, ex­
pert in Germanic antiquities, mythol­
ogy and medieval literature.—10 
N 
Nadler, Karl Christian Gottfried (1809-
1849)—German poet, wrote in the 
Palatinate dialect.—105 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821) — 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 and 
1815).—123,  175, 192, 309, 347, 375, 
415,  455, 459, 463, 465, 469, 495, 
506 
Napoleon HI (Charles Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—Napoleon 
I's nephew; President of the Second 
Republic (1848-51), Emperor of the 
French (1852-70).—29, 109, 297, 
302, 411, 412, 421, 460, 461, 463, 
464,  475-77, 479-82, 484-89, 494, 
498, 578, 580 
Napoleon the Little—see Napoleon III 
Nearchus (c. 360-c. 312 B. C.) —Mace­
donian navigator, a fellow cam­paigner of Alexander the Great, de­
scribed an expedition of the Macedo­
nian fleet from India to Mesopotamia 
(326-324  B.C.).  —168 
Nero (Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus 
Germanicus) (37-68)—Roman Em­
peror (54-68).— 35, 40, 116-17 
Nicholas I (1796-1855)—Russian Em­
peror (1825-55).—456, 460, 461, 477 
Niebuhr, Barthold Georg (1776-1831)— 
German historian.—206, 208, 228, 
269 
Nothjung, Peter (1821-1866)—German 
tailor; member of the Cologne Work­
ers' Association and of the Commu­
nist League; one of the accused at the 
Cologne Communist trial (1852).— 
328-29 
Novikova, Olga Alexeyevna (1840-
1925)—Russian journalist, lived in 
Britain for a long time; was in fact a 
diplomatic agent of the Russian gov­
ernment under Gladstone's adminis­
tration in the 1870s.—292 
Numonius Vala (died A. D. 9)—legate; 
commander of Quintilius Varus' 
cavalry; killed when fleeing after the 
Roman defeat in the Teutoburg 
Forest.—28 
O 
Oastler, Richard (1789-1861)—English 
clergyman and politician; sided with 
the Tories in opposing the Free 
Traders; favoured a reduction of the 
working day by law.—574 
O'Brien, James (pseudonym Bronterre) 
(1805-1864) —Irish journalist, ideol­
ogist and prominent figure in the 
Chartist movement, an editor of 
The Poor Man's Guardian in the 
1830s, an organiser of the National 
Reform League (1849).—569, 575, 
576 
O'Brien, William Smith (1803-1864)— 
Right-wing leader of the Young Ire­
land group; sentenced to death in 

=====第746页=====
718 Name Index 
1848 after an unsuccessful attempt to 
organise an uprising, commuted to 
life deportation; amnestied in 
1856.—573,  576 
O'Connell, Daniel (1775-1847)—Irish 
lawyer and politician, leader of the 
liberal wing of the national liberation 
movement.—572, 574-76 
O'Connor, Feargus Edward (1794-
1855)—a Left-wing Chartist leader, 
editor-in-chief of The Northern Star; 
reformist after 1848.—566-70, 
572-75 
Odoacer (c. 434-493)—German military 
leader in the service of West Roman 
emperors; dethroned Emperor 
Romulus Augustulus in 476 and be­
came king of the first "barbarian" 
kingdom in Italy.—245 
Olga (d. 969)—Grand Princess of Kiev, 
Regent of the Russian state from 
945, after the death of her husband 
Igor, her son Svyatoslav being still a 
minor.—235 
Orleans—branch in the royal house of 
Bourbons (1830-48).—416 
Orosius, Paulus (c. 380-c. 420)—Roman 
historian, Spaniard by birth; author 
of Historiarum adversum paganos.—20 
Orsini, Felice (1819-1858) —Italian 
democrat, republican; prominent fig­
ure in the struggle for Italy's national 
liberation and unification; executed 
for his attempt on the life of 
Napoleon III.—462 
Oshanina, Maria Nikolayevna (née 
Olovenikova) (1853-1898)—Russian 
revolutionary, member of the Execu­
tive of the Narodnaya Volya (People's 
Will) organisation; emigrated to Paris 
in 1882; representative of the Narod­
naya Volya's Executive abroad.—  591-
93 
Otfri(e)d (9th cent.) — monk from Wis-
sembourg in Alsace; wrote a poem 
entitled Liber Evangeliorum domini 
gratia theotisce conscriptus (c. 868), 
which included all four Gospels.— 86, 
105 Otho,  Marcus Salvius (32-69)—Roman 
statesman, legate in the province 
Lusitania; in January 69 organised 
praetorians' plot against Emperor 
Galba, had him murdered and pro­
claimed himself emperor; took his 
own life in April 69.—116 
Otto,  Karl Wunibald (born c. 1810)— 
German chemist; member of the 
Cologne Workers' Association and of 
the Communist League (1848-49); 
one of the accused at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852).—329 
Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 B.C.-
A.D.  18)—Roman poet.—29 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858)—British 
Utopian socialist.—599 
P 
Palgrave, Sir Robert Harry Inglis (1827-
1919)—English banker and econom­
ist, editor of The Economist (1877-
83).—300 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Viscount 
(1784-1865)—British statesman, Fo­
reign Secretary (1830-34,  1835-41, 
1846-51), Home Secretary (1852-55) 
and Prime Minister (1855-58 and 
1859-65).—461,  477 
Pare, William (1805-1873)—British 
economist, active in the co-operative 
movement, follower of Owen.—609 
Pattison, James (1786-1849)—English 
politician, liberal M.P. (1835-41 and 
1843-47).—574 
Peel, Sir Robert (1788-1850)—British 
statesman, moderate Tory; Home 
Secretary (1822-27, 1828-30), Prime 
Minister (1834-35, 1841-46); repealed 
the Corn Laws in 1846.—528, 570-73 
Pepin (or Pippin) III (the Short) (714-
768)—Frankish mayor of the palace 
(741-751), first king of the Carolin-
gian dynasty (751-768); son of Charles 
Martel.— 64, 65-67 

=====第747页=====
Name Index 719 
Perseus of Macedonia (c. 213-166 
B.C.)—last king of Macedonia (179-
168 B.C.).—10, 246 
Persius (Aulus Persius Flaccus) (34-62) — 
Roman satirist.—114 
Petty, Sir William (1623-1687)—English 
economist and statistician, founder of 
the classical school of political 
economy in Britain.—612 
Peucker, Eduard von (1791-1876) — 
Prussian general, War Minister in the 
so-called Imperial Government in 
Frankfurt am Main (1848-49); com­
manded counter-revolutionary troops 
suppressing the 1849 Baden-Pala­
tinate uprising.—420 
Pfänder, Karl (c. 1818-1876)—German 
artist; refugee in London from 1845; 
member of the Communist League 
and later of the General Council of 
the First International, friend and 
associate of Marx and Engels. —320 
Philip II (1527-1598)—King of Spain 
(1556-98).—30 
Philo of Alexandria (c. 20 B.C.-A.D. 
c. 54) — main representative of the 
Judaistic Alexandrian philosophy 
who exerted great influence on the 
shaping of Christian theology.—113 
Pisistratus (c. 600-527 B.C.)—tyrant of 
Athens (560-527 B.C. with interrup­
tions).—222 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-
Ferretti) (1792-1878)—Pope (1846-
78).—419 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher.— 111 
Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus) 
(A.D.  23 or 24-79)—Roman scholar, 
author of Natural History in 37 vol­
umes.—16, 18, 33, 36, 46-49, 54, 56, 
243, 246 
Plutarch (c. 46-c. 125)—Greek writer, 
historian and philosopher.—10, 171 
Pollux, Julius (2nd cent.) — Greek schol­
ar, compiled Onomasticon, an ency­
clopaedic dictionary.— 208 Probus, Marcus Aurelius (232-282)— 
Roman Emperor (276-282).—43 
Procopius of Caesaria (end of 5th cent.-
after 562) — Byzantine writer, author 
of an eight-volume history of Justi­
nian's wars against the Persians, Van­
dals and Goths.—47, 177 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865) — 
French writer, economist and 
sociologist; a founder of anarch­
ism.—278-80, 283, 285, 289, 325, 
382, 425, 428, 515, 604-06 
Ptolemy (Claudius Ptolemaeus) , (2nd 
cent.)—Greek mathematician, as­
tronomer and geographer.— 33-35, 
38, 41, 45-49, 54, 56 
Puttkamer, Robert Victor von (1828-
1900)—German Minister of the In­
terior (1881-88); helped to instigate 
the persecution of Social-Democrats 
under the Anti-Socialist Law.—472, 
624 
Pytheas of Marseilles (Massilia) (4th cent. 
B.C.)—Greek traveller and as­
tronomer; sailed to the shores of 
north-western Europe c. 325 B.C — 
10, 14 
Q 
Quinctilia—Roman patrician gens.— 
223 
R 
Racine, Jean Baptiste (1639-1699) — 
French dramatist.—496 
Regnault, Elias Georges Soulange Oliva 
(1801-1868) — French historian and 
journalist.— 293 
Reiff,  Wilhelm Joseph (b. 1824) — 
member of the Cologne Workers' 
Association and of the Communist 
League, expelled from the League in 
1850;  one of the accused at the 
Cologne Communist trial (1852).— 
329 

=====第748页=====
720 Name Index 
Remigius, St. (c. 437-c. 533)—arch­
bishop in Reims from 459.—64 
Renan, (Joseph) Ernest (1823-1892)— 
French philologist and historian of 
Christianity.—112, 326, 382 
Reymann, Daniel Gottlob (1759-1837) — 
German cartographer.—96-98 
Ricardo, David (1772-1823)—English 
economist.—279-83, 290, 522, 612 
Richelieu, Armand Jean du Plessi, duc de 
(1585-1642)—French statesman, Car­
dinal in the period of absolutism.— 
491 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794)—prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, 
leader of the Jacobins, head of the 
revolutionary Government.—376 
Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Johann Karl (1805-
1875)—German economist and 
politician; subsequently theoretician 
of "state socialism".—279-81, 283-90, 
608, 611 
Röser, Peter Gerhardt (1814-1865)— 
German cigar-maker; Vice-President 
of the Cologne Workers' Association 
(1848-49); member of the Commu­
nist League and from 1850 of its 
Cologne Central Authority; one of 
the accused at the Cologne Commu­
nist trial (1852); later a Lassallean.— 
328 
Roth,  Paul Rudolf von (1820-1892)— 
German lawyer and law historian; 
author of works on the origins of 
feudalism in Western Europe.—61-
64, 68, 71, 72, 77, 79-81 
Rotteck, Karl Wenzeslaus Rodecker von 
(1775-1840)—German historian and 
politician, liberal.—471 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-1778) — 
French philosopher and writer of the 
Enlightenment.—373 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880)—German 
radical journalist and philosopher, 
Young Hegelian; deputy to the 
Frankfurt Assembly (Left wing) in 1848;  German petty-bourgeois re­
fugee leader in England in the 
1850s.—328 
Russell, John, Earl of (1792-1878)— 
British statesman, Whig leader; 
Prime Minister (1846-52, 1865-66), 
Foreign Secretary (1852-53, 1859-65), 
President of the Council (1854-55).— 
477, 569, 574, 576 
S 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte de (1760-1825)—French Uto­
pian socialist.—599, 606 
Salvianus (c. 390-c. 484)—Christian 
preacher and writer, Marseilles cler­
gyman.—250, 253 
Sand,  Karl Ludwig (1795-1820)— 
German student, participated in the 
liberal movement of German intel­
ligentsia; executed for the assassina­
tion of the reactionary writer Kot-
zebue.—422 
Saturninus, Sentius (1st cent.)—Roman 
soldier, participated in campaigns 
against the Germans.—22 
Saussure, Henri de (1829-1905)—Swiss 
zoologist.—143 
Savoy, House of—Italian dynasty which 
ruled the Kingdom of Sardinia 
(1720-1861) and the united Italian 
Kingdom (1861-1946).—464 
Sax, Emil (1845-1927)—Austrian eco­
nomist.—425 
Schaaffhausen. Hermann (1816-1893)— 
German anthropologist and phy­
siologist.— 8 
Schapper, Karl (1812-1870)—German 
socialist; a leader of the. League of 
the Just; member of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League; 
a leader of the sectarian group dur­
ing the split in the Communist 
League in 1850; again became a close 
associate of Marx in 1856; member 
of the General Council of the First 

=====第749页=====
Name Index 721 
International.—305, 313-14, 319, 
323, 326, 328, 329 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, dramat­
ist, historian and philosopher.—373, 
606 
Schinderhannes —see Bückler, Johann 
Schloffel, Gustav Adolph (1828-1849)— 
German student and journalist, took 
part in the 1848-49 revolution in 
Germany and Hungary; killed in 
action.—123 
Schlosser, Friedrich Christoph (1776-
1861)—German historian, demo­
crat.—470 
Schlueter, Friedrich Hermann  (1851-
1919)—German Social-Democrat, 
historian; in the 1880s headed a 
Social-Democratic publishing house 
in Zurich and then in London; emi­
grated to the USA in 1889; wrote 
several works on the history of the 
working-class movement in Great 
Britain and the United States.— 623 
Schnapphahnski-Lichnowski—see Lichno-
wski, Felix Maria, Prince von 
Schneider II, Karl—German lawyer, 
democrat; President of the Cologne 
Democratic Society and member of 
the Rhenish District Committee of 
Democrats; defended Marx and En-
gels at the trial of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung on February 7, 1849; counsel 
for the defence at the Cologne Com­
munist trial (1852).—305, 306 
Schneider, Jacob (1818-1898)—German 
archaeologist and historian.— 32 
Schoemann, Georg Friedrich  (1793-
1879)—German philologist and his­
torian.—171,  210 
Scholefield,  Joshua (1774-1844)—English 
financier and manufacturer; radical 
M.P. (1832-44); favoured parliamen­
tary reform and free trade.—566 
Schulze-Delitzsch, Franz Hermann (1808-
1883)—German economist and 
politician; a deputy to the Prussian National Assembly (Left Centre) in 
1848;  a leader of the bourgeois-
liberal Party of Progress in the 1860s; 
advocated co-operative societies of 
mutual assistance as a means of 
improving the condition of the work­
ing class.—125 
Schurz, Karl (1829-1906)—German 
democrat, journalist; took part in the 
1849 Baden-Palatinate uprising; 
emigrated to the USA, participated 
in the Civil War on the side of the 
North; a Republican leader, Home 
Secretary (1877-81).—327 
Schweitzer, Johann Baptist (1833-1875)— 
prominent figure in the German 
working-class movement, Lassallean; 
an editor of the Social-Democrat 
(1864-67); President of the General 
Association of German Workers 
(1867-71).—278 
Scott, Sir Walter (1771-1832)—Scottish 
poet and novelist.— 235 
Sebastian (died c. 288)—a captain in 
the praetorian guard under the 
emperor Diocletian; executed for 
being a Christian; was canonised 
after death.—63 
Segestes (early 1st cent.)—a chief of the 
Germanic tribe of Cherusci.—27 
Segimerus (Sigimerus) (late 1st cent. 
B.C.-A.D. early 1st cent.)—a chief 
of the Germanic tribe of Cherusci, 
Arminius' father.—26, 27 
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus (c. 4 B.C.-
A.D.  65)—Roman philosopher.—113 
Serno-Solovyevich, Alexander Alexan-
drovich (1838-1869) —Russian rev­
olutionary democrat, follower of 
Chernyshevsky; participated in the 
Russian revolutionary movement in 
the early 1860s; emigrated to Gene­
va; member of the First Interna­
tional.—449 
Servius Tullius (578-534 B.C.)—sixth 
King of Rome.—230 
Severus, Lucius Septimius (146-211) — 
Roman Emperor (193-211).—37, 39, 
40 

=====第750页=====
722 Name Index 
Shelley, Percy Byshe (1792-1822)— 
English romantic poet.—570, 614 
Sirmond,  Jacques (1559-1651)—French 
historian, Jesuit; published early 
medieval documents.— 73 
Sismondi, Jean Charles Leonard Simonde 
de (1773-1842)—Swiss economist, 
representative of economic romanti­
cism.—612 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790)—Scottish 
economist.—522, 599, 608, 611-12 
Smith,  Adolph (Smith Headingley) — 
English socialist, journalist; member 
of the Social-Democratic Federation; 
was close to the French Possibilists.— 
542 
Soetbeer, Adolf Georg (1814-1892)— 
German economist and statistician.— 
506 
Solon (c. 638-c. 558 B.C.)—Athenian 
legislator; carried out several reforms 
directed against the aristocracy.— 
207, 215, 218-19, 230, 275 
Soulouque, Faustin Elie (c. 1782-1867)— 
president of the Republic of Haiti 
(1849-59); proclaimed himself Em­
peror Faustin I in 1849.—110 
Spruner von Merz, Karl (1803-1892)— 
German historian and cartog­
rapher.—96, 559 
Starcke, Carl Nikolaus (1858-1926)— 
Danish philosopher and sociologist.— 
357, 368, 372-74, 378, 379, 520 
Steenstrand—Dutch merchant in Eng­
land.—549 
Stein,  Julius (1813-1889)—Silesian 
teacher and journalist; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
wing) in 1848.—125 
Stephen III (II) (d. 757)—Pope (752-
757).—66 
Stephens, Joseph Rayner (1805-1879)— 
English clergyman; active in the 
Chartist movement in Lancashire 
(1837-39).—568 
Stepnyak—see Kravchinsky, Sergei 
Mikhailovich Stieber, Wilhelm (1818-1882)—Prussian 
police officer, one of the organisers 
of the Cologne Communist trial 
(1852);  chief of the Prussian political 
police (1850-60).—312, 322 
Stirner, Max (real name Schmidt, Jo­
hann Caspar) (1806-1856)—German 
Young Hegelian philosopher, an 
ideologist of individualism and 
anarchism.—364, 381-82 
Stoecker, Adolf (1835-1909)—German 
clergyman and reactionary politician; 
founder (1878) and leader of the 
Christian-Social Party, preached anti-
Semitism.—507 
Strabo (c. 63 B.C.-A.D. c. 20)—Greek 
geographer and historian.—14, 16, 
29, 45 
Strauss, David Friedrich (1808-1874)— 
German philosopher and publicist, 
Young Hegelian.—112, 363, 365, 
381-82 
Struve, Gustav von (1805-1870)— 
German democratic journalist; a 
leader of the Baden uprisings in 
April and September 1848 and of the 
Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849; 
one of the leaders of the German 
petty-bourgeois refugees in England; 
fought in the US Civil War on the 
side of the Northerners.—446 
Suetonius Tranquillus, Gaius (c. 70-after 
122)—Roman historian.— 21 
Sugenheim, Samuel (1811-1877) — 
German historian.—161 
Sybel, Heinrich von (1817-1895)— 
German historian and politician; Na­
tional Liberal from 1867; an advocate 
of the unification of Germany under 
Prussian supremacy; director of Prus­
sian state archives.—478 
T 
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius (c. 55-
c. 120) — Roman historian, orator 
and politician.—6, 12, 15-18, 25, 27, 
30-37,  39-42, 44-48, 53-54, 99, 116, 
132, 138-39, 176, 199, 238, 245 

=====第751页=====
Name Index 723 
Tarquinius, Lucius (nicknamed Super-
bus) (534-c. 509 B.C.)—last (seventh) 
semi-legendary King of Rome; ac­
cording to the legend, was exiled 
from Rome after a popular uprising 
which proclaimed a republic.—229, 
231 
Tauscher, Leonard (1840-1914)— 
German Social-Democrat, com­
positor; at the time of the Anti-
Socialist Law helped to publish the 
Sozialdemokrat in Zurich and then in 
London (1888-90), later an editor of 
the Social-Democratic publications in 
Stuttgart.—623 
Taylor, Sedly (second half of the 19th-
beginning of the 20th cent.)— 
participant in the co-operative move­
ment in Britain, favoured a share of 
capitalist profits for workers.—613 
Theocritus (3rd cent. B.C.)—Greek 
poet.— 184 
Theodorich —name of three kings of the 
Goths; two kings of the Visigoths, 
Theodorich I (reigned c. 418-51) and 
Theodorich II (reigned c. 453-66) 
and king of the Ostrogoths, 
Theodorich the Great (reigned 474-
526).—229 
Thierry, Jacques Nicolas Augustin (1795-
1856)—French historian.—389 
Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-1877)— 
French historian and statesman, 
Prime Minister (1836 and 1840); 
head of the Orleanists after 1848; 
organised the suppression of the 
Paris Commune (1871); President of 
the Republic (1871-73).—389, 490, 
497 
Thile, Karl Hermann von (1812-1889) — 
German diplomat, Deputy-Minister 
of Foreign Affairs of Prussia (1862-
71), and of the German Empire 
(1871-73).—487 
Thompson, William (c. 1785-1833)— 
Irish economist, follower of Owen.— 
280, 607-12, 614 
Thucydides (c. 460-c. 395 B.C.)—Greek 
historian.— 212 Tiberius  ( Tiberius Claudius Nero Caesar) 
(42 B.C.-A.D. 37)—Roman Emperor 
(14-37).—21,  22, 31, 32, 40, 116, 229 
Trajan (Marcus Ulpius Traianus) (53-
117)—Roman Emperor (98-117).—39 
Tschech, Heinrich Ludwig (1789-1844)— 
Prussian official, burgomaster of 
Storkow (Prussia) (1832-41); demo­
crat; executed for an attempt on the 
life of Frederick William IV.—471 
Tudors—royal family in England (1485-
1603).—565 
U 
Ulfila (Wulfila) (c. 311-383)  —Vi-
sigothic bishop, founder of the 
Gothic alphabet, translator of the 
Bible into Gothic—229 
V 
Vanderbilts—family of big financial and 
industrial magnates in the USA.— 
401, 475 
Varus, Publius Quintilius (c. 53 B.C.-
A.D.  9) — Roman politician and gen­
eral; proconsul of Syria (7 B.C.), gen­
eral in Germany (6-9); killed in 
battle in the Teutoburg Forest dur­
ing the uprising of the Germanic 
tribes.—24-30, 55, 223 
Veleda (A.D. 1st cent.)—priestess and 
prophetess of the Germanic tribe of 
Bructeri, took an active part in the 
uprising (led by Civilis) of Germanic 
and Gaulish tribes against Rome (69-
70).—239 
Velleius Paterculus, Marcus (c. 19 B.C.-
A.D.  c. 31) — Roman historian; took 
part in military expeditions to Ger­
many, Pannonia and Dalmatia.—21, 
22, 24, 26, 29, 46 
Venedey, Jakob (1805-1871)—German 
radical journalist; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
wing);  liberal after the 1848-49 rev­
olution.— 313 
48-1243 

=====第752页=====
724 Name Index 
Vercingetorix (c. 72-46 B.C.)—chief of 
the Gauls who headed their uprising 
against Rome (52-51 B.C.); was exe­
cuted.—30 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
567, 569, 572 
Villiers, Charles Pelham (1802-1898)— 
English politician, lawyer, Free 
Trader,  M.P.—571,  573 
Vincent, Henry (1813-1878)—Chartist, 
leader of London Workers' Associa­
tion.— 567 
Vinicius, Marcus (died c. 20)—Roman 
general, consul, took part in wars in 
Pannonia and Germany.— 22 
Virchow, Rudolf (1821-1902)—German 
naturalist, founder of cellular pathol­
ogy; politician, a leader of the Party 
of Progress.— 8 
Vogt, Karl (1817-1895)—German na­
turalist, petty-bourgeois democrat; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848-49; one 
of the five imperial regents (June 
1849);  emigrated in 1849; later re­
ceived subsidies from Napoleon III; 
slandered proletarian revolution­
aries.—369, 447, 448 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet (1694-
1778)—French philosopher, writer 
and historian of the Enlighten­
ment.—373,  396 
W 
Wachsmuth, Ernst Wilhelm Gottlieb 
(1784-1866)—German historian, pro­
fessor in Leipzig.—172 
Wagner, Adolf Heinrich Gotthilf (1835-
1917)—German economist, represen­
tative of the so-called socio-legal 
trend in political economy; armchair 
socialist.—284 
Wagner, Richard (1813-1883)—German 
composer.—147 Waitz, Georg (1813-1886)—German 
historian, professor in Göttingen. — 
50, 241 
Waldersee, Friedrich Gustav, Count 
(1795-1864)—Prussian general and 
military writer, War Minister (1854-
58).—473 
Walter, John (1776-1847)—owner and 
publisher of The Times, M.P. (1832-
37, 1841-42), moderate liberal.—573 
Walter, John (1818-1894)—owner and 
publisher of The Times, M.P. (1847-
65, 1868-85), liberal; son of the 
above.—574 
Watson, John Forbes (1827-1892)— 
English physician, colonial official, 
Director of the London Museum of 
India (1858-79), wrote a number of 
works on India.—151 
Weerth, Ferdinand (1774-1836)— 
German pastor; district inspector of 
church administration in the princi­
pality of Lippe; father of Georg 
Ludwig Weerth. —109 
Weerth, Georg Ludwig (1822-1856)— 
German proletarian poet and journ­
alist, member of the Communist 
League, an editor of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung in 1848-49; friend 
of Marx and Engels.— 108-11, 458 
Weitling, Wilhelm Christian (1808-
1871)—German tailor; one of the 
early leaders of the working-class 
movement in Germany; theorist of 
Utopian egalitarian communism; 
emigrated to the USA in 1849.—279, 
315-17,  319-20, 326, 328, 516 
Welcker, Carl Theodor (1790-1869) — 
German lawyer, liberal writer, deputy 
to the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Right Centre) in 1848-49.—471 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, Duke of 
(1769-1852)—British general and 
statesman, Tory; Prime Minister 
(1828-30) and Foreign Secretary (De­
cember 1834-April 1835).—490, 563 

=====第753页=====
Name Index 725 
Wermuth—police superintendant in 
Hanover; witness at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852).—312, 322 
Westermarck, Edward Alexander (1862-
1939)—Finnish ethnographer and 
sociologist.— 144-47, 159-60 
Westminster—see Grosvenor, Richard 
White, George (d. 1868)—Chartist, con­
tributed to The Northern Star, as­
sociate of Feargus O'Connor, later of 
Harney, agitated in Birmingham 
(1842),  Leeds (1850) and in other 
cities;  was arrested several times.— 
572 
Wiberg, Carl Fredrik (1813-1881)— 
Swedish historian.—  34, 36 
Wigand, Paul (1786-1886)—German 
jurist and law historian.— 85 
William I (1797-1888)—Prince of 
Prussia, Prince Regent (1858-61), 
King of Prussia (1861-88); German 
Emperor (1871-88).—417, 466, 472, 
491, 580 
William II (1859-1941)—King of Prus­
sia and German Emperor (1888-
1918).—540, 541, 627 
William III (1817-1890)—King of the 
Netherlands (1849-90).—485 
Williams, Zephaniah (c. 1794-1874) — 
Chartist, an organiser of the miners' 
uprising in Wales in 1839; deported 
for life to Australia.—568, 569, 575, 
577 
Willich, August (1810-1878)—retired 
Prussian army officer, member of the 
Communist League, participated in 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 
1849;  a leader of a sectarian group 
which split away from the League in 
1850;  emigrated to the USA in 1853, 
fought in the Civil War on the side 
of the North—128, 326, 328-29, 
419, 596 
Wilson, Daniel (b. 1840)—French 
politician, deputy to the National 
Assembly from 1871, moderate 
bourgeois republican.— 331 Wilson, James (1805-1860)—Scottish 
economist and politician, Free 
Trader, founder and editor of The 
Economist, U.V. (1847-59).—572 
Wolff,  Wilhelm (Lupus) (1809-1864)— 
German teacher, proletarian rev 
olutionary, leading figure in the 
Communist League, an editor of the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848 and 
1849;  friend and associate of Marx 
and Engels.— 110, 127, 128, 321, 
323, 325, 341, 348-49 
Wolfram von Eschenbach (c. 1170-
c. 1220)—German poet.—178 
Worsaae, Jens Jacob Asmussen  (1821-
1885)—Danish archaeologist and his­
torian; Minister of Education (1874-
75).—35 
Wright, Asher (1803-1875)—a US mis­
sionary, lived among the Seneca In­
dians (1831-75); compiled a diction­
ary of their language.—158 
Y 
Yaroslav the Wise (978-1054)—Grand 
Prince of Kiev (1019-1054).—167 
Yor(c)k von Wartenburg, Hans David 
Ludwig, Count (1759-1830) —  Prus­
sian general, field-marshal gen­
eral (from 1821); participated in 
wars against Napoleonic France.—29 
Z 
Zeuß, Johann Kaspar (1806-1856)— 
German linguist, made a detailed 
comparative description of Celtic lan­
guages.—43-49, 54 
Zhukovsky, Yuli Galaktionovich (1822-
1907) — Russian economist and jour­
nalist, manager of the State Bank, 
wrote "Karl Marx and His Book on 
Capital", an article containing attacks 
on Marxism.— 311 
Zurita, Alonso—Spanish colonial officer 
in Central America in the mid-
loth century.—168 
48* 

=====第754页=====
726 Name Index 
INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 
Abraham (Bib.)—patriarch of the Heb­
rews.—163 
Achilles (Gr. myth.)—the bravest Greek 
warrior in the Trojan War, a hero of 
Homer's Iliad.—170, 211 
Agamemnon (Gr. myth.)—legendary 
King of Argos, leader of the Greeks 
in the Trojan War, a hero of 
Homer's Iliad.—170, 208, 211 
Althaea (Gr. myth.)—daughter of King 
Thestius, mother of Meleager.— 238 
Anaitis—Greek name of Anahita— 
Persian goddess of waters and fertili­
ty. Her cult spread from Persia to 
Asia Minor. She was worshipped 
mostly in Armenia.—160, 174 
Aphrodite (Gr. myth.)—goddess of love 
and beauty.—174 
Argonauts (Gr. myth.)—sailors who, in 
a ship called Argos, made a voyage to 
Colchis in quest of the Golden Fleece 
guarded by the dragon.—238 
Astarte—Greek name of Ashtoreth— 
Phoenician goddess of fertility and 
love.—159 
Atta Troll—bear, the title character in 
Heine's satirical poem.—109 
Boreadi (Gr. myth.)—children of 
Boreas (god of the North Wind) and 
Oreithyia (Queen of Athens).—238 
Brunhild—a character in the Old Ger­
man epic and in the German mediev­
al poem, Nibelungenlied, Queen of 
Iceland, wife of Günther, King of the 
Burgundians.—185 
Cassandra (Gr. myth.) — daughter of 
Priam, King of Troy, prophetess; at 
the conquest of Troy was carried off 
by Agamemnon as his slave and 
mistress; a character in Aeschylus' 
Agamemnon.—171 
Chloe—an enamoured shepherdess in 
the novel Daphnis and Chloe by the 
Greek author Longus (2nd-
3rd cent.).—184 Christ (Jesus Christ) (Bib.)—114 
Cinderella—heroine of a popular fairy­
tale, a despised and neglected but 
diligent and gentle girl.— 315 
Cleopatra (Gr. myth.)—daughter of 
Boreas, god of the North Wind.— 238 
Daniel (Bib.)—a 'great prophet', author 
of the Book of Daniel in the Old 
Testament.—115 
Daphnis—an enarmoured shepherd in 
Daphnis and Chloe by the Greek 
author Longus (2nd-3rd cent.).—184 
Demodocus—a character in Homer's 
Odyssey, blind ministrel of the mythi­
cal King of Phaeacians Alcinous.— 
211 
Don Quixote—the title character in Cer­
vantes' novel.—502 
Droste-Fischering—a character in a Ger­
man satirical folk song.—471 
Egeria (Rom. myth.)—nymph, proph­
etess,  secret adviser of Numa Pom-
pilius,  Roman King.—613 
Enoch (Bib.)—author of the apocryphal 
Book of Enoch.—115 
Ermin (Ger. myth.)—one of the three 
sons of Mannus, legendary ancestor 
of the Germans.—47 
Eteocles (Gr. myth.)—a son of Oedipus, 
who usurped power in Thebes; a 
character in Aeschylus' tragedy 
Seven Against Thebes.—209 
Etzel—a character in Old German epic 
and in the Nibelungenlied, King of the 
Huns.—185 
Eumeaus—a swineherd in Homer's 
Odyssey, who remained faithful to his 
master, King Odysseus of Ithaca, 
during his long voyages.—211 
Freya (Sc. myth.) — goddess of fertility 
and love, wife of god Freyr, her 
brother; character in the Scandinav­
ian epic the Elder Edda. —147 

=====第755页=====
Name Index 727 
Ganymede (Gr. myth.) — handsome 
youth who was carried off by the 
gods to Olympus where he became 
Zeus'  lover and cup-bearer.—173 
George Dandin—title character in a 
farce by Molière George Dandin ou le 
mari confondu; rich simple-minded 
peasant married to a ruined aristo­
crat who deceives him.—266 
Günther —a character in the Old Ger­
man epic and also in the German 
medieval poem Nibelungenlied, King 
of the Burgundians.—184-85 
Gutrun (Kudrun)—a character in the 
Old German epic and in the 13th-
century German poem, Gutrun; 
daughter of Hettel, King of the 
Hegelingen, and Hilde; fiancée of 
Herwig, King of Seeland; carried off 
by King Hartmut of Normandy, was 
his prisoner for 13 years but refused 
to marry him; set free by Herwig, 
she married the latter.—185 
Hadubrand—one of the characters in 
the Old German epic, the Hilde-
brandslied (Lay of Hildebrand), son of 
Hildebrand, the main character.— 
237 
Hartmut —a character in the Old Ger­
man epic and in the 13th-century 
German poem, Gutrun; son of the 
King of Ormany (Normandy); one of 
Gutrun's unrequited fiancés. —185 
Heracles (Greek and Roman myth.)—a 
hero known for his physical strength 
and heroic deeds.—238 
Herwig —a character in the Old Ger­
man epic and in the 13th-century 
German poem, Gutrun, King of See-
land, fiancé and later husband of 
Gutrun. —185 
Hettel—a character in the Old German 
epic and in the 13th-century German 
poem, Gutrun; King of the 
Hegelingen. —185 
Hilde —a character in the Old German 
epic and in the 13th-century Ger­
man poem, Gutrun; daughter of the King of Ireland; wife of Hettel, King 
of the Hegelingen. —185 
Hildebrand —main character of the Old 
German heroic epic Hildebrandslied 
(Lay of Hildebrand).—  237, 262 
Ing (Ger. myth.)—one of the three 
sons of Mannus, legendary ancestor 
of the Germans.—47 
Isk (Ger. myth.)—one of the three sons 
of Mannus, legendary ancestor of the 
Germans.—47 
Jezebel—according to the Old Testa­
ment, despotic and cruel Queen of 
Israel, tried to have Hebrew religion 
replaced by the worship of Astarte. 
She is mentioned in the New Testa­
ment. The name is used in The 
Revelation of St. John the Divine 
(Apocalypse), to personify depravity 
and blasphemy.—113 
John (Bib.)—author of The Revelation of 
St. John the Divine (Apocalypse), a 
book of the New Testament.—115, 
117 
John (Bib.)—author of one of the four 
Gospels.— 115 
John (Bib.)—author of the three Epis­
tles.—115 
John Bull—the main character in John 
Arbuthnot's book The History of John 
Bull (18th cent.), the name is often 
used to personify England or En­
glishmen.—522 
Kriemhild—a character in the Old Ger­
man epic and in the German 
medieval poem Nibelungenlied; sister 
of Günther, King of the Burgun­
dians;  fiancée and wife of Siegfried; 
after his death, married Etzel, King 
of the Huns.—184-85 
Loki (Sc. myth.) — god of evil and of 
fire; character in the Scandinavian 
epic the Elder Edda. —147 
Mannus—according to Tacitus, son of 
the Old German god Tuisto, had 

=====第756页=====
728 Name Index 
three sons, Ing, Isk and Ermin; 
legendary ancestors of three major 
Germanic peoples, the Ingaevones, 
Iscaevones and Herminones.—47 
Meleager (Gr. myth.)—son of Oeneus, 
legendary King of Calydon, and Al­
thaea; killed his maternal uncles.— 
238 
Mephistopheles—a character in Goethe's 
Faust.—148,  359 
Moses—prophet and lawgiver; led the 
Jews out of Egyptian captivity.—114, 
163 
Mulios—a character in Homer's Odys-
sey, herald.—211 
Mylitta—goddess of love and fertility, 
worshipped in Babylon.—160 
Nerthus (Nertha)—according to Tacitus, 
goddess of fertility of ancient Ger­
mans.—48,  50 
Nestor (Gr. myth.)—the oldest and wis­
est Greek hero to take part in the 
Trojan War.—208 
Njordr (Sc. myth.)—god of fertility, 
character in the epic the Elder 
Edda.— 148 
Odysseus (Ulysses)—character in 
Homer's Illiad and Odyssey.—211 
Phineus (Gr. myth.)—blind prophet; 
egged on by his second wife, tortured 
his children born of his first mar­
riage with Cleopatra, daughter of 
Boreas, and the gods punished 
him.—238 
Polynices (Gr. myth.)—son of Oedipus, 
King of Thebes, and brother of 
Eteocles. The two brothers killed 
each other fighting for power. This is 
described by Aeschylus in his tragedy 
Seven Against Thebes.—209 
Procrustes (Gr. myth.)—giant robber 
who entrapped travellers and forced 
them to lie down on a bed; those 
who were too short for the bed had 
their legs stretched, and those who were too tall had them cut.—94, 606, 
608 
Rhadamanthus (Gr. myth.)—wise and 
fair judge.—380 
Romulus—legendary founder and first 
ruler of Rome.—224 
Schnapphahnski —satirical character in 
Heine's Atta Troll and Weerth's 
Leben und Thaten des berühmten Ritters 
Schnapphahnski; its prototype was 
the Prussian reactionary, Prince 
Lichnowski.—109 
Siegebant—a character in the Old Ger­
man epic and in the 13th-century 
German poem, Gutrun; King of Ire­
land.—185 
Siegfried—one of the main characters 
in the Old German epic and in the 
German medieval poem, Nibelungen­
lied.—  184-85 
Siegfried of Morland—a character in the 
Old German epic and in the 13th-
century German poem, Gutrun, one 
of Gutrun's unrequited fiancés. —185 
Sif (Sc. myth.)—wife of Thor, god of 
thunder, a character in the Scandinav­
ian epic the Elder Edda. —237 
Telamon (Gr. myth.) — participant in 
the expedition against Troy.—171 
Telemachus—a character in Homer's 
Odyssey, son of Odysseus, King of 
Ithaca.—170 
Tell, William—hero in folk tales about 
Switzerland's war of liberation against 
the Habsburgs at the end of the 13th 
and the beginning of the 14th cen­
tury.—624 
Teucer—a hero in Homer's  Iliad, 
fought in the Trojan War.—171 
Theseus—legendary King of Athens, 
supposed founder of the Athenian 
state.—  214 
Thestius (Cr. myth.)—legendary King 
of Pleuron in Aetolia.—238 

=====第757页=====
Name Index 729 
Tyr—god of war of ancient Germans 
and Scandinavians.—98 
Ute the Norwegian—a character in the 
Old German epic and in the 13th-
century German poem, Gutrun. —185 Volker —knight and musician in the Old 
German epic and in the Nibelungen­
lied.—  423 
Zeus (Gr. myth.)—supreme  god.—211, 
361 

=====第758页=====
730 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
KoHcneKm  KHUZU  Atwuca T. Mopzana "/fpeenee o6w,ecmeo". In: Apxue Mapxca u 
dnzeji-bca, T. IX, M., 1941. 
— Marx's Excerpts from Lewis Henry Morgan, 'Ancient Society". In: The Ethnological 
Notebooks of Karl Marx. Assen, 1972, pp. 95-241.—131, 134, 141, 150, 156, 
158, 165, 166, 170, 190, 194, 197, 205-08,  210-11,  225, 264, 276 
Capital. A Critique of Political Economy. Volume I. Book One. The  Process  of Production 
of Capital (present edition, Vol. 35) 
— Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band. Hamburg, 1867.— 
131, 279, 335, 340 
— Le Capital. Traduction de M. J. Roy, entièrement revisée par l'auteur. [Vol. 1] 
Paris,  s.a. [1872-1875].—589 
— Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Bd. 1. 3. vermehrte Aufl. 
Hamburg, 1883.—336-40, 433, 438 
— Capital: A Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production. Translated from the third 
German edition, by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling and edited by 
Frederick Engels. Vol. I. London, 1887.—340, 522 
Capital. A Critique of Political Economy. Volume II. Book Two. The Process of 
Circulation of Capital (present edition, Vol. 36) 
— Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Von Karl Marx. Zweiter Band. 
Buch II: Der Cirkulationsprocess des Kapitals. Herausgegeben von Friedrich 
Engels. Hamburg, 1885.—336 
The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of the International 
Working-men's Association (present edition, Vol. 22) 
—The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of the International 
Working-men's Association. London,  1871.—  518 
The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Die Klassenkämpfe in Frankreich 1848 bis 1850. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue. Nr. 1, 2, 3, 5-6, 1850.— 604 
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Part One (present edition, Vol. 29) 
—Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erstes Heft. Berlin, 1859.—  280-81, 
283, 291 

=====第759页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 731 
Critical Marginal Notes on the Article "The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a 
Prussian" (present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Kritische Randglossen zu dem Artikel "Der König von Preussen und die 
Sozialreform. Von einem Preussen". In: Vorwärts! Nr. 63, 64; 7., 10. August. 
Paris,  1844.—315 
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (present edition, Vol. 11) 
—Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Napoleon. In: Die Revolution. Erstes Heft. 
New York, 1852.—302 
—Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte. 3. Aufl. Hamburg, 1885.— 302 
General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's 
Association (present edition, Vol. 23) 
—Published as pamphlets in English and French in November and December 
1871 and in German in February 1872.—517 
The June Revolution (present edition, Vol. 7) 
—Die Junirevolution. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 29, 29. Juni 1848.—126 
On Proudhon [Letter to J. B. Schweitzer] (present edition, Vol. 20) 
—Über P.-J. Proudhon. In: Der Social-Demokrat, Nr. 16-18, 1., 3. und 5. 
Februar 1865.—278 
The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M. Proudhon 
(present edition, Vol. 6) 
—Misère de la philosophic Réponse à La philosophie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon. Paris-Bruxelles, 1847.—427, 613 
— Das Elend der Philosophie. Antwort auf Proudhons "Philosophie des Elends". 
Deutsch von E. Bernstein und K. Kautsky. Mit Vorwort und Noten von 
Friedrich Engels. Stuttgart, 1885.—278, 281, 427, 521, 613 
Preface [to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy] (present edition, 
Vol. 29) 
— Karl Marx. [Preface] In: Das Volk, Nr. 5, 14. Juni 1859.—519 
Provisional Rules of the Association (present edition, Vol. 20). In: Address and 
Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association, Established 
September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting Held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, 
London. [London,] 1864.— 517 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (present edition, Vol. 11) 
— Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln. Basel,  1853.—  312-13 
— Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten Prozess zu Köln. Neuer Abdruck mit 
Einleitung von Friedrich Engels und Dokumenten. Hottingen-Zürich, 1885.— 
312-13,  328-29 
Second Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on 
the Franco-Prussian War. To the Members of the International Working Men's 
Association in Europe and the United States (present edition, Vol. 22). Published as 
a leaflet in English and in German in September-December 1870.— 495 
Speech on the Question of Free Trade. Delivered to the Democratic Association of Brussels 
at Its Public Meeting of January 9, 1848 (present edition, Vol. 6) 
— Discours sur la question du libre échange, prononcé à l'association démocrati­
que de Bruxelles. Dans la Séance Publique du 9 Janvier 1848. Bruxelles, 
1848.—291 

=====第760页=====
732 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
—Rede über die Frage des Freihandels, gehalten am 9. Januar 1849 [1848] in 
der demokratischen Gesellschaft zu Brüssel von Karl Marx. In: Marx, K. Das 
Elend der Philosophie. Stuttgart, 1885, S. 188-209. Anhang 2.—521 
—Free Trade. A speech delivered before the Democratic Club, Brussels, 
Belgium, Jan. 9, 1848. Boston-New York, 1888.—521 
Theses on Feuerbach (present edition, Vol. 5) 
—First published in the Appendix to the separate edition of Ludwig Feuerbach 
und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen Philosophie. Stuttgart, 1888.— 520 
Wage Labour and Capital (present edition, Vol. 9) 
—Lohnarbeit und Kapital. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 264-267, 269; 5.-8., 
11. April, 1849.—127 
—Lohnarbeit und Kapital. Separat-Abdruck aus der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung 
vom Jahre 1849. Nottingen-Zürich, 1884.—277 
Engels, Frederick 
The Assembly at Frankfurt (present edition, Vol. 7) 
—Die Frankfurter Versammlung. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 1, 1. Juni 
1848.—124 
The Condition of theWorking-Class in England. From Personal Observation and Authentic 
Sources (present edition, Vol. 4) 
—Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England. Nach eigner Anschauung und 
authentischen Quellen. Leipzig, 1845.—119 
—The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844. With Appendix 
written 1886, and Preface 1887. New York [1887].—399, 402, 434 
—The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844. With appendix 
written 1886, and preface 1887. New York-London, 1888.—517 
The Housing Question (present edition, Vol. 23) 
—Zur Wohnungsfrage. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 51, 52, 53, 103, 104; 26., 29. Juni, 
25., 28. December 1872; Nr. 2, 3, 12, 13, 15, 16; 4., 8. Januar, 8., 12., 19., 22. 
Februar 1873.—424-25 
—Zur Wohnungsfrage. Zweite, durchgesehene Auflage. Hottingen-Zürich, 
1887.—424-26, 433 
Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (this volume) 
—Ludwig Feuerbach und der Ausgang der klassischen deutschen Philosophie. 
In: Die Neue Zeit, Nr. 4, 5, 1886 and as a pamphlet, Stuttgart, 1888.—519, 
600 
Preface [to the first German edition of Capital, Volume II] (present edition, 
Vol. 36) 
—Vorrede. In: K. Marx. Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Zweiter 
Band. Buch II: Der Cirkulationsprocess des Kapitals. Erste Auflage. 
Herausgegeben von Friedrich Engels. Hamburg,  1885.—  278 
The Role of Force in History (this volume) 
—Die Rolle der Gewalt in der Geschichte. In: Die Neue Zeit, Bd. 1, Nr. 22-26, 
1895-1896.—578-79 

=====第761页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 733 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick 
Address of the Central Authority to the League. March 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10) 
—Ansprache der Zentralbehörde an den Bund vom März 1850. In: Enthüllungen 
über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln von Karl Marx. Neuer Abdr. mit Einl. 
von Friedrich Engels, und Dokumenten. Hottingen-Zürich [1885].— 326 
Address of the Central Authority to the League. June 1850 (present edition, Vol. 10) 
—Ansprache der Zentralbehörde an den Bund vom Juni 1850. In: Enthüllungen 
über den Kommunisten-Prozess zu Köln von Karl Marx. Neuer Abdr. mit Einl. 
von Friedrich Engels, und Dokumenten. Hottingen-Zürich [1885].— 326 
[Circular Against Kriege] (present edition, Vol. 6). Published as a lithographic 
circular in 1846.—319 
Demands of the Communist Party in Germany (present edition, Vol. 7) 
—Forderungen der Kommunistischen Partei in Deutschland. Köln, 1848 (a 
leaflet).—323 
The German Ideology (present edition, Vol. 5) 
—Die deutsche Ideologic In: Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe. Erste Abteilung, 5. 
Band, M. 1932.—173, 519 
The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Company 
(present edition, Vol. 4) 
—Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik. Gegen Bruno Bauer und 
Consorten. Frankfurt a. M.,  1845.—  364 
Manifesto of the Communist Party (present edition, Vol. 6) 
— (anon.) Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei. Veröffentlicht im Februar 1848. 
London.— 120-21,  186, 312, 320, 441, 512-18 
— Manifesto of the German Communist Party (published in February 1848). In: 
The Red Republican, Nos. 21-24, November 9, 16, 23, 30, 1850.—512 
—(anon.) MaHHc[)ecTT> KoMMyHHCTHnecKOH napi-in. B. M. H r. [JKeHeBa, 
1869].—516 
—Manifesto of the German Communist Party (first published in February 1848). 
In: Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly, New York, No. 7, December 30, 1871.—516 
—Manifeste de Karl Marx. In: Le Socialiste, New York, Nos 16, 17, 19-24, 26; 20, 
27 janvier, 10, 17, 24 février, 2, 9, 16, 30 mars- 1872.—516 
— Das Kommunistische Manifest. Neue Ausgabe mit einem Vorwort der 
Verfasser. Leipzig, 1872.— 518 
— MaHH<j>ec-rB KoMMyHHCTHHecKOÖ napiiH KapAa Mapnca H Op. 9HreAbca. 
nepeBOA-b c HIM. H3AaHÜi 1872 r. CT> npeAHCAOßieMi^ aBTopoBi». >KeHeBa, 
1882.—516 
—Das Kommunistische Manifest. Dritte autorisirte deutsche Ausgabe. Mit 
Vorworten der Verfasser. Hottingen-Zürich, 1883.—118, 119 
—Manifesto of the Communists. Published by the International Working-men's 
Association. New York,  1883.—  516 
— Det Kommunistiske Manifest. Med Forfatternes Forord. (Efter den tredje 
avtoriserede tyske Udgave.) In: Socialistisk Bibliotek. Udgivet af Det social-
demokratiske Arbejderparti i Danmark. Bd. 1. Socialistiske Pjecer, K^benhavn, 
1885.—516 
—Manifeste du parti communiste. In: Le Socialiste, Nos 1-11; 29 août, 5, 12, 19, 
26 septembre, 3, 10, 17, 24, 31 octobre, 7 novembre 1885.—516 

=====第762页=====
734 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Manifesto del Partido Comunista. In: El Socialista, Nos 14-17, 19-22; 11, 18, 
25 Junio, 2, 16, 23, 30 Julio, 6 Agosto 1886.—516 
—The Manifesto of the Communists. By Karl Marx. Assisted by Frederick 
Engels. London, International Publishing Company, 1886.— 516 
— Manifesto of the Communist Party. Edited and annotated by Frederick Engels. 
Third Edition, London, 1888.—119, 512 
Preface to the 1872 German edition of the "Manifesto of the Communist Party" (present 
edition, Vol. 23) 
— Vorwort. In: Das Kommunistische Manifest. Neue Ausgabe mit einem Vorwort 
der Verfasser. Leipzig, 1872.— 518 
Preface to the Second Russian Edition of the "Manifesto of the Communist  Party  " (present 
edition, Vol. 24) 
— ripeAHCAOBie.  In: K. MapKc H <D. 9HreAbc. Mauucßecmh KoMMyuucmuuecKoü 
napmiu, JKeHeBa, 1882.—627 
Review. May to October [1850] (present edition, Vol. 10) 
— Revue. Mai bis Oktober [1850]. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, Nr. 5-6, Mai bis Oktober 1850.—328 
[Marx, K., Engels, F.] To the Workers of Cologne (present edition, Vol. 9) 
—An die Arbeiter Kölns. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 301, 19. Mai 
1849.—128 
Marx, K., Schapper, K., Schneider II. Appeal (present edition, Vol. 8) 
—Aufruf.  In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 147 (2. Aufl.) November 19, 
1848.—305 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Abendroth, H. von. Terrainstudien zu dem Rückzuge des Varus und den Feldzügen des 
Germanicus. Leipzig, 1862.— 20, 28 
Aeschylus. Oresteia: Agamemnon. —171 
— The Seven Against Thebes.—209 
— The Suppliants.—210 
Agassiz, L. and Agassiz, E. A Journey in Brazil. Boston, 1868.—160 
Altniederdeutsche Interlinearversion der Psalmen. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denk­
mäler. Mit ausführlichem Glossar herausgegeben von Moritz Heyne. Paderborn, 
1867.—83-84 
Ammianus Marcellinus. Rerum gestarum libri qui supersunt.—59, 177 
Annales Bertiniani. In: Roth, P. Geschichte des Beneficialwesens von der ältesten Zeiten 
bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 1850.— 77 
Appian of Alexandria. The Roman History (in 24 books).— 393 
Aristophanes. Thesmophoriazusae.—172 
Aristoteles. Politica. —212 
Arndt, E. M. Des Teutschen Vaterland. In: Arndt, E. M. Lieder für Teutsche im Jahr 
der Freiheit 1813. Leipzig, 1813, S. 99-101.—459 

=====第763页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 735 
Arnold, W. Deutsche Urzeit. Gotha, 1879.—82, 90, 95-97, 100-02 
Aveling, E. and Marx-Aveling, E. The Labour-movement in America. In: The Time, 
Nos 3-6, 1887.—434 
Bachofen, J.J. Das Mutterrecht. Eine Untersuchung über die Gynaikokratie der alten Welt 
nach ihrer religiösen und rechtlichen Natur. Stuttgart, 1861.—142,  150-51, 158-61, 
165, 188 
Bancroft, H. H. The Native Races of the Pacific States of North America,, Vols I-V. New 
York, 1875.—146, 159, 161, 259 
Bang, A. Ch. Vdluspâ og de sibyllinske orakler.—238 
Bauer, B. Christus und die Caesaren. Der Ursprung des Christentums aus dem römischen 
Griechenthum. Berlin, 1877.—113 
Becker, W. A. Charikles, Bilder altgriechischer Sitte. Zur genaueren Kenntniss des 
griechischen Privatlebens. Zweiter Theil. Leipzig, 1840.— 206 
[Beda Venerabilis.] De Venerabilis Baedae Historia  ecclesiastica  gentis Anglorum. —235 
Berthelot, M. Les origines de l'alchimie. Paris, 1885.— 376 
Beust, F. Kleiner historischer Atlas des Kantons Zürich. Zürich,  1873.—  99 
Bevan, W. [Speech at the Twentieth Annual Trades' Union Congress at Swansea 
on September 6, 1887.] In: W. Binning, "The Trades' Union Congress", The 
Commonweal, No. 88, September 17, 1887.— 515 
Bible— 112 
The Old Testament— 111, 112, 163 
Genesis—162-64 
2 Samuel —325 
The New Testament 
The Acts —338 
Revelation—112-15, 117 
Bonaparte, N.-L. Des idées napoléoniennes. Paris, 1839.—475 
Borkheim, S. Zur Erinnerung für die deutschen Mordspatrioten. 1806-1807. Mit einer 
Einleitung von Fr. Engels. Hottingen-Zürich, 1888.—446, 449-50 
Börne, L. Schilderungen aus Paris (1822 und 1823). In: Börne, Ludwig. Gesammelte 
Schriften. Neue vollständige Ausgabe. Bd. 3. Hamburg. Frankfurt a. M., 1862.— 
106 
Bougeart, A. Marat, L'ami du peuple. T. I-II. Paris, 1865.—126 
Braune, W. Zur Kenntnis des Fränkischen und zur hochdeutschen Lautverschiebung. In: 
Beiträge zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur. Bd. 1. Halle, 1874.—  81, 
84, 94, 105 
Bray, J. Fr. Labour's Wrongs and Labour's Remedy; or, the Age of Might and the Age of 
Right. Leeds, 1839.—280 
Bréquigny, L. G. O. F. de, La Porte du Theil, F. J. G. Diplomata, chartae, epistolae, et 
alia documenta, ad res Francicas spectantia, ex diversis regni, exterarumque regionum 
archivis ac  bibliothecis,  jussu regis christianissimi, multorum eruditorum curis, plurimum 
ad id conference Congregatione S. Mauri, eruta. In: Roth, P., Geschichte des 
Beneficialwesens von der ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 
1850.—64 

=====第764页=====
736 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Bugge, S. Studier over de nordiske Gude- og Heltesagns Oprindelse. Kristiania, 
1881-1889.—238 
Caesar, Gaius Julius. Commentarii de hello Gallico. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der 
deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.— 
12-14,  53-55, 139, 151, 236, 241, 246 
Cosijn, P. J. Kurzgefaßte altwestsächsische Grammatik. Th. 1: Die Vocale der 
Stammsilben. Leiden,  1881.—  84 
Coulanges, Fustel de. La cité antique. Étude sur le culte, le droit, les institutions de 
la Grèce et de Rome. Paris-Strasbourg, 1864.— 208 
[The Counterfeiters or the Agents of the Russian Government] &ajibuiueue  MOHemuuuu 
ujiu Azeumbi pyccxaeo npaeumejvhcmea. Genève-Bâle-Lyon, 1875.— 293 
Cunow, H. Die altperuanischen  Dorf-  und Markgenossenschaften. In: Das Ausland, Nr. 
42-44,  20. und 27. Oktober, 3. November 1890.—168 
Dahlmann, F. C. Geschichte von Dännemark. Bd. 1-3. Hamburg, 1840-1843.— 49 
Dante. Divine Comedy. Inferno. — 545 
Dawkins, W. Boyd. Early Man in Britain and His Place in the Tertiary  Period. 
London, 1880.—6, 8, 33 
Demosthenes. Against Eubulides.— 205 
[Dietzgen, J.] Das Wesen der menschlichen Kopfarbeit. Dargestellt von einem Handarbei­
ter. Eine abermalige Kritik der reinen und praktischen Vernunft. Hamburg, 
1869.—384 
Dio Cassius. Historia Romana. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit in 
deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—11, 20-24, 27, 29, 47 
Diodorus Siculus. Bibliothecae historicae quae supersunt.—  238,  246 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus. Roman Antiquities.— 209 
Dureau de la Malle, A. Economie politique des Romains. T. 1, Paris, 1840.— 230 
Die Edda die ältere und jüngere nebst den mythischen Erzählungen der Skalda. Stuttgart 
und Augsburg, 1855.— 147 
Edmonds, T. R. Practical Moral and Political Economy; or, the Government, Religion, 
and Institutions, most Conducive to Individual Happiness and to National Power. 
London, 1828.—280 
Einhardus. Vita Caroli Magni. In: Roth, P. Geschichte des Beneficialwesens von der 
ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 1850.— 61 
[Enfantin, B. P.] Les oisifs et les travailleurs. Fermages, loyers, intérêts, salaires. In: Le 
Globe, No. 66, 7 mars 1831.—606 
Engelhardt, C. Thorsbjerg Mosefund. Kçibenhavn,  1863.—  40 
Espinas, A. Des sociétés animales. Paris, 1877.—144 
Euripides. Orestes.—172 
Ferguson, A. An Essay on the History of Civil Society. Edinburgh,  1767.—  339-40 
Feuerbach, L. Fragmente zur Charakteristik maines philosophischen Curriculum vitae. In: 
Ludwig Feuerbach's sämmtliche Werke. Bd. II, Leipzig, 1846, S. 381-414.— 378 

=====第765页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 737 
— Grundsätze der Philosophie. Notwendigkeit einer Veränderung. In: Ludwig Feuerbach 
in seinem Briefwechsel und Nachlass sowie in seiner Philosophischen Charak­
terentwicklung. Bd. I. Leipzig und Heidelberg, 1874, S. 406-412.—374, 
378-79 
— Noth meistert alle Gesetze und hebt sie auf. In: Ludwig Feuerbach in seinem 
Briefwechsel und Nachlass sowie in seiner Philosophischen Charakterentwicklung. 
Bd. IL Leipzig und Heidelberg, 1874, S. 285-294.-378 
— Das Wesen des Christentums. Leipzig,  1841.—  364 
— Wider den Dualismus von Leib und Seele, Fleisch und Geist. In: Ludwig  Feuerbach's 
sämmtliche Werke. Bd. II, Leipzig, 1846, S. 347-379.-378 
Fison, L. and Howitt, A. W. Kamilaroi and Kurnai. Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, 
and Brisbane, 1880.—153, 155 
Florus, Publius Annius. Epitomae de Tito Livio. In: Die  Geschichtschreiber  der deutschen 
Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.— 20-21 
Formulae Turonenses vulgo Sirmondicae dictae. In: Roth, P. Geschichte des Beneficialwe-
sens von der ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 1850.— 73 
Fourier, Ch. Théorie de l'unité universelle. T. 3. In: Oeuvres complètes, T. 4. Paris, 
1841.—179 
— Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées  générales.  In: Oeuvres  complètes.  T. 1. 
Paris,  1841.—255 
Freckenhorster Heberolle. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler. Paderborn, 1867.— 
84-85 
Freeman, E. A. Comparative Politics. Six Lectures read before the Royal Institution 
in January and February, 1873. With The Unity of History. The Rede Lecture 
read before the University of Cambridge, May 29, 1872. London, 1873.—133 
Freifrau von Droste-Fischering. In: Historische Volkslieder der Zeit von 1756 bis 1871. 
Bd. 2. Berlin, 1871-1872, S. 82.—471 
Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd.  1 : Die Urzeit. 
Hrsg. v. G. H. Pertz, J. Grimm u.a. Berlin, 1847-1849.—11-16, 18, 20 
Giraud-Teulon, A. Les origines du mariage et de la famille. Genève et Paris, 
1884.—143-44 
Gladstone, W. E. Juventus Mundi. The Gods and Men of the Heroic Age. London, 
1869.—210 
Glossae Lipsianae. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler. Mit ausführlichem 
Glossar herausgegeben von Moritz Heyne. Paderborn, 1867.— 84 
Goethe, J. W. Faust. I. Teil.— 359 
— Der Gott und die Bajadere. Indische Legende. —148 
Gray, J. The Social System: A Treatise on the Principle of Exchange. Edinburgh, 
1831.—  283,  291 
Gregorius Turonensis. Historia Francorum. In: Roth, P. Geschichte des Beneficialwe-
sens von der ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 1850.— 62, 240 
Grimm, J. Deutsche Grammatik. Th. 1-4, 2. Ausg., Th. 1. Göttingen, 1822.— 85 
— Geschichte  der deutschen Sprache. Bd. 1-2. Leipzig, 1848.—17-18, 46-55,  80-81, 
85, 87, 98-99 
Grote, G. A History of Greece; from the Earliest Period to the Close of the Generation 

=====第766页=====
738 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Contemporary with Alexander the Great. A new edition. In twelve volumes. Vol. III. 
London, 1869.—205-08 
Guérard, B.-E.-C. Polyptyque de l'abbé Irminon. In: Roth, P. Geschichte des 
Beneficialwesens von der ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 
1850.—64, 80 
Gutrun (Kudrun), —185 
Hegel, G. W. H. Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse. The 
first edition was published in Heidelberg in 1817.— 358 
— Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, Berlin, 1821.—269, 358, 361, 378 
— Phänomenologie des Geistes. The first edition was published in Bamberg and 
Würzburg, 1807.—373 
— Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte, Leipzig [s. an.]. The first edition 
was published in Berlin in 1837.—388 
— Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Religion, Berlin, 1832.— 378 
— Wissenschaft der Logik. Bd. 1 (2 books),2. Nürnberg, 1812-1816.—360 
Heine, H. Atta Troll.— 109 
Herodotus Halicarnassensis. Historiae. —9, 151, 172 
Heusler, A. Institutionen des Deutschen Privatrechts. Zweiter Band, Leipzig, 1886.— 
167 
Heyne, M. Kleine altsächsische und altnieder]Zänkische Grammatik. Paderborn,  1873.— 
81-84,  86, 89 
Hildebrand, H. Das heidnische Zeitalter in Schweden. Eine archaeologisch-historische 
Studie. Hamburg, 1873.—38 
Hildebrandslied. — 237 
Hincmar Remensis. Annales Remenses: Annales ad annum 869. In: Maurer, G. L. 
Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Nof-,  Dorf-  und Stadt-Verfassung und der 
öffentlichen Gewalt. München, 1854.— 77-78 
— Vita Remigii. In: Roth, P. Geschichte des Beneficialwesens von der ältesten Zeiten bis 
ins zehnte Jahrhundert. Erlangen, 1850.— 64 
Hinkel, K. Jugend-Muth und -Kraft. In: Deutsche Volkslieder. Mainz, 1849, S. 39-40.— 
458 
Hodgskin, Th. Popular Political Economy. Four Lectures Delivered at the London 
Mechanics' Institution. London, 1827.— 280 
[Hoffmann von Fallersieben, A. H.] Das Lied der Deutschen. In: [Hoffmann von 
Fallersleben, A. H.] Deutsche Lieder aus der Schweiz. Zürich und Winterthur, 1842, 
S. 16-17.—459 
Homer. Iliad.—170, 208, 211 
— Odyssey.— 170, 211 
Höpfner, E. Der Krieg von 1806 und 1807. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Preußischen 
Armee nach den Quellen des Kriegs-Archivs  bearbeitet.  Bd. I-IV. Berlin,  1855.—  449 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus). Carminum. III.— 536 
Huschke, Ph. De Privilegiis Feceniae Hispalae senatusconsulto concessis. Gottingae, 
1822.—227 

=====第767页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 739 
Im Thurn, E. F. Among the Indians of Guiana. London,  1883.—  365 
Irenaeus. Refutation and Overthrow of Gnosis falsely so  called.  (Against the  Heresies.)  — 
116 
Jordanes. De origine actibusque Getarum.— 36 
Karl Marx vor den Kölner Geschwornen. Prozeß gegen den Ausschuß der rheinischen 
Demokraten wegen Aufrufs zum bewaffneten Widerstand. (9. Februar, 1849). 
Aus der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung. Mit einem Vorwort von Fr. Engels. 
Hottingen-Zürich, 1885 (Sozialdemokratische Bibliothek. IL) — 304 
Kern, H. Die Glossen in der Lex Salica und die Sprache der salischen Franken. Beitrag 
zur Geschichte der deutschen Sprachen. Haag, 1869.—  83, 86, 89 
Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler. Mit ausführlichem Glossar herausgegeben von 
Moritz Heyne. Paderborn, 1867. (Bibliothek der ältesten deutschen Litteratur-
Denkmäler. IV. Band. Altniederdeutsche Denkmäler. IL Teil. Paderborn, 1867.) — 
83-86 
Kopp,  H. Die Alchemie in älterer und neuerer Zeit. Ein Beitrag zur Culturgeschickte. 
Erster Theil: Die Alchemie bis zum letzten Viertel des 18. Jahrhunderts. Zweiter Theil: 
Die Alchemie von letzten Viertel des 18. Jahrhunderts an. Heidelberg, 1886.— 376 
KoBaAeBCKiö, M. nepeoômmuoe npaeo. Bwn. I, Po4i>. MocKBa, 1886 r.—167-69 
Kovalevsky, M. Tableau des origines et de l'évolution de la famille et de la propriété. 
Stockholm, 1890.—165-67, 232, 236-37, 241 
Lange, L. Römische Alterthümer. Erster Band, Berlin, 1856.— 227 
Lassalle, F. Das System der erworbenen Rechte. Eine Versöhnung des positiven Rechts und 
der Rechtsphilosophie. In zwei Theilen. Th. II: Das Wesen des Römischen und 
Germanischen Erbrechts in historisch-philosophischer Entwickelung. Leipzig,  1861.— 
275 
Lelewel, J. Pythéas de Marseille et la géographie de son temps. Bruxelles, 1836.—10 
Letourneau, Ch. L'évolution du mariage et de la famille. Paris, 1888.—143-44 
Liutprand, Antapodosis, seu rerum per Europam gestarum, libri VI.—249 
[Livius, Titus.] Titi Livi ab urbe condita libri. Neunter Band: Buch XXXIX-XXXXII. 
Berlin, 1864.—225 
[Longus.] Daphnis and Chloe. —184 
McLennan, J. F. Primitive Marriage. An Inquiry into the Origin of the Form of 
Capture in Marriage Ceremonies. Edinburgh, 1865.—140, 157, 169, 192, 232 
— Studies in Ancient History comprising a Reprint of Primitive Marriage. An Inquiry 
into the Origin of the Form of Capture in Marriage Ceremonies. London, 
1876.—  140 
Maine, H. S. Ancient Law: its connection with the early history of  society,  and its relation 
to modern ideas. 3rd ed. London, 1866. The first edition appeared in London in 
1861.—186 
Manlius, J. Loci communes.— 601 
Marcianus. Periplus maris  exteri.—  35 
Maurer, G. L. Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-,  Dorf-  und Stadt-Verfassung 
und der öffentlichen Gewalt. München, 1854.—53, 78 
49-1243 

=====第768页=====
740 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Geschichte  der Städteverfassung in Deutschland. Erster Band. Erlangen, 1869.— 
239 
Meitzen, A. Der Boden und die landwirthschaftlichen Verhältnisse des Preussischen 
Staates nach dem Gebietsumfange vor 1866. Erster Band. Berlin, 1868.—348, 350 
Menger, A. Das Recht auf den vollen Arbeitsertrag in geschichtlicher Darstellung. 
Stuttgart, 1886.—600, 602-08, 610-12, 614-15 
Molière, J. B. George Dandin, ou le mari confondu. —266 
Mommsen, Th. Römische Forschungen. Erster Band. Berlin, 1864.—225-27 
— Römische Geschichte. Erster Band. Leipzig, 1854.—229 
Mone, F. J. Urgeschichte des badischen Landes bis zu Ende des siebenten Jahrhunderts. 
Bd. 1: Die Römer im oberrheinischen Gränzland. Karlsruhe,  1845.—  99 
Morgan, L. H. Ancient Society or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from 
Savagery, through Barbarism to Civilization. London, 1877.—131, 141, 149, 156, 
158, 166, 174, 190, 194, 197, 210-12, 220, 235 
— Systems  of Consanguinity and Affinity of the Human Family. Washington, 
1871.—152, 190 
[Mülberger, A.] Die Wohnungsfrage. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 19; 3., 
7., 10., 14., 21. Februar und 6. März 1872.—425 
Mülberger, A. Zur Wohnungsfrage (Antwort an Friedrich Engels von A. Mülberger). In: 
Der Volksstaat, Nr. 86, 26. Oktober 1872.—425 
Müllenhoff, K. Deutsche Altertumskunde. Bd. 1. Berlin, 1870.—10 
Nadler, K. G. Fröhlich Palz, Gott erhalts! Gedichte in Pfälzer Mundart. Frankfurt a. M., 
1851.—105 
Nibelungenlied. —185, 423 
Niebuhr, B. G. Römische Geschichte. Erster Theil, Berlin, 1827. The first edition 
appeared in 1811.—228. 
Novikoff,  Olga de. The Russianization of England. In: Pall Mall Gazette, No. 6192, 
January 15, 1885.—292 
Orosius, Paulus. Historiae adversus paganos. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen 
Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—21 
Otfrid. Liber Evangeliorum domini gratia theotisce conscriptus. In: Beiträge zur 
Geschichte der deutschen Sprache und Literatur. Bd. 1. Halle, 1874. In: Braune, W. 
Zur Kenntnis des Fränkischen und zur hochdeutschen Lautverschiebung. — 86, 105 
Ovidius Naso, Publius. Ex Ponto. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit in 
deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.— 29 
— Tristia. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. 
Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—29 
The People of India. Ed. by J. F. Watson and J. W. Kaye, vols I-VI. London, 
1868-1872.—151 
[Persius Flaccus, A.] A. Persii Flacci satirarum liber. Lipsiae, 1881.—114 
[Plinius Secundus, C] Plini Secundi Naturalis historiae libri 37, vols I-IV. Hamburgi 
et Gothae, 1851-1853.—243, 246 
— Bellorum Germaniae libri XX.— 46 

=====第769页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 741 
— Naturalis historia. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher 
Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—16-17, 33, 36, 47-49, 54, 56 
Plutarch. Short Sayings of Spartan Women.—171 
Plutarchus, Chaeronensis. Vitae parallelae: Aemilius Paullus.—10 
Procopius, Caesariensis. De bello Vandalico. In: Grimm, J. Geschichte der deutschen 
Sprache. Bd. 1. Leipzig, 1848.—48, 177 
Proudhon, P. J. Système des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère. 
T. I-II. 2-me éd. Paris, 1850. The first edition appeared in 1846.—278, 606 
Ptolemaeus, Claudius. Geographia.—33-35, 38, 41, 45-47, 49, 54-56 
Pytheas von Massilia. Periodos oder Über den Ozean. —10 
Regnault, E. G. Histoire politique et sociale des principautés danubiennes. Paris, 
1855.—293 
Ricardo, D. On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation. First edition. 
London, 1817.—279, 281-83, 612 
Rodbertus [J. K.] Sociale Briefe an von Kirchmann. [Drei Briefe.] Berlin, 
1850-1851.—279 
—Zweiter  Brief:  Kirchmann's sociale Theorie und die meinige. Berlin, 1850.— 279 
Rodbertus-Jagetzow [J. K.] [Letter to R. Meyer of November 29, 1871.] In: 
Rodbertus-Jagetzow. Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsätze. Bd. 1. Berlin  [s.a.], 
S. 134.—279 
— [Letter to J. Zeller of March 14, 1875.] In: Zeitschrift für die gesammte 
Staatswissenschaft. Bd. 35. Tübingen, 1879. S. 219.—283 
— Der Normal-Arbeitstag. Berlin, 1871; and in: Berliner Revue, 16., 23., 30. 
September 1871.—283 
— Zur Erkenntniß unsrer staatswirthschaftlichen Zustände. Erstes Heft: Fünf Theoreme. 
Neubrandenburg und Friedland, 1842.—279, 283-86, 290 
Roth, P. Geschichte des Beneficialwesens von den ältesten Zeiten bis ins zehnte Jahrhundert. 
Erlangen, 1850.—61-63, 68, 71-75,  77-81,  253 
Salvianus. De Gubernatione Dei. In: 5. Salviani Opera Omnia, Tyrnaviae, 1752.— 
250 
Sax, E. Die Wohnungszustände der arbeitenden Classen und ihre Reform. Wien, 
1869.—425 
Schaaff hausen, H. [Paper presented to the Sixth General Congress of the German 
Society of Anthropology, Ethnology and Early History on August 11, 1875.] In: 
Correspondenz-Blatt der deutschen Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und 
Urgeschichte. Braunschweig, München, 1875. In the report, Die sechste  Allgemeine 
Versammlung der deutschen Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte 
zu München am 9. bis 11. August 1875.— 8 
Schiller, F. Die Worte des  Glaubens. — 606 
Schneider, J. Die römischen Militärstraßen an der Lippe und das Castell Aliso. Nach 
eigenen Lokalforschungen dargestellt. Düsseldorf, 1878.—  23, 32 
Schoemann, G. F. Griechische Alterthümer. Erster Band: Das Staatswesen. Berlin, 
1855.—171,  210 
49* 

=====第770页=====
742 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Serno-Solowiewitsch, A. Unsere russischen Angelegenheiten. Antwort auf den Artikel 
des Herrn Herzen: "Die Ordnung herrscht!" (Kolokol, No. 233). Aus dem 
Russischen übersetzt von S. L. Borkheim. Leipzig, 1871.—449 
CepHo-CoAOBbeBHHT>, A. Hauiu doMauiuin dbjia.  OTB"BTT>  r. TepqeHy Ha cTaTbio 
«nopH40Ki> TopjKecTByeT-b» (III.  KOJIOKOJIZ),  N° 233). Vevey, 1867.—449 
Spruner, K., Menke, Th. Hand-Atlas für die Geschichte des Mittelalters und der neueren 
Zeit. 3. Auf. von. K. v. Spruner's Hand-Atlas, neu bearb. von Th. Menke. Gotha, 
1880.—96, 99, 102, 559 
Starcke, C. N. Ludwig Feuerbach. Stuttgart, 1885.—357, 372-74, 378, 520 
Stirner, M. Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum. Leipzig, 1845.—364 
Strabo. Strabonis rerum geographicarum libri  XVII.  T. 6, Lipsiae, 1811.—168 
— Geographica.  In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher Bear­
beitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—14, 16, 29, 45 
Strauss, D. F. Die christliche Glaubenslehre in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung und im 
Kampfe mit der modernen Wissenschaft. Bd. 1-2. Tübingen-Stuttgart, 1840-1841.— 
382 
— Das Leben Jesu. Bd. 1-2. Tübingen, 1835-1836.—363, 382 
Sturluson Snorri. Ynglinga Saga. In: Sturluson,S. Heimskringla. —148 
Suetonius Tranquillus, Gaius. De vita Caesarum: Claudius. In: Die  Geschichtschreiber der 
deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 
1847-1849.—21 
Sugenheim, S. Geschichte der Aufhebung der Leibeigenschaft und Hörigkeit in Europa bis 
um die Mitte des Neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. St. Petersburg, 1861.—161 
Tacitus (Publius Cornelius Tacitus). Annales. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen 
Vorzeit in  deutscher  Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—15, 27,  30-31, 
34, 45, 99 
— Germania. In: Die  Geschichtschreiber  der deutschen Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. 
Bd. 1: Die Urzeit. Berlin, 1847-1849.—12, 15, 18, 25,  32-33,  36-37,  39-41,  45-49, 
54 
— Germania. In: Operum quae supersunt. Vol. IL Lipsiae, 1835.—139, 176, 199, 238, 
240-45 
— Historiarum. In: Operum quae supersunt Vol. IL Lipsiae, 1835.—116 
Taufgelöbnis. In: Kleinere altniederdeutsche Denkmäler. Mit ausführlichem Glossar 
herausgegeben von Moritz Heyne. Paderborn,  1867.—  86 
Thompson, W. An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most 
Conducive to Human Happiness; Applied to the Newly Proposed System of Voluntary 
Equality of Wealth. London, 1824.—614 
— An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive to 
Human Happiness. A new edition by W. Pare. London, 1850.—609-11 
Thucydides. The History of the Peloponnesian War.— 212 
Tschech's Attentat. In: Historische Volkslieder der Zeit von 1756 bis 1871. Bd. 2. Berlin, 
1871-1872, S. 79-80.—471 
Topographische Special-Karte von Deutschland. Hrsg. von Gottlob Daniel Reymann, 
fortges. von C. W. von Oesfeld und F. Handtke. Glogau, o. J.— 96-98, 100, 105 

=====第771页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 743 
Velleius Paterculus, Gaius. Historia Romana. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen 
Vorzeit in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1: Die Urzeit Berlin, 1847-1849.—21-22, 
24-26,  29, 46 
Virchow, R. [Report at the session of the Berlin Society of Anthropology, 
Ethnology and Early History on December 21, 1878.] In the article: Ver­
handlungen der Berliner Gesellschaft für Anthropologie, Ethnologie und Urgeschichte. 
Jahrgang 1878. In: Zeitschrift für Ethnologie, Bd. X. Berlin,  1878.—  8 
Wachsmuth, W. Hellenische Alterthumskunde aus dem Gesichtspunkte des Staates 1.-2. 
Theil. 1.-2. Abtheilungen, Halle, 1826, 1830.—172, 206 
Wagner, A. Vorwort. In: Rodbertus-Jagetzow, C. Das Kapital. Vierter socialer Brief an 
von Kirchmann. Berlin, 1884.—284 
Wagner, R. Die Walküre. Erster Tag aus der Trilogie: der Ring des Nibelungen. Mainz, 
s.a.— 147 
Waitz, G. Deutsche Verfassungsgeschichte. Bd. 1. Kiel, 1844.—50 
Waldersee, F. G. Die Methode zur kriegsgemäßen Ausbildung der Infanterie für das 
zerstreute Gefecht; mit besonderer Berücksichtigung der Verhältnisse des Preußischen 
Heeres. Berlin, 1848.—473 
Weerth, G. Leben und Thaten des berühmten Ritters Schnapphahnski. In: Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 69-72, 74, 92, 95, 103-107, 167, 171, 172, 176, 178;  8.-11., 
13. August; 2., 6., 15.-17., 19., 20. September; 13., 15., 17., 19., 23., 25. 
Dezember 1848 und Nr. 185, 188, 201; 3., 6., 21. Januar 1849.—109 
Weitling, W. Das Evangelium eines armen Sünders. Bern, 1845.—319 
— Garantieen der Harmonie und Freiheit Vivis, verl. des Verfassers, 1842.—315 
Wermuth, Stieber. Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des 19. Jahrhunderts. Im 
amtlichen Auftrage zur Benutzung der Polizei-Behörden der sämmtlichen 
deutschen Bundesstaaten auf Grund der betreffenden gerichtlichen und 
polizeilichen Acten. Erster Theil: Die historische Darstellung der betreffenden 
Untersuchungen. Zweiter Theil: Die Personalien der in den Communisten-
Untersuchungen vorkommenden Personen. Berlin, 1853-1854.—312, 322 
Westermarck, E. The History of Human Marriage. London and New York, 
1891.—144, 147 
Wiberg, C. F. Bidrag tili kännedomen om Grekers och Romares förbindelse med Norden 
och am de nordiska handelsvögarne. Gefle, 1861.—34 
— Der Einfluß der klassischen Völker auf den Norden durch den Handelsverkehr. Aus 
dem Schwedischen von  Mestorf.  Hamburg,  1867.—  34, 36-40 
Wolff,  W. Die schlesische Milliarde. Abdruck aus der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung. 
März-April 1849. Mit Einleitung von Friedrich Engels. Hottingen-Zürich, 1886. 
(Sozialdemokratische Bibliothek. VI). —341 
— Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 252, 255, 256, 258, 264, 270-272, 281; 22., 25., 
27., 29. März; 5., 12.-14., 25. April 1849.—127 
Worsaae, J. J. A. Die Vorgeschichte des Nordens nach gleichzeitigen Denkmälern. Ins 
Deutsche Übertragen von J.  Mestorf.  Hamburg, 1878.—35 
Zeuß,  K. Die Deutschen und die Nachbarstämme. München, 1837.—46, 48, 54 

=====第772页=====
744 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Zurita, A. de. Rapport sur les différentes classes de chefs de la Nouvelle-Espagne, sur les 
lois, les murs des habitants, sur les impôts établis avant et depuis la conquête, etc., etc. In: 
Voyages, relations et mémoires, originaux pour servir à l'histoire de la découverte de 
l'Amérique, publiés pour la première fois en français, par H. Ternaux-Compans. 
Vol. 11, Paris, 1840.—168 
DOCUMENTS 
Ancient Laws and Institutes of Wales; Volume the First. London, 1841.—233 
Annual Report of the Secretary of the Treasury on the State of the Finances for the Year 
1887. Washington, 1887.—527 
Archiv für die Geschichte des Niederrheins. Hrsg. v. Theod. Jos. Lacomblet. Abth. 1. 
Bd. 1. H. 1. Düsseldorf, 1831.—75 
Bismarck, O. Ansprache an die Einwohner des glorreichen Königreichs Böhmen. In: 
Königlich Preußischen Staats-Anzeiger, Nr. 164, 11. Juli, 1866.—481 
— Rede bei der zweiten Berathung des Gesetzentwurfs, betr. Aenderungen der Wehrpflicht 
[6. Februar 1888].—495 
Capitularia maiorum domus. —62, 74, 78-81 
Code Napoléon.—170, 392 
Friedrich Wilhelm III. Edikt den erleichterten Besitz und den freien Gebrauch des 
Grund-Eigenthums, so wie die persönlichen Verhältnisse der Land-Bewohner betreffend. 
Vom 9ten Oktober 1807; Verordnung wegen Zusammenziehung bäuerlicher Grundstücke 
oder Verwandlung  derselben  in Vorwerksland, mit Bezug auf die §§ 6. und 7. des Edikts 
vom 9ten Oktober 1807., den erleichterten Besitz und den freien Gebrauch des 
Grund-Eigenthums betreffend. Für die Provinzen Ostpreußen, Litthauen und 
Westpreußen. Vom 14ten Februar 1808; Verordnung wegen Zusammenziehung 
bäuerlicher Grundstücke oder Verwandlung  derselben  in Vorwerksland, mit Bezug auf die 
§§ 6. und 7. des Edikts vom 9ten Oktober 1807., den erleichterten Besitz und den freien 
Gebrauch des Grundeigenthums betreffend. Für das Herzogthum Schlesien und die 
Grafschaft Glatz. Vom 27sten März 1809; Publikandum, betreffend die, durch das sub 
dato Memel den 9ten Oktober 1807., ergangene Edikt, erfolgte Auflösung der 
persönlichen Erbunterthänigkeit in der Provinz Schlesien und in der Grafschaft Glatz. 
Vom 8ten April 1809; Verordnung wegen Zusammenziehung bäuerlicher Grundstücke 
oder Verwandlung derselben in Vorwerksland, mit Bezug auf die §§ 6. und 7. des Edikts 
vom 9ten Oktober 1807., den erleichterten Besitz und den freien Gebrauch des 
Grundeigenthums betreffend. Für die Provinzen Kur- und Neumark und Pommern. Vom 
9ten Januar 1810. In: Sammlung der für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten 
erschienenen Gesetze und Verordnungen von 1806. bis zum 27sten Oktober 1810. 
Berlin, 1822.—347 
— Edikt die Regulierung der gutsherrlichen und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse betreffend. Vom 
14ten September 1811. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlich-Preußische Staaten. 
Berlin, 1811.—347 
— Deklaration des Edikts vom 14ten September 1811, wegen Regulirung der 
gutsherrlichen und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse. Vom 29sten Mai 1816. In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten. Berlin, 1816,—346 
— Ordnung wegen Ablösung der Dienste, Natural- und Selbstleistungen von Grundstück­
en, welche eigenthümlich, zu Erbzins- oder  Erbpachtsrecht,  besessen  werden. Vom 7ten 

=====第773页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 745 
Juni, 1821. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten. Berlin, 
1821.—347 
Friedrich Wilhelm IV. Gesetz, betreffend die Ablösung der Dienste in denjenigen Theilen 
der Provinz Sachsen, in welchen die Ablösungsordnung vom 7. Juni 1821 gilt. Vom 18. 
Juli 1845; Gesetz, betreffend die Ablösung der Dienste in der Provinz Schlesien. Vom 
31. Oktober 1845. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten. 
Berlin, 1845.—348 
— Gesetz,  betreffend die Sistirung der Verhandlungen über die Regulirung der 
gutsherrlichen und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse und über die Ablösung der Dienste, 
Natural- und Geldabgaben, sowie der über diese Gegenstände anhängigen Prozesse. 
Vom 9. Oktober 1848; Verordnung, betreffend die interimistische Regulirung der 
gutsherrlich-bäuerlichen Verhältnisse in der Provinz Schlesien. Vom 20. Dezember 
1848. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten. Berlin, 
1848.—346 
— Gesetz,  betreffend die Ablösung der Reallasten und die Regulirung der gutsherrlichen 
und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse. Vom 2. März 1850. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die 
Königlichen Preußischen Staaten. Berlin, 1850.—349 
Hêliand. Mit ausführlichem Glossar herausgegeben von Moritz Heyne. Paderborn, 
1866.  In: Bibliothek der ältesten deutschen Litteratur-Denkmäler. II. Band. Altnieder­
deutsche Denkmäler. I. Teil. —89 
Kolb,  G. Fr. Handbuch der vergleichenden Statistik der Völkerzustands- und Staatenkunde. 
Für den allgemeinen praktischen Gebrauch. Siebente, auf Grundlage der 
neuesten staatlichen Gestaltungen bearbeitete Auflage. Leipzig, 1875.—530 
Leges nationum Germanicarum or Leges barbarorum. —42, 47, 59, 73, 82, 86 
Notes, échangées avec le plénipotentiaire de la Prusse, concernant l'extradition des criminels. 
1885, le 1 (13) janvier.— 292 
[Palgrave, I.] Address by R. H. Inglis Palgrave, F.R.S., F.S.S., President of the Section. 
In: Report of the Fifty-Third Meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of 
Science; held at Southport in September 1883. London, 1884.—300 
Protocole de Varsovie, signé le 5 juin 1851, entre la Russie et le Danemark, relatif à la 
succession danoise. —479 
[Report of the Agrarian Commission of the Prussian Second Chamber on the Draft 
Redemption Law of March 2, 1850.] In: Stenographische Berichte über die Ver­
handlungen der durch die Allerhöchste Verordnung vom 30. Mai 1849 einberufenen 
Zweiten Kammer. —350 
Report of the Royal Commission on the Housing of the Working Classes. England and 
Wales. 1885.—401 
Rules of the Communist League (present edition, Vol. 6). In: Wermuth und Stieber, 
Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des 19. Jahrhunderts. Erster Theil, Berlin, 1853, 
S. 239-243.—321 
Strafgesetzbuch für das Deutsch Reich. Mit Erläuterungen aus den Motiven und der 
Rechtsprechung königl. preuß. Ober-Tribunals. Zweite Auflage. Breslau, 1872.—290 

=====第774页=====
746 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Traité conclu à Berlin, le 5 août 1796 entre la République Française et la Prusse, pour 
l'établissement de la ligne de démarcation destinée à assurer la neutralité du nord de 
lA llemagne. —469 
Traité de paix conclu à Bâle le 16 Germinal an III (5 avril 1795) entre la République 
Française et le Roi de Prusse. —463-66, 469 
Traité signé à Londres, le 8 mai 1852, entre le Danemark d'une part, et l'Autriche, la 
France, la Grande-Bretagne, la Russie et la Suède de l'autre part relatif à l'ordre de 
succession dans la monarchie danoise. —490 
Verfassung des Deutschen Reichs. In: Reichs-Gesetzblatt. 1871. Berlin,  [s.a.],  Nr. 16.— 
504 
Wilhelm I. [Die Proclamation an das französische Volk 11. August 1870].—489 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES 
AND REPORTS PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
New Yorker Volkszeitung, Nr. 10, 12. Januar, 1887: Aveling und die Sozialisten. —618 
—Nr. 52, 2. März, 1887: Affaire Aveling noch einmal. —617 
[Novoye Vremya] Hoeoe epeMn, JVfs 3666, 15 (27) Man 1886 r.: Ympenwui nouma. 
Cpeda, 14-zo  MÜH,  Mocnea, 13-zo  Man  (TeAerpacJman KoppecnoH4eHijHfl IIpaBHTeA. 
BecTHHKa). —413 
The Times, No. 31352, January 24, 1885: Extradition by Russia and Prussia.— 292 

=====第775页=====
747 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
L'Ami  du Peuple. Journal politique et impartial —a newspaper published by a Jacobin 
leader Jean Paul Marat from September 12, 1789 to July 14, 1793; appeared 
under this title from September 16, 1789 to September 21, 1792, and then as 
Publiciste de la République française.— 126 
Das Ausland —a magazine on geography, ethnography and natural science published 
from 1828 to 1893, first daily and from 1853 on weekly (initially in Munich and 
from 1873 in Stuttgart).—168 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung —a newspaper founded by the German political refugees 
in Brussels and published from January 1847 to February 1848. From September 
1847 Marx and Engels regularly contributed to it and under their influence it 
became an organ of revolutionary communist propaganda.— 319 
Deutsche-Jahrbücher —a Young Hegelian literary and philosophical journal Deutsche 
Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst published in Leipzig from July 1841 under 
the editorship of Arnold Ruge. In January 1843 it was closed down and 
prohibited throughout Germany.—363 
Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher —a German-language yearly published in Paris under 
the editorship of Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge; only the first issue, a double one, 
appeared in February 1844. It carried a number of works by Marx and 
Engels.— 318 
Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt —a daily published in Frankfurt am Main from 
1856 (under this title from 1866) to 1943; newspaper of the petty-bourgeois 
democratic party of Southwestern Germany—the German People's Party—in the 
1880s.—307 
Le Globe, Journal Politique, Philosophique et Littéraire —a daily published in Paris from 
1824 to 1832; organ of the Saint-Simon school from January 18, 1831.—606 
Justice—a weekly of the Social-Democratic Federation published in London from 
January 1884 to December 1933; appeared under this title in 1884-1925 and 
then as Social-Democrat Incorporating Justice.—537 

=====第776页=====
748 Index of Periodicals 
Kölnische Zeitung —a German daily published in Cologne from 1802 to 1945; it took 
an anti-revolutionary stand and attacked the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 1848-49; 
it expressed the interests of the Prussian liberal bourgeoisie in the 1850s.—128, 
335, 489 
KojioKOJib  (The Bell)—a revolutionary-democratic newspaper; it was published by 
Alexander Herzen and Nikolai Ogaryev from 1857 to 1867 in Russian and in 
1868-69 in French (La Cloche) with Russian supplements; it was published in 
London until 1865, then in Geneva.—516 
Kreuz-Zeitung —see Neue Preußische Zeitung 
The Labour Elector—a weekly of the socialist trend published in London from June 
1888 to July 1894.—537 
The Leeds Mercury—an English weekly (until 1861) founded in Leeds in 1717; in 
the 1840s became the organ of the Radicals.—571 
The Manchester Guardian—a daily founded in 1821; a newspaper of the Free 
Traders and, from the mid-19th century, of the Liberal Party.—484 
Missouri Republican—a daily of the US Democratic Party; published in St. Louis 
under this title from 1822 to 1888, and as St. Louis Republic until 1919.—408 
Neue Preußische Zeitung —a conservative daily published from June 1848 to 1939; 
newspaper of the Prussian Junkers and Court circles, also known as the 
Kreuz-Zeitung because the heading contained a cross bearing the device: 
"Forward with God for King and Fatherland!"—124, 307 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie —a daily newspaper of the 
revolutionary proletarian wing of the democrats during the 1848-49 revolution in 
Germany; it was published in Cologne under Marx's editorship from June 1, 
1848 to May 19, 1849, with an interval between September 27 and October 12, 
1848.  Engels was among its editors.—109-11, 120, 123, 128, 277, 306, 325, 349, 
595 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue —a theoretical journal of the 
Communist League published by Marx and Engels from December 1849 to 
November 1850.—328 
Die Neue Zeit —a theoretical journal of the German Social-Democrats; published 
monthly in Stuttgart from 1883 to October 1890, and then weekly till the 
autumn of 1923. Engels contributed to it from 1885 to  1895.—  520 
New Yorker Volkszeitung —a German-language socialist newspaper, published from 
1878 to 1932.—408, 617, 626 
The Northern Star—a weekly, central organ of the Chartists; published from 1837 
to 1852; first in Leeds, then in London. Its founder and editor was Feargus 
O'Connor, George Harney being one of its co-editors. Engels contributed to the 
paper from 1843 to 1850.—319 
The Pall Mall Gazette—a conservative daily which appeared in London from 1865 
to 1921.—292 
The Red Republican—a Chartist weekly published by George Julian Harney in 
London from June to November 1850; it carried the first English translation of 
the Manifesto of the Communist Party by Marx and Engels. —512 

=====第777页=====
Index of Periodicals 749 
La Réforme —a daily newspaper of democratic republicans and petty-bourgeois 
socialists published in Paris from 1843 to 1850.—319 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a daily newspaper founded on 
January 1, 1842, as the organ of the Rhenish bourgeois opposition. It was 
published in Cologne till March 31, 1843. From October 15, 1842 to March 17, 
1843,  it was edited by Marx and assumed a strongly pronounced revolutionary-
democratic complexion, which led to its suppression. Engels was one of its 
contributors.— 363 
Science—an official press organ of the American Association for Advancement of 
Science published in New York from 1883.—397 
Severny Vestnik (Northern Herald) — a literary, scientific and political monthly of a 
liberal Narodnik trend published in St. Petersburg from 1885 to 1898.—311 
Der Social-Demokrat —an organ of the Lassallean General Association of German 
Workers. It was published under this title in Berlin from December 15, 1864 to 
1871;  in 1864-65 it was edited by Johann Baptist von Schweitzer.—278 
El Socialista—a weekly, central organ of the Socialist Workers' Party of Spain 
published in Madrid from  1885.—  543 
Le Socialiste —a French-language weekly published in New York from October 1871 
to May 1873; a newspaper of the French sections of the First International in the 
USA from December 1871 to October 1872. 
The Manifesto of the Communist Party was published abridged in it in 
January-February 1872.—516 
Le Socialiste —a French weekly founded by Jules Guesde in Paris in 1885; up to 
1902—press organ of the Workers' Party; from 1902 to 1905—of the Socialist 
Party of France; from 1905 to 1915—of the French Socialist Party, Engels 
contributed to it in the 1880s-90s.— 333 
Der Sozialdemokrat —a weekly central organ of the Social-Democratic Party of 
Germany published during the Anti-Socialist Law in Zurich from September 
1879 to September 1888 and in London from October 1888 to September 27, 
1890.—Ill, 449, 472, 623-24 
The Star—a daily of the Liberal Party published in London between 1888 and 
1909.—542 
Time—a socialist monthly published in London from 1879 to 1891.—434 
To-day—a socialist monthly published in London from April 1883 to June 1889; 
was edited by Henry Mayers Hyndman from July 1884 to  1886.—  335,  589 
Der Volksstaat —central organ of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party 
published in Leipzig from October 2, 1869 to September 29, 1876, first twice 
and from 1873, three times a week.—424-25, 449 
Der Volks-Tribun. Organ des Jungen Amerika —a weekly founded by German "true 
socialists" in New York; published from January 5 to December 31, 1846.—319 
Der Vorbote —a monthly of the German sections of the International in Switzerland, 
published in Geneva from 1866 to 1871 under the editorship of Johann Philipp 
Becker; on the whole, upheld the line pursued by Marx and the General 
Council, regularly published documents of the International and information 
about its activity in various countries.—422 

=====第778页=====
750 Index of Periodicals 
Vorwärts! Pariser Deutsche Zeitschrift —a German-language newspaper published in 
Paris from January to December 1844 twice a week. Marx and Engels 
contributed to it.—315 
Woodhull & Claflin's Weekly—was published in New York in 1870-76 by the 
bourgeois feminists Victoria Woodhull and Tenessee Claflin; published The 
Manifesto of the Communist Party (abridged) on December 30, 1871.—516 
Die Zukunft —a democratic newspaper of the People's Party, published in 1867 in 
Königsberg, and from 1868 to 1871 in Berlin, printed Marx's preface to 
Volume I of Capital and Engels' review of this volume.—449 

=====第779页=====
751 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Abstraction, abstract and concrete—337-
39, 365-67, 377, 381, 404 
Abyssinia—161 
Aesthetics—  362,  388 
Africa—160, 247 
Agnosticism—367-68 
Agriculture—  36,  60, 138, 163, 209, 
248-49, 254, 261-63, 265, 266, 
341-42, 431, 437-39, 556-59, 602, 
603 
Aims and means—126, 127, 133, 155, 
173, 212, 219-20, 275, 290, 292, 
296,  307, 319, 321, 373, 379, 386-
87, 390, 400, 436,  440-41,  480, 
481, 502, 553, 604-05, 615-16, 619-
20 
Alamanni (Swabians)—18, 54, 59, 82, 
95-101,  104, 106, 199 
Albigenses—395 
Alienation, estrangement—215, 269, 270, 
273-74, 276, 360, 364, 370, 383, 
450 
Alsace—  411,  485, 491-93, 495-97 
America—131, 136, 137, 159, 160, 162, 
204, 558 
American Indians—  7, 129, 136-38, 140, 
156, 157, 163, 191-97, 200, 202, 209, 
210, 216, 225, 240, 243, 244, 246, 
256 
Analogy— 83-90, 145, 232-33, 357, 375, 
387, 390, 404, 501, 508, 517 
Anarchism, anarchists—364, 382, 422, 
426 Ancient Greece—139, 149, 165, 170-72, 
176, 184, 190, 204-22, 229, 244, 245, 
266-68, 388 
Ancient Rome—15, 16, 24, 29, 31, 36, 
39, 53, 55, 149, 166, 168, 177, 184, 
188, 201,  222-31,  239, 243-45, 247-
55, 266-69, 271, 275, 376, 393, 394, 
437,  553, 601-03 
Angles—  38, 48, 49, 54, 55 
See also Anglo-Saxons 
Anglo-Egyptian war, 1882—411-12 
Anglo-Saxons—43, 57 
Annexation—495 
Antagonism, contradiction—113, 121, 
125, 132, 144-45, 166, 173, 175, 178, 
181, 214, 216, 222, 226, 268-70, 
275-86,  317-21,  327, 329, 359-65, 
378, 387, 390, 393, 438, 476-77, 
479,  500, 528, 599, 600, 601, 604-05, 
619 
Antiquity—159, 161, 174, 177, 183, 
184, 209, 211-12, 214-16, 219, 222, 
229, 231, 248-49, 253-55, 265-75, 
379, 437, 553, 607 . 
See also Ancient Greece; Ancient 
Rome; Athens (ancient) 
Antithesis,  opposites—\2l,  122, 125, 139, 
144, 173-75, 181, 183, 216, 222, 264, 
268-69, 276, 317, 321, 329, 339, 
359, 366, 378, 381, 384, 387-88, 
395, 436, 438, 463, 500, 501, 601, 
619 
Antwerp—548 
Appropriation—139, 273, 337, 401, 436, 
603, 608, 610 

=====第780页=====
752 Subject Index 
Arabs—62 
Aristocracy, mobility—  212,  215, 251, 264, 
266-75,  296, 553, 556-57, 559, 
562-64 
—English—389, 523, 547 
—French—346, 404 
—German—68, 73, 75, 123, 342-46, 
450,  476, 498-502, 506-09, 555-59 
579, 580 
— Italian—463 
Armaments, weapons—6, 7, 15, 41, 135-
36, 203, 219, 243, 260, 261, 262, 557, 
562-64 
Armchair socialists—427 
Army—10, 26-30, 72,  78-81,  198-99, 
219, 245, 246, 251, 252, 269, 323, 
346, 417, 473, 479, 484 
—Austrian—478, 626 
—British—203,  562-63 
—French—459, 496, 497, 563 
—German—423,  444,  450-51,  563, 
580 
—Prussian—443,  450, 471-74, 478, 
578, 595 
—Russian—496 
See also Armaments, weapons;  Artil­
lery ;  Infantry  ; Navy 
Art—139,  147-48, 276, 388 
—of ancient Germans—40-42 
Artillery—  562,  564 
Aryans—8, 59, 137 
Asia—160, 232, 259, 437 
Assimilation (national)—493-94, 559-
60 
Association—  216,  272, 553, 619 
Atheism—  363-65,  368-73, 375-77 
Athens (ancient)—184, 213-22,  266-71, 
275 
Australia— 6, 135, 499, 524 
Austria (before 1867)—124, 410, 412, 
413,  422, 456, 458-64, 465-66, 468-69, 
474,  477-78, 482-84, 492 
See also Army—Austrian; Austro-
Italo-French war, 1859; Austro-
Prussian war, 1866 
Austria-Hungary (from 1867)—410-15, 
482,  488, 510, 543, 578 
See also Hungary 
Austro-Italo-French war, 1859—421-22, 
461-63,  473, 478 
Austro-Prussian war,  1866—307,  412, 
450,  481-87, 504, 578 
Average rate of profit—282 B 
Babouvism—313, 604 
Baden—  418-19,  423, 482, 594, 595 
Balkans, the—  293,  412 
Banks—  296,  349, 464 
—in Proudhon's theory—427 
See also Stock Exchange 
Barbarians—  24, 31, 255-56 
Basis and superstructure—118, 183, 259, 
267, 283, 303, 317-18, 390-95, 517, 
535 
Bastarnae (ancient Germans)—10, 15, 
18, 56, 246 
Batavi (ancient Germans)—12, 19, 23, 
53, 101, 240 
Bavaria—  62, 482 
Being-—365-68 
Belgae—12, 55, 240 
Belgium—  485,  494, 558 
Berlin—123,  425, 456 
Bible—112-17 
Biology—118, 403, 517 
See also Darwinism 
Blanquism, Blanquists—313, 316, 317 
Blood revenge—  25, 202, 208, 240, 
256 
Bonapartism—  271,  460-62, 476-77 
—Prussian—271,  475, 477, 480, 498, 
503, 505, 579-80 
Bosnia—  410,  411 
Bourgeoisie—187, 283, 303, 359, 376, 
389-93,  397, 455, 456, 472, 517, 535, 
597-600 
—British—295-300, 331, 389, 400, 
546-50 
— French—125, 271-72, 303, 331, 
389, 396, 404, 407, 409, 460-62, 
476-77,  546, 547 
—German—121-22, 304, 309, 331, 
363, 456, 459, 464,  469-71,  476-80, 
482-84, 498-503, 505-07, 523, 546, 
547, 578-80 
— Italian—463,  470 
— Prussian—123,  305, 469-71 
—US—462,  526 
Brandenburg—  34, 54, 196, 342, 347, 
348 
Britons—150 
Buddhism— 376 
Bulgaria, Bulgarians—410-15 
Bureaucracy—121,  123 
Burghers—185, 393, 395, 561, 597 

=====第781页=====
Subject Index 753 
Burgundy, Burgundians—43, 44, 47, 
236, 237, 485, 563, 564 
Byzantium—39 
C 
California— 400, 456, 499, 524 
Calvinism—186, 395-96, 554 
Cannibalism—135, 138 
Capital—  391,  528-29, 600 
See also Concentration of capital 
"Capital"  by Karl Marx, Vol. One—279-
80, 335-40, 403, 426, 500, 589-90, 
600-01,  606-14 
Capitalist—  296,  359, 390, 400, 401, 
404, 433, 462, 535-36, 550, 608, 610, 
619 
Capitalist mode of production—186, 188, 
282, 283, 286-88, 300, 390, 399, 438, 
524, 533, 536, 599-600, 602 
Capital punishment—202 
Categories—  281,  336, 369 
Catholicism— 395-96, 597 
Causality—\4S-44, 156, 158, 162, 182-
84, 189, 230, 262, 264-65, 268-69, 
297, 308, 325, 333, 370,  388-91,  400, 
401, 412, 430, 431, 435-38, 443, 
469-70, 496, 523-24, 534-36, 548, 
554, 560, 564, 608 
Cell—  372,  385 
Celts—  9-11,  13, 33, 53, 96,  159-61, 
232-35 
Censorship—123, 358 
Chartism, Chartist movement—295-97, 
316, 318, 319, 566-77 
Chatti (Hessians)  —18,  19, 23, 26, 53-
55, 82, 101, 102, 104 
Chauvinism—  413,  415, 449, 460, 462, 
484 
Chemistry—  329,  367, 370, 371, 375-76, 
386, 529 
Cherusci (ancient Germans)—18, 20-23, 
26-27, 49, 53-55, 101 
Christianity—112-17, 249, 320, 366, 
376-77, 394-96, 597 
Church—  61-68,  76, 77, 178, 187, 250, 
253, 275, 366, 376, 395, 396, 504, 
509, 597-98 
—clergy—61-64, 66-68, 75, 76, 561, 
597 
—monasteries—64, 67, 80, 82, 254, 
343 Cimbri—10, 11, 14, 18, 35, 38, 48, 56, 
236 
Civilisation—134, 139, 173, 175, 247, 
270, 275-76, 401 
"Civil society"—  318,  339-40, 377, 391 
Civil War in the USA, 1861-65—358, 
525, 527 
Class (es)— 118, 132, 173, 177, 181, 
183, 203, 261, 265-67, 275, 303, 378, 
379, 389, 391-93, 396, 472, 512, 517, 
523, 536, 549-50, 557, 559, 601-04, 
615 
—in ancient society—214-15, 219, 
221, 231, 263, 268, 271, 274, 608 
—in feudal society—253-55, 270-72, 
556, 598 
—in bourgeois society—121, 122, 
125, 181, 187-88, 316-18, 329, 381, 
389-90, 403, 436-38, 463, 499-503, 
523, 536, 598-99, 601, 619 
Class struggle—118-21, 181, 216, 231, 
255, 268, 270, 271, 302-03, 306, 317, 
319, 321-22, 376,  389-91,  393, 395, 
404, 427, 434, 439, 441, 460, 472, 
499,  502, 512, 517, 554, 556, 597-98, 
600 
Code civil—123, 392, 506 
Cognition— 273-74, 359-62, 367, 383-87 
Cologne Communist Trial (1852)—312, 
328-29 
Commodity—  216,  265-66, 336-39, 400, 
402,  602, 605 
Commodity circulation—273-75 
Commodity production—186, 213, 261, 
273-74, 283, 287-88, 598, 602, 605, 
606 
Communism (social formation)—118-
19, 183, 272, 276, 289, 317-19, 321, 
323, 359, 403-04, 426, 427, 436-39, 
455-56, 517, 553, 591-92, 602, 605-
06, 615, 619-20 
Communism (theories and trends) — 
281-82, 403-04, 426, 517, 605 
— Icarian (Cabet's)—516-17, 604 
— "workers'", simplistic, egali­
tarian—313, 314, 320. 
—Utopian—313, 314, 318-20, 516-17 
—in France—313, 318, 320, 516 
—in Germany—306-07, 313, 322, 
326, 329, 472 
—in Switzerland—320 
See also Babouvism; Owenism, Owen-
ists ; Weitlingianism, Weitlingians 

=====第782页=====
754 Subject Index 
Communism, primeval—149, 157, 158, 
161, 181, 203, 236, 259 
Communist League—120-28, 306-07, 
312-30, 512, 515 
Communist movement—120-21, 321-30, 
441-42, 517, 518 
See also Cologne Communist Trial 
(1852); Communist League; German 
Workers' Educational Society in London 
(1840-1918); International Working 
Men's Association (First International) 
Community—  59,  155, 163, 205-06, 220, 
232, 237, 241, 251, 260, 261, 263, 
266, 268, 273 
—in England—232-33, 243, 251 
—in Russia—59, 167-69, 242, 345 
—Mark community among Ger­
mans—58-60, 169, 197, 201, 234, 
236,  242, 251, 252, 253, 255, 269, 
341, 342, 432 
Competition—  282,  283, 286-88, 298-
301, 400, 404, 528, 535, 536, 548, 
598, 619 
Concentration of capital—267, 400, 529 
Concept  (ion)—  146, 149, 187, 232, 236, 
275, 284, 367, 383-84, 394 
Confederation of the Rhine—463, 466, 
469 
Conquest—137, 250-52, 268, 270, 558 
Consciousness—118, 121, 122, 154, 208, 
273-74, 282, 305, 317, 329, 357, 361, 
362, 366-69, 374, 383, 386-89, 391, 
393, 394, 396-97, 435, 463, 517, 546, 
626 
—reason—269, 348, 358-59, 365 
Content and form—110, 213,  280-81, 
337-38, 361, 365, 366, 368-70, 377, 
383, 385-88, 390-93, 598, 599 
Corn Laws (in England)—295, 296, 
400, 521, 523, 528, 566, 569, 570, 
571, 574 
Court,  judicial system—123, 243, 344, 
507-08 
Crimean war, 1853-56—460-62, 473 
Culture—136-39, 564 
Customs Union (Germany, 1834-71)— 
469,  470, 484, 529, 578 
D 
Danish-Prussian war, 1848-50—450, 
473 
Danish war, 1864—478-79, 578 Darwinism—118, 371, 372, 385-86, 
517, 612 
Day labourers— 290, 344, 345, 348, 429, 
500, 508 
Democracy, ancient (social and political 
system)—209, 211-13, 222, 229, 263, 
267, 269 
Democracy, petty-bourgeois (political 
movement)—125, 325-28 
Democratic Association in Brussels 
(1847)—319, 521 
Denmark—196, 456, 474, 554 
Development— 114, 118, 120, 132, 136, 
143, 145, 152, 153, 155-57, 166, 
174-75,  178, 182, 192, 204, 246, 253, 
256, 259, 263, 265, 269-75, 303, 317, 
332, 358-60, 362, 366, 368-73, 383-
87, 390, 400, 402, 403, 422, 433, 436, 
439,  441, 457, 459,  470-71,  502, 506, 
526, 561, 600, 603, 604, 608 
Dialectical materialism—362-63, 369, 
371, 381-98, 519-20 
Dialectics, dialectical method—359-63, 
369-72, 382-87, 397 
Dialect (s) 
—Alamannic—82, 87, 93, 96, 98-
101, 106 
—American Indian—196, 200, 201, 
209 
—Bavarian—106 
—Bergish—83-86, 89, 92-95, 99 
—Dutch—81,  86-90, 92 
— Franconian—18, 50, 55, 57, 
81-106 
—German living dialects—18, 48, 
57, 83-90, 92-95, 103-06, 335, 485, 
494 
—Gothic—18, 48, 57 
—Hessian—82, 93, 101-03, 106 
—High German —82-85, 87, 89, 92-
93, 95, 104-07 
— Ingaevonian—49, 56, 83-85, 87, 
90 
— Lancashire—89 
—Latin—97, 247 
—Main-Franconian—82 
—Markish—82, 84, 95 
—of Palatinate —87, 104-07 
—Ripuarian—87-94, 97, 98, 100-04, 
107 
—Salic—57, 84,  86-91,  96-98, 100, 
102, 104 

=====第783页=====
Subject Index 755 
—Saxon—18,  49, 50, 55, 56, 81-95, 
99, 100, 102 
—Thuringian—82, 93, 102 
—Wallonian—91 
—Westphalian—55, 83-85, 93, 94, 
97, 99 
Dictatorship of the proletariat—426, 436-
37, 455-56, 518, 550, 615 
Discovery—  369,  372, 385 
Distribution—  253,  273, 605 
Division of labour—158, 164, 173, 213-
14, 217, 259-65, 267, 268, 272-73, 
275, 390 
Dogmatism—  359,  361, 597, 598 
Domestic industry—7, 42-43, 135-36, 
262-63,  428-33, 530 
E 
"Eastern question"—410-16 
Eclecticism—  325,  372, 397, 520 
Economic categories—  281,  287, 337-38 
Economic crises—  265,  274, 288, 295, 
296, 298-300, 327, 404, 524, 530, 535 
Economic history—520, 601 
Economic laws— 273-74, 282, 287-88, 
299-300, 399, 402, 534 
Economic relations—  318,  389-93, 396, 
536, 598 
Economics and politics—118, 121, 213, 
271, 285, 318, 376, 389, 393, 456, 
458, 459, 462,  470-71,  499, 502, 505, 
506, 557, 559, 562, 579, 598 
Embryology—361,  385 
Emigration—  292,  293, 313-16, 319-24, 
326-30, 418, 447, 448, 457, 532 
Engels about Marx—118-20, 278, 302, 
303, 317-19, 330, 335, 336, 382, 403, 
442, 515, 517, 519, 520 
England (Great Britain)—390, 506 
—history (before 19th cent.)—6, 7, 
9, 43, 50, 242, 247, 255, 308, 396, 
429, 506, 522, 563-64 
—in 19th cent.—298-301, 389, 402, 
404,  522-25, 546-47 
—commercial and industrial mono­
poly, causes for loss of dominant 
position—288, 296, 300, 430, 521-
23, 525, 528, 535 
—industry—297, 298, 300, 301, 400, 
429,  430, 524, 525, 528, 534, 535 
—commerce (trade)—298, 430, 521-
23, 531 —economic crises—295, 296, 298-
301, 524, 530-31 
See also Angles; Anglo-Egyptian war, 
1882;  Anglo-Saxons; Army—British; 
Bourgeoisie—British; Britons;  Char­
tism,  Chartist movement; Corn Laws (in 
England); Free Trade; International 
Working Men's Association (First In­
ternational)—in England; London; 
Peasantry—in England; Petty 
bourgeoisie— B ritish ;  Protectionism ; 
Scotland;  Socialism (theories and 
trends)—in England; Socialist move­
ment,  international (after the First 
International); Trade unions in  Eng­
land;  Truck system; Wales; Working 
class—in Britain; Working-class and 
socialist movement—in Britain 
English bourgeois revolution (17th 
cent.) —396, 506, 554, 598 
Epoch—118, 132, 136, 138, 165, 170, 
171, 204, 212-14, 219, 229, 245, 262, 
274, 391-92, 393, 517 
Equality—181-82, 187, 200, 202-03, 
206, 256, 379-80, 599, 604 
Essence and phenomenon—192, 281, 287, 
364, 372-73, 387 
Europe— 254, 327-28, 450, 597 
Exchange—  59, 132, 217, 260, 263, 265, 
272-74, 288, 303, 390, 391, 517, 598, 
600 
Exchange value—337-39 
Experience— 135, 188, 518 
Exploitation—  268,  271, 274, 276, 317, 
342, 350, 402, 438, 457, 517, 536-37, 
547-48,  608 
Expropriation—  432-33,  437-38 
F 
Factory, factory system—400, 429, 431-
33, 522, 530, 610-11 
Family and marriage—131-32, 139-89, 
206, 212, 225-28, 233, 255, 259, 261, 
263, 274, 290 
Feudalism—  265,  271-74, 342-45, 366, 
371, 376, 378, 390, 393, 395-96, 
437-38,  500, 553-55, 597-99, 601, 
603, 608 
—subsistence economy — 557-58, 
597-98 
50-1243 

=====第784页=====
756 Subject Index 
See also Community; Guilds, guild 
system;  Middle Ages; Monarchy— 
absolute; Serfdom; Society—feudal; 
State, the—feudal 
Feuerbach, Feuerbachianism — 364-65, 
367-69,  371-82, 519-20 
Finland,  Finns—8, 13 
Flanders—  98, 100, 493, 563 
Force (violence)—295, 390, 455, 479, 
495,  511, 578-79 
Foreign trade— 33-34, 186, 213, 215, 
430-32,  456, 522, 531, 532, 557 
Fourierism, Fourierists—179, 255, 276, 
516, 599 
France—  255,  271, 272, 297, 302-03, 
308-10, 313, 315-16, 319, 331-34, 
346, 357, 375, 389, 392, 395, 396, 
404, 407, 409, 411, 415-17, 429, 432, 
459-65,  469, 473, 476-77, 479-82, 
484-92,  494-96, 525, 532, 533, 546, 
547, 556, 564, 578 
See also Alsace; Bonapartism; French 
Revolution of the 18th century; Lor­
raine; Paris; Paris Commune of 1871; 
Petty bourgeoisie—French; Working-
class and socialist movement—in 
France 
Franconia—  62, 82, 342 
Franco-Prussian war, 1870-71—346, 
411,  483-91,  495, 497, 509-10, 
578-80 
Frankish state—  50, 58-81,  246, 251-55, 
560 
Franks—18, 32, 44, 50-55, 81-82, 85-
87, 95-97, 99, 100-03, 244, 247, 
251-53 
Freedom—121,  122, 128, 185-89, 215, 
272, 275, 365, 391, 404, 457, 492, 
503-04, 507, 512 
Free Trade— 296, 297, 299, 521-26, 
534-36 
French philosophy—  357,  364, 370-73, 
393 
French Revolution of the 18th.century— 
125, 218, 303, 309, 346, 350, 358, 
375-76,  396, 489, 493, 502, 522 
Frisians— 18, 19, 21, 23, 37, 38, 48-49, 
53, 55, 59, 87, 99 
G 
Gaul—  9-11,  17, 19, 21, 28, 30, 55, 
61-65,  77, 116, 240, 247, 250, 491 Gens, gentile constitution—59, 149, 152, 
155-56,  163, 166, 206, 212, 262, 264, 
266-70, 275, 517 
—among Australians—151, 154 
—among American Indians—132, 
163, 199-211, 216, 223, 225, 231, 
240, 243, 244, 256, 259 
—among Germans —  59, 132, 196, 
232, 236-45, 251, 256, 267, 268 
—Greek—132, 149, 190, 191, 196, 
202, 204-23, 228, 229, 231, 237, 
245, 256, 267, 268, 269 
—among Indians, Caucasians, Kal-
mucs and Samoyeds (Nentsi) — 232 
—among Celts—232-36 
—among Mexicans —  212,  237 
—Roman—132, 149, 190, 191, 202, 
223-31,  238, 245, 256, 267-69 
See also Ancient Greece; Ancient 
Rome; Community; Family and mar­
riage; Society—primitive; Tribe(s) 
Geography, geographical discoveries—44, 
186, 558-59 
George, Henry, teaching of—437-39 
German Confederation (1815-66) — 307, 
308, 456, 460, 480, 481 
German Empire (after 1871)  —271,  272, 
307-09,  329, 397, 411-15, 417, 424, 
450, 471, 475-76, 480, 484, 490, 491, 
495-505,  507-10, 578-80 
German Party of Progress (1861-84) — 
500, 501 
German philosophy— 357-59, 362-65, 
367-72,  374, 381-84, 397-98, 403, 
519-20 
German Social-Democracy—307-09, 407, 
417, 427-28, 442, 500, 510, 540, 580, 
624 
—Anti-Socialist Law, 1878—309, 
329, 428, 578, 580, 624 
German Workers' Educational Society in 
London (1840-1918)—314-16 
German Workers' Society in Brussels 
(from 1847) —277, 319 
Germany 
—history—9, 81-83, 85, 87, 132, 
455, 466, 493, 496, 497, 510 
—in Middle Ages  —255,  309, 341-
45, 485, 554-59 
—in 17th-18th centuries  —345,  429, 
485, 563 
—and French Revolution of the 18th 

=====第785页=====
Subject Index 757 
century —309-10, 346, 350, 459, 
469, 493-95, 502 
—in 19th century—121, 310, 314, 
329,  346-51,  357-58, 362-63, 390, 
397, 457-60, 492-93, 499, 501-03, 
507-09,  546, 558 
—fragmentation of the country and 
ways of its unification—124, 307-
10, 397, 424, 455-60, 462, 464-66, 
469-70, 473-74, 477, 479-89, 498-
501, 503-10, 530, 554-55, 565, 578 
—economy—121-22, 329, 397, 424-
25, 428-33, 457, 458, 474, 493, 
498-502, 522, 523, 525,  529-31, 
539, 555, 558, 578, 580 
—social and political system—120, 
121, 307-08, 342-44, 392, 395, 397, 
457, 477, 481-85, 499, 503, 546, 
553, 554 
—social estates, classes—121, 306, 
309, 310, 317, 318, 397, 428, 450, 
457, 476, 490, 500, 502, 507 
—bourgeois liberalism — 357-58, 363-
64, 465, 470-77, 479, 480, 482-83, 
501, 507 
—democratic movement— 124, 125, 
325, 327, 364, 457-59, 500, 501 
—science and culture—112, 363, 
365, 371-72, 397-98, 470, 471, 484, 
507, 520 
—foreign policy — 484, 498 
—and Britain — 459 
—and France —460, 462, 464, 469, 
477-82,  494-95 
—and Holland—395-96 
—and Hungary —307, 456, 481 
—and Italy —307, 421, 463, 555 
—and Russia —414, 460, 466, 497-98 
—and oppression of Slavs —  341, 
481, 560 
— and Switzerland—124, 458 
See also Aristocracy, nobility— 
German; Army—German; Baden; 
Bavaria, Berlin; Bourgeoisie— 
German; Brandenburg; Burghers; 
Confederation of the Rhine; Customs 
Union (Germany, 1834-71); German 
Confederation (1815-66); German Em­
pire (after 1871); Hesse (Hesse-
Darmstadt); Holy Roman Empire of the 
German Nation (962-1806); Lan­
guage— German ; Literature— classical 
German; National Association (Ger­many, 1859-67); North German Con­
federation (1867-71); Peasant war in 
Germany, 1524-25; Petty bourgeoisie— 
German; Prussia; Rhine Province; 
Westphalia 
God(s)—114, 367, 377, 394 
Gold and silver—187, 261, 263, 456, 
506, 558 
Goths—17-18, 43, 44, 47, 54, 56, 237, 
247 
Gotland—  35, 37-39 
Greek philosophy— 394, 612 
Guilds, guild system—185, 187, 390, 
547, 553 
H 
Handicrafts, handicraftsmen— 262-63, 
265, 317, 390, 500, 556, 557 
Hegel,  Hegelianism 
—Hegelian philosophy —  359-61, 
365, 381-84, 519-20 
—Hegelian system — 357, 360-65, 
368, 374, 382 
—Hegelian method  —359-63,  369, 
370, 383-84 
—Hegelianism and reality — 358-59, 
361, 366-69, 383-84 
—Hegel's absolute idea —  360-61, 
364, 367, 369, 370, 386 
—idealism —364, 366-68, 373, 377, 
382-84, 388, 391 
— Hegelian dialectics —359-62, 370-
71, 382 
—phenomenology of the mind — 361 
—Hegelian logic —359-62, 369, 383 
—philosophy of nature —  361,  364, 
370, 383 
—philosophy of the mind — 361 
—philosophy of history — 358-62, 
378, 386, 388 
—philosophy of state and law — 269, 
358, 361, 377 
—philosophy of religion — 361 
—aesthetics — 362 
—and Prussian state — 357-58, 361, 
363-64, 470 
—and natural science —  360,  368, 
370 
—history of Hegelian philosophy — 
357, 362-65, 381-84, 519-20 
—and Feuerbach — 364-65, 367, 368, 
377-78,  382, 519-20 
50* 

=====第786页=====
758 Subject Index 
—and Marxism —364, 382-84, 
519-20 
Helvetii— 12, 32 
Heresy, heretics-—395-96 
Hermi(n)ones (ancient Germans)—18, 
47, 53, 54, 57, 101, 237, 247 
Hermunduri (Thuringians)—11, 13, 17, 
18, 20, 23, 34, 53, 54, 67, 101 
Hesse {Hesse-Darmstadt) —  82, 482 
Historical approach—140-41, 148, 151-
52, 163, 274, 360, 370-72,  377-81, 
387, 391, 470, 599, 600, 603-04, 
607-08 
Historical materialism, materialist  under­
standing of history—118-19, 131-32, 
278, 303, 318, 360-62, 369-72, 382-
83, 386-98, 458-59, 519-20, 599, 
601 
Historiography, historians—10-19, 32-34, 
48-49,  80, 113, 118-19, 132-33, 166-
68, 206, 210, 213, 225, 340, 377, 389, 
393, 397-98, 479 
—bourgeois—126, 132-33, 142-43, 
158, 166-68, 206-08, 225-27, 229, 
232, 241-42, 254, 269, 308, 376, 
389, 393, 479 
—Marxist—118-19, 131-32, 169, 
302-03,  458-59, 608 
History— 29-30, 118, 273-74, 303, 308, 
318,  359-61, 370-71, 386-91,  393, 
440,  455, 458, 502, 576-79, 607 
Holland—  395-96,  485, 522, 554, 557, 
558 
Holy Roman Empire of the German Na­
tion (962-1806) —309-10, 459, 465, 
491-93,  554 
Housing question—401, 424-25, 428, 
433 
Hundred Years' War, 1337-1453—555, 
563-65 
Hungary—  298,  307, 410, 455, 456, 466 
Hypothesis— 165, 237, 368 
I 
Iberians—8, 9 
Ideal—193-94, 208, 318, 359, 372-73, 
385-89,  591 
Idealism— 366, 373 
—history of—364, 366-69, 371-73, 
382-83 
—and fundamental question of 
philosophy—366-67 —and materialism — 364, 366-74, 
382-83 
—and religion —364-66, 368, 374-77 
—Feuerbach's idealistic understand­
ing of history —372, 374-82 
Idea(s) —143, 204, 376, 384, 475, 597 
See also  Hegel,  Hegelianism—Hegel's 
absolute idea 
Identity—367 
Ideological struggle in the working-class 
movement—  320-21,  325-28, 515 
Ideology—  283,  303, 376, 388, 389, 392-
98, 458, 470, 519, 553 
Impoverishment of the working class—267, 
298-301,  391 
India— 6 
Industrial reserve army—298, 535 
Industrial revolution—424, 425, 432-33 
Infantry—122-28, 319, 623-24 
Ingaevones (ancient Germans)—18, 47-
56, 247 
Intellectual,  the—465, 585 
Interests—  59, 120, 122, 124, 165, 184-
86, 203, 217, 264, 267, 269, 296, 322, 
344-46,  381, 390, 395-96, 398, 414, 
415,  433, 436-38, 440-43, 450, 459, 
462-63,  466, 497, 499, 503, 506, 523, 
549, 550, 601, 615 
Internationalism, proletarian—312, 322, 
330, 406-07, 449, 455-56 
International Working Men's Association 
(First International) —312, 322, 330, 
422, 426 
Inventions—135-36, 138, 529, 534, 
564 
Ireland—9, 232-34, 295, 296, 429, 431, 
432, 571, 573-75, 577, 602 
" Irony of history"—  60, 186, 188, 304-05 
Italian wars, 1494-1559—5 
Italy— 8, 9, 33, 138, 297, 308, 411, 422, 
455,  460, 462-65, 470, 488, 494, 507, 
555-57,  578 
See also Aristocracy, nobility—Italian 
J 
Judaism—113-14 
Junkers, Prussian—  342-51,  450, 480, 
489-90, 495, 498-502, 505, 507-09 
Jurisprudence— 123, 395, 504, 597, 599 
Justice—  358,  435, 507, 579 
Jutland,  Jutes—10, 14, 38, 55, 478 

=====第787页=====
Subject Index 759 
K 
Kaffirs— 203 
Kant,  Kantianism— 359, 367, 368, 370, 
373, 381 
Knights—177-78, 184, 187, 341, 343, 
558, 561-65 
Knights of Labor (USA) —437, 439-40 
L 
Labour—  132, 250, 261, 264, 283, 285, 
288-89,  339, 340, 350, 398, 605, 619 
See also Division of  labour;  Labour 
power;  Labour time 
Labour  power—  261,  274, 291, 299, 401 
Labour time— 287, 336, 400, 610 
Langobardi—  11, 22, 23, 45, 49, 54-55, 
66, 236, 237 
Language— 8, 50, 86-88, 90, 105, 106, 
209, 247, 252, 335-40, 485, 494-95, 
559-60, 564 
—American Indian—196, 200-02 
—Anglo-Saxon  —43,  49-50, 56, 83, 
84-86 
—Castillian — 564 
—Danish—14, 87, 88, 105 
—Dutch  —81,  83, 86-92, 94, 104, 
107 
—English — 50, 89, 336, 508 
—Flemish —87, 88, 90 
—French  —50,  81, 88, 90, 98, 100, 
103, 485, 493, 494 
—Frisian —18, 48-50, 56, 83-85, 90, 
99 
—German—18,  50-51,  53-54, 57, 
81-85,  87-89, 92-95, 99-100, 104-
07, 236, 335, 336, 485, 492, 494-
95, 559-60 
—Gothic—17-18, 43, 47-48, 56-57, 
85, 87, 102 
—Greek  —56,  89, 209, 247 
— Italian —89 
—Latin —56, 89, 97, 247, 252 
— Portuguese, Provençal — 564 
—Roman (old French) —96-100, 
252, 559-60 
—Scandinavian—18, 43, 56, 57, 90, 
237 
Large-scale industry— 262, 299-300, 317, 359, 389, 390, 391, 397, 424, 430-32, 
435, 500, 599, 602 
Lassalleanism, Lassalleans—275, 278, 
500, 515 
Latifundia—  30, 36, 248, 254, 348 
Law,  right—  24-25,  58-59, 65-72, 74, 
78-79,  152, 154-55, 160-68, 170, 173, 
179-81,  186, 194, 205-07, 210, 212, 
214-15,  218, 223-25, 234, 237-39, 
241, 242, 244, 247, 250, 255, 262, 
266, 275, 283, 341, 343, 346-47, 377, 
379, 391-93, 395, 458, 486, 506, 507, 
558, 561-62, 597-609, 614-15 
See also Jurisprudence; Justice; 
Lawyers, jurists 
Law(s)—273-74, 387, 389, 548 
—of nature —371-72, 384-86 
—of society  —282-83,  287, 299, 391, 
393, 402, 440, 599-600, 615 
—of thinking —369, 384, 394, 397 
Lawyers, jurists— 230, 234, 259, 344, 
392, 393, 506-07, 561, 600-02 
See also Legislation 
League of the  Just—  313-21,  517 
Legislation—160, 180, 232-35, 266, 
270, 346, 391-93, 457, 483, 506-07, 
598, 615 
Liberalism— 357 
Linguistics—40, 57 
Literature—109, 110, 138-39, 147, 170-
71, 178, 206, 208-12, 235, 238, 239, 
335-36,  423, 471, 564 
—English —235 
—classical German—147, 184, 237, 
262, 423 
—classical Greek—111, 138-39, 147, 
170-72,  184, 208-12 
—classical Roman—111, 537 
—classical Scandinavian—147, 239 
—French—178, 373, 496 
—German—110-11,  147, 178, 373, 
423, 493, 496 
—Provençal— 177, 184 
—Swedish—178 
Lithuania, Lithuanians—8, 46, 342, 565 
Logic—see  Hegel,  Hegelianism 
Lombardy— 494 
London—  299,  314, 425, 547-49 
Lorraine—  92, 96, 100, 103-04, 411, 
485, 491-95, 497, 559, 578 
Lutheranism—186, 395-96, 554 
Luxemburg— 103, 104, 485-86, 494 

=====第788页=====
760 Subject Index 
M 
Macedonia— 10, 246, 410 
Machines— 275, 298-99, 389, 429-30, 
433,  436, 535, 602, 609-10 
Man,  individual—  6-8, 131-32, 134-35, 
139, 143-45, 160, 216, 255, 313, 362, 
364,  373-81,  383, 386-87, 389, 391, 
392 
Mankind—118, 134-39, 143, 182, 254, 
359-62, 365, 367, 373, 404, 517 
Manufacture— 186, 390, 432, 463 
Marcomanni (Bavarians)—11, 12, 18, 
21, 23, 45, 54 
Materialism—  364-75,  382-83, 388, 397 
See also Dialectical materialism; His­
torical materialism, materialist  under­
standing of history 
Matter,  material—  203,  366-70, 380, 391-
94, 429, 458, 465, 506, 507 
Means of production—183, 381, 401, 
426,  427, 436-38, 521, 599, 602, 605, 
607,  609 
Merchants— 265-66, 496, 500 
— Hanseatic—557 
Metaphysics— 368-72, 384-87 
Method—see  Hegel,  Hegelianism 
Mexico—136, 137, 161, 187, 212 
Middle Ages—185, 255, 366, 371, 376, 
395, 438, 556, 558-62, 564, 597, 
602-03 
Migration of the peoples—8-14, 21-22, 
33, 37, 40, 41, 43-44, 51, 59-60, 103, 
237, 243-45, 554 
Military art—10, 31-32, 237-38, 478, 
562-63 
See also Army 
"Military democracy"—  211,  229, 263 
Mind—  360, 361, 366, 369 
Mode of production—  216,  303, 391, 431, 
517,  521-22, 597-603 
Monarchy—  211,  303, 361, 554, 561-65 
—absolute—123, 271, 306, 455-56, 
554-55,  598 
Money—  33, 39, 216, 260, 265-67, 273, 
274, 557-58 
Monopolies— 531-33, 547-50, 553, 
579 
Morality—147-48, 177, 178, 204, 235, 
373-75,  377-81 
Mortgage—  215,  266, 274, 323, 432, 
499,  626 
Motion—  303,  370, 383-87 Mythology—139,  170-71,  173, 197, 208, 
238-39, 394 
N 
Napoleonic wars—123, 307, 309, 345, 
346, 347, 449, 455, 465, 469, 489-90, 
493, 564 
Nation— 200, 247, 254-55, 371, 455-56, 
493,  559-61,  564 
National Association (Germany, 1859-
67)—474, 476 
Nationalisation of land—323, 437-39 
National Liberals (Germany, from 
1866)—307, 501, 505, 507 
Nationalities question—394, 455-56 
—criticism of the Bonapartist 
"nationalities principle"—462, 477 
Nationality— 254, 394, 559, 560 
Natural science— 360, 369-72, 384-86, 
397, 597, 612 
Nature—134-39, 145-46, 204, 216, 273, 
360, 364, 366, 370-72, 375, 381, 
382-85,  394, 397, 439 
Navy—558 
Needs, requirements—122, 138, 157, 183, 
217, 261, 267, 271, 286-88, 364, 375, 
376, 379, 390-92, 394, 404, 458, 505, 
506, 555-56 
Neo-Kantianism—368 
New York—  581,  582, 585 
Mc«—463, 494 
Nomads—14 
Normans—  37, 39, 138, 252 
North German Confederation (1867-71)— 
307, 308, 480-85, 503, 505 
Notion—158, 367, 394 
Nuremberg—491 -92 
O 
Officials— 270, 271 
Old Hegelianism—  363,  397 
Organisation of social labour and  product­
ion—  272,  287-89, 390, 619 
Organism— 370, 385 
Outlaws' League—313 
Owenism, Owenists—301, 516, 599 
P 
Paganism—114 
—priests—174, 193, 205, 211-12, 
229 

=====第789页=====
Subject Index 761 
Palaeontology—141,  361 
Paris—  313,  316, 425, 490-91 
Paris Commune of 1871—406-07, 426, 
432, 497, 518, 595 
Parliament, British—  501,  508, 568-74, 
577. 
Party of the Centre (Germany, from 
1870)—504, 509 
Party, political—  317,  501, 529, 615-16 
Party, proletarian—120-28, 272, 306, 
307, 319-25, 327, 330, 332, 404, 407, 
416-17,  426-28,  436-41,  512, 518, 
615-16 
See also Communist League; Interna­
tional Working Men's Association (First 
International); Proletariat's tactics in 
class struggle; Socialist Labor Party of 
North America (from 1876); United 
Labor Party (USA); Workers' Party of 
France 
Pastoral peop les— 137-38, 162, 164 
Peasant labour services and dues—64-65, 
248-49,  342-44, 347-49 
Peasantry—  67, 71,  78-81,  203, 231, 255, 
344-46,  348-50, 432-33, 437, 499, 
556-59,  562-63, 603 
—in Belgium—558 
—in England—429, 563 
—in France—252, 254, 255, 346 
—in Germany—255, 341-43, 428-29, 
432-33,  464, 499-501, 555, 558 
—in Ireland—234, 300, 571, 574 
—in Italy—463 
—in Russia—345 
—in Spain—161 
— in Switzerland—563 
See also Day labourers; Peasant labour 
services and dues; Peasant war in Ger­
many, 1524-25; Serfdom 
Peasant war in Germany, 1524-25—342, 
554 
People, popular masses—11, 14, 18, 33, 
55, 59, 81, 113, 202, 204, 209, 263, 
388-89,  394, 395, 470, 479, 493, 524, 
559 
Period of transition from capitalism to 
communism—426-27, 437 
Petty bourgeoisie—125, 283, 306, 317, 
500 
—British—295,  584 
— French—125,  332 
—German—121,  123, 306, 309, 317, 
464,  500, 501, 507, 584 —Prussian—123,  471 
Philosophy—141,  283, 303, 314, 315, 
357-78,  380-89, 393-95, 403, 470, 
520, 597, 599, 612 
See also Dialectical materialism; Dialec­
tics, dialectical  method;  Feuerbach, Feuer-
bachianism; French philosophy; German 
philosophy; Hegel, Hegelianism; Histori­
cal materialism, materialist understanding 
of history; Idealism; Kant, Kantianism; 
Materialism; Metaphysics; Morality; 
Natural science; Neo-Kantianism; Old 
Hegelianism; Philosophy of nature; 
Stoicism, stoics; "  Thing-in-itself" 
(Kant);  World (philos.); Young He­
gelianism 
Philosophy of nature—  386-87,  397 
Physiology—  371,  385 
Plebeians, pUbs—  231-32,  268, 395, 598 
Poetry—108-11,  177, 184, 423, 471, 536 
Poland—124, 324, 410, 455, 466 
Police—  221,  270 
Political struggle—  301-02,  318,  389-91, 
393, 598-99 
Political  system—  60, 78, 310, 358, 391, 
502 
Politics—118, 141, 283, 302, 318, 357, 
389-93,  395, 462, 516-17, 529, 546, 
558, 559, 591, 599-600 
Pomerania—Z5, 342, 347 
Pope, papacy—  61, 509, 597 
Population—138, 161, 204, 242, 246, 
247, 256, 263, 265, 270, 342 
Possibilism, Possibilists—542-44 
Possibilist Paris Congress (1889)—542, 
543 
Press, the—122-28, 319, 623-24 
Prerequisites—177, 267, 269, 450, 470 
Prevision, forecasting—189-90, 318-19, 
327, 417, 428, 451, 484, 486, 503-04, 
580, 624 
Price—  282,  286-89,  429-31,  610 
Principle*—120, 281, 296, 312, 322, 
'367,  441, 462, 477, 495, 515, 523, 
535, 579, 584 
Private property—132, 163-64, 173, 186, 
188, 205, 216, 218-19, 259, 260, 266, 
275, 321, 561, 600 
Production— 118, 131-32, 134-39, 181-
82, 186, 188, 204, 213, 216, 242-43, 
246, 249, 250, 253, 256-68, 272-75, 
286-88,  303, 327, 365, 368, 380, 
389-92,  429, 432, 433, 463, 517, 

=====第790页=====
762 Subject Index 
523-25,  530, 535-36, 549-50, 557, 
597-99,  602-03, 609-11 
See also Domestic industry; Means of 
production 
Productive forces—134-39, 327, 390, 
391, 523-24 
Proletariat's tactics in class struggle—120-
22, 333-34, 441-42, 512 
Proof—  366-68,  396 
Property—132, 163-64, 182, 188, 213, 
218, 241, 253, 259, 261, 266, 427, 
437-39,  561, 599-600, 605, 608 
—landed—60-67, 76-79, 167-68, 
213, 216, 218, 220, 224, 231, 
241-42,  263, 266-67, 275, 296, 323, 
342-43,  389, 390, 437-39, 498, 517, 
523, 531, 602 
See also Private  property ;  State property 
Prostitution—142-43, 172, 174, 175, 
179, 182-83, 266 
Protectionism—  521-23,  526-30, 532, 
534-36 
Protestantism—395-96, 554 
See also Calvinism; Lutheranism 
Proudhonism, Proudhonists—278-80, 283-
85, 289, 325, 382, 426-28, 515, 
604-06 
Prussia—123,  124, 305-06, 308, 309, 
341-51,  358, 392, 414, 443-44, 449-
50, 456, 459-60, 463-64, 466, 469-92, 
494, 497-500, 504, 506-10, 532, 578, 
579 
See also Bourgeoisie—Prussian; Jun­
kers,  Prussian; Petty bourgeoisie— 
Prussian; Working class—Prussian 
Q 
Quality and quantity—336, 338, 340, 
385 
R 
Race—7, 8, 9, 140, 585 
Radicalism, radicals—180, 333, 426 
Railways—  323,  391, 400, 424, 499 
Rate of profit—  282,  431, 432 
Reality, real—140, 180, 182, 207, 302, 
358-61,  364, 367-70, 373, 374, 377, 
381-84, 386, 436, 439, 456, 499 
Reflection—178, 208, 302, 360, 361, 
364, 367, 368, 373, 374, 377, 383-84, 
389, 516, 607 Reform—  323,  348-49 
Reformation—186, 395-96, 554, 555, 
564, 598 
Reformism—  298-99,  427 
Regularity— 273-74, 387 
Relations of production—327 
Relativity—  359-62,  384 
Religion—113-15, 141, 187, 197, 208, 
303, 364, 366, 374-78, 393-96, 
597-99 
See also Buddhism; Calvinism; 
Catholicism  ; Christianity  ; Church  ; 
God(s);  Heresy, heretics; Judaism; 
Lutheranism; Paganism; Pope, papacy; 
Protestantism 
Republic—222, 271, 333 
—bourgeois—181,  271-72, 306 
Revolution—121,  308-09, 317, 327, 357, 
472, 481, 499, 500, 592 
—bourgeois—121,  122, 125, 126, 
218, 297, 306, 309, 322-23, 348-49, 
376, 390, 421, 456, 472, 546, 
554-55 
—lasting—125,  126, 271 
—social—182, 404, 433, 524 
See also Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Austria; Revolution of 1848 in France. 
Second Republic; Revolution of 1848-49 
in Germany; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Hungary; Revolutions of 1848-49 in 
Europe; Revolutions of 1848-49 in 
Italian states 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Austria—304, 
324, 456, 466, 472 
Revolution of 1848 in France. Second 
Republic—121,  122, 126-28, 295-96, 
302, 303, 324, 326-28, 432, 456, 460, 
472,  512, 604 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Germany—109, 
120-28,  297, 304-07, 309, 324-26, 
346, 348-49, 357, 365, 411,  419-21, 
423,  430, 446-47, 456, 465, 472, 
479-80, 493, 499-501, 503, 546, 578, 
579, 594-96 
—German Democratic Legion—324 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Hungary—127, 
297, 326, 456, 462, 578 
Revolutions of 1848-49 in Europe—121, 
126-27,  295-97, 306, 326, 371, 456, 
472, 512, 578 
Revolutions of 1848-49 in Italian states— 
127, 419, 456, 578 

=====第791页=====
Subject Index 763 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist—118, 
218, 307, 328, 432-33, 436,  440-41, 
455-56, 516-18, 524, 536, 546, 602, 
619,  622 
See also Paris Commune of 1871 
Rhine Province—11, 14-15, 31-32, 123, 
305, 342, 350, 456, 463-65, 469, 
471-72, 480, 493, 558 
Rights of man—188, 256, 271, 379-80, 
503-04 
Russia— 292-94, 311, 410-17, 421, 456, 
459-61,  463, 466, 533, 565, 591-92 
See also Community—in Russia; 
Slavophiles; Tsarism, autocracy in 
Russia 
Russo-Turkish war, 1877-78—410, 412 
S 
Saint-Simonism, Saint-Simonists— 5  99, 
606 
Saxons—14, 32, 37-39, 44, 49, 50, 59, 
62, 67, 85, 97, 99, 102 
Saxony—  348,  456, 470, 482 
Scandinavia—8, 13, 16-18, 36, 43, 56, 
239, 565 
Schleswig-Holstein— 10, 35, 37-39, 243, 
474, 477, 493 
Science—112, 117, 275, 290, 316-19, 
397, 403, 597, 600, 606-09, 612 
See also Economic history; Palaeon­
tology 
Scotland—  232,  235, 395, 554, 602 
Scythians—8, 146 
Self-consciousness— 363-64, 383, 435-36 
Sensuousness—  369,  373, 377 
Serbia, Serbs— 410-14 
Serfdom—  72-81,  166, 239, 249, 252-55, 
274, 342-50, 379, 380, 438, 493, 500, 
508, 555-57,  559-61,  603 
Seven Years' War, 1756-63—347 
Shipbuilding—  39,  42, 44, 527 
Silesia—  34, 342, 344, 347, 348, 428, 
456,  459, 498, 509 
Singular, particular and universal—120, 
217-18, 264-65, 369-70, 384-88, 392, 
436-38, 440-43, 615 
Slavery— 36-37, 163, 220, 231, 248-49, 
254, 255, 263, 267, 274, 437 
Slavophiles—  413,  417 
Slavs—11,  14, 196, 341, 411, 560 Socialisation of the means of production— 
182-83,  426, 427, 436-39, 605 
Socialism (theories and trends)—113, 
278-90, 325, 375, 406, 428, 433, 518, 
597-616 
—Utopian—122, 516-17, 599 
—bourgeois—427, 433, 517 
—petty-bourgeois—325, 375, 427-28, 
433 
—state—283 
—scientific—118-19, 122, 307, 318-
19, 321, 322, 330, 381-84, 403-04, 
406,  426, 427, 438-39, 441-42, 
515-20, 599-602, 607-09 
—in England—279-81 
—in Germany—427, 442, 471-72 
See also Armchair socialism; Babouv-
ism; Blanquism, Blanquists; Fourier-
ism, Fourierists; Lassalleanism, Lassal-
leans; League of the Just; Outlaws' 
League ; Owenism, Owenists ; 
Proudhonism, Proudhonists  ; Saint-
Simonism, Saint-Simonists  ; Weitling-
ianism, Weitlingians 
Socialist Labor Party of North America— 
(from 1876)—434, 437, 439-42 
Socialist movement, international (after 
the First International)—330, 406-
07, 416-17, 425-27, 437-39, 442, 516 
Social labour—262 
Social relations—162, 181, 275, 287, 
317, 327, 360, 381, 435-36, 559, 598 
Social system—  60, 78, 118, 132, 267, 
288-89, 517, 602, 607 
Société des saisons (Paris, 1837)—313, 
316 
Society—118-19, 132, 152, 155, 157, 
162, 166, 170, 174, 175, 189,  200-01, 
206, 217-18, 222, 245, 256, 269-76, 
300, 318, 323, 372, 391-92, 401, 404, 
426,  437, 438, 547, 553, 608, 614-15 
—gentile—204, 214, 268, 517 
—primitive—16, 145, 164-65, 181-
83, 203, 204, 517 
—slave-holding—149, 212-16, 219, 
231, 261, 263, 267-69, 274, 393, 
602 
—feudal—60, 78, 255, 343, 376, 
. 395, 500, 556-65, 597-98 
—bourgeois—118, 132, 178, 286, 
288-89, 306, 327, 377, 380, 389-90, 
396, 403, 434-36, 517, 524 

=====第792页=====
764 Subject Index 
See also Organisation of social labour 
and production; Social labour; Social 
relations; Social system 
Space and time—370 
Spain—8, 9, 11, 161, 247, 308, 555, 
558, 564 
Sparta—171-72, 176, 201 
State property—  224,  231, 323, 426-27, 
438, 579 
State, the 
—as superstructure—59-62, 71-79, 
318, 391-92 
—and society—132, 166, 201, 206, 
213, 214, 217-18, 221, 222, 245, 
267-72,  275, 318, 377, 391-93, 450, 
559, 598 
—and mode of production—521-22 
—origin of—132, 201-02, 211-12, 
230, 245, 263-64, 267-72, 392-93, 
559-60 
—and consolidation of nations—559-
61, 564 
—eastern—59 
—slave-holding—30-31,  208-09, 213, 
215, 217-22, 224, 268-71 
—feudal—59-62, 73-79, 254-55, 271, 
560-63 
—bourgeois—270-72, 390-92, 598 
See also Court, judicial system; Democ­
racy, ancient (social and political sys­
tem);  Dictatorship of the proletariat; 
Police; State property 
Stock Exchange—  272,  296, 380, 399-
400,  461 
Stoicism, stoics—113, 394 
Suebi (ancient Germans)—11-15, 18, 
20, 32, 49-54, 196, 236, 241 
Suffrage—211,  272, 323, 407, 461, 546, 
566, 569 
Sugambri (ancient Germans)—18-21, 
23, 26, 28, 29, 53, 55 
Surplus value—  281,  282, 401, 608-14 
Sweden—18, 35, 37-39, 56, 442, 554 
Switzerland—  7, 124, 308, 314, 395, 418, 
458, 494, 522, 525, 554, 563 
System—140-42, 357, 360-65, 369, 370, 
382, 385-86, 397, 470, 535-36 
T 
Taxes—  270,  323, 504, 557 
Terrorism— 292-94 
Teutonic Order—342 Teutons—10, 11, 14, 48-49, 236 
Theology—  395,  597, 598 
Theory and practice—114, 121, 142, 184, 
188, 279-83, 288-90, 299, 312-20, 
322, 359, 361, 363-64, 367-68, 371-
72, 380-82, 393, 397, 404, 427, 439, 
442, 455, 466, 512, 518, 584, 598, 
600, 601, 605, 607 
Theory of evolution—  371,  372, 385-86, 
612 
"Thing-in-itself"  (Kant)—367 
Thinking, thought—138, 187, 221, 283-
85, 359-62, 364-73, 377, 383-84, 394, 
397, 597, 620 
Thirty Years' War, 1618-48—Mb, 429, 
451, 459, 491 
Town and country—  24, 33, 36, 139, 185, 
209, 217, 253, 262-65, 267, 275, 298, 
309, 342, 393, 395, 424, 493, 553-57, 
559, 560, 598 
Trade, commerce—13, 33-40, 44, 60, 
186, 213-15, 219-20, 222, 243, 248, 
263, 265-67, 399, 456-57, 522-24, 
527-35,  547-48, 557 
Trade unions in England—298, 515, 
543-44, 626 
Trade unions, trade union movement— 
298, 325 
See also Trade unions in England 
Transport—212, 323, 524-25 
Tribe(s)—  8-11,  13-18, 46-57,  139-41, 
142, 152, 156, 165, 185, 196-204, 
208-12,  223, 224, 228, 232, 256, 259, 
263, 269 
Truck system—400, 402 
"True socialism"—320, 365 
Trusts and rings—  531,  533, 549-50 
Truth—  283,  301, 359-62, 384, 404, 480 
Tsarism, autocracy in Russia—414-15 
Turkey—410-12, 415 
U 
Unevenness of capitalist development— 
288, 401, 533-35 
United Labor Party (USA)—435-37 
United States of America, the—270-72, 
308, 402-03, 434-37, 439, 525-27, 
529-30, 533-34, 581-82, 602 
See also New  York;  Trusts and rings; 
Working-class and socialist movement— 
in the USA 

=====第793页=====
Subject Index 765 
Usury, usurers—  215,  219, 248, 266, 274, 
432, 558 
V 
Value— 279-84, 286, 288, 429-30, 605, 
609-10 
Vienna Congress of 1814-15—410, 455, 
459 
Vindili—17, 47 
W 
Wage labour—183, 271, 274, 289, 536, 
600,  603 
Wales—  232-33,  235 
War of Austrian Succession, 1740-48— 
459-60, 469 
War of Bavarian Succession, 1778-79— 
458 
War (s)—496 
—between tribes—198, 203, 212, 
256 
—in slave-holding society—30, 37, 
261, 264 
—in feudal society—67, 555, 556, 
569-62,  565 
—in capitalist society—307, 443-44, 
450-51,  580 
—and revolution—415-17, 456, 592 
See also Austro-Italo-French war, 
1859; Austro-Prussian war, 1866; Cri­
mean war, 1853-56; Danish-Prussian 
war, 1848-50; Danish war, 1864; 
Franco-Prussian war, 1870-71; 
Hundred Years' War, 1337-1453; 
Italian wars, 1494-1559; Military art; 
Napoleonic wars; Peasant war in Ger­
many, 1524-25; Seven Years' War, 
1756-63;  Thirty Years' War, 1618-48; 
War of Austrian Succession, 1740-48; 
War of Bavarian Succession, 1778-79; 
Wars of the First French Republic (late 
18th-early 19th cent.) 
Wars of the First French Republic (late 
18th-early 19th cent.)—462, 492, 
493 
Wealth—132, 139, 262-63, 267-68, 275, 
337, 536 
Weitlingianism, Weitlingians—279, 315, 
316, 317, 319-20, 326, 517 Westphalia—  32, 97, 428, 469 
Will—187, 264, 275, 333-34, 373, 387, 
391, 476, 478, 480 
Workers' aristocracy—299-301, 403, 626 
Workers' Party of France— 333-34, 407, 
415-17 
Working class—118, 121, 272, 317, 319, 
322, 329, 330, 365, 390, 401, 404, 
424-25,  432-33, 435, 438, 440, 456, 
500, 515-18, 535, 536, 550, 599-600, 
602 
—in Britain—296-301, 389, 400, 626 
—in France—122, 125, 271, 303, 
389, 456, 472, 512 
—in Germany—121-22, 305-06, 317-
18, 329-30, 407, 428, 431-32, 472, 
476, 500, 502, 539, 541 
—in Italy^-463 
—in Prussia—305 
—in the USA—402-03, 434-37, 
439-40 
Working-class and socialist movement— 
120, 128, 313, 316, 318, 321-22, 391, 
404, 406, 425, 435-37,  439-41,  455-
56, 512, 515, 517, 599-600 
—in Austria—543 
—in Belgium—426, 442 
—in Britain—299, 432, 545, 626 
—in Denmark—442 
—in France—303, 313, 316, 409, 442, 
546 
—in Germany—122, 305-06, 312, 
314, 315, 317, 319, 325, 328-30, 
397-98,  407, 418, 428, 432, 472, 
476, 499, 502,  539-41,  546, 580 
—in Holland—442 
—in Hungary—543 
—in Ireland—626 
—in Italy—426 
—in Portugal—442 
—in Spain—442, 544 
—in Sweden—442 
—in Switzerland—314, 320, 442 
—in the USA—402-03, 434-41 
See also Chartism, Chartist movement; 
Communist League; German Social-
Democracy; German Workers' Society in 
Brussels (from 1847); Ideological strug­
gle in the working-class movement; In­
ternational Working Men's Association 
(First International); Knights of Labor 
(USA);  League of the Just; Paris Com-

=====第794页=====
766 Subject Index 
mune of 1871; Possibilist Paris Congress 
(1889);  Socialist Labor Party of North 
America (from 1876); Société des 
saisons (Paris, 1837); United Labor 
Party (USA); Workers' Party of France 
World (philos.)— 366-70, 374, 377, 381 
World  market—  296,  300,  429-31,  457, 
522-34, 536 World  outlook—  328,  369, 383, 475, 519-
20, 597-98, 607 
See also Idealism; Materialism 
Writing—40, 43 
Y 
Young Hegelianism— 3 63 -64 

=====第795页=====
767 
GLOSSARY OF GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES' 
Abyssinia Ethiopia 
Adrianople Edirne 
Aix Aix-en-
Provence 
Aliso Alise-Sainte-
Reine 
Bardengau Lüneburger 
Heide 
Bardenwik  Bardowick 
Barmen Wuppertal 
Becva  Beczwa 
Bohemian Forest Sumava, 
Cesky Les 
Branibor  Brandenburg 
Breslau  Wroclaw 
Britlinga  Brietlingen 
Bromberg  Bydgoszcz 
Castrop  Castrop-
Rauxel 
Constantinople Istanbul 
Crastlingi  Krassum 
Crettenach Crettnach 
Cyrene  Cyrenaica 
Danzig Gdansk 
Drontheim Trondheim 
Edingahûsun  Edemissen 
Ems Bad Ems Etsch  Adige 
Fiume  Rijeka 
(Rieka) 
Frisches Haft Zalew 
Wislany 
Glogau  Glogôw 
(Glogow) 
Gravelingen Gravelines 
Greifswalde  Greifswald 
Guyana  Guiana 
Havana Habana 
Hai Halle 
Haspelscheid  Haspeischeidt 
Homburg Bad Hom­
burg vor der 
Höhe 
Horsadal Roßtal 
Jaxartes  Syr Darya 
Karninschesberg  Kaninchen­
berg 
Kerprich  Kerprich-
Hemmers-
dorf 
Königgrätz Hradec 
Krâlové 
Lestines Estinnes du 
Mont 
a This glossary includes geographical names occurring in Engels' articles in the 
form customary in the press of the time but differing from the national names or 
from those given in modern maps. The left column gives geographical names as 
used in the original; the right column gives corresponding names as used on 
modern maps and in modern literature.— Ed. 

=====第796页=====
768 Glossary of Geographical Names 
Lower Silesia Dolny Slask 
Lützelstein  La Petite-
Pierre 
March Morava 
Massel  Maslow 
Mederiacum Brück 
Memel Neman 
Merzig Messancy 
Montabaurer Höhe Montabaurer 
Wald 
Mülhausen Mulhouse 
Neufahrwasser  Nowy Port 
Nimwegen  Nijmegen 
Oberbarmen Wuppertal 
Oesel Saaremaa 
Olandsund Kalmar 
Sound (Kal­
marsund) 
Olmütz Olomouc 
Otlinga Ötlingen 
Oxus  Amu Darya Pillau Baltiisk 
Pomerania  Pomorze 
Reekheim  Reckheim 
Riesengebirge Karkonosze 
Saarburg Sarrebourg 
St. Petersburg  Leningrad 
Silesia Slask, Slezsko 
Sinkfal  De Honte or 
Wester-
schelde 
Soonwald  Soon Wald 
Stedieraburg Steterburg 
Taschberg Moor Thorsbjerger 
Moor 
Tilsit  Sovetsk 
Thebes Thivai 
(Thevai) 
Trebnitz Trzebnica 
Troy Ilium 
Upper Silesia Görny Slask 
Widau  Wied Au 

=====第797页=====
