MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 24
Marx and Engels 1874-83    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_24.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:38]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
24 
Marx and Engels 1874-83
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me24.htm [09/12/2010 15:20:15]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-968-6 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
Contents 
Preface XIII 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
May 1874-May 1883 
1. F. Engels. Refugee Literature 3 
I. A Polish Proclamation 5 
II. Programme of the Blanquist Commune Refugees 12 
III 19 
IV 29 
V. On Social Relations in Russia 39 
2. K. Marx. Epilogue to Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial 
in Cologne 51 
3. K. Marx and F. Engels. For Poland 55 
4. F. Engels. Semi-Official War-Cries 59 
5. F. Engels. Letter to August Bebel. March 18-28, 1875 67 
6. K. Marx. Critique of the Gotha Programme 75 
Letter to Wilhelm Bracke. May 5, 1875 77 
Marginal Notes on the Programme of the German Workers' 
Party, 81 
1 81 
II 91 
III 93 
IV 94 
7. F. Engels. Introduction to the Pamphlet On Social Relations in 
Russia 100 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
8. F. Engels. Letter to the General Council of the International 
Working Men's Association in New York 105 
9. F. Engels. Speech at the Meeting Held to Commemorate the 
Anniversary of the Polish Uprising of 1863 107 
10. F. Engels. Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 109 
I Ill 
II 122 
11. F. Engels. Wilhelm Wolff 129 
1 132 
II 136 
III 140 
IV 144 
V 147 
VI 150 
VII 155 
VIII 158 
IX 162 
X 166 
XI 169 
12. F. Engels. Letter to Enrico Bignami on the German Elections of 
1877 172 
13. F. Engels. From Italy 174 
14. F. Engels. British Agricultural Labourers Want to Participate in 
the Political Life of Their Country 179 
15. F. Engels. British Agricultural Union and the Collectivist Move­
ment in the Countryside 181 
16. F. Engels. Karl Marx 183 
17. K. Marx. Letter to Otechestvenniye Zapiski 196 
18. K. Marx. To an Editorial Board in London 202 
19. F. Engels. On the Socialist Movement in Germany, France, the 
United States and Russia 203 
20. F. Engels. The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 207 
1 209 
II 213 
III 216 
IV 221 
V. (Conclusion) 226 
21. K. MarxandF. Engels. Herr Bucher  230 
22. K. Marx. Reply to Bucher's "Declaration" 232 
23. K. Marx. Mr. George Howell's History of the International 
Working-Men's Association 234 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
24. K. Marx. The Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law 
(Outline of an Article) 240 
25. F. Engels. The Anti-Socialist Law in Germany.—The Situation 
in Russia 251 
26. K. Marx and F. Engels. Circular Letter to August Bebel, Wilhelm 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm Bracke and Others 253 
I. The Negotiations with Carl Hirsch 253 
II. The Proposed Stance of the Paper 259 
III. The Manifesto of the Zurich Trio 262 
27. K. Marx and F. Engels. About Karl Blind 270 
28. F. Engels. The Socialism of Mr. Bismarck 272 
I. The Customs Tariff 272 
II. The State Railways 277 
29. F. Engels. Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 281 
1 285 
II 298 
III 306 
30. K. Marx. Note on The Poverty of  Philosophy  326 
31. K. Marx. Workers' Questionnaire 328 
1 328 
II 329 
III 330 
IV 333 
32. K. Marx. Introduction to the French Edition of Engels' Social­
ism: Utopian and Scientific 335 
33. K. Marx. Preamble to the Programme of the French Workers' 
Party 340 
34. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Meeting in Geneva Held to 
Commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the Polish Revolution of 
1830 343 
35. K. Marx. Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 346 
First Draft 346 
Second Draft 360 
Third Draft 364 
36. K. Marx. Letter to Vera Zasulich 370 
37. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Chairman of the Slavonic 
Meeting, March 21st 1881, in Celebration of the Anniversary of 
the Paris Commune 372 
38. K. Marx and F. Engels. To the Editor of The Daily News 374 
39. F. Engels. A Fair Day's Wages for a Fair Day's Work 376 
40. F. Engels. The Wages System 379 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
41. F. Engels. Trades Unions  382 
1 382 
II 385 
42. F. Engels. The French Commercial Treaty  389 
43. F. Engels. Two Model Town Councils  394 
44. F. Engels. American Food and the Land Question 397 
45. F. Engels. The Wages Theory of the Anti-Corn Law League 400 
46. F. Engels. A Working Men's Party 404 
47. F. Engels. Bismarck and the German Working Men's Party 407 
48. F. Engels. To the Editor of the Freiheit  410 
49. F. Engels. Cotton and Iron 411 
50. F. Engels. Social Classes—Necessary and Superfluous 415 
51. F. Engels. Draft for the Speech over the Grave of Jenny Marx ... 419 
52. F. Engels. Jenny Marx, née von Westphalen 422 
53. K. Marx and F. Engels. Preface to the Second Russian Edition of 
the Manifesto of the Communist Party 425 
54. F. Engels. Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity 427 
55. F. Engels. The Vicar of Bray 436 
56. F. Engels. The Mark 439 
57. F. Engels. Preface to the First German Edition of Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific 457 
58. F. Engels. Jenny Longuet, née Marx 460 
59. F. Engels. To the New Yorker Volkszeitung  462 
60. F. Engels. Draft of a Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx 463 
61. F. Engels. Karl Marx's Funeral 467 
62. F. Engels. To the Editors of the New Yorker Volkszeitung  472 
63. F. Engels. On the Death of Karl Marx 473 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
1. K. Marx. Notes on Bakunin's Book Statehood and Anarchy 485 
2. F. Engels. Note on Page 29 of the Histoire de la Commune 527 
3. K. Marx. Marginal Notes on Adolph Wagner's Lehrbuch der 
politischen Oekonomie  531 
APPENDICES 
1. Declaration by Karl Marx on His Naturalisation in England  563 
2. Speeches by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels at the Meeting 
Held to Celebrate the 36th Anniversary of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London, February 7, 1876 565 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
3. Frederick Engels' Notice on the Death of His Wife, Lydia 
Burns 567 
4. Account of Karl Marx's Interview with the Chicago Tribune 
Correspondent 568 
5. Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant Duff's Account of a Talk with 
Karl Marx (from a Letter to Crown Princess Victoria) 580 
6. Account of an Interview of Karl Marx with John Swinton, 
Correspondent of The Sun 583 
7. Statement on the Closure of L'Egalité  586 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 589 
Name Index 671 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 704 
Index of Periodicals 726 
Subject Index 732 
Glossary of Geographical Names 743 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
The first page of Marx's Critique of the Gotha Programme 79 
The title-page of Engels' pamphlet On Social Relations in Russia, 
Leipzig, 1875 101 
The title-page of the Volks-Kalender, Brunswick, 1878 185 
The first page of Marx's "Letter to Otechestvenniye ZapiskV 197 
A page of the "Circular Letter to August Bebel, Wilhelm 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm Bracke and Others" by Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels 255 
The title-page of the authorised English edition of Engels' Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific 283 
The first page of Marx's "Introduction to the French Edition of 
Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific" 337 
L'Égalité, No. 24, June 30, 1880, containing Marx's "Preamble to 
the Programme of the French Workers' Party" 341 
A page of the first draft of Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich 347 
A page of Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 13, March 22, 1883, contain­
ing Engels' article "Karl Marx's Funeral" 465 
Part of a page from Marx's "Notes on Bakunin's Book Statehood and 
Anarchy" 489 

=====第8页=====

=====第9页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
DAVID FORGACS: Works 12, 14, 15, 19, 25 
RODNEY and KRYSTYNA LIVINGSTONE: From the 
Preparatory Materials 1 
PETER and BETTY ROSS: Works 5, 6 (Letter to 
Wilhelm Bracke), 18, 24, 26, 48, 59, 62; Ap­
pendix 3 
BARRIE SELMAN: Works 1 (I, III, IV), 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11, 17, 
28, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 52, 55; From the Preparatory 
Materials 2, 3; Appendices 2, 7 
JOAN and TREVOR WALMSLEY: Works 7, 10, 22 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
XIII 
Preface 
Volume 24 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels covers the period between May 1874 and May 1883. 
These years were an important stage in the development of the 
international working-class movement that began after the Paris 
Commune of 1871. The Paris Commune enriched the proletariat 
with the invaluable experience of class struggle, but at the same 
time demonstrated that the objective and subjective conditions for 
the transfer of power to the working people were not yet ripe and, 
above all, that there was a lack of independent mass proletarian 
parties armed with the theory of scientific socialism and capable of 
leading the working class in the struggle for the radical 
transformation of society. After the defeat of the Commune the 
working class was faced with the task of rallying its forces and 
preparing for new revolutionary battles, and the need to form 
proletarian parties in individual countries came to the fore. The 
period of the spread of Marxism began, a "period ... of the 
formation, growth and maturing of mass socialist parties with a 
proletarian class composition" (V.l. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 19, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1980, pp. 295-96). 
In the works in this volume Marx and Engels continue their 
analysis of the historical experience of the International Working 
Men's Association and the Paris Commune. They show that, in the 
new historical conditions, the organisational form of the Interna­
tional no longer corresponded to the aims of the proletariat's class 
struggle. Thanks to the International, the understanding of the 
idea of proletarian internationalism and the unity of the working 
class's aims and tasks had risen to a new level. "The social 
democratic working-men's parties," Marx wrote, "organised on 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
more or less national dimensions ... form as many international 
groups, no longer single sections thinly scattered through different 
countries and held together by an eccentric General Council, but 
the working masses themselves in continuous, active, direct 
intercourse, cemented by exchange of thought, mutual services, 
and common aspiration" (see this volume, p. 239). Marx and Engels 
skilfully related the tasks of the workers' parties in separate 
countries to the aims of the whole international working-class 
movement. 
The formation of the socialist parties took place at a time of 
bitter ideological struggle waged by the representatives of the 
Marxist trend against alien class influences and petty-bourgeois 
views,  fostered by the socially heterogeneous composition of the 
working class, and against reformist, opportunist and anarchist 
trends in the working-class movement  itself.  The fight for 
ideological unity on the basis of scientific socialism forms the main 
substance of Marx's and Engels' theoretical and practical activities 
as leaders of the international working-class movement in the 
period under review. 
London, where Marx and Engels were living at that time, was 
still the ideological centre of the international working-class 
movement. Prominent figures in the workers' parties appealed to 
Marx and Engels, as acknowledged authorities, for help and 
advice. Their correspondence, their contributions to the working-
class press, the publication of their new and republication of their 
old works, propagated the ideas of Marxism in the international 
working-class movement. 
The experience of the Paris Commune called for a thorough­
going elaboration of the problems of the state and revolution, the 
fundamental propositions of Marxism on the dictatorship of the 
proletariat and the role of the party, and the problem of what 
allies the proletariat should have in the fight for the radical 
transformation of society. Of prime importance was the task of 
providing an integral and systematic exposition of Marxism, 
defending its theoretical principles, revealing the universal charac­
ter of its dialectical method, and teaching revolutionary socialists 
how to apply the theory creatively, how to work out scientific 
programmes and tactics for their parties and rebuff the oppo­
nents of Marxism. 
The present volume includes a considerable number of works 
written by Marx and Engels specifically for the German pro-

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
letariat. This was explained by the fact that during the Franco-
Prussian war (1870-71) the centre of the European workers' move­
ment had been shifted from France to Germany (p. 211). As 
Engels wrote, "the German workers' position in the van of the 
European movement rests essentially on their genuinely interna­
tional attitude during the war" (p. 68). Analysis of the achieve­
ments and mistakes of German Social-Democracy enabled Marx 
and Engels to examine the general problems of the theory and 
tactics of the whole international working-class movement. Indis­
putably, the most important of their works on this subject are 
Marx's Critique of the Gotha Programme and Engels' letter to Bebel 
of March 18-28, 1875, both responses to the draft programme for 
the Gotha Congress. This congress united the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party of Germany (Eisenachers), the first mass party 
based on the principles of the First International and led by 
August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht, and the General Associa­
tion of German Workers led by followers of Ferdinand Lassalle. 
Marx and Engels had maintained that this union should have 
taken place only if the Lassallean leaders were ready "to abandon 
their sectarian slogans and their state aid, and to accept in its 
essentials the Eisenach Programme of 1869 or an improved 
edition of it adapted to the present day. Our party has absolutely 
nothing to learn from the Lassalleans in the theoretical sphere" (see 
Engels' letter to August Bebel of March 18-28, 1875; this volume, 
p. 67). 
Marx and Engels saw the draft of the Gotha programme as an 
unacceptable ideological concession and surrender to Lassallean-
ism. They regarded as totally inadmissible the inclusion in the 
programme of the proposition that in relation to the working class 
all other classes were reactionary and of the "iron law of wages", 
which was founded on false theoretical premisses (pp. 68-69). They 
also condemned the programme's virtual rejection of "the principle 
that the workers' movement is an international one" (p. 68), the 
brushing aside of the problem of the trade unions, and much else. 
They argued cogently that these propositions, by dragging the party 
backwards in the theoretical sphere, would do grave harm to the 
German workers' movement. In his letter to Bebel, Engels stressed 
that "a new programme is after all a banner planted in public, and 
the outside world judges the party by it" (p. 72). The Gotha 
programme, he showed, was a step backwards in comparison with 
the Eisenach programme. 
Critical analysis of the draft Gotha programme gave Marx a 
handle for expounding his views on the crucial theoretical 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
questions of scientific socialism on the basis of his previous 
socio-economic research and, above all, on Capital The Critique 
of the Gotha Programme is mainly concerned with the Marxist 
theory of the state and socialist revolution. In contrast to the 
Gotha programme, in which the state was treated "as an in­
dependent entity" (p. 94), Marx revealed the class, exploitative 
nature of the bourgeois state. He also examined the role of the 
state after the victory of the socialist revolution and stressed that a 
relatively long period would inevitably be required to carry out the 
immense creative work of the revolutionary remoulding of society. 
"Between capitalist and communist society lies the period of the 
revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. 
Corresponding to this is also a political transition period in which the 
state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of  the proletariat" 
(p. 95). 
In his Critique of the Gotha Programme Marx elaborated new 
aspects of the theory of the future communist society as a social 
formation developing according to its objective laws. It was here 
that he first set forth the proposition on the two phases of 
communist society, the two stages of the great transformative 
process embracing the sphere of production and production 
relations, the distribution of material goods, people's political and 
intellectual life, morality and the right. In the first phase, under 
socialism, we have to deal with a society "just as it emerges from 
capitalist society, which is thus in every respect, economically, 
morally and intellectually, still stamped with the birth-marks of the 
old society" (p. 85). 
Marx criticised the Lassallean thesis of the programme that 
under socialism every worker would possess the total product of 
his labour, the "undiminished proceeds of labour" (p. 84). He 
pointed out that even after the abolition of private property in the 
means of production, before becoming available for individual 
consumption the total social product would have to reimburse the 
funds set aside for the replacement of the means of production, for 
its further expansion, and for public needs. The first phase of 
communism presupposes the equality of the members of society 
only in the sense of their equal relationship to the means of 
production that have become public property, their equal obliga­
tion to work, and their equal rights to various social goods and 
services. This form of distribution embodies the social justice of 
the socialist society: "The individual producer receives back from 
society—after the deductions have been made—exactly what he 
gives to it" (p. 86). 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
Only at the next stage, with its very high development of all the 
productive forces and of the productivity of social labour, would 
radical changes take place in people's material standard of living, 
in their labour conditions and consciousness. Marx draws a picture 
of communist society in which the individual, freed of the struggle 
for his daily bread and fear of the future, will be able to realise all 
the abilities of his personality, its harmonious development, and be 
able to shed the possessive instincts and nationalist prejudices 
inbred by centuries. "Only then," Marx wrote, "can the narrow 
horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society 
inscribe on its banners: From each according to his abilities, to each 
according to his needs!" (p. 87). 
The Critique of the Gotha Programme was aimed not only against 
Lassalleanism, against opportunist trends in the German working-
class movement, but also against vulgar socialism as a whole. It 
exposed its inherent basic methodological defect—failure to 
understand the determining role of social production, the desire 
to shift the centre of gravity, both in criticism of the existing 
society and in projects for social transformation, into the sphere of 
distribution. "The vulgar socialists ... have taken over from the 
bourgeois economists the consideration and treatment of distribu­
tion as independent of the mode of production and hence the 
presentation of socialism as turning principally on distribution" 
(p. 88). 
The rapid growth of Social-Democracy's influence in Germany, 
its sweeping advance among the mass of the German workers, and 
the successes of the Socialist Workers' Party at the elections to the 
Reichstag (see pp. 250, 251), were a cause of grave concern to 
Bismarck. On October 19, 1878, using as a pretext two attempts 
on the life of William I, in which the Social-Democrats were in no 
way involved, the government passed a "Law against the Harmful 
and Dangerous Aspirations of Social-Democracy", which remained 
in force right up to 1890. This so-called Exceptional Law Against the 
Socialists, better known as the Anti-Socialist Law, virtually proscribed 
the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany. 
In September 1878, even before the law was introduced, on the 
basis of the minutes of the Reichstag sitting at which the 
government Bill was debated, Marx outlined an exposé entitled 
"The Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law" in which he 
resolutely repudiates the reactionaries' attempts to accuse rev­
olutionary Social-Democracy of terrorism and identify it with the 
anarchistic elements; he unmasks the provocative police methods 
Bismarck's government resorted to in the Reichstag to cast a 
2-1317 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
veneer of legality over its actions. "Indeed," Marx wrote, "the 
government is seeking to suppress by force a development it 
dislikes but cannot lawfully attack" (p. 249). 
In this article Marx poses the question of the dialectical 
relationship between the peaceful and non-peaceful forms of the 
proletariat's struggle. He emphasises that in countries where the 
conditions are favourable the working class can count on the 
peaceful acquisition of power. But even in this case it must be 
aware that this peaceful path may be blocked by forces "interested 
in restoring the former state of affairs" (p. 248). The choice of path, 
peaceful or non-peaceful, is determined not by the subjective 
desires of the movement's leaders or their doctrines but by the 
line-up of class forces, the behaviour of the ruling class, the form 
in which it resists the maturing social changes. "An historical 
development," Marx writes, "can remain 'peaceful' only for so 
long as its progress is not forcibly obstructed by those wielding 
social power at the time" (ibid.). 
At a difficult time for the German Social-Democrats, Marx and 
Engels helped them to find new forms of activity, to evolve a 
correct tactical line. A special role was played by the "Circular Letter 
to August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Wilhelm Bracke and others", 
written by Marx and Engels in September 1879. This is one of the 
key documents of Marxism against opportunism in the working-class 
movement. Marx and Engels sharply criticised the opportunist 
programme of the party's reformist wing (the so-called Manifesto 
of the Zurich Trio — Karl Höchberg, Eduard Bernstein and Karl 
Schramm). These are, the Circular Letter said, "the representatives 
of the petty bourgeoisie, terrified lest the proletariat, impelled by its 
revolutionary situation, should 'go too far'. Instead of resolute 
political opposition—general conciliation; instead of a struggle 
against government and bourgeoisie—an attempt to win them over 
and talk them round; instead of defiant resistance to maltreatment 
from above—humble subjection and the admission that the 
punishment was deserved" (p. 267). 
In a situation when Marxism had begun to spread widely in the 
mass working-class movement, its ideological opponents no longer 
dared openly to declare themselves its adversaries. Instead they 
tried to revise Marxism from within, by peddling an eclectic 
hotch-potch of vulgar materialist, idealistic and pseudo-socialist 
views as scientific socialism. The Circular Letter was designed to 
scotch this danger. It exposes the class and ideological roots of 
opportunism and proves the need to clear the ground of them. 
Marx and Engels noted that this phenomenon was due to the 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
influence of the petty bourgeoisie on the proletariat, the penetra­
tion of non-proletarian ideology into the working-class movement. 
Repudiation of the class struggle against the bourgeoisie was being 
preached under the flag of Marxism. "On paper," the Circular 
Letter stated, "it is recognised because there is no denying it any 
longer, but in practice it is glossed over, suppressed, emasculated" 
(p. 267). The authors of the letter urged the German Social-
Democrats to dissociate themselves from the "adulterating ele­
ment" in the workers' party (p. 269) and to strengthen its class 
character. "For almost 40 years," Marx and Engels wrote, "we 
have emphasised that the class struggle is the immediate motive 
force of history and, in particular, that the class struggle between 
bourgeoisie and proletariat is the great lever of modern social 
revolution; hence we cannot possibly co-operate with men 
who seek to eliminate that class struggle from the movement" 
(p. 269). 
As Marx and Engels stressed, with the Anti-Socialist Law in 
operation the position of the party organ became especially 
important. It should "crowd on sail" (p. 262), educating the 
proletarian masses in the spirit of revolutionary class struggle, 
defending the interests of the working class. The working-class 
party could play its vanguard role only if it clearly understood the 
revolutionary aims of the proletarian movement, and remained 
unshakeably loyal to them. 
Under a regime of police terror the party must learn to combine 
legal and illegal forms of struggle, to use the parliamentary 
platform, to work out a consistently class-oriented stand for the 
Social-Democratic group in the Reichstag, and to maintain strict 
party discipline. Marx and Engels warned the party of the danger 
of the "parliamentary disease" (p. 261). Triumphs in parliamentary 
elections, as Engels wrote in his article "The Anti-Socialist Law in 
Germany.—The Situation in Russia", had "made some people 
believe that it was no longer necessary to do anything else in order 
to obtain the final victory of the proletariat" (p. 251). 
The articles Marx and Engels contributed to the workers' press 
did much to spread the ideas of proletarian internationalism and 
the revolutionary theory of class struggle, and to strengthen the 
ideological platform of the Social-Democratic parties which were 
being set up. They also enhanced their prestige as the acknowl­
edged leaders of the international working-class movement and 
strengthened their personal ties with the leaders of various parties. 
In these years, as Marx's health declined, this journalistic work fell 
more and more on Engels. 
2* 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
Especially important were Engels' contributions to the German 
workers' newspapers, the organs of the German Social-Democratic 
Party, Der Volksstaat, Vorwärts, Die Neue Welt, and from 1881 to 
Der Sozialdemokrat, and others. Expressing a standpoint he shared 
with Marx, Engels actively opposed all attempts to identify 
Social-Democracy with the anarchist trends existing in one or 
another guise in the German and international working-class 
movement. Both men set out to explode the false thesis that the 
very doctrine of scientific socialism prompted people to commit 
excesses and terrorist acts and inclined them towards voluntarist 
decisions. In Refugee Literature, which opens the present volume, 
Engels made a detailed study of the programme drawn up by 
Blanquists forced to emigrate after the Commune. He took apart 
their thesis that a revolution could be made by an insignificant 
minority "according to a plan worked out in advance", and that it 
could begin "at any time" (p. 14). Emphasising that one could not 
"play at revolution", he countered the Blanquists' misconceived 
thesis on the ruling out of compromises. Engels wrote with irony: 
"They imagine that, as soon as they have only the good will to 
jump over intermediate stations and compromises, everything is 
assured" (p. 17). In his own name and that of Marx he was equally 
firm in condemning the sectarian-anarchist trends that had 
emerged among the German Social-Democrats since the introduc­
tion of the Anti-Socialist Law, and that were most patently 
expressed in the statements of Johann Most and the London 
émigré paper, Freiheit, which Most had founded (pp. 478-79). 
In his works "Semi-Official War-Cries", Prussian Schnapps in the 
German Reichstag and "The Vicar of Bray", Engels showed the 
reactionary aggressive character of Bismarck's empire, the socio­
economic roots of the political influence wielded by the Prussian 
"Schnapps-Junkers" and Prussian militarism (see p. 124). Engels' 
series of articles on Wilhelm  Wolff,  the closest friend and associate 
of Marx and Engels, Marx's epilogue to the second edition of 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne, and the 
speeches by Marx and Engels on February 7, 1876 at the German 
Workers' Educational Society in London, acquainted the new 
generation of workers with the history and revolutionary traditions 
of Germany's proletarian movement. 
Besides the articles about Wilhelm  Wolff,  Engels' essay The 
Mark, which showed the evolution of agrarian relations in 
Germany from the ancient community (the mark) up to the 1870s, 
was of great importance for determining the tactics of the 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party with regard to the German 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
peasantry. Engels here traced the main stages in the 
transformation of the peasants from free members of the 
communities into serfs, and exposed the true nature of the 
half-hearted reforms introduced in Germany in the first half of 
the nineteenth century (see pp. 454-55). He stressed that the 
small-scale peasant farming had become "a method of production 
more and more antiquated, less and less capable of yielding a 
livelihood" (p. 455). For the peasantry the future lay in reviving the 
mark, "not in its old, outdated form, but in a rejuvenated form", 
that would enable the peasants to use the advantages of large-scale 
farming and modern machinery, but "without capitalists by the 
community  itself"  (p. 456). In this the peasants would find their 
natural allies in the workers and the proletarian party (ibid.). 
Marx and Engels contributed to the French socialist newspaper, 
L'Égalité, founded in 1877 on the initiative of Jules Guesde. In 
March 1880 it printed two articles by Engels entitled "The 
Socialism of Mr. Bismarck", attacking social demagoguery of the 
Bonapartist variety. With specific examples from Bismarck's 
policies, Engels demonstrated the illusory nature of the ideas of 
state socialism current among some of the French socialists, their 
belief that the bourgeois state could carry through social reforms 
affecting the bedrock of bourgeois relations. 
The theoretical section of the programme of the French 
Workers' Party formulated by Marx at the request of the French 
socialists ("Preamble to the Programme of the French Workers' 
Party") was of particular significance. The party was founded in 
October 1879 at a constituent congress in Marseilles. This 
preamble, published not only in L'Egalité, but in a number of 
other papers, contained, as Marx put it in a letter to Friedrich 
Adolf Sorge on November 5, 1880, "a definition of the 
Communist aim" (see present edition, Vol. 46). The preamble 
regarded the emancipation of the proletariat as "that of all human 
beings without distinction of sex or race". In setting the workers 
the task of taking over the means of production and bringing 
them into collective ownership Marx stressed that "this collective 
appropriation can only spring from the revolutionary action of the 
producing class—or proletariat—organised as an independent 
political party" (p. 340). 
The development of theory in the French socialist movement 
was deeply influenced by a work written by Engels at the request 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
of Paul Lafargue, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, which Marx 
described as an "introduction to scientific socialism" (p. 339). First 
published in the French magazine La Revue  socialiste,  it was issued 
in the same year 1880 as a separate edition. Written with a notable 
clarity of style, this pamphlet, which Engels based on three 
chapters from Anti-Dühring, became available to a wide circle of 
working-class readers. In Engels' lifetime the pamphlet appeared 
in authorised German and English editions, was translated into 
many other European languages and played an important part in 
propagating the ideas of Marxism throughout the international 
labour movement. 
In this work Engels set out to arm the vanguard of the 
proletarian movement with an understanding of the relationship 
between Utopian and scientific socialism. This was a counterstroke 
to the attempts that were being made to obliterate the difference 
between them and to present Marx's teaching as a variety of the 
socialist Utopias. Acknowledging the historical role of Utopian 
socialism, Engels treated it as one of the theoretical sources of 
Marxist theory. He gave a systematic account of the genesis of 
scientific socialism, which, as he pointed out, had emerged as a 
logical phenomenon, conditioned by the whole course of history. 
Called into being by the need to explain the proletariat's 
revolutionary struggle, to build a scientific theory for the 
movement, Marxism was the result of a synthesis of the 
achievements of previous science and culture. "Like every new 
theory," wrote Engels, "modern socialism had, at first, to connect 
itself with the intellectual stock-in-trade ready to its hand, however 
deeply its roots lay in the material economic facts" (p. 285). 
From the overall achievements of Marxist thought Engels 
singled out two of Marx's great discoveries, which played a 
decisive role in converting socialism from a Utopia into a 
science—the materialist conception of history, which reveals the 
laws of social development and proves the inevitability of the 
socialist revolution; and the theory of surplus value, which lays 
bare the essence of capitalist exploitation. 
The emergence of Marxism, Engels noted, which had opened 
up a new stage in the history of human thought, also revolution­
ised socialist thinking. In contrast to the speculative constructs 
propounded by the Utopian socialists, scientific socialism based its 
conclusions on a profound theoretical analysis of reality, on 
getting to the bottom of social phenomena, on revealing the 
objective laws of social life. This was why scientific socialism could 
provide a genuine theoretical foundation for the workers' rev-

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
olutionary struggle, an ideological weapon for the socialist 
transformation of society. With its appearance on the scene, 
Engels wrote, this struggle was placed on a realistic basis. It was 
scientific socialism which had identified the historical mission of 
the proletariat as the force destined, in alliance with all the 
working people, to bring about the socialist revolution, and which 
had overcome the gap between socialist theory and the working-
class movement and armed the proletarian masses with a 
knowledge of the prospects of their struggle, with scientific 
forecast of the future society. 
Developing the theory of socialist revolution, Engels made the 
point that the fundamental contradiction of capitalism—the 
contradiction between the social nature of production and the 
private character of appropriation—could be resolved only by a 
proletarian revolution. The proletariat, having taken power, would 
first of all turn the means of production into public property. 
Engels believed the organisation of socialist production on the 
basis of socialised property was the decisive condition for the 
building of the future society. Socialist society, he predicted, would 
be the first to be capable of regulating social production by 
conscious application of the objective laws of its development. The 
role of social consciousness would thus grow in importance. 
Society would be able to guide its economic activity according to 
plan and control the key social processes. "To accomplish this act 
of universal emancipation," Engels wrote, "is the historical mission 
of the modern proletariat" (p. 325). 
At the close of the 1870s symptoms of change began to appear 
in the British labour movement. The economic crisis of 1877-78 
hit the great mass of the workers very hard and narrowed the 
economic ground for reformist illusions, thereby stimulating 
interest in social questions. Engels regarded this moment as 
favourable for a statement of his views in the British trade union 
newspaper, The Labour Standard, and between the beginning of 
May and the beginning of August 1881 he wrote a total of 11 
articles for it. In them he expounded in popular form the main 
propositions of scientific socialism and Marxist political economy, 
explaining to British workers the mechanism of capitalist exploita­
tion. Referring in the title of one of the articles to the popular 
trade union slogan "A Fair Day's Wages for a Fair Day's Work", 
Engels proved that by its very nature capitalism ruled out fairness. 
He tried to emphasise the idea that the basic demand of the 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
proletarian struggle should be the slogan: "Possession of the 
means of work—raw material, factories, machinery—by the 
working people themselves!" (p. 378). 
In his articles for The Labour Standard Engels showed that the 
class struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat was 
historically inevitable. It was bound to become a political struggle, 
the struggle for power (see p. 386). Engels gave theoretical 
substance to the significance of the workers' economic struggle 
and showed the role of the trade unions as its organisers. At the 
same time he pointed out that their activities could not rid the 
worker of capitalist slavery (p. 385). For the proletariat to achieve 
success, he emphasised, the working class must be organised as a 
class,  there must be an independent political party of the 
proletariat. Engels devoted a special article to this important 
question—"A Working Men's Party". "In England," he wrote, "a 
real democratic party is impossible unless it be a working men's 
party... No democratic party in England, as well as elsewhere, will 
be effectively successful unless it has a distinct working-class 
character" (pp. 405-06). The lack of an independent prole­
tarian party, Engels noted, had left England's working class 
content to form, as it were, "the tail of the 'Great Liberal Party' " 
for nearly a quarter of a century (p. 404). These articles by 
Engels exerted a definite influence on the young generation in 
the British socialist movement. James Macdonald, later to be one 
of the representatives of the Marxist wing of the British socialists, 
said what really attracted him to socialism were Engels' articles in 
The Labour Standard (How I Became a Socialist, London, [1896,] 
pp. 61-62). 
Several articles written by Engels in 1877-78 for the Italian 
socialist paper La Plebe ("British Agricultural Labourers Want to 
Participate in the Political Life of Their Country", "On the 
Socialist Movement in Germany, France, the United States and 
Russia", and others) have been included in this volume. Here he 
told the Italian workers about the experience and successes of the 
proletariat's struggle in various countries, wrote about the 
movement of the agricultural labourers in England, which at that 
time was of particular interest to the Italian socialists. Engels 
developed the idea of an alliance between the working class and 
the peasantry, and concentrated special attention on the impor­
tance of drawing the broad masses of the agricultural proletariat 
into the revolutionary struggle. 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
In the 1870s and early 1880s Marx and Engels kept a close 
watch on the economic and social development of the USA, noting 
the unprecedented concentration of capital, the growth of big 
companies controlling the activity of major branches of industry 
and trade and owning huge amounts of property in land, finance 
and the railways. In Engels' articles "The French Commercial 
Treaty", "American Food and the Land Question" and others, 
and also in the Preface that Marx and Engels wrote for the second 
Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, the 
attention of European workers is focussed on Britain's loss of its 
industrial monopoly and the inevitability of the United States' 
predominance in the world market (see pp. 392-93). Marx and 
Engels analyse these processes from the standpoint of the 
prospects for the labour movement in Europe and the struggle 
waged by the American proletariat. For the American socialist 
weekly The Labor Standard Engels wrote a series of articles on the 
labour movement in Europe, entitled "The Workingmen of 
Europe in 1877", in which he popularised the ideas of proletarian 
internationalism. 
The interest Americans displayed in Marx as an individual and 
his ideas is illustrated by two documents included in the 
Appendices to this volume—the accounts of his interviews with a 
correspondent from The Chicago Tribune and with John Swinton, 
the editor of The Sun, an influential progressive bourgeois paper. 
These documents gave readers not only the main biographical facts 
about Marx and the history of the International, but also expounded 
his point of view on the problems of the labour movement in the 
USA. Rejecting the allegation that socialist ideas were "alien" to the 
United States, Marx stressed that "Socialism has sprung up in that 
country without the aid of foreigners, and was merely caused by the 
concentration of capital and the changed relations between the 
workmen and their employers" (p. 573). Developing ideas on the 
historically law-governed character and driving forces of revolution, 
Marx emphasised: "No revolution can be made by a party, but by a 
nation" (p. 576). 
In these years Marx and Engels devoted much attention to the 
economic and social situation in Russia and the development of 
the Russian revolutionary movement. They studied the economy, 
agrarian system and social relations in Russia after the peasant 
reform of 1861 and read extensively Russian scientific literature 
and fiction. They were personally acquainted with many Russian 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preface 
revolutionaries, scientists and journalists. A prominent place was 
given to the study of Russian culture and language, which, in the 
words of Engels, is "a language that, both for its own sake, as one 
of the richest and most powerful living languages, and on account 
of the literature thereby made accessible, richly deserves study" 
(pp. 27-28). Marx and Engels valued Nikolai Chernyshevsky and 
Nikolai Dobrolyubov as profound revolutionary-democratic 
thinkers and writers. Engels called them "two socialist Lessings" 
(p. 23). 
In a country where the working class had not yet become an 
organised force and was as yet incapable of leading a nation-wide 
struggle, the Russian revolutionary movement was represented by 
the Narodniks (Populists). While eager to help the Russian 
revolutionaries, Marx and Engels criticised their idealistic notions, 
their failure to grasp the link between legal, political institutions 
and the interests of definite classes of society. In the third and 
fourth articles of his series Refugee Literature, Engels took the side 
of one of the prominent ideologists of Narodism, Pyotr Lavrov, in 
his polemic with another Narodnik, Pyotr Tkachov, on the tasks of 
revolutionary propaganda in Russia. Engels resolutely objected to 
irresponsible "impetuous rodomontades" about an immediate 
uprising (p. 36) without taking into account the objective conditions 
and preliminary revolutionary propaganda, and to the voluntarist 
statements by Tkachov that "the revolutionary ... must assume the 
right to summon the people to revolt ... without waiting until the 
course of historical events announces the moment" (p. 35). 
In the last article of his Refugee Literature ("On Social Relations 
in Russia"), and in a letter to the editors of Otechestvenniye Zapiski 
and in drafts of his reply to a letter from Vera Zasulich, Engels 
and Marx respectively made a profound analysis of the socio­
economic relations in Russia after the peasant reform of 1861. They 
regarded it as a milestone in the history of Russia, the beginning of a 
new stage in the country's development (see p. 199, etc.). The 
abolition of serfdom in Russia in 1861 was connected with the 
mounting discontent of the peasants and the growth of peasant 
movement. Marx and Engels noted the decisive factors in the 
build-up of the revolutionary situation in Russia in the 1870s: the 
robbing of the peasantry as a result of the 1861 reform, the growth 
of the mass peasant movement and the protest of "the enlightened 
strata of the nation" (p. 50). Engels foresaw the revolutionary 
situation in Russia at the end of the 1870s and the beginning of the 
1880s. Already in 1875 he had expressed the firm conviction that 
revolution in that country was "far closer than it would appear on 

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
the surface" (p. 11). Marx and Engels also hoped that the 
foreign-policy troubles the Tsarist government was experiencing in 
connection with the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78 would precipitate 
revolutionary events in Russia. 
Marx and Engels believed that the coming revolution in Russia 
should be a bourgeois-democratic, mostly peasant, revolution (see 
e.g. pp. 204-05). They saw that its prospects would be close­
ly connected with the class struggle of the European proletariat. 
This revolution, Engels wrote in 1878, "means such a change in the 
whole situation of Europe as must be hailed with joy by the 
workingmen of every country as a giant step towards their com­
mon goal—the universal emancipation of Labor" (p. 229; see 
also p. 426). Marx and Engels thought that a revolution in Russia 
would start a process "which, maybe after long and violent strug­
gles,  must ultimately and certainly lead to the establishment of a 
Russian Commune" (p. 372). 
The question raised by Marx and Engels as to whether the 
non-capitalist development of Russia was possible, whether it 
would have to endure the torments of all the stages of economic 
evolution that the peoples of the industrially developed countries 
of Europe had endured before it, was of the greatest theoretical 
importance. Central to this question was the fate of the peasant 
commune. Marx and Engels showed that communal ownership of 
the land was not an exclusively Russian phenomenon, but one of 
the most ancient social institutions, an institution to be found 
"among all Indo-Germanic peoples ... from India to Ireland" 
(p. 46). 
The commune could become "the fulcrum of social re­
generation in Russia" only if it were ensured "the normal con­
ditions of spontaneous development" (p. 371). Such conditions 
could be created only out of a successful democratic revolution in 
Russia, which would free it of exploitation "by trade, landed 
property and usury" and by "a new capitalist vermin" (pp. 354-55). 
In themselves neither the artel nor the commune could serve as a 
means of transition to socialism. This meant that the productive 
forces of society should be "developed so far that they permit the 
final destruction of class distinctions" (p. 39). 
Only a revolution in Russia, Marx and Engels believed, and its 
support by the victorious working class of the developed capitalist 
countries (see p. 426) could offer the opportunity of reviving the 
archaic institution of the rural commune and remoulding it on 
socialist lines. Only such a revolution could open up for Russia the 
prospect of transition to socialism bypassing the stage of capitalist 

=====第26页=====
XXVIII Preface 
development. While acknowledging such a possibility, Marx and 
Engels made a sober assessment of the growth of the capitalist 
economy in Russia and its probable consequences. Marx stressed: 
"If Russia continues along the path it has followed since 1861, it 
will miss the finest chance that history has ever offered to a 
nation, only to undergo all the fatal vicissitudes of the capitalist 
system" (p. 199). 
The Preface to the second Russian edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party (1882), the translation of which was prepared by 
Georgi Plekhanov, provides a useful resume of the views of Marx 
and Engels on the development of the revolutionary movement in 
Russia. Whereas in 1848-49 the reactionary governments and the 
European bourgeoisie, they wrote, "found their only salvation 
from the proletariat ... in Russian intervention", now the tsar is "a 
prisoner of war of the revolution", and "Russia forms the 
vanguard of revolutionary action in Europe" (p. 426). They also 
clearly defined their point of view on the fate of the peasant 
community: "If the Russian Revolution becomes the signal for a 
proletarian revolution in the West, so that the two complement 
each other, the present Russian common ownership of land may 
serve as the starting point for communist development" (p. 426). 
This path for Russia did not come about in this way in the course 
of history. However, this definition suggests that Marx and Engels 
saw the theoretical possibility of non-capitalist path of develop­
ment for industrially underdeveloped countries in the event of a 
victorious socialist revolution in countries with highly developed 
productive forces. 
Marx and Engels consider the problems of the liberation of 
Poland and the involvement in the revolutionary movement of 
other oppressed nations of Europe, and also the revolutionary 
changes in Austria-Hungary, in direct connection with the tasks 
and prospects of the Russian revolution. In the first article of his 
Refugee Literature Engels repeats and develops the idea he had 
first expressed in 1847: "A people that oppresses others can­
not emancipate  itself"  (p. 11). This work and also the speeches 
made by Marx and Engels at meetings in honour of the anniver­
saries of the Polish uprisings of 1830 and 1863, raised the question 
of the organic link between the struggle of the working class 
against the exploiting society and that of the oppressed peoples for 
their national liberation (see pp. 57-58). The liberation of the 
Polish people from social and national oppression was thus linked 
with the struggle of the Russian people to overthrow the tsarist 
autocracy. 

=====第27页=====
Preface XXIX 
The section "From the Preparatory Materials" contains two very 
important manuscripts written by Marx, unpublished in his or 
Engels' lifetime. The first is his conspectus of Bakunin's Statehood 
and Anarchy, which Marx compiled in 1874 and the beginning of 
1875 and in which he summed up, as it were, the ideological 
struggle with Bakuninism in the First International. In contrast to 
Bakunin's subjective and voluntarist arguments for the possibility 
of a social revolution at any time and in any place, Marx 
developed the proposition that "a radical social revolution is 
bound up with definite historical conditions of economic develop­
ment" (p. 518). Showing the nonsensical character of Bakunin's 
slogan on the immediate "abolition of the state", Marx formulated 
the idea of the necessity of establishing the rule of the proletariat, 
the proletarian state, in which with the assumption of power the 
workers would have to suppress "the strata of the old world who 
are struggling against them" and keep power in their hands "as 
long as the economic basis of class society has not been destroyed" 
(p. 521). Here Marx states his views on the tactics of the 
proletarian party towards the peasantry. On coming to power the 
proletariat must "take the measures needed to enable the peasant 
to directly improve his condition, i.e. to win him over to the 
revolution; these measures, however, contain the seeds which will 
facilitate the transition from the private ownership of the land to 
collective ownership, so that the peasant arrives at this economi­
cally of his own accord" (p. 517). The important ideas 
expressed in this manuscript on the maturing of the social 
preconditions for the socialist revolution and the dictatorship of 
the proletariat, the alliance of the working class with the peasantry 
and the petty-bourgeois strata in general, and the dangers of 
anarchism and voluntarism in the work of social transformation, 
were reflected and developed by Marx and Engels in the Critique 
of the Gotha Programme, Refugee Literature, the drafts of the letter to 
Vera Zasulich and other works mentioned earlier. 
The second manuscript is the "Marginal Notes on Adolph 
Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie". Criticising the 
bourgeois economist Adolph Wagner, an "armchair socialist", 
Marx explains and specifies certain key propositions of his own 
economic theory, its subject and method. He exposes the dishonest 
tricks used by bourgeois economists in their "criticism" of him, 
their idealist approach to the analysis of economic phenomena 
and interpretation of them as reflections of the evolution of le­
gal standards. Replying to Wagner's criticism of the theory of value 
in Capital, Marx stresses that for him the subject is not "value" and 

=====第28页=====
XXX Preface 
not "exchange value" but commodity (p. 544). Here he sets forth 
his method of analysing the commodity, the foundations of its 
"duality" determined by the dual character of labour em­
bodied in it—its specific determinateness, on the one hand, and 
simply as the expenditure of human labour power, on the other. 
Marx also speaks of the historicism of his economic theory; in his 
analysis use-value "still only comes under consideration when such 
a consideration stems from the analysis with regard to economic 
formations, not from arguing hither and thither about the 
concepts or words 'use-value' and 'value' " (p. 546). Marx thus 
emphasises that his investigation deals not with an abstract logical 
construction but with analysis of the existing economic reality. 
The volume contains some vivid biographical material about 
Marx by Engels. These are "Karl Marx", written in 1877 for the 
Volks-Kalender almanac, and also the obituary and funeral oration 
with which Engels marked the death of his friend on March 14, 
1883 ("Draft of a Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx", "Karl 
Marx's Funeral" and "On the Death of Karl Marx"). Engels 
provides a model analysis of Marx's life and work. He saw Marx as 
a great scientist, who looked upon science "above all things as a 
grand historical lever, as a revolutionary power in the most 
eminent sense of the word" (p. 463). For Marx, according to 
Engels, theory was always inseparable from practice: "The 
struggle for the emancipation of the class of wages-labourers from 
the fetters of the present capitalist system of economic produc­
tion," Engels wrote, "was his real element" (p. 464). Engels also 
showed Marx's role as organiser and leader of the class struggle of 
the proletariat, the true creator of the Communist League and the 
International Working Men's Association. "An immeasurable loss 
has been sustained both by the militant proletariat of Europe and 
America," Engels said at Marx's funeral, "and by historical 
science, in the death of this man" (p. 467). Engels concluded his 
funeral oration with the prophetic words, "His name will endure 
through the ages, and so also will his work!" (p. 469). 
* * * 
The volume contains 66 works by Marx and Engels, of which 28 
appear in English for the first time, including Prussian Schnapps in 
the German Reichstag, Wilhelm  Wolff,  "The Anti-Socialist Law in 

=====第29页=====
Preface XXXI 
Germany.—The Situation in Russia", "The Socialism of Mr. Bis­
marck" by Engels, and the "Notes on Bakunin's Book Statehood and 
Anarchy" by Marx. Among the materials published in the 
Appendices, four documents make their first appearance in English. 
The drafts of Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich in the main section of the 
volume are printed for the first time in English in full, in strict 
accordance with the manuscript. 
The volume is arranged in chronological order with the 
exception of Engels' letter to August Bebel of March 18-28, 1875, 
which is traditionally placed together with the Critique of the Gotha 
Programme by Marx. Engels' manuscripts On the Early History of the 
Germans and The Frankish  Period,  written during the period 
covered by Volume 24, are printed in Volume 26 of the present 
edition because these works are connected with Engels' The Origin 
of the Family, Private Property and the State. 
In cases where works by Marx or Engels have survived in 
several languages, the English version—manuscript or printed—is 
reproduced in this volume. Significant differences in reading with 
versions in other languages are indicated in the footnotes. 
All the texts have been translated from the German except 
where otherwise stated. Headings supplied by the editors where 
none existed in the original are given in square brackets. The 
asterisks indicate footnotes by the authors; the editors' footnotes 
are indicated by index letters. 
Misprints in proper and geographical names, figures, dates, and 
so on, have as a rule been corrected without comment by checking 
with the sources used by Marx and Engels. The known literary 
and documentary sources are referred to in footnotes and in the 
index of quoted and mentioned literature. Words written in 
English in the original are given in small caps; longer passages 
written in English in the original are placed in asterisks. 
When working on this volume, the editors made use of the 
results of the scientific research done when preparing for print 
volumes 24 (Section I) and 25 (Section I) of Marx-Engels 
Gesamtausgabe (MEGA 2), a new complete edition of the Works of 
Marx and Engels in the languages of the original. 
The volume was compiled and the preface and notes written by 
Marina Doroshenko and Valentina Ostrikova (Institute of Marx­
ism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). The materials of the volume 
covering the period from May 1874 to September 1878, as well as 
the drafts of Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich and the manuscripts in 

=====第30页=====
XXXII Preface 
the section "From the Preparatory Materials", were prepared by 
Marina Doroshenko. The materials from September 1878 to May 
1883 and the documents in the Appendices were prepared by 
Valentina Ostrikova. 
The name index, the index of quoted and mentioned literature, 
the index of periodicals and the glossary of geographical names 
were prepared by Yelena Kofanova. 
The entire volume was edited by Valentina Smirnova (Institute 
of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The translations were made by David Forgacs, Rodney and 
Krystyna Livingstone, Peter and Betty Ross, Barrie Selman, and 
Joan and Trevor Walmsley (Lawrence & Wishart) and edited by 
Nicolas Jacobs (Lawrence & Wishart), Jane Sayer, Stephen 
Smith, Lydia Belyakova, Anna Vladimirova and Yelena Vorotniko-
va (Progress Publishers), and Vladimir Mosolov, scientific editor 
(Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the CC CPSU). 
The volume was prepared for the press by the editor Yelena 
Kalinina. 

=====第31页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
May 1874-May  1883 

=====第32页=====

=====第33页=====
Frederick Engels 
REFUGEE LITERATURE1 

=====第34页=====
Written between mid-May 1874 and 
April 1875 
First published in Der Volksstaat, Nos. 69, 
73, 117 and 118, June 17 and 26, Oc­
tober 6 and 8, 1874; Nos. 36, 37, 43, 44 
and 45, March 28, April 2, 16, 18 and 
21, 1875. Article V appeared as a sepa­
rate pamphlet: F. Engels, Soziales aus 
Rußland,  Leipzig, 1875. Articles I, II and V 
were reprinted in the book: F. Engels, 
Internationales aus dem "Volksstaat"  (1871-
75), Berlin, 1894 Printed according to the news­
paper, checked (Articles I, II and 
V) with the text of the 1894 edition 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 
Signed: F. Engels 

=====第35页=====
5 
I 
A POLISH PROCLAMATIONS 
When the Tsar of Russia arrived in London, the entire police 
force there was already astir. It was claimed that the Poles wanted 
to shoot him, the new Berezowski had already been found and was 
better armed than before, in Paris.3  The houses of well-known 
Poles were surrounded by plain-clothes policemen, and the police 
inspector with special responsibility for surveillance of Poles under 
the Empire was even summoned from Paris. The police precau­
tions along the Tsar's route from his residence into the City were 
organised according to positively strategic principles—and all this 
trouble for nothing! No Berezowski showed up, no pistol shots 
were fired, and the Tsar, who was trembling quite as much as his 
daughter, got off with a fright. All this trouble was not, however, 
entirely in vain, for the Tsar awarded a tip of £5 to every police 
superintendent and £2 to every police inspector (33 and 14 talers 3 
respectively) who had been on duty for his sake. 
Meanwhile, the Poles had other things on their minds than 
murdering the noble Alexander. The society called "The Polish 
People" 4  issued an "Address of the Polish Refugees to the English 
People", signed: General W. Wrôblewski, President, J. Krynski, 
Secretary. This address was distributed in large numbers in 
London during the Tsar's visit. With the exception of Reynolds's 
Newspaper^ the London press unanimously refused to publish it: 
"England's guest" should not be insulted! 
The address starts by pointing out to the English that it was no 
honour, but an insult, for the Tsar to visit them at the very 
a In the 1894 edition: "100 and 40 marks".— Ed. 
b Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 1240, May 17, 1874.— Ed. 

=====第36页=====
6 Frederick Engels 
moment he was making preparations in Central Asia to overthrow 
English rule in India, and that if England, instead of lending a 
willing ear to the blandishments of the Tsar, this ostensible father 
of the peoples he oppresses, were to be less indifferent to the 
Poles'  aspirations to independence, England, as well as the rest of 
Western Europe, could quietly stop their colossal armaments. And 
this is quite correct. The background to all European militarism is 
Russian militarism. As a reserve in the war of 1859 on the side of 
France, in 1866 and 1870 on the side of Prussia,5 the Russian 
army enabled the leading military power of the day to vanquish its 
enemy in isolation. As the leading European military power, Prussia 
is a direct creation of Russia, although she has since grown too large 
for her patron's liking. 
The address continues: 
"By her geographical situation and by her readiness at any moment to fight in 
the cause of humanity, Poland always was, and in future always will continue to be, 
the foremost champion of justice, civilisation and social development in all North 
Eastern Europe. Poland has incontestably proved this by her centuries of resistance 
to the invasions of Eastern Barbarians 6 on the one hand, and to the inquisition, then 
oppressing nearly the entire West, on the other. How was it that the Nations of 
Western Europe were enabled peaceably to occupy themselves with the development 
of their social vitality precisely in the most decisive epoch of modern times? Merely 
because on the Eastern frontier of Europe the Polish soldier stood sentry, always 
watchful, always ready to charge, always prepared to sacrifice his health, his property, 
his life. It was owing to the shelter of Polish arms, that on Europe's awakening to a new 
life in die sixteenth century, the arts and sciences could flourish afresh, that 
commerce, industry and wealth could attain their present wonderful extension. What, 
for instance, would have become of the legacy of civilisation left to the West by 
the labour of two centuries, had not Poland, herself threatened by Mongolian 
hordes at her back, come to the rescue of Central Europe threatened by the Turks, 
and broken the Ottoman power by the brilliant victory under the walls of 
Vienna7?"3 
The address goes on to argue that even today it is essentially 
Poland's resistance that prevents Russia from turning her forces 
on the West and that has even managed to disarm the most 
dangerous allies of Russia, her pan-Slavist agents. The most 
renowned Russian historian, Pogodin, says, in a work printed by 
the order and at the expense of the Russian government,b that 
Poland, hitherto the most painful sore on Russia's body, must 
become her right hand by restoring her as a small, weak kingdom 
under the sway of some Russian Prince—that would be the 
strongest bait for the Turkish and Austrian Slavonians: 
a Address of the Polish Refugees to the English People, London, 1874, p. 2.— Ed 
b M. n. Iloro4HHT>,  FIoAttCKoù  eonpoct. Coôpanie  pcucyoKdeniu,  aanucoKh u 30Mb-
Hauiü. 1831-1867.—Ed 

=====第37页=====
Refugee Literature.—I. A Polish Proclamation 7 
"We shall [...] proclaim this in a manifesto, England and France will bite their 
lips, and as for Austria it will be her death-blow.... All the Poles, even the most 
irreconcilable, will fly to our embrace; the Austrian and Prussian Poles will reunite 
with their brothers. All Slavonic races now oppressed by Austria, Czechs, Croats, 
Hungarians (!), even the Slavonians of Turkey, will long for the hour when they 
shall be able to breathe as freely as the Poles. We shall be a race of a hundred 
millions- under one sceptre, and then, ye nations of Europe, come and try your 
strength with us!"8 
Unfortunately, this beautiful plan lacked only the main thing: 
the consent of Poland. But 
"to all those allurements—the world knows it—Poland replied: I will live and 
must live, if I am to live at all, not as the tool of a foreign Tsar's plans for world 
conquest, but as a free nation among the free nations of Europe".3 
The address then explains in further detail how Poland has 
confirmed this unshakeable decision of hers. At the critical 
moment of her existence, at the outbreak of the French 
Revolution, Poland was already crippled by the first partition and 
divided between four states.9 Yet she had the courage to raise the 
banner of the French Revolution on the Vistula—by the 
Constitution of the 3rd of May, 179110—a deed that earned her a 
place high above all her neighbours. The old Polish economy was 
thus destroyed; given a few decades of peaceful development, 
undisturbed from outside, and Poland would have become the 
most advanced and most powerful country east of the Rhine. It 
would not, however, suit the partition powers for Poland to rise 
once again, and even less for her to rise through the naturalisation 
of revolution in north-eastern Europe. Her fate was sealed: the 
Russians imposed on Poland what Prussians, Austrians and 
Imperial troops attempted in France in vain.11 
"Kosciuszko fought simultaneously for Polish independence and the principle of 
equality. [...] And it is notorious that from the moment of the loss of her national 
independence and in spite of it, Poland, in virtue of her innate patriotism and of 
her solidarity with all nations struggling for the rights of humanity, became the 
most active champion of justice outraged, no matter in what country, fighting on 
whatever battlefield tyranny was resisted. Unbroken by her own disasters, unshaken 
by the blindness and ill will of European governments, Poland has not for one 
moment been unmindful of the duties imposed upon her by  herself,  by history and 
by regard for the future."b 
At the same time, she has also developed the principles on 
which this future, the new Polish republic, will be organised: they 
are laid down in the manifestoes of 1836, 1845 and  1863. 12 
a Address..., pp. 3-4.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 4.— Ed 

=====第38页=====
8 Frederick Engels 
"The first of those manifestoes, while asserting the unshakeable national rights 
of Poland, proclaims at the same time the equality of rights of the peasantry.3 That of 
1845,  issued on Polish soil, in the then free city of Cracow,13 and sanctioned by 
delegates from all parts of Poland, proclaims not only this equality of rights, but 
also the principle that the soil, cultivated by the peasantry for centuries, shall  become 
their property.3—In the part of Poland stolen by the Muscovites, the landlords, 
accepting the above manifestoes as part and parcel of Polish national law, had long 
before the imperial so-called Emancipation Proclamation resolved to settle this 
internal matter, which troubled their consciences, voluntarily and by agreement 
with the peasantry (1859-1863). The Polish land question was resolved, in principle, 
by the Constitution of May 3rd,  1791 ;  if since then the Polish peasantry have been 
oppressed it was solely in consequence of the despotism and Machiavellism3 of the 
Tsar who based his domination upon the mutual antagonism of landlords and 
peasants. The resolution was taken long before the imperial proclamation of 
February 19th, 1861; and this proclamation, applauded by the whole of Europe 
and pretending to establish equal rights for the peasants, is merely a cloak for one 
of the ever-repeated attempts of the Tsar to take unto himself other people's 
property. The Polish rural populace is just as oppressed as before, but—the soil 
has become the property of the Tsarl And as a punishment for the bloody protest 
raised in 1863 against the treacherous barbarism of her oppressors,14 Poland has 
had to undergo a. series of brutal persecutions such as would shake with horror 
even the tyranny of past centuries. [...] 
"And yet neither the cruel yoke of the Tsar, though it has now weighed on her 
for a full century, nor the indifference of Europe, have been able to kill Poland. 
"We have lived and we shall live by virtue of our own will, our own strength and 
our own social and political development, which renders us superior to our 
oppressors; for their existence is based, from beginning to end, upon brute force, 
prisons and the gallows, and their chief means of action abroad are clandestine 
machinations, treacherous surprises and, finally, conquest by force. "b 
Let us, however, leave the address, which has been adequately 
characterised by the above extracts, in order to append to it some 
observations on the importance of the Polish question for the 
German workers. 
No matter how much Russia had developed since Peter the 
Great, no matter how much her influence had grown in Europe 
(to which Frederick II of Prussia contributed more than a little, 
even though he knew full well what he was doing), she 
nevertheless remained essentially just as non-European a power as, 
for example, Turkey, until the moment she seized Poland. The 
first partition of Poland was in 1772; in 1779 in the Peace of 
Teschenc Russia was already demanding0 the attested right to 
a Italicised by Engels. — Ed. 
b Address..., pp. 4-5.— Ed 
c Traité de paix entre Sa Majesté l'Impératrice de Hongrie et de Bohème, et Sa Majesté 
le Roi de Prusse, conclu et signé à Teschen le treize mai 1779, avec un article séparé et les 
conventions, garanties et actes  annexés. — Ed 
d In the 1894 edition added: "and received".— Ed. 

=====第39页=====
Refugee Literature.—I. A Polish Proclamation 9 
interfere in German affairs.15 That should have taught the 
German princes a lesson; yet Frederick William II, the only 
Hohenzollern ever to offer serious resistance to Russian policy, 
and Francis II agreed to the complete break-up of Poland. After 
the Napoleonic wars, Russia took, in addition, the lion's share of 
the previously Prussian and Austrian Polish provinces and now 
appeared openly as Europe's arbiter, a role she continued to play, 
without interruption, until 1853. Prussia was evidently proud of 
being allowed to crawl before Russia; Austria followed reluctantly, 
but always gave way at the crucial moment for fear of revolution, 
against which the Tsar remained the last bulwark. Thus, Russia 
became the stronghold of European reaction, without denying 
herself the pleasure of preparing further conquests in Austria and 
Turkey with pan-Slavist rabble-rousing. During the years of 
revolution, the crushing of the Hungarians by Russia16 was just as 
decisive an event for Eastern and Central Europe as was the June 
battle in Paris for the West17; and when Tsar Nicholas shortly 
afterwards sat in judgment on the King of Prussia3 and the 
Emperor of Austriab in Warsaw, Russia's domination set the seal 
on the domination of reaction in Europe.18 The Crimean War 
liberated the West and Austria from the Tsar's insolence19; Prussia 
and the small states of Germany were all the more willing to crawl 
before him; but, in 1859, he was already chastising the Austrians 
for their disobedience by ensuring that his German vassals did not 
side with them,20 and in 1866 Prussia completed the punishment 
of Austria.21 We have already seen above that the Russian army 
constitutes the pretext for and the reserve of all European 
militarism. Only the fact that Nicholas had challenged the West in 
1853,  relying on his million soldiers (who, admittedly, existed 
largely on paper only), provided Louis Napoleon with an excuse in 
the Crimean War to turn the then rather enfeebled French army 
into the strongest in Europe. Only because the Russian army 
prevented Austria from siding with France in 187022 was Prussia 
able to defeat France and to complete the Prusso-German military 
monarchy. Behind all these grand performances of state23 we see 
the Russian army. And even if the victory of Germany over France 
will just as surely produce a war between Russia and Germany— 
unless Russia's internal development soon enters a revolutionary 
flux—as the victory of Prussia over Austria at Sadowa24 entailed 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
b Francis Joseph I.— Ed, 

=====第40页=====
10 Frederick Engels 
the Franco-German War,* the Russian army will always be 
prepared to oppose any movement in the interior of Prussia. Even 
today, official Russia is the stronghold and bulwark of all 
European reaction, her army the reserve of all other armies, 
ensuring the suppression of the working class in Europe. 
Yet it is the German workers who are first exposed to the 
onslaught of this large reserve army of oppression, both in the 
so-called German Empire and in Austria. As long as the Russians 
stand behind the Austrian and German bourgeoisie and govern­
ments, the sting is taken out of the entire German labour 
movement. So we, more than any others, have an interest in 
ridding ourselves of Russian reaction and the Russian army. 
Moreover, in doing this we have only one reliable ally, which 
will remain reliable in all circumstances: the Polish people. 
Through her historical development and her present position, 
Poland is faced, far more than France is, with the choice of either 
being revolutionary or perishing. And this scotches all the silly talk 
concerning the essentially aristocratic nature of the Polish move­
ment. There are plenty of Polish refugees who have aristocratic 
cravings; but once Poland herself enters the movement it becomes 
revolutionary through and through, as we have seen in 184625 and 
1863.  These movements were not simply national; they were also 
aimed directly at liberating the peasants and transferring landed 
property to them. In 1871 the great mass of Polish refugees in 
France entered the service of the Commune26 ; was this an act of 
aristocrats? Did that not prove that these Poles were at the very 
apex of the modern movement? Since Bismarck introduced the 
Kulturkampf 27 in Posen3  and, on the pretext of striking a blow 
against the Pope, b searches out Polish textbooks, suppresses the 
Polish language and does his utmost to drive the Poles into the 
arms of Russia, what happens? The Polish aristocracy is increas­
ingly siding with Russia to at least reunify Poland under Russian 
rule;  the revolutionary masses reply by offering to ally themselves 
with the German workers' party and fighting in the ranks of the 
International. 
In 1863, Poland showed that she could not be done to death, 
and continues to show this every day. Her claim to an 
* This is already stated in the "Second Address of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association on the Franco-German War" (dated 
September 9, 1870). 
a The 1894 edition has: "Poland".— Ed 
b Pius IX.— Ed. 

=====第41页=====
Refugee Literature.—I.  A Polish Proclamation 11 
independent existence  in the  European family  of nations  is 
irrefutable.  Her  restoration, however,  is a  necessity  for two  nations 
in particular:  for the  Germans  and for the  Russians themselves. 
A people that oppresses others cannot emancipate  itself. The 
power  it needs  to oppress others  is ultimately always turned 
against  itself. As  long  as there  are  Russian soldiers  in Poland,  the 
Russian people cannot liberate itself politically  or socially.  At the 
present stage  of development  in Russia, however,  it is  beyond 
dispute that  the day  Russia loses Poland,  the  movement will 
become strong enough  in Russia herself  to bring down  the  existing 
order.  The  independence  of Poland  and  revolution  in Russia 
imply each other. Meanwhile, Polish independence  and  revolution 
in Russia—which  is far  closer than  it would appear  on the  surface, 
given  the  complete social, political  and  financial breakdown  and 
the corruption that pervades  the  whole  of official Russia—mean 
for the  German workers that  the  bourgeoisie,  the  governments,  in 
short, reaction  in Germany, will  be reduced  to their  own  forces, 
forces that  we shall,  in time, overcome. 

=====第42页=====
12 
il 
PROGRAMME OF THE BLANQUIST COMMUNE 
REFUGEES28 
After every unsuccessful revolution or counter-revolution, fever­
ish activity develops among the émigrés who escaped abroad. Party 
groups of various shades are formed, which accuse each other of 
having driven the cart into the mud, of treason and of all other 
possible mortal sins. They also maintain close ties with the 
homeland, organise, conspire, print leaflets and newspapers, swear 
that it will start over again within the next twenty-four hours, that 
victory is certain and, in the wake of this expectation, distribute 
government posts. Naturally, disappointment follows disappoint­
ment, and since this is attributed not to inevitable historical 
conditions, which they do not wish to understand, but to 
accidental mistakes by individuals, recriminations accumulate and 
result in general bickering. Such is the history of all refugee 
societies, from the royalist émigrés of 1792 29 to those of today; 
and those among the émigrés who have common sense and reason 
give up this fruitless squabbling as soon as this can properly be 
done, and turn to something more useful. 
The French emigration after the Commune has not escaped this 
inevitable fate either. Owing to the European smear campaign, 
which attacked all equally, and especially in London, where the 
French emigration had its common centre in the General Council 
of the International, for some time it was compelled to conceal its 
internal squabbles at least from the outside world. In the last two 
years,  however, it was no longer able to hide the process of 
disintegration that is progressing rapidly in its ranks. An open 
quarrel flared up everywhere. In Switzerland some of the refugees 
joined the Bakuninists, notably under the influence of Malon, who 
was one of the founders of the secret Alliance.30 Then, in London, 

=====第43页=====
Refugee Literature.— II. Programme of Blanquist Refugees 13 
the so-called Blanquists split off from the International and 
formed a group that called itself the Revolutionary Commune.31 
Later, a number of other groups emerged that were, however, 
constantly fusing and reorganising, and did not produce anything 
worthwhile even as regards manifestoes, whereas the Blanquists 
have just issued the proclamation to the "Communeux",3 calling 
the world's attention to their programme. 
They are called Blanquists not because they are a group 
founded by Blanqui—of the 33 signatories to the programme only 
a few may ever have spoken to Blanqui—but because they want to 
act in his spirit and in accordance with his tradition. Blanqui is 
essentially a political revolutionary, a socialist only in sentiment, 
because of his sympathy for the sufferings of the people, but he 
has neither socialist theory nor definite practical proposals for 
social reforms. In his political activities he was essentially a "man 
of action", believing that, if a small well-organised minority should 
attempt to effect a revolutionary uprising at the right moment, it 
might, after scoring a few initial successes, carry the mass of the 
people and thus accomplish a victorious revolution. Naturally, 
under Louis Philippe he was able to organise this nucleus only in 
the form of a secret society, and it met the fate usually reserved 
for conspiracies: the people, fed up with the constant proffering 
of empty promises that it would soon begin, finally lost all 
patience, became rebellious, and there remained only the alterna­
tive of letting the conspiracy collapse or of striking without any 
external cause. They struck (May 12, 1839), but the insurrection 
was immediately suppressed.32  This Blanqui conspiracy, by the 
way, was the only one in which the police never succeeded in 
gaining a foothold; for the police, the insurrection came like a bolt 
from the blue.—Since Blanqui regards every revolution as a coup 
de main by a small revolutionary minority, it automatically follows 
that its victory must inevitably be succeeded by the establishment 
of a dictatorship—not, it should be well noted, of the entire 
revolutionary class, the proletariat, but of the small number of 
those who accomplished the coup and who themselves are, at first, 
organised under the dictatorship of one or several individuals. 
Obviously, Blanqui is a revolutionary of the old generation. 
These views on the course of revolutionary events have long since 
become obsolete, at least as far as the German workers' party is 
concerned, and in France, too, they meet the approval only of the 
less mature or more impatient workers. We shall also find that, in 
a Aux Communeux, London, June 1874.— Ed. 

=====第44页=====
14 Frederick Engels 
the programme in question, definite limitations have been 
imposed on these views. However, our London Blanquists too are 
guided by the principle that revolutions do not generally occur by 
themselves, but are made; that they are made by a relatively small 
minority and according to a plan worked out in advance; and, 
finally, that at any time it may "soon begin". With such principles 
people naturally become irretrievable victims of all the  self-
deceptions of the refugees and plunge from one folly into another. 
Most of all they want to play the role of Blanqui—the "man of 
action". But little good can be accomplished here by good will 
alone; Blanqui's revolutionary instinct, his ability to reach quick 
decisions are not, however, given to all, and no matter how much 
Hamlet may speak of action, he still remains Hamlet. Moreover, 
when our thirty-three men of action find that there is absolutely 
nothing to be done in the field they call action, our thirty-three 
Brutuses fall into a contradiction with themselves, which is comical 
rather than tragic, a contradiction wherein the tragedy is not 
heightened by the gloomy appearance they assume, as though they 
are a lot of "Moros, of the cloak and dagger", 3 which, by the way, 
does not even enter their heads. What can they do? They are 
preparing for the next "outburst", by drawing up proscription 
lists for the future, to cleanse (épuré) the ranks of the people who 
took part in the Commune, which is why the other refugees call 
them the pure (les purs). Whether or not they have themselves 
assumed that title I do not know; it would ill fit some of them. 
Their meetings are closed, their decisions are kept secret, but this 
does not prevent their being echoed throughout the whole French 
Quarter the following morning. As always happens with such 
serious men of action, when they have nothing to do—they have 
picked first a personal, then a literary quarrel with a worthy 
opponent, one of the most notorious members of the Paris petite 
press,  a certain Vermersch, who under the Commune published 
the Père Duchêne, a miserable caricature of Hébert's newspaper of 
1793.  In reply to their moral indignation, this gentleman 
published a pamphlet in which he branded them as "rogues or 
accomplices of rogues" b and poured a veritable stream of abusive 
invectives at them: 
Each word a night-pot 
and not an empty one at that.c 
a F. Schiller, Die Bürgschaft ("Damon und Phintias"), 1st stanza.— Ed. 
b E. Vermersch, Un mot au public, London, April 1874; Les partageux. Poème, 
May 12, 1874.— Ed. 
c H. Heine, "Disputation", Verse 86, Romanzero. Drittes Buch. Hebräische 
Melodien. — Ed 

=====第45页=====
Refugee Literature.— II. Programme of Blanquist Refugees 15 
And our thirty-three Brutuses find it worthwhile to pick a public 
quarrel with such an opponent! 
If one thing is certain it is that, after the exhausting war, after 
the hunger in Paris and, notably, after the awful blood-letting of 
the May days in  1871,33  the Paris proletariat needs a long rest to 
recuperate, and that every premature attempt at an insurrection 
can only end in a new, perhaps still more horrible defeat. Our 
Blanquists hold a different view. In their opinion, the disintegra­
tion of the monarchic majority in Versailles34 ushers in 
"the fall of Versailles, the revanche for the Commune. This is because we are 
approaching a great historical moment, one of the great crises when the people, 
apparently succumbing in wretchedness and condemned to death, resume their 
revolutionary advance with renewed force".8 
So, it starts all over again, and what is more, immediately. This 
hope for an immediate "revanche for the Commune" is not 
merely an émigré illusion; it is an essential article of faith for 
people who have taken it into their heads to play "men of action" 
at a time when absolutely nothing can be done in their sense, that 
is, in the sense of precipitating a revolution. All the same, since it 
is to begin, they feel that "the time has come for all refugees who 
still have a spark of life left in them to define their position". b 
And thus the thirty-three tell us that they are 1) atheists, 2) 
Communists, 3) revolutionaries. 
Our Blanquists have a basic feature in common with the 
Bakuninists, in that they want to represent the most far-reaching, 
most extreme trend. It is for this reason, incidentally, that the 
Blanquists, while opposing the Bakuninists over aims, often agree 
with them over means. It is, therefore, a question of being more 
radical than all others as regards atheism. Luckily, it is easy 
enough these days to be an atheist. In the European workers' 
parties atheism is more or less self-understood, even though in 
some countries it is quite often similar to that of the Spanish 
Bakuninist who declared: to believe in God is against all socialism, 
but to believe in the Virgin Mary is something quite different, and 
every decent Socialist should naturally do so. As regards the 
German Social-Democratic workers,0 it can be said that atheism has 
already outlived its usefulness for them; this pure negation does 
not apply to them, since they no longer stand in theoretical, but 
only in practical opposition to all belief in God: they are simply 
a Aux Communeux, p. 2.— Ed. 
*> Ibid.— Ed 
c The 1894 edition has: "As regards the great majority of the German 
Social-Democratic workers".— Ed. 

=====第46页=====
16 Frederick Engels 
through with God, they live and think in the real world and are, 
therefore, materialists. The same probably applies to France. If 
not, there could be nothing simpler than to organise the mass 
distribution among the workers of the splendid French materialist 
literature of the last century, of the literature in which the French 
spirit has attained its sublime expression as regards both form and 
content, and which, considering the level of science that existed 
then, even today stands exceedingly high as regards content, and 
still unexcelled as regards form. This, however, does not suit our 
Blanquists. To prove that they are the most radical of all, God, as 
in 1793, 35 is decreed out of existence: 
"Let the Commune forever deliver mankind from this spectre of past misery" 
(God),  "of this cause" (non-existent God a cause!) "of their present misery.—There 
is no room for priests in the Commune; every religious service, every religious 
organisation must be banned."3 
And this demand to transform the people par ordre du mufti h 
into atheists is signed by two members of the Commune,0  who 
surely must have had sufficient opportunity to discover, first, that 
anything can be decreed on paper but that this does not mean that 
it will be carried out; second, that persecution is the best way of 
strengthening undesirable convictions! This much is certain: the 
only service that can still be rendered to God today is to make 
atheism a compulsory dogma and to surpass Bismarck's anticlerical 
Kulturkampf laws by prohibiting religion in general. 
The second point of the programme is communism. Here we 
find ourselves on more familiar ground for the ship we are sailing 
here is called the Manifesto of the Communist Party, published in 
February 1848. Already in the autumn of 1872 the five Blanquists 
who had left the International embraced a socialist programme 
that, in all its essential features, was that of present-day German 
communism, and based their withdrawal solely on the refusal of 
the International to play at revolution after the fashion of those 
five. 36 Now the council of the thirty-three has adopted this pro­
gramme, with all its materialist view of history, even though 
its translation into Blanquist French leaves much to be desired where 
the wording of the Manifesto was not kept almost verbatim, as for 
example, in this phrase: 
3 Aux Communeux, p. 4.— Ed 
h by order of the mufti, by order from above.— Ed. 
c A slip of the pen; the proclamation is signed by four members of the 
Commune: Edouard Vaillant, Emile Eudes, Jean Clement and Frédéric Cournet. — 
Ed. 

=====第47页=====
Refugee Literature.— II. Programme of Blanquist Refugees 17 
"The bourgeoisie has removed the mystic veils from the exploitation of labour 
in which this last expression of all forms of slavery was formerly shrouded: 
governments, religions, the family, laws, institutions of both the past and present 
are finally revealed in this society, resting on the simple opposition of capitalists 
and wage-workers, as the instruments of oppression, with whose help the 
bourgeoisie upholds its rule and suppresses the proletariat."3 
Let us compare this with the Communist Manifesto, Section I: "In 
one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious and political 
illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, brutal 
exploitation. The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every 
occupation hitherto honoured and looked up to with reverent awe. 
It has converted the physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the 
man of science, into its paid wage-labourers. The bourgeoisie has 
torn away from the family its sentimental veil, and has reduced 
the family relation to a mere money relation," etc.b 
Yet as soon as we leave theory aside and get down to practice, 
the peculiar stand of the thirty-three becomes evident: 
"We are Communists because we want to arrive at our aim without stop-overs at 
intermediate stations, without entering into compromises, which only put off 
victory and prolong slavery."0 
The German Communists are Communists because, through all 
intermediate stations and compromises, created not by them but 
by historical development, they clearly perceived  the ultimate aim: 
the abolition of classes, the establishment of a society in which 
there will be no private ownership of land and means of 
production. The thirty-three are Communists because they im­
agine that, as soon as they have only the good will to jump over 
intermediate stations and compromises, everything is assured, and 
if, as they firmly believe, it "begins" in a day or two, and they take 
the helm, "communism will be introduced" the day after 
tomorrow. And they are not Communists if this cannot be done 
immediately. What childish naïveté to advance impatience as a 
convincing theoretical argument! 
Finally, our thirty-three are "revolutionaries".6 As regards the 
bandying of big words, the Bakuninists are known to have done 
everything humanly possible in this respect. But our Blanquists 
feel obliged to outdo them. But how? It will be remembered that 
the whole socialist proletariat, from Lisbon and New York to 
Budapest and Belgrade, immediately adopted responsibility for 
a Aux Communeux, pp. 4-5.— Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 487.— Ed. 
c Aux Communeux, p. 5.— Ed. 
d The 1894 edition has: "they clearly perceive and pursue".— Ed. 
e Aux Communeux, p. 7.— Ed. 
4-1317 

=====第48页=====
18 Frederick Engels 
the actions of the Paris Commune en bloc. But that is not enough 
for our Blanquists: 
"As far as we are concerned, we claim our share of the responsibility for the 
executions" (under the Commune) "of the enemies of the people" (a list of the 
executed is appended), "we claim our share of the responsibility for the arson that 
destroyed the instruments of monarchic or bourgeois oppression or protected those 
engaged in struggle."3 
A lot of follies are unavoidably committed in every revolution, 
as they are indeed at all other times, and when at last people calm 
down sufficiently to be able to review events critically, they 
inevitably draw the following conclusion: we have done many 
things that it would have been better to leave undone, and have 
failed to do many things that it would have been better to do, and 
that is why things took a bad turn. But what a lack of critical 
attitude is needed to declare the Commune impeccable and 
infallible and to assert that, every time a house was burned down 
or a hostage shot, this was a case of retributive justice, right down 
to the dot on the "i". Is this not tantamount to asserting that, 
during the week in May, the people shot precisely the number of 
people, and no more, than was necessary, that exactly those 
buildings were burned down, and no more, than had to be burned 
down? Is that not tantamount to saying of the first French 
revolution: each one beheaded got his deserts, first those whom 
Robespierre beheaded, and then Robespierre himself? Such 
childish patter results when essentially quite good-natured people 
give in to the urge to appear savagely brutal. 
Enough. In spite of all the foolish actions taken by the refugees 
and the droll attempts to make boy Karl (or Eduard?) b appear 
awe-inspiring, some definite progress can be noted in this 
programme. It is the first manifesto in which French workers rally to 
the cause of present-day German communism. Moreover, these workers 
are of a trend that regards the French as the chosen people of the 
revolution, and Paris the revolutionary Jerusalem. To have 
brought them this far is to the indisputable credit of Vaillant, who 
is one of the signatories and who, as is widely known, has a good 
knowledge of the German language and of German socialist 
writing. The German socialist workers who, in 1870, proved that 
any national chauvinism is absolutely alien to them, may consider 
it a favourable omen that the French workers are adopting correct 
theoretical principles, even though these come from Germany. 
a Aux Communeux, pp. 11-12.— Ed. 
b Engels plays on the words of Philipp II from Schiller's drama Don Carlos 
(Act I, Scene 6). In the 1894 edition the words "(or Eduard?)" —an allusion to 
Edouard Vaillant —are omitted.— Ed. 

=====第49页=====
19 
m 37 
In London a review entitled Vperyod! (Forward)3 is appearing 
in the Russian language and at irregular intervals. It is edited by a 
personally most respectable scholar,b whom the prevailing strict 
etiquette in Russian refugee literature prevents me from naming. 
For even those Russians who pose as out-and-out revolutionary 
ogres,  who dub it a betrayal of the revolution to respect anything 
at all—in their polemics even they respect the appearance of 
anonymity with a conscientiousness only equalled in the English 
bourgeois press; they respect it even when it becomes comical, as 
it does here, because all the Russian refugees and the Russian 
government know perfectly well what the man's name is. It would 
never occur to us to let out such a carefully kept secret without 
good reason; but since the child must have a name, let us hope 
that the editor of the Forward will excuse us if, for the sake of 
brevity, in this article we call him by the popular Russian name 
Peter. 
In his philosophy, Friend Peter is an eclectic who selects the best 
from all the different systems and theories: try everything and 
keep the best! He knows that everything has a good side and a 
bad side, and that the main thing is to appropriate the good side 
of everything without being saddled with the bad, too. Since every 
thing, every person, every theory has these two sides, a good and a 
bad, every thing, every person, every theory is as good and as bad 
as any other in this respect, hence, from this vantage point, it 
would be foolish to become impassioned for or against one or the 
other. From this point of view, the struggles and disputes of the 
a Bnepedh! HenepioduuecKoe  o6o3pÈnie. — Ed. 
b P. L. Lavrov.— Ed. 
4* 

=====第50页=====
20 Frederick Engels 
revolutionaries and socialists amongst themselves are bound to 
appear sheer fatuous absurdities that serve no better purpose than 
to please their opponents. Moreover, nothing could be more 
understandable for a man of this opinion than to attempt to bring 
all of these mutually hostile factions together and earnestly enjoin 
them no longer to treat reaction to this scandalous spectacle, but 
exclusively to attack the common adversary. All the more natural, 
of course, if one comes from Russia, where the labour movement 
is, as we know, so extremely highly developed. 
The Forward is, then, full of exhortations urging concord on all 
socialists or urging them, at least, to avoid all public discord. When 
the Bakuninists' attempts to subjugate the International to their 
rule under false pretences, by lies and deceit, occasioned the 
well-known split in the Association, again it was the Forward that 
exhorted us to unity. This unity could, of course, only be attained 
by immediately letting the Bakuninists have their way and 
delivering the International up to their secret conspiracies, tied 
hand and foot. One was not unprincipled enough to do so; one 
accepted the challenge; the Hague Congress came to its decision, 
threw out the Bakuninists and resolved to publish the documents 
justifying this expulsion.38 
There was a great deal of lamentation on the editorial board of 
the Forward over the fact that the entire labour movement had not 
been sacrificed to dear "unity". Yet even greater was the horror 
when the compromising Bakuninist documents really did appear 
in the commission's report (see "Ein Komplott gegen die 
Internationale", 39 German edition, Brunswick, Bracke). Let us 
hear from the Forward  itself: 
"This publication ... has the character of caustic polemics against persons who 
are in the foremost ranks of the Federalists, ... its contents are topped up with 
private matters which could only have been collected by hearsay, and the credibility 
of which could consequently not have been indisputable for the authors."3 
In order to prove to the people who implemented the decision 
of the Hague Congress what a colossal crime they had committed, 
the Forward refers to a feuilleton in the Neue Freie Presse by a 
certain Karl Thaler, b which, 
"having emerged from the bourgeois camp, merits particular attention because 
it proves most clearly the importance for the common enemies of the working class, 
a [P. L. Lavrov,] "Afc-ronHCb pa6onaro 4BHweHk", Bnepedb! HenepioduuecKoe 
o6o3phnie, Zurich, 1874, Vol. II, Part II, Ch. II, p. 26.— Ed. 
b Karl von Thaler, "Rothe Jesuiten", Neue Freie  Presse  (Morgenblatt), Nos. 3284 
and 3285, October 14 and 15, 1873 (in the section Feuilleton). — Ed 

=====第51页=====
Refugee Literature.—III 21 
for the bourgeoisie and governments of the mutually accusatory pamphlets of the 
contenders for supremacy among the ranks of the workers".3 
First let us remark that the Bakuninists are here presented 
simply as "Federalists", as opposed to the alleged Centralists, as if 
the author believed in this non-existent opposition invented by the 
Bakuninists. That this was not, in fact, the case will become 
evident. Second, let us remark that from this feuilleton, written to 
order for such a venal bourgeois sheet as the Vienna Neue Freie 
Presse, the conclusion is drawn that genuine revolutionaries should 
not expose merely ostensible revolutionaries because these mutual 
accusations provide amusement for the bourgeois and govern­
ments. I believe that the Neue Freie Presse and all this press rabble 
could write ten thousand articles without having the slightest effect 
on the stance of the German workers' party. Every struggle has 
moments when one cannot deny one's opponent a certain 
satisfaction, if one is not to inflict positive damage on  oneself. 
Fortunately, we have got so far that we can allow our opponents 
this private pleasure if we thereby achieve real successes. 
The main charge, however, is that the report is full of private 
matters the credibility of which could not have been indisputable 
for the authors, because they could only have been collected by 
hearsay. How Friend Peter knows that a society like the 
International, which has its official organs throughout the civilised 
world, can only collect such facts by hearsay is not stated. His 
assertion is, anyway, frivolous in the extreme. The facts in 
question are attested by authentic evidence, and those concerned 
took good care not to contest them. 
But Friend Peter is of the opinion that private matters, such as 
private letters, are sacred and should not be published in political 
debates. To accept the validity of this argument on any terms is to 
render the writing of all history impossible. The relationship 
between Louis XV and Du Barry or Pompadour was a private 
matter, but without it the whole pre-history of the French Rev­
olution is incomprehensible. Or, to take a step towards the 
present: if an innocent girl called Isabella 15 is married to a manc 
who,  according to experts (assessor Ulrichs, for example) cannot 
stand women and hence only falls in love with  men—if,  finding 
herself neglected, she takes men wherever she finds them, then 
that is purely a private matter. But if the said innocent Isabella is 
a [P. L. Lavrov,] "AÊTonHCb pa6onaro 4BH>KeHiii", Bnepedh!, Zurich, 1874, 
Vol. II, Part II, Ch. II, p. 26.— Ed. 
b Isabella II—Queen of Spain.— Ed. 
c Francisco de Asis.— Ed. 

=====第52页=====
22 Frederick Engels 
Queen of Spain and one of these young men kept by her is a 
young officer called Serrano3; if this Serrano is promoted field 
marshal and prime minister in recognition of the heroic deeds he 
has performed behind closed doors, is then supplanted and 
overthrown by another,15 subsequently throws his faithless 
sweetheart out of the country with the help of other companions 
in misfortune, and after a variety of adventures eventually himself 
becomes dictator of Spain and such a great man that Bismarck 
does his utmost to persuade the Great Powers to recognise 
him—then this private affair between Isabella and Serrano 
becomes a piece of Spanish history, and anyone wishing to write 
about modern Spanish history and knowingly concealing this titbit 
from his readers would be falsifying history. Again, if one is 
describing the history of a gang like the Alliance, among whom 
there is such a large number of tricksters, adventurers, rogues, 
police spies, swindlers and cowards alongside those they have 
duped, should one falsify this history by knowingly concealing the 
individual villainies of these gentlemen as "private matters"? Much 
as it may horrify Friend Peter, he may rely on it that we are not 
done with these "private matters" by a long chalk. The material is 
still mounting up. 
When, however, the Forward describes the report as a clumsy 
concoction of essentially private facts, it is committing an act that is 
hard to characterise. Anyone who could write such a thing had 
either not read the report in question at all; or he was too limited 
or prejudiced to understand it; or else he was writing something 
he knew to be incorrect. Nobody can read the "Komplott gegen 
die Internationale" without being convinced that the private 
matters interspersed in it are the most insignificant part of it, are 
illustrations meant to provide a more detailed picture of the 
characters involved, and that they could all be cut without 
jeopardising the main point of the report. The organisation of a 
secret society, with the sole aim of subjecting the European labour 
movement to a hidden dictatorship of a few adventurers, the 
infamies committed to further this aim, particularly by Nechayev 
in Russia 40—this is the central theme of the book, and to maintain 
that it all revolves around private matters is, to say the least, 
irresponsible. 
To be sure, it may be extremely painful for some Russians 
suddenly to see the dirty side—and it certainly is very dirty—of 
a Francisco Serrano y Dominguez.— Ed. 
b Luis Gonzales Bravo.— Ed. 

=====第53页=====
Refugee Literature.—III 23 
the Russian movement ruthlessly exposed to Western Europe. But 
who is to blame? Who else but those Russians themselves who 
represent this dirty side, who, not satisfied with deceiving their 
own compatriots, attempted to subordinate the whole European 
labour movement to their personal ends? If Bakunin and company 
had restricted their heroic deeds to Russia, people in Western 
Europe would hardly have troubled to train their sights on them. 
The Russians themselves would have done that. But as soon as 
those gentlemen, who do not even understand the rudiments of 
the conditions and development of the West European labour 
movement, seek to play the dictator with us, it ceases to be 
amusing: one simply fires at them pointblank. 
Anyway, the Russian movement can take such revelations with 
equanimity. A country that has produced two writers of the 
stature of Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky, two socialist Lessings, 
will not be destroyed because, all at once, it spawns a humbug like 
Bakunin and a few immature little students, who inflate them­
selves with big words like frogs, and finally gobble one another up. 
Even among the younger Russians we know people of first-class 
theoretical and practical talents and great energy, people who have 
the advantage over the French and the English, thanks to their 
knowledge of languages, in their intimate acquaintance with the 
movement in different countries, and over the Germans in their 
cosmopolitan versatility. Those Russians who understand and 
participate in the labour movement can only regard it as a service 
rendered to have been relieved of complicity in the Bakuninists' 
acts of villainy. All this does not, however, prevent the Forward 
from concluding its account with the words: 
"We do not know what the authors of this pamphlet think of the results it has 
achieved. The majority of our readers would probably share the feeling of 
depression with which we have read it and with which we record these sorry 
phenomena in our pages, in pursuance of our duty as chroniclers."3 
With this feeling of depression on the part of Friend Peter we 
conclude the first section of our tale. The second begins with the 
following paragraph from the same volume of the Forward: 
"Our readers will be pleased to receive another piece of news in a similar vein. 
With us, in our ranks, we also have the well-known writer Peter Nikitich Tkachov; 
after four years' detention he has succeeded in escaping from the place where he 
was interned and condemned to inactivity, to reinforce our ranks."b 
a [P. L. Lavrov,] Op. cit., p. 27.— Ed 
b Bnepedt,!  HenepiodunecKoe  o6o3phuie,  Vol. II, Part 2, Zurich, 1874:  H3T>  MpKymcKa. 
In the section: Hmo dhjiaemcn na Podunh}, p. 115.— Ed 

=====第54页=====
24 Frederick Engels 
We learn who the well-known writer Tkachov is from a Russian 
pamphlet, The Tasks of Revolutionary Propaganda in Russia, which 
he himself published in April 1874 and which depicts him as a 
green grammar-school boy of singular immaturity, the Karlchen 
Missnick, as it were, of Russian revolutionary youth. He tells us 
that many people have asked him to collaborate in the Forward; he 
knew the editor was a reactionary; nevertheless, he considered it 
his duty to take the Forward under his wing, although—it should 
be noted—it had not asked for him. On arriving he finds, to his 
astonishment, that the editor, Friend Peter, presumes to make the 
final decision on the acceptance or rejection of articles. Such an 
undemocratic procedure naturally infuriates him; he composes a 
detailed document claiming, for himself and the other staff 
(who—it should be noted—had not asked for it), "in the name of 
justice, on the basis of purely theoretical considerations ... equality 
of rights and obligations" (with the editor-in-chief) "with regard to 
everything affecting the literary and economic side of the 
enterprise". 3 
Here we see straightaway the immaturity that, while it does not 
dominate the Russian refugee movement, is, nevertheless, more or 
less endured. A Russian scholar, who has a considerable reputa­
tion in his own country, becomes a refugee and acquires the 
means to found a political journal abroad. Scarcely has he 
managed to do this, when some more or less enthusiastic youth 
comes along, unasked, and offers to take part, on the more or less 
childish condition that he should have an equal voice with the 
founder of the journal in all literary and financial matters. In 
Germany he would have been laughed at. But the Russians are not 
so coarse. Friend Peter goes to great pains to convince him that he 
is wrong, both "in the name of justice and on the basis of purely 
theoretical considerations"—naturally in vain. Tkachov, offended, 
withdraws like Achilles to his tent41 and fires off his pamphlet 
against Friend Peter, whom he calls a "philistine philosopher".b 
With a stifling heap of eternally repeated Bakuninist phrases 
about the nature of true revolution, he accuses Friend Peter of the 
crime of preparing the people for revolution, of seeking to bring 
them to a "clear understanding and awareness of their needs". 
Anyone, however, who wishes to do that is no revolutionary, but a 
man of peaceful progress, i.e., a reactionary, a supporter of 
a n. H. TKanëB-b, 3adauu  peeoJiwu,ioHuoü  nponazaudvi es Pocciu, [London,] 1874, 
p. VIII.—Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 10.— Ed. 

=====第55页=====
Refugee Literature.— III 25 
"bloodless revolution in the German taste".a The true revolution­
ary "knows that the people are always ready for revolution"b; 
anyone who does not believe this does not believe in the people, 
and faith in the people "constitutes our strength". To anyone who 
does not realise this, the writer quotes a pronouncement by 
Nechayev, this "typical representative of our modern youth". 
Friend Peter says we must wait until the people are ready for 
revolution—"but we cannot and will not wait"c; the true-
revolutionary differs from the philistine philosopher in that he 
"assumes the right to summon the people to revolution at any 
time". d And so on. 
Here in Western Europe we would simply dismiss all this 
childish nonsense with the answer: "If your people are ready for 
revolution at any time, if you assume the right to summon them to 
revolution at any time, and if you simply cannot wait, why do you 
go on boring us with your prattle, why, for goodness sake, don't 
you go ahead and strike now?" 
But our Russians do not view matters quite so simply. Friend 
Peter thinks that Mr. Tkachov's childish, tedious and contradictory 
observations, which revolve in an eternal circle, may exert the 
seductive attraction of a mons veneris42  on Russian youth, and, as the 
faithful Eckart of this youth, he issues an admonitory exhortation of 
sixty closely printed pages against them. e In this he sets out his own 
views on the nature of revolution, investigating in deadly earnest 
whether or not the people are ready for revolution and in what 
circumstances revolutionaries have the right to summon them to 
revolution or not and similar niceties, which at this level of generality 
have about as much value as the scholastics' studies of the Virgin 
Mary. In the process, "the Revolution" itself becomes a sort of 
Virgin Mary, theory becomes faith, activity in the movement 
becomes a religion, and the whole debate takes place not on terra 
firma, but in a cloudy sky of generalities. 
Here, however, Friend Peter becomes involved in a tragic 
contradiction with  himself.  He, the preacher of unity, the 
opponent of all polemics, of all "mutually accusatory pamphlets" 
within the revolutionary party, cannot, of course, do his duty as 
Eckart, without also engaging in polemics; he cannot reply to his 
opponent's accusations without similarly accusing him. Friend 
a Ibid., p. 8.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 10.— Ed 
c Ibid., p. 34.— Ed 
d Ibid., p. 10.— Ed 
e [P. L. Lavrov,]  PyccKoü  coiiiaJibHo-peeoAtoiiioHHoUMOJiodeDKu,  [London,] 1874.— Ed 

=====第56页=====
26 Frederick Engels 
Peter will himself testify to the "feeling of depression" that 
accompanies this "sorry phenomenon". 
His pamphlet begins as follows: 
"Of two evils, one must choose the lesser. 
"I know full well that all this refugee literature of mutually accusatory 
pamphlets, of polemics about who is the genuine friend of the people and who is 
not, who is honest and who is not, and, in particular, who is genuine representative 
of Russian youth, of the true revolutionary party—that all this literature about the 
personal dirt of the Russian emigration is as repugnant to the reader as it is 
insignificant for the revolutionary struggle, and can only gratify our enemies—this 
I know, and yet I find it necessary to pen these lines, necessary with my own hand 
to swell the number of these wretched writings by one more, to the tedium of our 
readers and the delight of our enemies—necessary, because of two evils, one must 
choose the lesser."3 
Splendid. But why is it that Friend Peter, who evinces so much 
Christian tolerance in the Forward and demands the same of us 
towards the tricksters we have exposed—tricksters whom, as we 
shall see, he knows as well as we do,—that he did not even have 
the modicum of tolerance towards the writers of the report to ask 
himself whether they, too, were obliged to choose the lesser of two 
evils? Why must the fire first burn his own fingers before he 
realises that there might be even greater evils than a little harsh 
polemics against people who, in the guise of ostensibly revolution­
ary activity, were endeavouring to debase and destroy the entire 
European labour movement? 
Let us, however, be indulgent towards Friend Peter; fate has 
been rather hard on him. No sooner has he done, in full 
consciousness of his own guilt, what he reproaches us with doing, 
than Nemesis drives him on and forces him to supply Mr. Karl 
Thaler with new material for several more articles in the Neue 
Freie Presse. 
"Or," he asks the ever-ready madcap Tkachov, "has your agitation already 
done its work? Is your organisation perhaps ready? Ready? Really ready? Or have 
we here that notorious secret committee of 'typical' revolutionaries, the committee 
that consists of two men and circulates decrees?43 Our young people have been 
told so many lies, they have been so often deceived, their trust so shamefully 
abused, that they will not, all at once, believe in the readiness of the revolutionary 
organisation." b 
For the Russian reader it is, of course, unnecessary to add that 
the "two men" are Bakunin and Nechayev. Further: 
"But there are those who claim to be friends of the people, supporters of the 
social revolution, and who, at the same time, bring to their activity that 
mendaciousness and dishonesty that I have described above as a belch of the old 
a Ibid., p. 3.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 17.— Ed. 

=====第57页=====
Refugee Literature.— III 27 
society.... These people used the bitterness of the supporters of the new social 
order against the injustice of the old society, asserting the principle that, in war, 
every means is allowable. Among these allowable means they included the deception 
of their collaborators, the deception of the people whom they, nevertheless, 
claimed to serve. They were prepared to lie to everyone and anyone solely in order 
to organise a sufficiently strong party, just as if a strong social-revolutionary party 
could be produced without the honest solidarity of its members! They were ready 
to arouse in the people the old passions of banditry and enjoyment without work.... 
They were ready to exploit their friends and comrades, to make them tools of their 
plans;  they were ready verbally to defend the most complete independence and 
autonomy of persons and sections, while at the same time organising the most 
pronounced secret dictatorship and training their supporters in the most sheep-like 
and thoughtless obedience, as if the social revolution could be carried out by a 
union of exploiters and exploited, by a group of people whose actions are, at every 
turn, a slap in the face for everything their words preach!"3 
It is incredible, but true: these lines, which resemble an extract 
from the "Komplott gegen die Internationale" as closely as one 
egg does another, were written by the very man who, a few 
months before, had described that pamphlet as a crime against the 
common cause, because of its attacks on the very same people, 
attacks that were in complete agreement with the above lines. 
Well, let us be satisfied with this. 
If, however, we now look back on Mr. Tkachov, with his great 
pretensions and utterly insignificant achievements, and at the little 
malheur that befell our Friend Peter on this occasion, we might 
well consider it our turn to say: 
"We do not know what the authors think of the results 
achieved. The majority of our readers would probably share the 
feeling of 'amusement' with which we have read it and with which 
we record these 'strange' phenomena in our pages, in pursuance 
of our duty as chroniclers." 
Joking aside, however. Many peculiar phenomena in the Russian 
movement to date are explained by the fact that, for a long time, 
every Russian publication was a closed book to the West, and that 
it was, therefore, easy for Bakunin and his consorts to conceal 
from it their goings-on, which had long been known to the 
Russians. They zealously spread the assertion that even the dirty 
sides of the Russian movement should—in the interests of the 
movement itself—be kept secret from the West; anyone who 
communicated Russian matters to the rest of Europe, in so far as 
they were of an unpleasant nature, was a traitor. That has now 
ceased. Knowledge of the Russian language—a language that, 
both for its own sake, as one of the richest and most powerful 
living languages, and on account of the literature thereby made 
» Ibid., pp. 44, 45.— Ed 

=====第58页=====
28 Frederick Engels 
accessible, richly deserves study—is no longer a great rarity, at any 
rate among the German Social-Democrats. The Russians will have 
to bow to the inevitable international fate: their movement will 
henceforth develop in full view and under the surveillance of the 
rest of Europe. Nobody has had to pay so dearly for their earlier 
isolation than they themselves. But for this isolation, it would 
never have been possible to cheat them so disgracefully for years 
on end, as Bakunin and his consorts did. Those who will derive 
the greatest benefit from the West's criticism, from the interna­
tional interaction of the various West European movements on the 
Russian movement and vice versa, from the eventual fusion of the 
Russian movement with the all-European movement, are the 
Russians themselves. 

=====第59页=====
29 
IV 44 
The readers of the Volksstaat have suffered a misfortune. Some 
of them may still remember that, in my last article on "refugee 
literature" (Nos. 117 and 118), a I dealt with some passages from 
the Russian periodical Forward and a pamphlet by its editor.b 
Quite by chance I happened to mention a Mr. Peter Tkachov, who 
has published a little pamphlet attacking the aforementioned 
editor,0  and with whom I had only concerned myself as little as 
was absolutely necessary. I described him, to judge by the form 
and content of his immortal work, "as a green grammar-school 
boy of singular immaturity, the Karlchen Missnick, as it were, of 
Russian revolutionary youth" d and pitied the editor of the 
Forward for deeming it necessary to bandy words with such an 
adversary. I was soon to learn, however, that the boy Karl is 
beginning to get cross with mee  and entangling me, too, in 
polemics with him. He publishes a pamphlet: Offener Brief an 
Herrn Friedrich Engels by Peter Tkachov, Zurich, typography by 
Tagwacht, 1874. The fact that, in it, I have all sorts of things 
foisted on to me that Mr. Tkachov must know I have never 
maintained would be a matter of indifference to me; but the fact 
that he gives the German workers quite a false picture of the 
situation in Russia, in order to justify the activities of the 
Bakuninists in relation to Russia, makes a reply necessary. 
In his open letter, Mr. Tkachov consistently sets himself up as a 
representative of Russian revolutionary youth. He maintains that I 
"dispensed advice to the Russian revolutionaries ... urging them to 
a See this volume, pp. 19-28.— Ed. 
h Ibid., p. 25.— Ed. 
c Ibid., p. 24.— Ed 
d Ibid.— Ed 
e Ibid., p. 18.— Ed 

=====第60页=====
30 Frederick Engels 
enter into an alliance with me (!)"a; at the same time I had 
depicted them, "the representatives of the Russian revolutionary 
party abroad", their efforts and their literature in the "most 
unfavourable colours to the German labour world"; he says: "You 
express your utter contempt for us Russians because we are so 
'stupid' and 'immature'," etc. "...'green grammar-school boys', as 
you please to call us"—and finally there follows the inevitable 
trump-card: "By mocking us you have done our common enemy, 
the Russian state, a valuable service." I have subjected him, Mr. 
Tkachov claims, "to every conceivable kind of abuse".b 
Now, nobody knows better than Peter Nikitich Tkachov that 
there is not a single grain of truth in all this. First, in the article in 
question, I held no one responsible for Mr. Tkachov's utterances 
other than Mr. Tkachov  himself.  It never occurred to me to see 
him as a representative of the Russian revolutionaries. If he 
appoints himself as such, thereby transferring the green grammar-
school boy and other pleasantries from his shoulders on to theirs, 
then I must definitely protest. Among Russian revolutionary youth 
there are, of course, as everywhere, people of widely differing 
moral and intellectual calibre. Yet its general level, even after 
taking full account of the time difference and the essentially 
different milieu, is undoubtedly still far higher than our German 
student youth has ever attained, even during its best period in the 
early 1830s. Nobody but Mr. Tkachov himself gives him the right 
to speak on behalf of these young people in their entirety. Indeed, 
even though he reveals himself as a true Bakuninist on this 
occasion, I nevertheless doubt at the moment whether he has the 
right to conduct himself as the representative of the small number 
of Russian Bakuninists whom I described as "a few immature little 
students, who inflate themselves with big words like frogs, and 
finally gobble one another up".c But even if this were the case, it 
would only be a new version of the old story of the three tailors of 
Tooley Street in London, who issued a proclamation that started, 
"We,  the people of England, declare" 45 etc.* Thus, the main point 
that needs to be made is that the "Russian revolutionaries" do not 
* What's the betting that Mr. Tkachov will say that, with the above anecdote, 
I have betrayed the proletariat by depicting tailors as such in a "ridiculous 
light" d? 
a P. Tkatschoff, Offener Brief an Herrn Friedrich Engels..., Zurich, 1874, 
p. 3.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 3, 7, 10 and  11.—  Ed. 
c See this volume, p. 23.— Ed. 
d P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief...,  p. 10.— Ed 

=====第61页=====
Refugee Literature.— IV 31 
come into it, now any more than before, and that for Tkachov's 
"we"  it is necessary to substitute "I", throughout. 
I am supposed to have given him "advice". I haven't the faintest 
idea what he is talking about. I may have let fly a few  blows,  Peter 
Nikitich, but advice*? Be so kind as to furnish  proof. 
At the end of my last article, I am supposed to have urged him 
or his ilk to enter into an alliance with me. I will pay Mr. Tkachov 
ten marks in Bismarck's coin of the realm46 if he can demonstrate 
that. 
I am supposed to have maintained that he is "stupid", and he 
puts the word in quotation marks. Although I would not deny that 
he has hidden his talents—if that is the appropriate word 
here—under a bushel of considerable size in both these works, it 
is open to anyone to ascertain that the word '.'stupid" does not 
occur once anywhere in my article. But if all else fails, the 
Bakuninists resort to bogus quotations. 
Further, I am supposed to have "mocked" him and portrayed 
him in a "ridiculous light". Granted, Mr. Tkachov will never be 
able to force me to take his pamphlet seriously. We Germans are 
widely reputed to be boring, and must have richly deserved this 
reputation on many an occasion. That does not, however, oblige 
us in all circumstances to be as boring and pompous as the 
Bakuninists. The German labour movement has acquired a 
singularly humorous character from its skirmishes with police, 
state prosecutors and prison-warders; why should I deny it? Mr. 
Tkachov has full permission to mock me and depict me in a 
ridiculous light, if he can manage it without imputing any lies to 
me. 
Now the incomparable accusation: by portraying Mr. Tkachov in 
a light befitting him and his works, I have "done our common 
enemy, the Russian state, a valuable service"! Similarly, he says at 
another point: by describing him as I have, I am breaching "the 
basic principles of the programme of the International Working 
Men's Association"! Here we see the true Bakuninist. These 
gentlemen, as true revolutionaries, shun no means against us, 
particularly in the dark; but if one fails to treat them with the 
greatest respect, if one drags their antics into the light, criticises 
them and their ringing phrases, then one is serving the Tsar of 
Russia and breaching the basic principles of the International. 
Precisely the opposite is the case, in fact. The one who has done 
a In the original a play on the words Schläge (blows) and Ratschläge 
(advice).— Ed. 

=====第62页=====
32 Frederick Engels 
the Russian government a service is no other than Mr. Tkachov. If 
the Russian police had any sense, it would spread this gentleman's 
pamphlet throughout Russia in large numbers. On the one hand, 
it could hardly find a better means of discrediting the Russian 
revolutionaries, whom the writer claims to represent, in the eyes of 
all sensible people. On the other hand, it is always possible that 
some worthy but inexperienced young people would allow it to 
provoke them to rash acts, thus delivering themselves into a trap. 
But, says Mr. Tkachov, I have subjected him to "every 
conceivable kind of abuse". Now a certain kind of abuse, the 
so-called invective, is one of the most effective forms of rhetoric, 
employed by all great orators when necessary; the most powerful 
English political writer, William Cobbett, possessed a supreme 
command of it that is still admired to this day and serves as an 
unsurpassed model. Mr. Tkachov himself also indulges in a good 
deal of "abuse" in his pamphlet. So, if I had indulged in abuse, 
that would not in itself have been wrong of me at all. But as I did 
not become rhetorical with regard to Mr. Tkachov, as I did not 
take him seriously at all, I cannot have used abuse to attack him. 
Let us examine what I said about him. 
I called him "a green grammar-school boy of singular immaturi­
ty". Immaturity may refer to character, mind or knowledge. As 
far as immaturity of character is concerned, I made the following 
addition to Mr. Tkachov's own account: 
"A Russian scholar, who has a considerable reputation in his 
own country, becomes a refugee and acquires the means to found 
a political journal abroad. Scarcely has he managed to do this, 
when some more or less enthusiastic youth comes along, unasked, 
and offers to take part, on the more or less childish condition that 
he should have an equal voice with the founder of the journal in 
all literary and financial matters. In Germany he would have been 
laughed at."a 
I hardly think I need adduce any further evidence of 
immaturity of character. Immaturity of mind is sufficiently 
demonstrated by the further quotations from Mr. Tkachov's 
pamphlet that follow below. As far as knowledge is concerned, the 
dispute between the Forward and Mr. Tkachov largely concerns 
this: the editor of the Forward demands that the Russian 
revolutionary youth should learn something, should enrich them­
selves with serious and thorough information, should acquire 
critical faculties in accordance with accepted methods, should work 
a See this volume, p. 24.— Ed. 

=====第63页=====
Refugee Literature.—IV 33 
at their self-development and self-education by the sweat of their 
brow. Tkachov rejects such advice with disgust: 
"Again and again I must express the feeling of profound indignation that it has 
always aroused in me... Learn! Educate yourselves! Oh God, how can a living 
human being say such a thing to another living human being! Wait! Study and 
finish your education! But have we the right to wait" (with revolution to wit)? 
"Have we the right to waste time on education?" (p. 14). "Knowledge is probably a 
necessary precondition for peaceful progress, but it is not necessary at all for the 
revolution" (p. I7).a 
So, if Mr. Tkachov evinces profound indignation at the very 
injunction to study, if he declares all knowledge superfluous for a 
revolutionary, if, in addition, he does not betray even the slightest 
trace of knowledge in his entire pamphlet, he himself writes out 
the testimony to his own immaturity, and I have but ascertained 
the fact. Yet anyone who makes out this testimony himself can, in 
our opinion, aspire at most to the educational level of a 
grammar-school boy. Thus, by attributing the highest possible 
level to him, rather than abusing him, I was perhaps doing him 
even too much credit. 
Furthermore, I said that Mr. Tkachov's observations were childish 
(for examples of this, see the quotations in this article), tedious 
(surely even the writer himself would not deny this), contradictory 
(as the editor of the Forward has demonstrated) and revolving in 
an eternal circle (which is also true). I then go on to speak of his 
great pretensions (which I have simply related in his own terms) 
and his utterly insignificant achievements (which the present 
article demonstrates more than adequately). Where, then, is all the 
abuse? Surely, it cannot be abuse to compare him with Karlchen 
Missnick, Germany's favourite grammar-school boy and one of the 
most popular German writers. But stay! Did I not say of him that 
he had retired like Achilles to his tent and from there fired off his 
pamphlet against the Forward? b That must be the crux of the 
matter. In the case of a man whose hackles rise at the mere 
mention of studying, who can boldly take Heine's words: 
And all his ignorance 
He acquired  himself,0 
as his motto, I dare say one may assume that it is the first time he 
has come across the name Achilles. And as I link Achilles with 
"tent" and "firing", perhaps Mr. Tkachov imagines that this 
Achilles is a Russian N.C.O. or a Turkish bashibazouk47 and it 
a II. TKaMëBT>, 3adav,u peeoMoiiiouHou nponaeandt* «&  Pocciu.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, p. 24.— Ed. 
c H. Heine, Kobes I.—Ed 
5-1317 

=====第64页=====
34 Frederick Engels 
must, therefore, be a breach of etiquette to call him an Achilles. 
Let me, however, assure Mr. Tkachov that the Achilles of whom I 
speak was the greatest hero of Greek legend, and that the said 
retreat to his tent provided the material for the greatest heroic 
epic of all time, the  Iliad,  which even Mr. Bakunin will confirm for 
him. If my assumption should be correct I would then, of course, 
be forced to declare that Mr. Tkachov is not a grammar-school 
boy at all. 
Mr. Tkachov goes on to say: 
"Despite all this I ventured, however, to express the conviction that the social 
revolution can be easily called into life. 'If it is so easy to call it into life,' you 
remark, 'why do you not do so, instead of talking about it?'—It seems to you to be 
ridiculous, childish behaviour... I and those who think as I do are convinced that 
the practicability of the social revolution in Russia presents no problems, that it is 
possible at any moment to induce the Russian people to make a general 
revolutionary protest (!). True, this conviction commits us to a certain amount of 
practical activity, but it does not militate in the least against the usefulness and 
necessity of literary propaganda. It is not enough that we are convinced; we want 
others, too, to share our conviction. The more like-minded comrades we have, the 
stronger we shall feel, the easier it will be for us to achieve a practical solution to 
the task."3 
That really does take the cake. It sounds so nice, so sensible, so 
cultivated, so reasonable. It quite sounds as though Mr. Tkachov 
had only written his pamphlet0 to demonstrate the usefulness of 
literary propaganda, and I, the impatient greenhorn, had ans­
wered him: "The devil take literary propaganda, let's get 
cracking!" Now, what is the true state of affairs? 
Mr. Tkachov commences his pamphlet by straightaway giving 
newspaper propaganda (and that is surely the most effective form 
of literary propaganda) a vote of no confidence, saying that one 
should not "expend too much revolutionary energy on it", for "it 
does far more harm through inappropriate use, than it does the 
good through appropriate use".c So enthusiastic is our Tka­
chov about literary propaganda in general. In particular, 
though, if one wishes to engage in such propaganda and recruit 
like-minded comrades, mere rhetoric is no good; one must 
examine causes, and treat the matter theoretically, i.e., in the final 
analysis, scientifically. On this point, Mr. Tkachov tells the editor 
of the Forward: 
"Your philosophical struggle, that purely theoretical, scientific propaganda to 
which your journal is devoted, ... is, from the point of view of the interests of the 
revolutionary party, not merely useless; it is even harmful."d 
a P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief...,  pp. 9-10.— Ed 
b 3adanu peeojiwuiowHoü nponazanàbi ea Pocciu.—  Ed 
c n. TKanèBi», 3adauu peaoMouionnoü nponazandu  er> Pocciu, p. II.— Ed 
d Ibid., p. 37.— Ed 

=====第65页=====
Refugee Literature.— IV 35 
It is evident that the more we investigate Mr. Tkachov's views 
on literary propaganda, the more bogged down we become, and 
the further we are from discovering what he wants. So what does 
he really want? Let us listen to a little more: 
"Do you not realise that the revolutionary always assumes and must assume the 
right to summon the people to revolt; that he differs from philistine philosophers 
in that, without waiting until the course of historical events announces the moment, 
he himself chooses this moment, in that he knows that the people are always ready 
for revolution (p. 10) ... Whoever does not believe in the possibility of the 
revolution in the present does not believe in the people, does not believe in the 
people's readiness for revolution (p. 11) ... That is why we cannot wait, why we 
maintain that revolution is an urgent necessity in Russia, and particularly necessary 
at the present time; we permit no hesitation, no delay. Now or very late, perhaps 
never (p. 16)! ... Every people exposed to despotism, enslaved by exploiters ... any 
such people (and all peoples are in this position) is by virtue of the very conditions 
of its social order—revolutionary; it is always capable, it is always willing to make 
revolution; it is always ready for revolution (p. 17)... But we cannot and will not 
wait (p. 34)... Now is no time for long, protracted arrangements and eternal 
preparations—let everyone pack his possessions and hasten on his way. The 
question of what is to be done48 must no longer concern us. It has long since been 
settled. It is to make revolution.— How? To the best of one's ability" (p. 39[-40]). 
This seems clear enough to me. So I asked Karlchen Missnick: 
If nothing else will do, if the people are ready for revolution, and 
you are too; if you are simply unwilling and unable to wait any 
longer, and have no right to wait; if you claim the right to choose 
the moment to strike, and if it is, at last, "now or never!"—well, 
dear Karlchen, do what you cannot refrain from doing, make 
revolution today and smash the Russian state into a thousand 
pieces, otherwise you will end up by bringing about an even 
greater misfortune! 
And what does Karlchen Missnick do? Does he strike? Does he 
destroy the Russian state? Does he liberate the Russian people, 
"this unfortunate people, streaming in blood, with the crown of 
thorns, nailed to the cross of slavery", 3 whose suffering prevents 
him from waiting any longer? 
Not a bit of it. Karlchen Missnick, with tears of injured 
innocence in his eyes, appears before the German workers saying: 
See what lies that depraved Engels is imputing to me! He claims I 
spoke of striking immediately; yet it is not a question of that, but 
of making literary propaganda, and this Engels, who does nothing 
more himself than make literary propaganda, has the effrontery to 
pretend that he does not understand "the usefulness of literary 
propaganda". b 
a Ibid., p. 34.—  Ed. 
b P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief...,  p. 10.— Ed. 
5* 

=====第66页=====
36 Frederick Engels 
But stay! Make literary propaganda!  But  have  we the  right  to 
wait, have  we the  right  to waste time  on literary propaganda? 
After  all,  every minute, every hour  the  revolution  is delayed costs 
the people  a thousand victims  (p. 14)!a Now is no  time  for literary 
propaganda;  the  revolution must  be carried  out now, or  perhaps 
never—we permit  no hesitation,  no delay.  And we are  supposed 
to make literary propaganda!  Oh God, how can a  living human 
being  say  such  a thing  to another human being,  and  this human 
being's name  is Peter Tkachov! 
Was I wrong when  I described these impetuous rodomontades, 
now so basely denied,  as "childish"? They  are so  childish that  one 
would think  the  writer  had  gone  as far as was  humanly possible  in 
this respect.  And yet he has  since surpassed  himself.  The  editor  of 
the Forward quotes  a passage from  a proclamation  to the  Russian 
peasants, penned  by Mr.  Tkachov.  In it Mr.  Tkachov describes  the 
state  of affairs after  a completed social revolution  as follows: 
"And then  the  peasant would embark  on a  merry life with song  and  music  ... 
his pockets would  be full,  not of  coppers  but of  gold ducats.  He  would have  all 
kinds  of beasts  and  poultry  in the  farmyard,  as many  as he  desired.  On the  table  he 
would have every kind  of meat,  and  festive cakes,  and  sweet wines,  and the  table 
would  be laid from morn  to night.  And he  would  eat and  drink  as much  as his 
belly would hold,  but he  would work  no more than  he had a  mind  to. And  there 
would  be no one who  dared  to force  him: go,  eat!—go,  lie down  on the  stove!  "b 
And the  person capable  of perpetrating this proclamation 
complains when  I confine myself  to  calling  him a  green 
grammar-school  boy of  rare immaturity! 
Mr. Tkachov continues: 
"Why  do you  reproach  us  with conspiracies?  If we  were  to renounce 
conspiratorial, secret, underground activities,  we  would have  to renounce  all 
revolutionary activity.  But you  also castigate  us for not  wanting  to depart from  our 
conspiratorial ways here  in the  European West  and  thus disturbing  the  great 
international labour movement."0 
First,  it is  untrue that  the  Russian revolutionaries have  no other 
means  at their disposal than pure conspiracy.  Mr.  Tkachov himself 
has just stressed  the  importance  of literary propaganda, from 
abroad into Russia! Even within Russia oral propaganda among 
the people themselves, particularly  in the  cities,  can  never  be quite 
excluded  as a  method, whatever  Mr.  Tkachov  may  find  it in his 
interest  to say  about  it. The  best proof  of this  is that,  in the  latest 
a IT.  TKaneBt, 3adauu  peeoJiwi^ioHHoü  nponazandu  ea Pocciu.—  Ed 
b II. AaBpoB-b, PyccKoü  c&uicuibHO-peeajiwiiioHHoü  MOJiodeJKu,  [London,]  1874, 
p. 47.— Ed. 
c P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief..., p. 7.—Ed. 

=====第67页=====
Refugee Literature.— IV 37 
mass arrests in Russia, it was not the educated nor the students, 
but the workers who were in the majority.49 
Second, I undertake to fly to the moon, even before Tkachov 
liberates Russia, as soon as he proves that I have ever, anywhere, 
at any time in my political career, declared that conspiracies were 
to be universally condemned in all circumstances. I undertake to 
bring him back a souvenir from the moon as soon as he proves 
that any other plots are mentioned in my article but the one 
against the International by the Alliance. Indeed, if only the 
Russian Bakuninists really were to conspire seriously against the 
Russian Government! If only, instead of fraudulent conspiracies 
based on lies and deceit against their co-conspirators, like that of 
Nechayev,50 this "typical representative of our present-day youth" 
according to Tkachov,3 instead of plots against the European 
labour movement like the Alliance, fortunately exposed and thus 
destroyed—if only they, the "doers" (dejateli), as they boastfully 
call themselves, would at last, for once, perform a deed proving 
that they really possess an organisation and that they are 
concerned with something else apart from the attempt to form a 
dozen! Instead, they cry out loud to all and sundry: We conspire, 
we conspire!—just like operatic conspirators roaring in four parts: 
"Silence, silence! Make not a sound!"*5  And all the tales about 
far-reaching conspiracies only serve as a cloak to hide nothing 
more than revolutionary inactivity vis-à-vis governments and 
ambitious cliquishness within the revolutionary party. 
It is precisely our ruthless exposure of this entire fraud in the 
Komplott gegen die Internationale that causes these gentlemen to wax 
so indignant. It was "tactless". In exposing Mr. Bakunin we were 
seeking "to besmirch one of the greatest and most selfless 
representatives of the revolutionary epoch in which we live", and 
with "dirt", at that. The dirt that came to light on this occasion 
was, to the very last particle, of Mr. Bakunin's own making, and 
not his worst by any means. The pamphlet in question made him 
out to be far cleaner than he really was. We simply quoted § 18 of 
the "Revolutionary Catechism", the article stipulating how to 
behave vis-à-vis the Russian aristocracy and bourgeoisie, how "to 
seize hold of their dirty secrets and thereby make them our slaves, 
so that their wealth, etc., becomes an inexhaustible treasure and a 
valuable support in all kinds of undertaking". 51 We have not yet 
a n. TKaMëBT>, 3adanu  peeoAioiiioHHoü  nponazauàbi  ej>  Pocciu, [London,] 1874, 
p. 19.—  Ed. 
b G. Verdi, Rigoletto, Scene II. Libretto by Piave with changes according to 
Victor Hugo's Le roi s'amuse. — Ed. 

=====第68页=====
38 Frederick Engels 
related how this article has been translated into practice. This is a 
story that would be long in the telling, but it will, in due course, be 
told. 
It thus turns out that all the accusations Mr. Tkachov has made 
against me, with that virtuous mien of injured innocence that 
becomes all Bakuninists so well, are all based on claims he not only 
knew to be false, but were also a pack of lies that he himself had 
concocted. Whereupon we take our leave of the personal part of 
his "Open Letter". 

=====第69页=====
39 
v 
ON SOCIAL RELATIONS IN RUSSIA52 
On the subject matter, Mr. Tkachov tells the German workers 
that, as regards Russia, I possess not even a "little knowledge",2 
possess nothing but "ignorance", and he feels  himself,  therefore, 
obliged to explain the real state of affairs to them, particularly the 
reasons that, just at the present time, a social revolution could be 
accomplished in Russia with the greatest of ease, much more easily 
than in Western Europe. 
"We have no urban proletariat, that is undoubtedly true; but, then, we also 
have no bourgeoisie; ...our workers will have to fight only against the political 
power—the power of capital is with us still only in embryo. And you, sir, are 
undoubtedly aware that the fight against the former is much easier than against the 
latter." b 
The revolution that modern socialism strives to achieve is, 
briefly, the victory of the proletariat over the bourgeoisie and the 
establishment of a new organisation of society by the destruction 
of all class distinctions. This requires not only a proletariat to carry 
out this revolution, but also a bourgeoisie in whose hands the 
social productive forces have developed so far that they permit the 
final destruction of class distinctions. Among savages and semi-
savages there likewise often exist no class distinctions, and every 
people has passed through such a state. It could not occur to us to 
re-establish this state, for the simple reason that class distinctions 
necessarily emerge from it as the social productive forces develop. 
Only at a certain level of development of these social productive 
forces, even a very high level for our modern conditions, does it 
a P. Tkatschov, Offener Brief an Herrn Friedrich Engels..., pp 3-5.— Ed. 
b Ibid.— Ed. 

=====第70页=====
40 Frederick Engels 
become possible to raise production to such an extent that the 
abolition of class distinctions can constitute real progress, can be 
lasting without bringing about stagnation or even decline in the 
mode of social production. But the productive forces have reached 
this level of development only in the hands of the bourgeoisie. 
The bourgeoisie, therefore, in this respect also is just as necessary 
a precondition for the socialist revolution as is the proletariat 
itself.  Hence a man who says that this revolution can be more 
easily carried out in a country where, although there is no 
proletariat, there is no bourgeoisie either, only proves that he has 
still to learn the ABC of socialism. 
The Russian workers—and these workers are, as Mr. Tkachov 
himself says, "tillers of the soil and, as such, not proletarians but 
owners"*—have, therefore, an easier task, because they do not 
have to fight against the power of capital, but "only against the 
political power", against the Russian state. And this state 
"appears only at a distance as a power... It has no roots in the economic life of 
the people; it does not embody the interests of any particular estate... In your 
country the state is no imaginary power. It stands four square on the basis of 
capital; it embodies in  itself"  (!!) "certain economic interests... In our country the 
situation is just the reverse—our form of society owes its existence to the state, to a 
state hanging in the air, so to speak, one that has nothing in common with the 
existing social order, and has its roots in the past, but not in the present. "b 
Let us waste no time over the confused notion that the economic 
interests need the state, which they themselves create, in order to 
acquire a body, or over the bold contention that the Russian form 
of society (which, of course, must also include the communal 
property of the peasants) owes its existence to the state, or over 
the contradiction that this same state "has nothing in common" 
with the existing social order, which is supposed to be its very own 
creation. Let us rather examine at once this "state hanging in the 
air", which does not represent the interests of even a single estate. 
In European Russia, the peasants possess 105 million dessiatines,0 
the nobility (as I shall here term the big landowners for the sake 
of brevity)—-100 million dessiatines of land, of which about half 
belong to 15,000 nobles, each of whom consequently possesses, on 
average, 3,300 dessiatines.d The area belonging to the peasants is, 
therefore, only a trifle bigger than that of the nobles. So, you see, 
a P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief...,  p. 8.— Ed 
b Ibid., p. 6.— Ed. 
c Dessiatine—measure of land in Russia until 1917—equals 2,7 acres. Here and 
below Engels quotes data from BoeHHo-cmamucmunecKiu  c6opnuKr>.  BwnycKi. IV. 
St. Petersburg, 1871, pp. 105, 108, 200 and  203.—  Ed. 
d Der Volksstaat and the 1894 edition mistakenly have: "33,000".— Ed 

=====第71页=====
Refugee Literature.—  V. On Social Relations in Russia 41 
the nobles have not the slightest interest in the existence of the 
Russian state, which protects them in the possession of half the 
country. To continue: the peasants pay 195 million rubles land tax 
annually for their  half,  the nobles—13 million! The lands of the 
nobles are, on average, twice as fertile as those of the peasants, 
because during the settlement3  for the redemption of the corvée?* 
the state not only took the greater part, but also the best part of 
the land from the peasants and gave it to the nobles, and for this 
worst land the peasants had to pay the nobility the price of the 
best.* And the Russian nobility has no interest in the existence of 
the Russian state! 
The peasants—taken in the mass—have been put by the 
redemption into a most miserable and wholly untenable position. 
Not only has the greatest and best part of their land been taken 
from them, so that, in all the fertile parts of the empire, the 
peasant land is far too small—under Russian agricultural condi­
tions—for them to be able to make a living from it. Not only were 
they charged an excessive price for it, which was advanced to them 
by the state and for which they now have to pay interest and 
instalments on the principal to the state. Not only is almost the 
whole burden of the land tax thrown upon them, while the 
nobility escapes almost scot-free—so that the land tax alone 
consumes the entire ground rent value of the peasant land and 
more, and all further payments which the peasant has to make 
and wThich we will speak of immediately are direct deductions 
from that part of his income which represents his wages. Then, in 
addition to the land tax, to the interest and depreciation payments 
on the money advanced by the state, since the recent introduction 
of local administration there are the provincial and district imposts 
as. well.55 The most essential consequence of this "reform" was 
fresh tax burdens for the peasants. The state retained its revenues 
in their entirety, but passed on a large part of its expenditures to 
the provinces and districts, which imposed new taxes to meet 
them, and in Russia it is the rule that the higher estates are almost 
tax exempt and the peasants pay almost everything. 
Such a situation is as if specially created for the usurer, and with 
the almost unequalled talent of the Russians for trading on a 
* The exception was Poland,54  where the government wanted to ruin the nobility 
hostile to it and to draw the peasants to its side. [Note to the text published in Der 
Volksstaat; in the 1875 and 1894 editions it was omitted.] 
a "Oômee noAOJKeHie o KpecTbflHax-b, BwmeAuiHxi,  H3T>  KpfcnocTHoft 
3aBHCHMOCTH", CauKmnemepoypzcKin BhdoMocmu, Nos. 53 and 54, March 7 and 8, 
1861.—Ed. 

=====第72页=====
42 Frederick Engels 
lower level, for taking full advantage of favourable business 
situations and the swindling inseparable from this—Peter I long 
ago said that one Russian could get the better of three Jews—the 
usurer makes his appearance everywhere. When taxes are about to 
fall due, the usurer, the kulak—frequently a rich peasant of the 
same village community—comes along and offers his ready cash. 
The peasant must have the money at all costs and is obliged to 
accept the conditions of the usurer without demur. But this only 
gets him into a tighter fix, and he needs more and more ready 
cash. At harvest time, the grain dealer arrives; the need for money 
forces the peasant to sell part of the grain he and his family 
require for their subsistence. The grain dealer spreads false 
rumours, which lower prices, pays a low price and often even part 
of this in all sorts of highly priced goods; for the TRUCKSYSTEM 6 is 
also highly developed in Russia. It is quite obvious that the great 
corn exports of Russia are based directly on starvation of the 
peasant population.—Another method of exploiting the peasant is 
the following: a speculator rents domain land from the govern­
ment for a long term of years, and cultivates it himself as long as 
it yields a good crop without manure; then he divides it up into 
small plots and lets out the exhausted land at high rents to 
neighbouring peasants, who cannot manage on the income from 
their allotment. Here we have precisely the Irish MIDDLEMEN, 57 just 
as above the English TRUCK  SYSTEM.  In short, there is no country in 
which, in spite of the pristine savagery of bourgeois society, 
capitalistic parasitism is so developed, so covers and entangles the 
whole country, the whole mass of the population with its nets, as 
in Russia. And all these bloodsuckers of the peasants are supposed 
to have no interest in the existence of the Russian state, the laws 
and law courts of which protect their sleek and profitable 
practices! 
The big bourgeoisie of Petersburg, Moscow, and Odessa, which 
has developed with unprecedented rapidity over the last decade, 
chiefly owing to the railways, and which cheerfully "went smash" 
along with the rest during the last swindle years, the grain, hemp, 
flax and tallow exporters, whose whole business is built on the 
misery of the peasants, the entire Russian large-scale industry, 
which only exists thanks to the protective tariffs granted it by the 
state—have all these important and rapidly growing elements of 
the population no interest in the existence of the Russian state? To 
say nothing of the countless army of officials, which swarms over 
Russia and plunders her, and here constitutes a real social estate. 
And when Mr. Tkachov assures us that the Russian state has "no 

=====第73页=====
Refugee Literature.— V. On Social Relations in Russia 43 
roots in the economic life of the people", that "it does not embody 
the interests of any particular estate", that it hangs "in the air", 
methinks it is not the Russian state that hangs in the air, but 
rather Mr. Tkachov. 
It is clear that the condition of the Russian peasants, since the 
emancipation from serfdom, has become intolerable and cannot be 
maintained much longer, and that for this reason alone, if for no 
other, a revolution is in the offing in Russia. The question is only: 
what can be, what will be the result of this revolution? 
Mr. Tkachov says it will be a social one. This is pure tautology. 
Every real revolution is a social one, in that it brings a new class to 
power and allows it to remodel society in its own image. But he 
wants to say it will be a socialist one; it will introduce into Russia 
the form of society at which West European socialism aims, even 
before we in the West succeed in doing so—and that under the 
conditions of a society in which both proletariat and bourgeoisie 
appear only sporadically and at a low stage of development. And 
this is supposed to be possible because the Russians are, so to 
speak, the chosen people of socialism, and have artels and 
communal ownership of the land. 
The artel, which Mr. Tkachov mentions only incidentally, but 
with which we deal here because, since the time of Herzen, it has 
played a mysterious role with many Russians 58; the artel in Russia 
is a widespread form of association, the simplest form of free 
co-operation, such as is found for hunting among hunting tribes. 
Word and content are not of Slavic but of Tatar origin. Both are 
to be found among the Kirghiz, Yakuts, etc., on the one hand, and 
among the Lapps, Samoyeds59 and other Finnish peoples, on the 
other.* That is why the artel developed originally in the North 
and East, by contact with Finns and Tatars, and not in the 
South-West. The severe climate necessitates industrial activity of 
various kinds, and so the lack of urban development and of capital 
is replaced, as far as possible, by this form of co-operation.—One 
of the most characteristic features of the artel, the collective 
responsibility of its members for one another to third parties, was 
originally based on blood relationship, like the mutual liability 
[Gewere] of the ancient Germans, blood vengeance, etc.— 
Moreover, in Russia the word artel is used for every form not only 
of collective activity, but also of collective institution. The Bourse is 
also an artel.a 
* On the artel, compare inter alia: Sbornik materialov ob Arteljach v Rossiji 
(Collection of Material on Artels in Russia), St. Petersburg, 1873, Part I. 
a Engels left out this sentence from the 1894 edition.— Ed. 

=====第74页=====
44 Frederick Engels 
In workers' artels, an elder (starosta, starshina) is always chosen 
who fulfils the functions of treasurer, bookkeeper, etc., and of 
manager, as far as necessary, and who receives a special salary. 
Such artels are formed: 
1. for temporary enterprises, after the completion of which they 
dissolve; 
2. for the members of one and the same trade, for instance, 
porters, etc.; 
3. for permanent enterprises, industrial in the proper sense of 
the word. 
They are established by a contract signed by all the members. 
Now, if these members cannot bring together the necessary 
capital, as very often happens, such as in the case of cheeseries 
and fisheries (for nets, boats, etc.), the artel falls prey to the 
usurer, who advances the amount lacking at a high interest rate, 
and thereafter pockets the greater part of the income from the 
work. Still more shamefully exploited, however, are the artels that 
hire themselves in a body to an employer as wage-labourers. They 
direct their industrial activity themselves and thus save the 
capitalist the cost of supervision. The latter lets to the members 
huts to live in and advances them the means of subsistence, which 
in turn gives rise to the most disgraceful TRUCK  SYSTEM.  Such is the 
case with the lumbermen and tar distillers in the Archangel 
gubernia, and in many trades in Siberia, etc. (Cf. Flerovsky, 
Polozenie rabocago klassa v Rossiji. "The Condition of the Working 
Class in Russia", St. Petersburg, 1869). 60 Here, then, the artel serves 
to facilitate considerably the exploitation of the wage-worker by 
the capitalist. On the other hand, there are also artels which 
themselves employ wage-workers, who are not members of the 
association. 
It is thus seen that the artel is a co-operative society that has 
arisen spontaneously and is, therefore, still very undeveloped, and 
as such neither exclusively Russian, nor even Slavic. Such societies 
are formed wherever there is a need for them. For instance, in 
Switzerland among the dairy farmers and in England among the 
fishermen, where they even assume a great variety of forms. The 
Silesian navvies (Germans, not Poles), who built so many German 
railways in the forties, were organised in fully fledged artels. True, 
the predominance of this form in Russia proves the existence in 
the Russian people of a strong impulse to associate, but is far from 
proving their ability to jump, with the aid of this impulse, from 
the artel straight into the socialist order of society. For that, it is 
necessary above all that the artel itself should be capable of 

=====第75页=====
Refugee Literature.— V. On Social Relations in Russia 45 
development, that it shed its primitive form, in which, as we saw, it 
serves the workers less than it does capital, and rise at least to the 
level of the West European co-operative societies. But if we are to 
believe Mr. Tkachov for once (which, after all that has preceded, 
is certainly more than risky), this is by no means the case. On the 
contrary, he assures us with a pride highly indicative of his 
standpoint: 
"As regards the co-operative and credit associations on the German" (!) "model, 
recently artificially transplanted to Russia, these have met with complete 
indifference on the part of the majority of our workers and have been a failure 
almost everywhere."3 
The modern co-operative society has at least proved that it can 
run large-scale industry profitably on its own account (spinning 
and weaving in Lancashire). The artel is so far not only incapable 
of doing this; it must of necessity even be destroyed by big 
industry if it does not develop further. 
The communal property of the Russian peasants was discovered 
in 1845 by the Prussian Government Councillor Haxthausen and 
trumpeted to the world as something absolutely wonderful, 
although Haxthausen could still have found survivals enough of it 
in his Westphalian homeland and, as a government official, it was 
even part of his duty to know them thoroughly. It was from 
Haxthausen that Herzen, himself a Russian landowner, first 
learned that his peasants owned the land in common, and he 
made use of the fact to describe the Russian peasants as the true 
vehicles of socialism, as born communists, in contrast to the 
workers of the aging, decayed European West, who would first 
have to go through the ordeal of acquiring socialism artificially. 
From Herzen this knowledge came to Bakunin, and from Bakunin 
to Mr. Tkachov. Let us listen to the latter: 
"Our people ... in its great majority ... is permeated with the principles of 
common ownership; it is, if one may use the term, instinctively, traditionally 
communist. The idea of collective property is so closely interwoven with the whole 
world outlook of the Russian people" (we shall see immediately how far the world 
of the Russian peasant extends) "that today, when the government begins to 
understand that this idea is incompatible with the principles of a 'well-ordered' 
society, and in the name of these principles wishes to impress the idea of individual 
property on the consciousness and life of the people, it can succeed in doing so 
only with the help of the bayonet and the knout. It is clear from this that our 
people, despite its ignorance, is much nearer to socialism than the peoples of 
Western Europe, although the latter are more educated."b 
a P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief...,  p. 8.— Ed 
h Ibid., p. 5.—Ed. 

=====第76页=====
46 Frederick Engels 
In reality, communal ownership  of the  land  is an  institution 
found among  all  Indo-Germanic peoples  at a low  level  of 
development, from India  to Ireland,  and  even among  the  Malays, 
who are  developing under Indian influence,  for  instance,  on Java. 
As late  as 1608, in the  newly conquered North  of Ireland,  the 
legally established communal ownership  of the  land served  the 
English  as a  pretext  for  declaring  the  land  to be  ownerless  and, as 
such, escheated  to the  Crown.  In India,  a whole series  of forms  of 
communal ownership  has  been  in existence down  to the  present 
time.  In Germany  it was  general;  the  communal lands still  to be 
found here  and  there  are a  relic  of it; and  often still distinct traces 
of it, temporary divisions  of the  communal lands,  etc., are  also  to 
be found, especially  in the  mountains. More exact references  and 
details with regard  to old  German communal ownership  may be 
consulted  in the  various writings  of Maurer, which  are  classic  on 
this question. 3 In Western Europe, including Poland  and  Little 
Russia,  at a  certain stage  in social development, this communal 
ownership became  a fetter,  a brake  on agricultural production, 
and was  increasingly eliminated.  In Great Russia (that  is, Russia 
proper),  on the  other hand,  it persists until today, thereby 
proving,  in the  first place, that here agricultural production  and 
the social conditions  in the  countryside corresponding  to it are  still 
very undeveloped,  as is  actually  the  case.  The  Russian peasant lives 
and has his  being only  in his  village community;  the  rest  of the 
world exists  for him  only  in so far as it  interferes with  his 
community. This  is so  much  the  case that,  in Russian,  the  same 
word  "wir"  means,  on the one  hand, "world"  and, on the  other, 
"peasant community".  "Ves' mir", the whole world, means  to the 
peasant  the  meeting  of the  community members. Hence, when 
Mr. Tkachov speaks  of the  "world outlook"  of the  Russian 
peasants, 13 he has  obviously translated  the  Russian  "wir"  incorrectly. 
Such  a complete isolation  of individual communities from  one 
another, which creates throughout  the  country similar,  but the 
very opposite  of common, interests,  is the  natural basis  for oriental 
despotism;  and  from India  to Russia this form  of society, wherever 
it has  prevailed,  has  always produced  it and  always found  its 
complement  in it. Not  only  the  Russian state  in general,  but  even 
its specific form, tsarist despotism, instead  of hanging  in the air, is 
a G. L. von Maurer, Einleitung  zur  Geschichte  der  Mark-,  Hof-, Dorf-, und 
Stadt-Verfassung  und der  öffentlichen Gewalt; Geschichte  der Dorfverfassung  in Deutsch­
land;  Geschichte  der Fronhöfe,  der  Bauernhöfe  und der  Hofverfassung  in Deutschland; 
Geschichte,  der Markenverfassung  in Deutschland. — Ed 
b P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief.., p. 5.—Ed. 

=====第77页=====
Refugee Literature.—  V. On Social Relations in Russia 47 
a necessary and logical product of Russian social conditions with 
which, according to Mr. Tkachov, it has "nothing in common"! — 
Further development of Russia in a bourgeois direction would here 
also destroy communal ownership little by little, without any need 
for the Russian government to intervene with "bayonet and 
knout". And this especially since the communally owned land in 
Russia is not cultivated by the peasants in common, so that the 
product may then be divided, as is still the case in some districts in 
India; on the contrary, from time to time the land is divided up 
among the various heads of families, and each cultivates his 
allotment for  himself.  Consequently, very great differences in 
degree of prosperity are possible and actually exist among the 
members of the community. Almost everywhere there are a few 
rich peasants among them—here and there millionaires—who 
play the usurer and suck the blood of the mass of the peasants. 
No one knows this better than Mr. Tkachov. While he wants the 
German workers to believe that the "idea of collective ownership" 
can be driven out of the Russian peasants, these instinctive, 
traditional communists, only by bayonet and knout, he writes on 
page 15 of his Russian pamphlet3: 
"Among the peasants a class of usurers (kulakov) is making its way, a class of 
people who buy up and rent the lands of peasants and nobles—a muzhik 
aristocracy." 
These are the same kind of bloodsuckers as we described more 
fully above. 
The severest blow to communal ownership was dealt again by 
the redemption of the corvée. The greater and better part of the 
land was allotted to the nobility; for the peasant there remained 
scarcely enough, often not enough, to live on. In addition, the 
forests were given to the nobles; the wood for fuel, implements 
and building, which the peasant formerly might fetch there for 
nothing, he now has to buy. Thus, the peasant has nothing now 
but his house and the bare land, without means to cultivate it and, 
on average, without enough land to support him and his family 
from one harvest to the next. Under such conditions and under 
the pressure of taxes and usurers, communal ownership of the 
land is no longer a blessing; it becomes a fetter. The peasants 
often run away from it, with or without their families, to earn 
their living as migratory labourers, and leave their land behind 
them.* 
* On the position of the peasants compare, inter alia, the official report of the 
government commission on agricultural production (1873), and further, Skaldin, 
a 3adauu  peeoJiwiiioHHOu  nponazauàbi  et> Pocciu.—  Ed. 

=====第78页=====
48 Frederick Engels 
It is clear that communal ownership in Russia is long past its 
period of florescence and, to all appearances, is moving towards its 
disintegration. Nevertheless, the possibility undeniably exists of 
raising this form of society to a higher one, if it should last until 
the circumstances are ripe for that, and if it shows itself ca­
pable of developing in such manner that the peasants no longer 
cultivate the land separately, but collectively*; of raising it to this 
higher form without it being necessary for the Russian peasants to 
go through the intermediate stage of bourgeois small holdings. This, 
however, can only happen if, before the complete break-up of 
communal ownership, a proletarian revolution is successfully 
carried out in Western Europe, creating for the Russian peasant 
the preconditions requisite for such a transition, particularly the 
material things he needs, if only to carry through the revolution, 
necessarily connected therewith, of his whole agricultural system. 
It is, therefore, sheer bounce for Mr. Tkachov to say that the 
Russian peasants, although "owners", are "nearer to socialism" 
than the propertyless workers of Western Europe. Quite the 
opposite. If anything can still save Russian communal ownership 
and give it a chance of growing into a new, really viable form, it is 
a proletarian revolution in Western Europe. 
Mr. Tkachov treats the political revolution just as lightly as he 
does the economic one. The Russian people, he relates, 
"protests incessantly" against its enslavement, now in the form of 
"religious sects ... refusal to pay taxes ... robber bands" (the 
German workers will be glad to know that, accordingly, Schin­
derhannes 3 is the father of German Social-Democracy) "... incen­
diarism ... revolts ... and hence the Russian people may be termed 
an instinctive revolutionist". Therefore, Mr. Tkachov is convinced that 
"it is only necessary to evoke an outburst in a number of places at 
the same time of all the accumulated bitterness and discontent, 
which ... is always seething in the breast of our people". Then 
"the union of the revolutionary forces will come about of  itself,  and 
the fight ... must end favourably for the people's cause. Practical 
W Zacholusti i w Stolice (In the Backwoods and in the Capital), St. Petersburg, 1870; 
the latter publication by a liberal conservative. 
* In Poland, particularly in the Grodno gubernia, where the nobility for the most 
part was ruined by the insurrection of 1863, the peasants now frequently buy or 
rent estates from the nobles and cultivate them unpartitioned and on their collective 
account And these peasants have not had communal ownership for centuries and 
are not Great Russians, but Poles, Lithuanians and Byelorussians. 
a Schinderhannes: nickname of Johann Bückler, a notorious German robber.— 
Ed 

=====第79页=====
Refugee Literature.—  V. On Social Relations in Russia 49 
necessity, the instinct of self-preservation", will then achieve, quite 
of themselves, "a firm and indissoluble alliance among the 
protesting village communities".3 
It is impossible to conceive of a revolution on easier and more 
pleasant terms. One starts shooting, at three or four places 
simultaneously, and the "instinctive revolutionist", "practical 
necessity" and the "instinct of self-preservation" do the rest "of 
themselves". Being so dead easy, it is simply incomprehensible 
why the revolution has not been carried out long ago, the people 
liberated and Russia transformed into the model socialist country. 
Actually, matters are quite different. The Russian people, this 
instinctive revolutionist, has, true enough, made numerous isolated 
peasant revolts against the nobility and against individual officials, 
but never against the tsar, except when a false tsar put himself at its 
head and claimed the throne. The last great peasant rising,61 
under Catherine II, was only possible because Yemelyan Pugachov 
claimed to be her husband, Peter III, who allegedly had not been 
murdered by his wife, but dethroned and clapped in prison, and 
had now escaped. The tsar is, on the contrary, the earthly god of 
the Russian peasant: Bog  vysok,  Car daljok—God is on high and the 
tsar far away, is his cry in hour of need. There is no doubt that 
the mass of the peasant population, especially since the redemp­
tion of the corvée, has been reduced to a condition that 
increasingly forces on it a fight also against the government and 
the tsar; but Mr. Tkachov will have to try to sell his fairy-tale of 
the "instinctive revolutionist" elsewhere. 
Then again, even if the mass of the Russian peasants were ever 
so instinctively revolutionary, even if we imagined that revolutions 
could be made to order, just as one makes a piece of flowered 
calico or a teakettle—even then I ask, is it permissible for anyone 
over twelve years of age to imagine the course of a revolution in 
such an utterly childish manner as is the case here? And 
remember, further, that this was written after the first revolution 
made on this Bakuninist model—the Spanish one of 1873—had so 
brilliandy failed.62 There, too, they let loose at several places 
simultaneously. There, too, it was calculated that practical necessity 
and the instinct of self-preservation would, of themselves, bring 
about a firm and indissoluble alliance between the protesting 
communities. And what happened? Every village community, 
every town defended only  itself;  there was no question of mutual 
assistance and, with only 3,000 men, Pavia overcame one town 
a P. Tkatschoff, Offener  Brief...,  pp. 5-6, 9.— Ed. 
6-1317 

=====第80页=====
50 Frederick Engels 
after another in a fortnight and put an end to the entire 
anarchist glory (cf. my Bakuninists at Work, where this is described 
in detail). 
Russia undoubtedly is on the eve of a revolution. Her financial 
affairs are in extreme disorder. Taxes cannot be screwed any 
higher, the interest on old state loans is paid by means of new 
loans,  and every new loan meets with greater difficulties; money 
can now be raised only on the pretext of building railways! The 
administration, corrupt from top to bottom as of old, the officials 
living more from theft, bribery and extortion than on their 
salaries. The entire agricultural production—by far the most 
essential for Russia—completely dislocated by the redemption 
settlement of 1861; the big landowners, without sufficient labour 
power; the peasants without sufficient land, oppressed by taxation 
and sucked dry by usurers; agricultural production3 declining by 
the year. The whole held together with great difficulty and only 
outwardly by an Oriental despotism the arbitrariness of which we 
in the West simply cannot imagine; a despotism that, from day to 
day, not only comes into more glaring contradiction with the views 
of the enlightened classes and, in particular, with those of the 
rapidly developing bourgeoisie of the capital, but, in the person of 
its present bearer, has lost its head, one day making concessions to 
liberalism and the next, frightened, cancelling them again and 
thus bringing itself more and more into disrepute. With all that, a 
growing recognition among the enlightened strata of the nation 
concentrated in the capital that this position is untenable, that a 
revolution is impending, and the illusion that it will be possible to 
guide this revolution along a smooth, constitutional channel. Here 
all the conditions of a revolution are combined, of a revolution 
that, started by the upper classes of the capital, perhaps even by 
the government  itself,  must be rapidly carried further, beyond the 
first constitutional phase, by the peasants; of a revolution that will 
be of the greatest importance for the whole of Europe, if only 
because it will destroy at one blow the last, so far intact, reserve of 
the entire European reaction. This revolution is surely approach­
ing. Only two events could still delay it: a successful war against 
Turkey or Austria, for which money and firm alliances are 
necessary, or—a premature attempt at insurrection, which would 
drive the possessing classes back into the arms of the government. 
a The 1894 edition has: "agricultural output".— Ed. 

=====第81页=====
51 
Karl Marx 
EPILOGUE 
[TO REVELATIONS CONCERNING 
THE COMMUNIST TRIAL IN COLOGNE] 
The Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne, which 
the Volksstaat now considers it timely to reprint, originally 
appeared in Boston (Massachusetts) and in Basle. Most of the 
latter edition was confiscated at the German border. The 
pamphlet saw the light of day a few weeks after the trial closed. At 
that point, it was of prime importance to waste no time, hence a 
good many errors of detail were inevitable. An example of this is 
the list of names of the Cologne jury. Thus, a certain Levy and not 
M. Hess is said to have been the author of the Red Catechism. 64 
And W. Hirsch assures us in his "Rechtfertigungsschrift" 3 that 
Cherval's escape from gaol in Paris was pre-arranged by  Greif,  the 
French police and Cherval  himself,  in order that the latter might 
act as an informer in London during the court proceedings. This 
is likely, as the forgery of a bill of exchange committed in Prussia 
and the resultant risk of extradition were bound to bring Cramer b 
(ChervaFs real name) to heel. My account of the incident is based 
on Cherval's "confessions" to a friend of mine. Hirsch's statement 
casts an even harsher light on Stieber's perjury, the intrigues of 
the Prussian embassies in London and Paris, and the shameless 
intervention by Hinckeldey. 
When the Volksstaat started to reprint the pamphlet in its 
columns, I was for a moment undecided whether or not it might 
a W. Hirsch, "Die Opfer der Moucharderie. Rechtfertigungsschrift", Belletris­
tisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, Nos. 3-6, April 1, 8, 15 and 22, 
1853.  See also Marx's Herr Vogt (present edition, Vol. 17, p. 64) and Hirsch's 
Confessions (ibid., Vol. 12, pp. 40-43).— Ed. 
b A pun: Cramer—Cherval's real name, Krämer (in German) means huckster.— 
Ed. 
6* 

=====第82页=====
52 Karl Marx 
be appropriate to omit Section VI (The Willich-Schapper Group).3 
On further consideration, however, any mutilation of the text 
appeared to me to be a falsification of an historical document. 
The violent suppression of a revolution leaves behind a shock in 
the minds of its protagonists, particularly those forced into exile 
far from the domestic scene—a shock that, for a time, renders 
even the most able people, as it were, not responsible for their 
actions. They are unable to accept the course of history; they are 
loth to realise that the form of the movement has changed. Hence 
the conspiratorial and revolutionary games they play, equally 
compromising for themselves and for the cause they serve; hence, 
too, the errors of Schapper and Willich. In the North American 
Civil War, Willich showed that he was more than a visionary, and 
Schapper, a life-long champion of the labour movement, confessed 
and acknowledged his momentary aberration soon after the 
Cologne trial. Many years later, on his death-bed, the day before 
he died, he spoke to me with scathing irony about that time of 
"refugee foolishness".—Nevertheless, the circumstances in which 
the Revelations were written explain the bitterness of the attack on 
the involuntary accomplices of the common enemy. In times of 
crisis,  thoughtlessness is a crime against the party calling for public 
expiation. 
"The whole existence of the political police depends on the outcome of 
this trial!" With these words, written during the Cologne court 
proceedings to the embassy in London (see my pamphlet Herr 
Vogt, p. 27 b), Hinckeldey betrayed the secret of the Communist 
trial. "The whole existence of the political police" is not merely 
the existence and activities of the staff immediately concerned with 
this area. It is the subordination of the entire governmental 
machinery, including the courts (see the Prussian disciplinary law 
for judicial officials of May 7, 1851c) and the press (see reptile 
funds65),  to that institution, just as the entire state system of 
Venice was once subordinated to the State Inquisition.66 The 
political police, paralysed during the revolutionary storm in 
Prussia, needed re-organising along the lines of the second French 
Empire. 
After the demise of the 1848 revolution, the German labour 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 445-52.—.Ed. 
b A reference to the 1860 edition published in London (see present edition, 
Vol. 17, p.  67).—  Ed. 
c Gesetz, betreffend die Dienstvergehen der Richter und die unfreiwillige Versetzung 
derselben auf eine andere Stelle oder in den Ruhestand. Vom 7. Mai 1851. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, No. 13,  1851.—  Ed. 

=====第83页=====
Epilogue to Revelations Concerning  the Communist Trial in  Cologne  53 
movement continued to exist only in the form of theoretical 
propaganda, confined to narrow circles; the Prussian Government 
was not for a moment deceived about its harmlessness in practice. 
The government's Communist witch-hunt served simply as a 
prelude to its reactionary crusade against the liberal bourgeoisie, 
and the bourgeoisie itself steeled the main weapon of this reaction, 
the political police, by sentencing the workers' representatives and 
acquitting Hinckeldey-Stieber. Stieber thus earned his spurs at the 
assizes in Cologne. At that time Stieber was a humble low-ranking 
policeman ruthlessly pursuing a higher salary and promotion; now 
Stieber stands for the unrestricted rule of the political police in the 
new holy Prussian-German empire. Thus he has, to a certain 
extent, become a moral person, moral in the metaphorical sense, 
as, for example, the Reichstag is a moral creation. This time the 
political police is not striking at the workers in order to hit the 
bourgeoisie. Quite the reverse. Precisely in his position as dictator 
of the German liberal bourgeoisie, Bismarck considers himself 
strong enough to drive3 the workers' party out of existence. The 
German proletariat can, therefore, measure the progress of the 
movement it has achieved since the Cologne Communist trial by 
Stieber's growth in stature. 
The Pope's infallibility is small beer compared with that of the 
political police. After for decades sticking young hotheads in gaol 
in Prussia for advocating German unity,6 the German Empire and 
the German monarchy, it is today even incarcerating bald-headed 
old men for refusing to advocate these divine gifts. Today it is just 
as vainly attempting to eradicate the enemies of the Empire as it once 
tried to eradicate the friends of the Empire. What glaring proof that 
it is not called on to make history, even if it were only the history 
of the quarrel over the Emperor's beard! 
The Communist trial in Cologne itself brands the state power's 
impotence in its struggle against social development. The royal 
Prussian state prosecutor ultimately based the guilt of the accused 
on the fact that they secretly disseminated the subversive 
principles of the Communist Manifesto.13 Are not the same 
principles being proclaimed openly in the streets in Germany 
twenty years later? Do they not resound even from the tribune of 
the Reichstag? Have they not journeyed round the world, in the 
shape of the Programme of the International Working Men's 
Association,6* despite all the government arrest-warrants? Society 
a Marx uses here the verb stiebern coined from the name of Stieber.— Ed. 
b by Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. — Ed. 

=====第84页=====
54 Karl Marx 
simply does not find its equilibrium until it revolves around the 
sun of labour. 
At the end of the Revelations it says: "Jenal ... that is the final 
outcome of a government69 that requires such methods in order to 
survive and of a society that needs such a government for its 
protection. The word that should stand at the end of the 
Communist trial is—Jenal"* 
An accurate prediction indeed, giggles the first Treitschke to 
happen along, with a proud reference to Prussia's latest feat of 
arms and the Mauser rifle. Suffice it for me to point out that there 
is not only an inner Düppel, 70 but also an inner Jena. 
London, January 8, 1875 
Karl Marx 
First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 10, Printed according to the news-
January 27, 1875 and in the book: Karl paper, checked with the book 
Marx, Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-
prozess zu Köln, Leipzig, 1875 Published in English for the first 
time 
a See present edition, Vol. 11, p. 457.— Ed. 

=====第85页=====
55 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
FOR POLAND 71 
This year, too, a memorial celebration was held in London to 
commemorate the Polish uprising of January 22, 1863. Large 
numbers of our German party comrades took part in the 
celebration; several of them made speeches, among whom were 
Engels and Marx. 
"There has been talk here," said Engels, "about the reasons for 
the revolutionaries of all countries to sympathise with Poland's 
cause and intervene on its  behalf.  Only one thing has been 
forgotten to mention, namely this: that the political situation in 
which Poland has been placed is a thoroughly revolutionary one, 
leaving Poland with no other choice than to be revolutionary or to 
perish. This was already evident after the first partition, which was 
brought about by the efforts of the Polish nobility to maintain a 
constitution and privileges which had lost their right to existence 
and were harming the country and public order instead of 
preserving peace and securing progress. 2 Already after the first 
partition a section of the nobility acknowledged the mistake and 
came to the conviction that Poland could only be restored by 
revolution;—and ten years later we saw Poles fighting for 
liberty in America.73 The French Revolution of 1789 found an 
immediate echo in Poland. The Constitution of  179174  with the 
rights of man became the banner of revolution on the banks of 
the Vistula and turned Poland into the vanguard of revolutionary 
France, and that at the very moment when the three powers which 
had already despoiled Poland once were uniting in order to march 
to Paris and strangle the revolution.75 Could they stand back and 
allow revolution to gain a foothold in the centre of the coalition? 
Unthinkable. Again they hurled themselves on Poland, this time 

=====第86页=====
56 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
with the intention of completely depriving it of its national 
existence. The unfolding of the revolutionary banner was one of 
the chief reasons for the subjugation of Poland. The country that 
has been dismembered and struck off the list of nations because it 
was revolutionary can seek its salvation nowhere else but in 
revolution. And for this reason we find Poles in all revolution­
ary struggles. Poland realised this in 1863, and during 
the uprising whose anniversary we are celebrating today published 
the most radical revolutionary programme3 that has ever been 
drawn up in Eastern Europe. It would be ridiculous should one 
consider the Polish revolutionaries to be aristocrats wishing to 
reconstruct the aristocratic Poland of 1772, just because there 
exists a Polish aristocratic party. The Poland of 1772 is lost and 
gone forever. No power will be capable of raising it out of the 
grave. The new Poland, which the revolution will put on its feet, is 
as fundamentally different socially and politically from the Poland 
of 1772 as the new society towards which we are hastening is 
fundamentally different from present-day society. 
"One more word. No one can enslave a people with impunity. 
The three powers that murdered Poland have been severely 
punished. Look at my own country: Prussia-Germany. Under the 
signboard of national unification we brought upon us the Poles, 
the Danes and the French—and have a threefold Venice76; we have 
enemies everywhere, we have encumbered ourselves with debts 
and taxes in order to maintain countless masses of soldiers who 
must also serve to suppress the German workers. Austria, even 
official Austria, knows full well how dearly that little bit of Poland 
has cost her. At the time of the Crimean War, Austria was 
prepared to go to war against Russia provided that Russian Poland 
was occupied and liberated. However, that did not agree with 
Louis Napoleon's plans, and still less with Palmerston's. And as far 
as Russia is concerned, we see: in 1861 the first major movement 
broke out among the students, all the more dangerous since the 
people were everywhere in a state of great agitation as a result of 
the emancipation of the serfs; and what did the Russian 
government do, well realising the danger?—It provoked the uprising 
of 1863 in  Poland71;  for it has been proved that this uprising was its 
work. The movement amongst the students, the profound 
agitation of the people vanished at once, giving way to Russian 
chauvinism, which descended on Poland once it was a question of 
a Centralny Narodowy Komitet jako tymczasowy Rzqd Narodowy. Dan w Warszawie 22 
Stycznia 1863.— Ed. 

=====第87页=====
For Poland 57 
maintaining Russian rule there. Thus perished the first significant 
movement in Russia as a result of the calamitous struggle against 
Poland. The restoration of Poland is indeed in the interest of 
revolutionary Russia, and I hear tonight with pleasure that this 
opinion agrees with the convictions of the Russian revolutionaries" 
(who had expressed this view at the meeting78). 
Marx said roughly this: The Working Men's Party of Europe 
takes the keenest interest in the emancipation of Poland, and the 
original programme of the International Working Men's Associa­
tion declares the restoration of Poland to be one of the goals of 
working-class politics.3 What are the reasons for this special 
interest of the Working Men's Party in the fate of Poland? 
Firstly, of course, sympathy for a subjugated people, which by 
continuous heroic struggle against its oppressors has proved its 
historic right to national independence and self-determination. It 
is by no means a contradiction that the international Working 
Men's Party should strive for the restoration of the Polish nation. 
On the contrary: only when Poland has re-conquered its indepen­
dence, when it once again exercises control over itself as a free 
people, only then can its internal development recommence and 
will it be able to take part in its own right in the social transformation 
of Europe. As long as a viable people is fettered by a foreign 
conqueror, it must necessarily apply all its strength, all its efforts, 
all its energy against the enemy from without; for this length of 
time,  then, its inner life remains paralysed, it remains unable to 
work for social emancipation. Ireland, Russia under Mongolian 
rule,  etc., provide striking proof of this thesis. 
Another reason for the sympathy of the Working Men's Party 
for the resurrection of Poland is its special geographical, military 
and historical position. The partition of Poland is the mortar 
binding together the three great military despotisms: Russia, 
Prussia and Austria. Only the reconstitution of Poland can break 
this bond and thus remove the greatest obstacle to the social 
emancipation of the peoples of Europe. 
The main reason for the sympathy of the working class towards 
Poland is, however, this: Poland is not merely the only Slavic tribe, 
it is the only European people that has fought and is fighting as 
the cosmopolitan soldier of the revolution. Poland shed its blood 
during the American War of Independence; its legions fought 
under the banner of the first French Republic; by its revolution of 
a K. Marx, "Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Associa­
tion" (see present edition, Vol. 20, p.  13).—  Ed. 

=====第88页=====
58 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
1830 it prevented the invasion of France that had been decided by 
the partitioners of Poland; in 1846 in Cracow it was the first in 
Europe to plant the banner of social revolution; in 1848 it played 
an outstanding part in the revolutionary struggle in Hungary, 
Germany and Italy; finally, in 1871 it supplied the Paris 
Commune with its best generals and most heroic soldiers. 
In the brief moments when the popular masses of Europe were 
able to move freely, they remembered what they owe to Poland. 
After the victorious March Revolution in Berlin in 1848, the first 
deed of the people was to release the Polish prisoners, Mieroslaws-
ki and his comrades-in-suffering, and proclaim the restoration of 
Poland79; in Paris, in May 1848, Blanqui marched at the head of 
the workers against the reactionary National Assembly in order to 
force it to accept armed intervention for Poland80; finally, in 1871, 
when the Parisian workers had constituted themselves as the 
government, they honoured Poland by entrusting its sons with the 
military leadership of their forces. 
Neither at the present moment does the German Working 
Men's Party allow itself to be the least misled by the reactionary 
conduct of the Polish deputies in the German Reichstag; it knows 
that these gentlemen are not acting on behalf of Poland but of 
their own private interests; it knows that the Polish peasant, the 
Polish worker, in short, every Pole who is not blinded by class 
interests, must realise that Poland has and can only have one ally in 
Europe—the Working Men's  Party. 81 — Long Live  Poland! 
First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 34, Printed according to the news-
March 24, 1875 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第89页=====
59 
Frederick Engels 
SEMI-OFFICIAL WAR-CRIES 
Once again the press reptiles8 of the German Empire have 
received orders to sound the war-trumpets. That godless and 
degenerate country France will simply not, at any price, leave 
Germany in peace, that god-fearing country bursting out in 
glorious bloom under the rule of stock-exchange swindles, 
floatationM  and the crash. France is re-arming on the most 
colossal scale, and the high-pressure velocity at which these 
armaments are being carried out is the best proof that it intends, 
if possible next year, to attack the innocent, peace-loving 
Bismarckian Empire, which, as we all know, has never done 
anything to offend anyone, which is tirelessly disarming and about 
which only the subversive press has spread the slander that it has 
just turned two million citizens into reserve soldiers by a Landsturm 
Law. 85 
The press reptiles are in a difficult position. While in the service 
of the Foreign Office they have to portray the Empire as a lamb 
of infinite meekness, the Ministry of War finds it in its interest to 
make it clear to the German bourgeois that something is actually 
happening in return for their heavy taxes, that the armaments 
decided on are really being produced, the fortifications really 
being built, the cadres and mobilisation plans for the large 
number of soldiers "on leave" are being completed, that the 
combat readiness of the army is increasing with every day that 
passes. And as the announcements made in this connection are 
authentic and, moreover, originate from experts, we are perfectly 
able to judge the war-cries of the press toads. 
The new French Cadre Law86 provides the pretext for all the 
noise. Let us then compare the institutions thus created in 
France—for the time being still on paper—with those actually 

=====第90页=====
60 Frederick Engels 
existing in Germany, restricting ourselves for brevity's sake to the 
decisive branch of the service, the infantry. 
On the whole, the new French law turns out to be a 
considerably worsened version of the Prussian one. 
The French infantry of the line is supposed to consist of 144 
regiments of the line, 4 Zouave and 3 Turco regiments of 4 
battalions each,87 30 rifle battalions, 4 foreign and 5 penal battal­
ions,  in all 643 battalions, while the German army of the line 
admittedly only amounts to 468 battalions. This superiority of the 
French line is, however, purely apparent. 
Firstly, the French battalion, like the Prussian, does indeed have 
four companies, but each company has only four officers instead 
of five; and of these four, one is a reserve officer, which is a 
species that simply does not yet exist in France. In France they have 
hitherto had one officer to every 35-40 men, and on account of 
the outdated and cumbersome French drill regulations this is 
necessary, while Prussia has managed quite well with one officer to 
50 men. But this is also the maximum, and the committee of the 
National Assembly that dealt with this law was agreed that no more 
than 200 men might be placed in each company. The French 
company is thus 25 per cent weaker numerically than the Prussian, 
and as the reserve officer does not exist at present, and will not 
exist for many years to come, it is also far from being its equal 
organisationally. But as the company—because of the breech­
loader88—has now become the tactical unit in battle and the action 
of the company columns and of the skirmishers based on them 
requires strong companies, the National Assembly has hereby 
inflicted the greatest harm on the French Army that it could have 
inflicted. 
The French line on a war-footing therefore comprises 
606 battalions of the line with 800 men each 484,800 men 
Zouaves, Turcos, Foreign Legion, Penal Battal­
ions 46,000 " 
total 530,800 men. 
From this number, though, at least 40,000 men must be 
subtracted for Algeria, who only become available when new 
formations are capable of relieving them. This leaves, then, 
490,800 infantrymen at the outbreak of war. The 468 battalions of 
the German infantry each comprise 1,050 men on a war-footing, a 
total of 490,480 men according to official figures, almost exactly as 
many as the French line. 

=====第91页=====
Semi-Official War-Cries 61 
So far, then, equality of numbers, with Germany having a better 
and stronger organisation. But now comes the difference. 
As far as France is concerned, the above 643 weak battalions 
comprise all the infantry for which there exists any war 
organisation at all. Certainly, the 318 depot companies of the line 
and of the riflemen are said to contain a total of 249,480 extra 
reserves (including 50 or 40 officers and non-commissioned 
officers per company), but of these only the men actually exist up 
to now, and these are for the greater part quite untrained, and 
those who are trained have mostly had only six months' service. As 
for the officers and non-commissioned officers, a quarter are 
available, at the most. By the time these 318 depot companies are 
turned into 318 mobile battalions, the entire campaign may have 
been decided, and those who do go into action will not exceed the 
quality of the mobile guards of 1870.89  Then there is the 
Territorial Army, which is composed of the men between 30 and 
40 years old, and is to be organised in 144 regiments of 3 
battalions each, making 432 battalions. All this exists only on 
paper. In order to put such a scheme really into effect, 10,000 
officers and 20,000 non-commissioned officers are needed, of 
which almost literally not a single one is yet available. And where 
are these officers to come from? It took almost two generations 
before the one-year volunteers provided serviceable reserve and 
Landwehr 90 officers in Prussia; right up to the forties, they were 
regarded as a liability in nearly all regiments and treated 
accordingly. And in France, where such an institution infringes all 
traditions of revolutionary equality, where those serving one year 
are despised by the officers and hated by the men, there is quite 
simply no chance of getting anywhere. Yet no other source of 
reserve officers exists. 
As far as the non-commissioned officers and men are con­
cerned, it will be remembered that the victors of Sadowa in 186691 
boasted that the long existence of the Landxvehr system in Prussia 
gave them a lead of 20 years over any other country that might 
adopt the same system; not until the oldest annual intakes 
consisted of trained men would equality with Prussia be attained. 
This appears to have been forgotten now, as does the fact that in 
France only half of the annual contingent actually serves, the 
other half being released after six months' service (which is totally 
inadequate in view of the present pedantic regulations). The 
reserves and militia in France thus chiefly consist of recruits, in 
contrast to their Prussian counterparts. And they pretend to be 
frightened of the present French Territorial Army, which consists 

=====第92页=====
62 Frederick Engels 
of the same untrained cannon-fodder that in 1870 and 1871 could 
not hold its ground on the Loire and at Le Mans against German 
units which were only half as strong, but disciplined! 92 
But there is more to tell yet. In Prussia, after bitter experience, 
they have finally learnt how to mobilise. In eleven days the whole 
army is ready for combat, the infantry much sooner. But this 
requires that everything is organised in the simplest way and, in 
particular, that every individual soldier on leave is assigned in 
advance to the unit he is to join. The basis for this is that every 
regiment has its own permanent recruitment district, from which 
the corresponding Landwehr regiment also draws most of its 
recruits. The new French law, on the contrary, assigns the recruits 
and reservists to the regiment that happens to be in the district at 
the time of mobilisation. This was done out of attachment to a 
tradition handed down from the days of Napoleon whereby the 
individual regiments are garrisoned in all parts of France in turn 
and are supposed to be recruited as far as possible from the whole 
of France. Being obliged to drop the latter, they stuck all the more 
determinedly to the former, thus rendering impossible that 
permanent organic link between regiment command and territori­
al district command which ensures rapid mobilisation in Prussia. 
Even if this senseless change, which is bound to cause much more 
trouble for the specialised branches than for the infantry, only 
delays the mobilisation of the latter for three days, in the face of 
an active adversary they will be the most important three days of 
the entire campaign. 
So what do all the immense French armaments come to? An 
infantry of the line equal to the German in numbers but more 
poorly organised, which, moreover, has to call up a number of 
men with only six months' training in order to get on a 
war-footing; a first reserve which is dominated by men with only 
six months' training for which at best a quarter of the necessary 
officers and non-commissioned officers are available; a second 
reserve of predominantly untrained men without any officers 
whatsoever, and for both reserves, of course, a total lack of 
regular cadres. In addition, the certain prospect of never being 
able to procure the officers that are lacking under the present 
system, so that in the case of war neither of the reserves will be 
able to perform better than the battalions hurriedly established in 
the autumn and winter of 1870. 
Now let us take a look at the German Empire, which is gentle 
like a lamb and which supposedly does not even have any teeth, 
even less baring them. We have already shown the existence of an 

=====第93页=====
Semi-Official War-Cries 63 
infantry of the line of 468 battalions, with 490,480 men on a 
war-footing. But to this must be added the following new 
formations. 
Since the beginning of 1872 each battalion has been allocated 
another 36 recruits, making 17,000 men per year in round 
figures. Furthermore, a full quarter of the men have been 
released after two years' service, this, however, being compensated 
by an equal number of new recruits, making about 28,000 men. 
Thus a total of 45,000 more men are being recruited and trained 
every year than hitherto, making by the end of 1875, in three 
years,  135,000 men, to which must be added 12,000 one-year 
volunteers (at 4,000 per year); all in all 147,000 men, or just 
enough to form a fourth battalion in each of the 148 regiments. 
The surplus reserve companies for this purpose have already 
been "organisationally prepared" in all the regiments of the line 
since the same time, i.e. the officers and non-commissioned officers 
of the line and of the reserves due to enter these battalions 
have already been selected. The fourth battalions can thus be 
on the march at the most two or three days after the 
first three, reinforcing the army by 148 battalions of 
1,050 men = 155,400 men. But these figures do not by any means 
express the full addition to its strength that the field army thereby 
receives. Anyone who saw the Prussian fourth battalions in 
1866 knows that, consisting chiefly of strong, physically mature 
men of 24-27 years, they are the vital core of the army. 
Alongside the formation of the fourth battalions, the organisa­
tion of the reserve battalions—148 in number, not to mention the 
reserve companies of the riflemen—is going ahead. They are 
composed of the surplus trained reservists and the untrained men 
of the second reserve.93 Their strength was officially given as 
188,690 men in 1871. By this it should be understood, however, 
that the cadres of officers and non-commissioned officers already 
appointed in peacetime are capable of training this number of 
men, for the second reserve alone, whose first class now has an 
annual intake of about 45,000 men, supplies in seven annual 
contingents far more than the above figure. The reserve battalions 
are, in fact, the reservoirs from which the battalions in the field, 
weakened by combat and even more by hardship, obtain the 
necessary re-inforcements of more or less trained men, and which 
then go on bringing themselves up to strength again from the second 
reserves. 
At the same time as the line and the reserve troops, the 
Landwehr is mobilised. The cadres of the Landwehr, likewise 

=====第94页=====
64 Frederick Engels 
already appointed in peacetime, comprise 287 battalions (to be 
brought up to 301). In the two last wars the Landwehr battalions 
were only brought up to 800 men; accepting this very low 
envisaged strength, we find that the German Empire can muster a 
Landwehr infantry of 229,600 organised troops, while an annually 
increasing surplus still remains available for subsequent use. 
As if this were not enough, the Landsturm has also been revived. 
According to semi-official reports, by the end of 1874 the 
war-strength of the German infantry had already been increased 
by 234 Landsturm battalions (at 800 men = 187,200 men) exclud­
ing the rifle companies; which can only mean that the cadres for 
these battalions have at least been appointed after a fashion. But 
this is far from exhausting the Landsturm for according to 
Voigts-Rhetz's triumphant announcement in Reichstag it embraces 
"five per cent of the population, two million men". 3 
So what does the balance-sheet look like? 
France has an infantry of the line, including the troops serv­
ing in Algeria, of 530,800 men, and that is its total organised 
infantry. Even if we include the whole of the first reserve, insofar 
as it possesses any apparent organisation at all, 254,600 men 
(288 depot companies of 800 men, 30 rifle depots of 540 men 
and 8,000  surplus convicts), it still only makes 785,400 men on 
foot. 
As for the German Empire, eleven days after the mobilisation 
order it can muster: 
an infantry of the line of 490,480 men 
Two or three days later 
another 148 battalions 155,400 " 
In another fortnight 
287 Landwehr battalions of 800 men 229,600 " 
And after another fortnight 
234 Landsturm battalions of 800 men 187,200 " 
making a total infantry of  1,062,680  men 
which already in peace-time is completely organised and supplied 
in advance with all necessities, backed up by 148 reserve battalions 
with a strength of 188,690 (see above) for filling the gaps caused 
a J. von Voigts-Rhetz made this announcement in his speech in the German 
Reichstag on January 11, 1875. See Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen 
des Deutschen Reichstages. 2. Legislatur-Periode. II. Session 1874/75. Zweiter Band. 
Berlin, 1875, p. 945.—  Ed. 

=====第95页=====
Semi-Official War-Cries 65 
by the campaign. All in all, an organised infantry body of 
1,251,370  men. 
Does anyone think we are exaggerating? By no means. We are 
still lagging behind the truth by neglecting various small factors 
which all the same amount to quite a respectable total when added 
up. Here is the evidence. 
The Kölnische Zeitung of December 27, 1874 contains a "military 
announcement" emanating from the War Ministry 3 from which 
we gather the following. At the end of 1873 the German Army on 
a war-footing amounted to: 
1,361,400  men, of which infantry 994,900 men. 
In 1874 were added the fourth battalions 155,400 " 
and 234 battalions of the Landsturm  187,200 " 
a total infantry of  1,337,500  men, 
in other words, almost 100,000 men more than in our estimate. 
The same article puts the strength of the entire war capability of 
all arms at  1,723,148  men, of whom 39,948 are officers; while the 
French, on the other hand, have at the most 950,000 troops 
organised in advance, of which 785,000 are infantrymen! 
As regards the quality of the troops—assuming the average 
warlike tendencies of each nation to be the same—that of the 
French army has certainly not improved since the war. The 
government has done everything to demoralise the troops, 
particularly by placing them in barracks, where in winter a soldier 
can neidier drill nor do anything else and is reduced exclusively, 
as it were, to drinking absinth. There is a lack of non­
commissioned officers, the companies are weak, the cavalry 
regiments are seriously short of horses. The Norddeutsche All­
gemeine Zeitung emphasised this fact as late as January  15  b; at the 
time it was still preaching peace! 
But the new army legislation places at the disposal of the French 
minister of war: 704,714 men of the line, 510,294 reserves, a 
territorial army of 582,523 men and its reserves of 625,633 men, 
making 2,423,164 men in all, which in an emergency can be 
brought up to 2,600,000! Certainly—although after careful 
a "Die Steigerung der deutschen Kriegsstärke im Jahre 1874 und die 
Vergleichstellung derselben zu der Wehrmacht der andern europäischen Mächte", 
Kölnische Zeitung, No. 358, December 27, 1874 (in the section Militärische 
Mittheilungen. Deutschland). — Ed. 
b See Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 12, January 15, 1875 (in the section 
Politischer Tagesbericht). — Ed. 
7-1317 

=====第96页=====
66 Frederick Engels 
scrutiny of the relevant documents, General Lewal announces that 
this total must be reduced to 2,377,000. And even this is enough 
to drive the best war minister mad. What on earth is he supposed 
to do with this host of men, almost two-thirds of whom are 
untrained? Where is he to obtain the officers and non­
commissioned officers without whom he cannot train, much less 
organise, them? 
In Germany the position is quite different. The strength of the 
army on a war-footing is already assumed to be  1,500,000  men in 
the motives of the Imperial Military Law.3  But as a result of this 
law, these are supplemented by five annual contingents of the sec­
ond reserve, whose liability to service has been extended 
from their 27th year to the end of their 31st—45,000 men every 
year—making about 200,000 men. At least 200,000 surplus men 
over and above the war capability had already been on the 
registers. And in addition, there is the Landsturm with fully two 
million men; so that the German war minister has 3,900,000 men, 
if not four million, at his disposal. This army, as the semi-official 
quoted above says, 
"even with conscription up to  1,800,000  men and more, will, with the exception 
of the recruits conscripted into the reserve army, consist throughout of experienced 
soldiers with a complete military training, a state which is not likely to be reached in 
France, including the Territorial Reserve, for another twenty years". 
We can see that it is not France but the German Empire of the 
Prussian Nation94 that is the true representative of militarism. 
Four million soldiers, ten per cent of the population! Let them go 
on. It suits us perfectly that the system is being taken to the 
furthest extremes. This system cannot be ultimately broken from 
without by another victorious military state, only from within, 
by its own inevitable consequences. And the more it is 
exaggerated, the sooner it will collapse. Four million soldiers! 
Social-Democracy will also be indebted to Bismarck when he raises 
the figure to five or six million and then as soon as possible starts 
calling up girls too. 
Written between April 6 and 18, 1875 
First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 46, 
April 23, 1875 
Signed: F. E. 
a Motive [zum Reichsmilitärgesetz]. See Stenographische Berichte über die Ver­
handlungen des Deutschen Reichstages. 2. Legislatur-Periode. I. Session 1874. Dritter 
Band. Anlagen zu den Verhandlungen des Reichstages, Berlin, 1874.— Ed. Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第97页=====
67 
Frederick Engels 
LETTER TO AUGUST BEBEL 
London, March 18-28, 1875 
Dear Bebel, 
I have received your letter of February 23 and am glad to hear 
that you are in such good bodily health. 
You ask me what we think of the unification affair. We are, 
unfortunately, in exactly the same boat as  yourself.  Neither 
Liebknecht nor anyone else has let us have any kind of 
information, and hence we too know only what is in the papers—not 
that there was anything in them until a week or so ago, when the 
draft programme appeared. That astonished us not a little, I must 
say. 
Our party had so often held out a conciliatory hand to the 
Lassalleans, or at least proffered co-operation, only to be 
rebuffed so often and so contemptuously by the Hasenclevers, 
Hasselmanns and Tölckes as to lead any child to the conclusion 
that, should these gentlemen now come and themselves proffer 
conciliation, they must be in a hell of a dilemma. Knowing full well 
what these people are like, however, it behoves us to make the 
most of that dilemma and insist on every conceivable guarantee 
that might prevent these people from restoring, at our party's 
expense, their shattered reputation in general working-class 
opinion. They should be given an exceedingly cool and cautious 
reception, and union be made dependent on the degree of their 
readiness to abandon their sectarian slogans and their state aid, 96 
and to accept in its essentials the Eisenach Programme of 186997 
or an improved edition of it adapted to the present day. Our party 
has absolutely nothing to learn from the Lassalleans in the theoretical 
sphere, i.e. the crux of the matter where the programme is 
7* 

=====第98页=====
68 Frederick Engels 
concerned, but the Lassalleans doubtless have something to learn 
from the party; the first prerequisite for union was that they cease 
to be sectarians, Lassalleans, i.e. that, first and foremost, they 
should, if not wholly relinquish the universal panacea of state aid, 
at least admit it to be a secondary provisional measure alongside 
and amongst many others recognised as possible. The draft 
programme shows that our people, while infinitely superior to the 
Lassallean leaders in matters of theory, are far from being a match 
for them where political guile is concerned; once again the 
"honest men"98 have been cruelly done in the eye by the 
dishonest. 
To begin with, they adopt the high-sounding but historically 
false Lassallean dictum: in relation to the working class all other 
classes are only one reactionary mass. This proposition is true only 
in certain exceptional instances, for example in the case of a 
revolution by the proletariat, e.g. the Commune, or in a country in 
which not only has the bourgeoisie constructed state and society 
after its own image but the democratic petty bourgeoisie, in its 
wake, has already carried that reconstruction to its logical 
conclusion. If, for instance, in Germany, the democratic petty 
bourgeoisie were part of this reactionary mass, then how could the 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party have gone hand in hand with it, 
with the People's Party," for years on end? How could the 
Volksstaat derive virtually all its political content from the 
petty-bourgeois democratic Frankfurter Zeitung? And how can one 
explain the adoption in this same programme of no less than 
seven demands that coincide exactly and word for word with the 
programme of the People's Party and of petty-bourgeois democra­
cy? I mean the seven political demands, 1 to 5 and 1 to 2, of 
which there is not one that is not bourgeois -democratic. 100 
Secondly, the principle that the workers' movement is an 
international one is, to all intents and purposes, utterly denied in 
respect of the present, and this by men who, for the space of five 
years and under the most difficult conditions, upheld that 
principle in the most laudable manner. The German workers' 
position in the van of the European movement rests essentially on 
their genuinely international attitude during the war101; no other 
proletariat would have behaved so well. And now this principle is 
to be denied by them at a moment when, everywhere abroad, 
workers are stressing it all the more by reason of the efforts made 
by governments to suppress every attempt at its practical 
application in an organisation! And what is left of the inter­
nationalism of the workers' movement? The dim prospect—not 

=====第99页=====
Letter to August Bebel 69 
even of subsequent co-operation among European workers with a 
view to their liberation—nay, but of a future "international 
brotherhood of peoples"—of your Peace League bourgeois "Unit­
ed States of Europe"!102 
There was, of course, no need whatever to mention the 
International as such. But at the very least there should have been 
no going back on the programme of 1869, and some sort of 
statement to the effect that, though first of all the German workers' 
party is acting within the limits set by its political frontiers (it has 
no right to speak in the name of the European proletariat, 
especially when what it says is wrong), it is nevertheless conscious 
of its solidarity with the workers of all other countries and will, as 
before, always be ready to meet the obligations that solidarity 
entails. Such obligations, even if one does not definitely proclaim 
or regard oneself as part of the "International", consist for 
example in aid, abstention from blacklegging during strikes, 
making sure that the party organs keep German workers informed 
of the movement abroad, agitation against impending or incipient 
dynastic wars and, during such wars, an attitude such as was 
exemplarily maintained in 1870 and 1871, etc. 
Thirdly, our people have allowed themselves to be saddled with 
the Lassallean "iron law of wages" which is based on a completely 
outmoded economic view, namely that on average the workers 
receive only the minimum wage because, according to the 
Malthusian theory of population, there are always too many 
workers (such was Lassalle's reasoning). Now in Capital Marx has 
amply demonstrated that the laws governing wages are very 
complex, that, according to circumstances, now this law, now that, 
holds sway, that they are therefore by no means iron but are, on 
the contrary, exceedingly elastic, and that the subject really cannot 
be dismissed in a few words, as Lassalle imagined. Malthus' 
argument, upon which the law Lassalle derived from him and 
Ricardo (whom he misinterpreted) is based, as that argument 
appears, for instance, on p. 5 of the Arbeiterlesebuch, where it is 
quoted from another pamphlet of Lassalle's, 103 is exhaustively 
refuted by Marx in the section on "Accumulation of Capital"3. 
Thus,  by adopting the Lassallean "iron law" one commits oneself 
to a false proposition and false reasoning in support of the same. 
Fourthly, as its one and only social demand, the programme puts 
forward—Lassallean state aid in its starkest form, as stolen by 
Lassalle from Bûchez. 104 And this, after Bracke has so ably 
a K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part VII (see present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed. 

=====第100页=====
70 Frederick Engels 
demonstrated the sheer futility of that demand3 ; after almost all, 
if not all, of our party speakers have, in their struggle against the 
Lassalleans, been compelled to make a stand against this "state 
aid"! Our party could hardly demean itself further. International­
ism sunk to the level of Amand Goegg, socialism to that of the 
bourgeois republican Bûchez, who confronted the socialists with this 
demand in order to supplant them! 
But "state aid" in the Lassallean sense of the word is, after all, 
at most only one measure among many others for the attainment 
of an end here lamely described as "paving the way for the 
solution of the social question", as though in our case there were 
still a social question that remained unsolved in theory! Thus, if you 
were to say: The German workers' party strives to abolish wage 
labour and hence class distinctions by introducing co-operative 
production into industry and agriculture, and on a national scale; 
it is in favour of any measure calculated to attain that end!—then 
no Lassallean could possibly object. 
Fifthly, there is absolutely no mention of the organisation of the 
working class as a class through the medium of trade unions. And 
that is a point of the utmost importance, this being the 
proletariat's true class organisation in which it fights its daily 
battles with capital, in which it trains itself and which nowadays 
can no longer simply be smashed, even with reaction at its worst 
(as presently in Paris). Considering the importance this organisa­
tion is likewise assuming in Germany, it would in our view be 
indispensable to accord it some mention in the programme and, 
possibly, to leave some room for it in the organisation of the party. 
All these things have been done by our people to oblige the 
Lassalleans. And what have the others conceded? That a host of 
somewhat muddled and purely democratic demands should figure in 
the programme, some of them being of a purely fashionable 
nature—for instance "legislation by the people" such as exists in 
Switzerland and does more harm than good, if it can be said to do 
anything at all. Administration by the people—that would at least 
be something. Similarly omitted is the first prerequisite of all 
liberty—that all officials be responsible for all their official actions 
to every citizen before the ordinary courts and in accordance with 
common law. That demands such as freedom of science and 
freedom of conscience figure in every liberal bourgeois pro­
gramme and seem a trifle out of place here is something I shall not 
enlarge upon. 
a W. Bracke, Der Lassalle'sche Vorschlag, Brunswick,  1873.—  Ed. 

=====第101页=====
Letter to August Bebel 71 
The free people's state is transformed into the free state. 
Grammatically speaking, a free state is one in which the state is 
free vis-à-vis its citizens, a state, that is, with a despotic 
government. All the palaver about the state ought to be dropped, 
especially after the Commune, which had ceased to be a state in 
the true sense of the term. The people's state has been flung in our 
teeth ad nauseam by the anarchists, although Marx's anti-Proudhon 
piece 3 and after it the Communist Manifestoh  declare outright that, 
with the introduction of the socialist order of society, the state will 
dissolve of itself and disappear. Now, since the state is merely a 
transitional institution of which use is made in the struggle, in the 
revolution, to keep down one's enemies by force, it is utter 
nonsense to speak of a free people's state; so long as the 
proletariat still makes use of the state, it makes use of it, not for the 
purpose of freedom, but of keeping down its enemies and, as soon 
as there can be any question of freedom, the state as such ceases 
to exist. We would therefore suggest that Gemeinwesen 0 be 
universally substituted for state; it is a good old German word that 
can very well do service for the French "Commune". 
"The elimination of all social and political inequality", rather 
than "the abolition of all class distinctions", is similarly a most 
dubious expression. As between one country, one province and 
even one place and another, living conditions will always evince a 
certain inequality which may be reduced to a minimum but never 
wholly eliminated. The living conditions of Alpine dwellers will 
always be different from those of the plainsmen. The concept of a 
socialist society as a realm of equality is a one-sided French concept 
deriving from the old "liberty, equality, fraternity", a concept 
which was justified in that, in its own time and place, it signified a 
phase of development, but which, like all the one-sided ideas of 
earlier socialist schools, ought now to be superseded, since they 
produce nothing but mental confusion, and more accurate ways of 
presenting the matter have been discovered. 
I shall desist, although almost every word in this programme, a 
programme which is, moreover, insipidly written, lays itself open 
to criticism. It is such that, should it be adopted, Marx and I could 
never recognise a new party set up on that basis and shall have to 
consider most seriously what attitude—public as well as private— 
we should adopt towards it.105 Remember that abroad we are held 
a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon.— Ed. 
b K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist  Party.—  Ed. 
c Commonalty.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
72 Frederick Engels 
responsible for any and every statement and action of the German 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party. E.g. by Bakunin in his work 
Statehood and Anarchy,* in which we are made to answer for every 
injudicious word spoken or written by Liebknecht since the 
inception of the Demokratisches Wochenblatt People imagine that we 
run the whole show from here, whereas you know as well as I do 
that we have hardly ever interfered in the least with internal party 
affairs, and then only in an attempt to make good, as far as 
possible, what we considered to have been blunders—and only 
theoretical blunders at that. But, as you yourself will realise, this 
programme marks a turning-point which may very well force us to 
renounce any kind of responsibility in regard to the party that 
adopts it. 
Generally speaking, less importance attaches to the official 
programme of a party than to what it does. But a new programme 
is after all a banner planted in public, and the outside world 
judges the party by it. Hence, whatever happens there should be 
no going-back, as there is here, on the Eisenach programme. It 
should further be considered what the workers of other countries 
will think of this programme; what impression will be created by 
this genuflection on the part of the entire German socialist 
proletariat before Lassalleanism. 
I am, moreover, convinced that a union on this basis would not 
last a year. Are the best minds of our party to descend to 
repeating, parrot-fashion, Lassallean maxims concerning the iron 
law of wages and state aid? I'd like to see you, for one, thus 
employed! And were they to do so, their audiences would hiss 
them off the stage. And I feel sure that it is precisely on these bits 
of the programme that the Lassalleans are insisting, like Shylock 
the Jew on his pound of flesh.b  The split will come; but we shall 
have "made honest men" again of Hasselmann, Hasenclever and 
Tölcke and Co.; we shall emerge from the split weaker and the 
Lassalleans stronger; our party will have lost its political virginity 
and will never again be able to come out whole-heartedly against 
the Lassallean maxims which for a time it inscribed on its own 
banner; and then, should the Lassalleans again declare themselves 
to be the sole and most genuine workers' party and our people to 
be bourgeois, the programme would be there to prove it. All the 
socialist measures in it are theirs, and our party has introduced 
a EaKyHHHi>,  rocydapcmeeHHOcmh  u anapxin, [Geneva,] 1873 (for Marx's notes on 
this book see this volume, pp. 485-526).— Ed. 
b Shakespeare, The Merchant of Venice, Act I, Scene  3.—  Ed. 

=====第103页=====
Letter to August Bebel 73 
nothing save the demands of that petty-bourgeois democracy 
which it has itself described in that same programme as part of the 
"reactionary mass"! 
I had held this letter back in view of the fact that you would 
only be released on April 1, in honour of Bismarck's birthday,106 
not wanting to expose it to the risk of interception in the course of 
an attempt to smuggle it in. Well, I have just had a letter from 
Bracke, who has also felt grave doubts about the programme and 
asks for our opinion. I shall therefore send this letter to him for 
forwarding, so that he can read it without my having to write the 
whole thing over again. I have, by the way, also spoken my mind 
to Ramm; to Liebknecht I wrote but briefly. I cannot forgive his 
not having told us a single word about the whole business (whereas 
Ramm and others believed he had given us exact information) 
until it was, in a manner of speaking, too late. True, this has 
always been his wont—hence the large amount of disagreeable 
correspondence which we, both Marx and  myself,  have had with 
him, but this time it really is too bad, and we definitely shan't act in 
concert with him. 
Do see that you manage to come here in the summer; you 
would, of course, stay with me and, if the weather is fine, we 
might spend a day or two taking sea baths, which would really do 
you good after your long spell in jail. 
Ever your friend, 
F. E. 
Marx has just moved house. He is living at 41 Maitland Park 
Crescent, NW London. 
First published in the book: 
A. Bebel, At« meinem Leben, Part 2, 
Stuttgart, 1911 Printed according to the book 

=====第104页=====

=====第105页=====
Karl Marx 
CRITIQUE OF THE GOTHA PROGRAMME 

=====第106页=====
Written in April-early May 1875 Printed according to the manu­
script First published abridged in Die Neue Zeit, 
Vol. 1, No. 18, 1891 

=====第107页=====
77 
LETTER TO WILHELM BRACKE 
London, May 5, 1875 
Dear Bracke, 
Will you be so kind, after you have read the following marginal 
notes on the unity programme, 3 to pass them on for Geib and 
Auer, Bebel and Liebknecht to see. Notabene. The manuscript 
should be returned to you so as to be at my disposal if needs be. I 
have more than enough to do, and, as it is, must take on far more 
work than laid down for me by my doctor. Hence it was by no 
means a "pleasure" to write such a lengthy screed. Yet it was 
necessary if the steps I shall have to take later on are not to be 
misinterpreted by the party friends for whom this communication 
is intended. 
After the Unity Congress is over, Engels and I will publish a 
short statement to the effect that we entirely disassociate ourselves 
from the said programme of principles and have nothing to do 
with it. 
This is indispensable because of the view taken abroad—a 
totally erroneous view, carefully nurtured by party enemies—that 
we are secretly directing the activities of the so-called Eisenach 
Party from here. Only recently, in a newly published Russian 
work,b  Bakunin suggests that I, for instance, am responsible, not 
only for that party's every programme, etc., but actually for every 
step taken by Liebknecht from the day he began co-operating with 
the People's Party. 
Aside from this, it is my duty to refuse recognition, even by 
maintaining a diplomatic silence, to a programme which, I am 
a "Programm der deutschen Arbeiterpartei", Der Volksstaat, No. 27, March 7, 
1875.—  Ed. 
b BaKyHHHT>,  rocydapcmeeHHOcmt>  u auapxin. — Ed. 

=====第108页=====
78 Karl Marx 
convinced, is altogether deplorable as well as demoralising for the 
party. 
Every step of real movement is more important than a dozen 
programmes. Hence, if it was impossible to advance beyond the 
Eisenach Programme—and circumstances at the time precluded 
this—they should simply have come to an agreement about action 
against the common foe. But to draw up programmes of 
principles (instead of waiting till a longish spell of common activity 
has prepared the ground for that sort of thing) is to set up bench 
marks for all the world to see, whereby it may gauge how far the 
party has progressed. 
The leaders of the Lassalleans came because circumstances 
forced them to. Had they been told from the start that there was 
to be no haggling over principles, they would have been compelled 
to content themselves with a programme of action or a plan of 
organisation for common action. Instead, our people allow them 
to present themselves armed with mandates, and recognise those 
mandates as binding, thus surrendering unconditionally to men who 
are themselves in need of help. To crown it all, they are holding 
another congress prior to the  congress  of compromise,  whereas our own 
party is holding its congress post festum* Obviously their idea was to 
elude all criticism and not allow their own party time for reflection. 
One knows that the mere fact of unification is enough to satisfy the 
workers, but it is wrong to suppose that this momentary success has 
not been bought too dear. 
Besides, the programme's no good, even apart from its 
canonisation of the Lassallean articles of faith. 
I shall shortly be sending you the final instalments of the French 
edition of Capital. Printing was held up for a considerable time by 
the French government ban. The thing will be finished this week 
or at the beginning of next. Have you received the six previous 
instalments? l  8 Would you also very kindly send me the address of 
Bernhard Becker, to whom I must likewise send the final 
instalments. 
The bookshop of the Volksstaat has peculiar manners. For 
instance, they haven't as yet sent me so much as a single copy of 
their reprint of the Cologne Communist Trial! 3 
With kind regards. 
Your 
Karl Marx 
a After the event.— Ed. 
b K. Marx, Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in  Cologne.—  Ed. 

=====第109页=====
^ *U-  -H :U ^(Urfw^ 4^^*** .>•  *Ä *** 
•«^fuW^*^ ^^~*^U 4uwtw^ «-A~>« «^^"f 
M«*  ^^ML^ r. . . . 
V"^ 5 -<fU*.  -^»WH  Lj*^.\*>.c*t  p«**  ********* 
^•&»V*- ^  ÏU..^^  J^ J^IU^ J&U*. &**** **~<0>M 
^^^  f******  "ÎAAs^Ai  *«NVW^U „KA #  o>^U -*- ^^ 
The first page of Marx's Critique of the Gotha Programme 

=====第110页=====

=====第111页=====
81 
MARGINAL NOTES ON THE PROGRAMME 
OF THE GERMAN WORKERS' PARTY 
i 
1. "Labour is the source of all wealth and all 
culture, and since useful labour is possible only 
in society and through society, the proceeds of 
labour belong undiminished with equal right to 
all members of society."3 
First part of the paragraph: "Labour is the source of all wealth 
and all culture." 
Labour is not the source of all wealth. Nature is just as much the 
source of use values (and it is surely of such that material wealth 
consists!) as labour, which itself is only the manifestation of a force 
of nature, human labour power. The above phrase is to be found 
in all children's primers and is correct insofar as it is implied that 
labour is performed with the pertinent objects and instruments. 
But a socialist programme cannot allow such bourgeois phrases to 
pass over in silence the conditions that alone give them meaning. 
And insofar as man from the outset behaves towards nature, the 
primary source of all instruments and objects of labour, as an 
owner, treats her as belonging to him, his labour becomes the 
source of use values, therefore also of wealth. The bourgeois have 
very good grounds for ascribing supernatural creative power to 
labour; since precisely from the fact that labour is determined by 
nature, it follows that the man who possesses no other property 
than his labour power must, in all conditions of society and 
culture, be the slave of other men who have made themselves the 
owners of the material conditions of labour. He can work only 
with their permission, hence live only with their permission. 
Let us now leave the sentence as it stands, or rather limps. What 
would one have expected in conclusion? Obviously this: 
"Since labour is the source of all wealth, no one in society can 
appropriate wealth except as the product of labour. Therefore, if 
a Here and below Marx quotes the draft of the "Programm der deutschen 
Arbeiterpartei", Der Volksstaat, No. 27, March 7,  1875.—  Ed. 
8-1317 

=====第112页=====
82 Karl Marx 
he himself does not work, he lives by the labour of others and also 
acquires his culture at the expense of the labour of others." 
Instead of this, by means of the verbal rivet "and since" a 
second proposition is added in order to draw a conclusion from 
this and not from the first one. 
Second part of the paragraph: "Useful labour is possible only in 
society and through society." 
According to the first proposition, labour was the source of all 
wealth and all culture; therefore no society is possible without 
labour. Now we learn, conversely, that no "useful" labour is 
possible without society. 
One could just as well have said that only in society can useless 
and even socially harmful labour become a gainful occupation, 
that only in society can one live by being idle, etc., etc.—in short, 
one could just as well have copied the whole of Rousseau. 
And what is "useful" labour? Surely only labour which produces 
the intended useful result. A savage—and man was a savage after 
he had ceased to be an ape—who kills an animal with a stone, 
who collects fruits, etc., performs "useful" labour. 
Thirdly. The conclusion: "And since useful labour is possible only 
in society and through society, the proceeds of labour belong 
undiminished with equal right to all members of society." 
A fine conclusion! If useful labour is possible only in society and 
through society, the proceeds of labour belong to society—and 
only so much therefrom accrues to the individual worker as is not 
required to maintain the "condition" of labour, society. 
In fact, this proposition has at all times been made use of by the 
champions of the state of  society  prevailing at any given time. First come 
the claims of the government and everything that sticks to it, since 
it is the social organ for the maintenance of the social order; then 
come the claims of the various kinds of private owners for the 
various kinds of private property are the foundations of society, 
etc. One sees that such hollow phrases can be twisted and turned 
as desired. 
The first and second parts of the paragraph have some 
intelligible connection only in the following wording: 
"Labour becomes the source of wealth and culture only as social 
labour", or, what is the same thing, "in and through society". 
This proposition is incontestably correct, for although isolated 
labour (its material conditions presupposed) can create use values, 
it can create neither wealth nor culture. 
But equally incontestable is the other proposition: 
"In proportion as labour develops socially, and becomes 

=====第113页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 83 
thereby a source of wealth and culture, poverty and destitution 
develop among the workers, and wealth and culture among the 
non-workers." 
This is the law of all history hitherto. What, therefore, had to be 
done here, instead of setting down general phrases about "labour" 
and "society", was to prove concretely how in present capitalist 
society the material, etc., conditions have at last been created 
which enable and compel the workers to lift this historical curse. 
In fact, however, the whole paragraph, bungled in style and 
content, is only there in order to inscribe the Lassallean catchword 
of the "undiminished proceeds of labour" as a slogan at the top of 
the party banner. I shall return later to the "proceeds of labour", 
"equal right", etc., since the same thing recurs in a somewhat 
different form further on. 
2. "In present-day society, the means of 
labour are the monopoly of the capitalist class; 
the resulting dependence of the working class is 
the cause of misery and servitude in all their 
forms." 
This sentence, borrowed from the Rules of the International, is 
incorrect in this "improved" edition.109 
In present-day society the means of labour are the mono­
poly of the landowners (the monopoly of land ownership is 
even the basis of the monopoly of capital) and the capitalists. In 
the passage in question, the Rules of the International mention 
neither the one nor the other class of monopolists. They speak of 
the "monopoly of the means of labour, that is, the sources of life". The 
addition, "sources of life", makes it sufficiently clear that land is 
included in the means of labour. 
The correction was introduced because Lassalle, for reasons now 
generally known, 110 attacked only the capitalist class and not the 
landowners. In England, the capitalist is mostly not even the 
owner of the land on which his factory stands. 
3. "The emancipation of labour demands the 
raising of the means of labour to the common 
property of society and the collective regula­
tion of the total labour with a fair distribution of 
the proceeds of labour." 
"The raising of the means of labour to common property"! 
Ought obviously to read their "conversion into common property". 
But this only in passing. 
8* 

=====第114页=====
84 Karl Marx 
What are "proceeds of labour"? The product of labour or its 
value? And in the latter case, is it the total value of the product or 
only that part of the value which labour has newly added to the 
value of the means of production consumed? 
"Proceeds of labour" is a loose notion which Lassalle has put in 
the place of definite economic concepts. 
What is "fair" distribution? 
Do not the bourgeois assert that present-day distribution is 
"fair"? And is it not, in fact, the only "fair" distribution on the 
basis of the present-day mode of production? Are economic 
relations regulated by legal concepts or do not, on the contrary, 
legal relations arise from economic ones? Have not also the 
socialist sectarians the most varied notions about "fair" distribu­
tion? 
To understand what is implied in this connection by the phrase 
"fair distribution", we must take the first paragraph and this one 
together. The latter presupposes a society wherein "the means of 
labour are common property and the total labour is collectively 
regulated", and from the first paragraph we learn that "the 
proceeds of labour belong undiminished with equal right to all 
members of society". 
"To all members of society"? To those who do not work as well? 
What remains then of "the undiminished proceeds of labour"? 
Only to those members of society who work? What remains then 
of "the equal right" of all members of society? 
But "all members of society" and "equal right" are obviously 
mere phrases. The crucial point is this, that in this communist 
society every worker must receive his "undiminished" Lassallean 
"proceeds of labour". 
Let us take first of all the words "proceeds of labour" in the 
sense of the product of labour; then the collective proceeds of 
labour are the total social product. 
From this must now be deducted: 
First, cover for replacement of the means of production used 
up-
Secondly, additional portion for expansion of production. 
Thirdly, reserve or insurance funds to provide against accidents, 
disturbances caused by natural factors, etc. 
These deductions from the "undiminished proceeds of labour" 
are an economic necessity and their magnitude is to be determined 
according to available means and forces, and party by com­
putation of probabilities, but they are in no way calculable by 
equity. 

=====第115页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 85 
There remains the other part of the total product, intended to 
serve as means of consumption. 
Before this is divided among the individuals, there has to be 
again deducted from it: 
First, the general costs of administration not directly appertaining to 
production. 
This part will, from the outset, be very considerably restricted in 
comparison with present-day society and it diminishes in propor­
tion as the new society develops. 
Secondly, that which is intended for the common satisfaction of needs, 
such as schools, health services, etc. 
From the outset this part grows considerably in comparison with 
present-day society and it grows in proportion as the new society 
develops. 
Thirdly, funds for those unable to work, etc., in short, for what is 
included under so-called official poor relief today. 
Only now do we come to the "distribution" which the 
programme, under Lassallean influence, has alone in view in its 
narrow fashion, namely, to that part of the means of consumption 
which is divided among the individual producers of the col­
lective. 
The "undiminished proceeds of labour" have already unnotice-
ably become converted into the "diminished" proceeds, although 
what the producer is deprived of in his capacity as a private 
individual benefits him directly or indirectly in his capacity as a 
member of society. 
Just as the phrase of the "undiminished proceeds of labour" has 
disappeared, so now does the phrase of the "proceeds of labour" 
disappear altogether. 
Within the collective society based on common ownership of 
the means of production, the producers do not exchange their 
products; just as little does the labour employed on the products 
appear here as the value of these products, as a material quality 
possessed by them, since now, in contrast to capitalist society, 
individual labour no longer exists in an indirect fashion but 
directly as a component part of the total labour. The phrase 
"proceeds of labour", objectionable even today on account of its 
ambiguity, thus loses all meaning. 
What we are dealing with here is a communist society, not as it 
has developed on its own foundations, but on the contrary, just as it 
emerges from capitalist society, which is thus in every respect, 
economically, morally and intellectually, still stamped with the 
birth-marks of the old society from whose womb it emerges. 

=====第116页=====
86 Karl Marx 
Accordingly, the individual producer receives back from society— 
after the deductions have been made—exactly what he gives to it. 
What he has given to it is his individual quantum of labour. For 
example, the social working day consists of the sum of the 
individual hours of work; the individual labour time of the 
individual producer is the part of the social working day 
contributed by him, his share in it. He receives a certificate from 
society that he has furnished such and such an amount of labour 
(after deducting his labour for the common funds), and with this 
certificate he draws from the social stock of means of consumption 
as much as the same amount of labour costs. The same amount of 
labour which he has given to society in one form he receives back 
in another. 
Here obviously the same principle prevails as that which 
regulates the exchange of commodities, as far as this is the 
exchange of equal values. Content and form are changed, because 
under the altered circumstances no one can give anything except 
his labour, and because, on the other hand, nothing can pass to 
the ownership of individuals except individual means of consump­
tion. But, as far as the distribution of the latter among the 
individual producers is concerned, the same principle prevails as 
in the exchange of commodity-equivalents: a given amount of 
labour in one form is exchanged for an equal amount of labour in 
another form. 
Hence, equal right here is still in principle—bourgeois right, 
although principle and practice are no longer at loggerheads, 
while the exchange of equivalents in commodity exchange only 
exists on the average and not in the individual case. 
In spite of this advance, this equal right is still constantly 
encumbered by a bourgeois limitation. The right of the producers 
is proportional to the labour they supply; the equality consists in 
the fact that measurement is made with an equal standard, labour. 
But one man is superior to another physically or mentally and so 
supplies more labour in the same time, or can work for a longer 
time;  and labour, to serve as a measure, must be defined by its 
duration or intensity, otherwise it ceases to be a standard of 
measurement. This equal right is an unequal right for unequal 
labour. It recognises no class distinctions, because everyone is only 
a worker like everyone else; but it tacitly recognises the unequal 
individual endowment and thus productive capacity of the workers 
as natural privileges. It is, therefore, a right of inequality, in its 
content, like every right. Right by its nature can exist only as the 
application of an equal standard; but unequal individuals (and 

=====第117页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 87 
they would not be different individuals if they were not unequal) 
are measurable by an equal standard only insofar as they are made 
subject to an equal criterion, are taken from a certain side only, 
for instance, in the present case, are regarded only as workers and 
nothing more is seen in them, everything else being ignored. 
Besides, one worker is married, another not; one has more 
children than another, etc., etc. Thus, given an equal amount of 
work done, and hence an equal share in the social consumption 
fund, one will in fact receive more than another, one will be richer 
than another, etc. To avoid all these defects, right would have to 
be unequal rather than equal. 
But these defects are inevitable in the first phase of communist 
society as it is when it has just emerged after prolonged birth-
pangs from capitalist society. Right can never be higher than the 
economic structure of society and its cultural development which this 
determines. 
In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving 
subordination of the individual to the division of labour, and 
thereby also the antithesis between mental and physical labour, has 
vanished; after labour has become not only a means of life but 
life's prime want; after the productive forces have also increased 
with the all-round development of the individual, and all the 
springs of common wealth flow more abundantly—only then 
can the narrow horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its 
entirety and society inscribe on its banners: From each according 
to his abilities, to each according to his needs! 
I have dealt at greater length with the "undiminished proceeds 
of labour", on the one hand, and with "equal right" and "fair 
distribution", on the other, in order to show what a crime it is to 
attempt, on the one hand, to force on our Party again, as dogmas, 
ideas which in a certain period had some meaning but have now 
become obsolete verbal rubbish, while again perverting, on the 
other, the realistic outlook, which it cost so much effort to instil 
into the Party but which has now taken root in it, by means of 
ideological, legal and other trash so common among the Democrats 
and French Socialists. 
Quite apart from the analysis so far given, it was in general a 
mistake to make a fuss about so-called distribution and put the 
principal stress on it. 
Any distribution whatever of the means of consumption is only 
a consequence of the distribution of the conditions of production 
themselves. The latter distribution, however, is a feature of the 
mode of production  itself.  The capitalist mode of production, for 

=====第118页=====
88 Karl Marx 
example, rests on the fact that the material conditions of 
production are in the hands of non-workers in the form of capital 
and land ownership, while the masses are only owners of the 
personal condition of production, of labour power. If the elements 
of production are so distributed, then the present-day distribution 
of the means of consumption results automatically. If the material 
conditions of production are the collective property of the 
workers themselves, then there likewise results a distribution of 
the means of consumption different from the present one. 
The vulgar socialists (and from them in turn a section of the 
Democrats) have taken over from the bourgeois economists the 
consideration and treatment of distribution as independent of the 
mode of production and hence the presentation of socialism as 
turning principally on distribution. After the real relation has long 
been made clear, why retrogress again? 
4. "The emancipation of labour must be the 
work of the working class, in relation to which all 
other classes are only one reactionary mass." 
The main clause is taken from the introductory words of the 
Rules of the International,3 but "improved". There it is said: "The 
emancipation of the working classes must be conquered by the 
working classes themselves"; here, on the contrary, the "working 
class"  has to emancipate—what? "Labour". Let him understand 
who can. 
In compensation, the subordinate clause, on the other hand, is 
a Lassallean quotation of the first water: "in relation to which 
(the working class) all other classes are only one reactionary 
mass". 
In the Communist Manifesto it is said: "Of all the classes that 
stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, the proletariat alone 
is a really revolutionary class. The other classes decay and finally 
disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the proletariat is its 
special and essential product."b 
The bourgeoisie is here conceived as a revolutionary class—as 
the bearer of large-scale industry—in relation to the feudal lords 
and the middle estates, who desire to maintain all social positions 
that are the creation of obsolete modes of production. Thus they 
a See present edition, Vol. 20, p.  441.—  Ed. 
b Ibid., Vol. 6, p. 494.— Ed 

=====第119页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 89 
do not form together with the bourgeoisie only one reactionary 
mass. 
On the other hand, the proletariat is revolutionary in relation to 
the bourgeoisie because, having itself grown up on the basis 
of large-scale industry, it strives to strip off from production the 
capitalist character that the bourgeoisie seeks to perpetuate. But 
the Manifesto adds that the "middle estates" are becoming 
revolutionary "in view of their impending transfer into the 
proletariat". 
From this point of view, therefore, it is again nonsense to say 
that they, "together with the bourgeoisie", and with the feudal 
lords into the bargain, "form only one reactionary mass" in relation 
to the working class. 
Did anyone proclaim to the artisans, small manufacturers, etc., 
and peasants during the last elections: In relation to us you, together 
with the bourgeoisie and feudal lords, form only one reactionary 
mass? 111 
Lassalle knew the Communist Manifesto by heart, as his faithful 
followers know the gospels written by him. If, therefore, he has 
falsified it so grossly, this has occurred only to put a good colour 
on his alliance with absolutist and feudal opponents against the 
bourgeoisie. 
In the above paragraph, moreover, his oracular saying is 
dragged in by the hair, without any connection with the botched 
quotation from the Rules of the International. Thus it is here 
simply an impertinence, and indeed not at all displeasing to 
Mr. Bismarck, one of those cheap pieces of insolence in which the 
Marat of Berlin 112 deals. 
5. "The working class strives for its emanci­
pation first of all within the framework of the 
present-day national state, conscious that the neces­
sary result of its efforts, which are common to 
the workers of all civilised countries, will be the 
international brotherhood of peoples." 
Lassalle, in opposition to the Communist Manifesto and to all 
earlier socialism, conceived the workers' movement from the 
narrowest national standpoint. He is being followed in this—and 
that after the work of the International! 
It is altogether self-evident that, to be able to fight at all, the 
working class must organise itself at home as a class and that its 
own country is the immediate arena of its struggle. To this extent 
its class struggle is national, not in substance, but, as the 

=====第120页=====
90 Karl Marx 
Communist Manifesto says, "in form".3 But the "framework of the 
present-day national state", for instance, the German Empire, is 
itself in its turn economically "within the framework of the world 
market", politically "within the framework of the system of 
states".  Every businessman knows that German trade is at the 
same time foreign trade, and the greatness of Mr. Bismarck 
consists, to be sure, precisely in his pursuing his kind of 
international policy. 
And to what does the German workers' party reduce its 
internationalism? To the consciousness that the result of its efforts 
"will be the international brotherhood of peoples"—a phrase bor­
rowed from the bourgeois League of Peace and Freedom, which is 
intended to pass as equivalent to the international brotherhood of 
the working classes in the joint struggle against the ruling classes 
and their governments. So not a word about the international 
functions of the German working class! And it is thus that it is to 
defy its own bourgeoisie—which is already linked up in brother­
hood against it with the bourgeois of all other countries—and 
Mr. Bismarck's international policy of conspiracy! 
In fact, the internationalism of the programme stands even 
infinitely below that of the Free Trade Party. The latter also asserts 
that the result of its efforts will be "the international brotherhood 
of peoples". But it also does something to make trade international 
and by no means contents itself with the consciousness—that all 
peoples are carrying on trade at home. 
The international activity of the working classes does not in any 
way depend on the existence of the "International Working Men's 
Association". This was only the first attempt to create a central 
organ for that activity; an attempt which was a lasting success on 
account of the impulse which it gave, but which was no longer 
realisable in its first historical form after the fall of the Paris 
Commune. 
Bismarck's Norddeutsche was absolutely right when it announced, 
to the satisfaction of its master, that the German workers' party had 
forsworn internationalism in the new programme. 113 
a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 495,  502-03.—  Ed. 

=====第121页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 91 
il 
"Starting from these basic principles, the 
German workers' party strives by all legal means 
for the free state—and—socialist society; the 
abolition of the wage system together with the 
iron law of wages—and—exploitation in every 
form; the elimination of all social and political 
inequality." 
I shall return to the "free" state later. 
So, in future, the German workers' party has got to believe in 
Lassalle's "iron law of wages" 114! That this may not be lost, the 
nonsense is perpetrated of speaking of the "abolition of the wage 
system" (it should read: system of wage labour) "together with the 
iron law of wages". If I abolish wage labour, then naturally I 
abolish its laws too, whether they are of "iron" or sponge. But 
Lassalle's attack on wage labour turns almost solely on this 
so-called law. In order, therefore, to prove that the Lassallean sect 
has won, the "wage system" must be abolished "  together  with the iron 
law of wages" and not without it. 
It is well known that nothing of the "iron law of wages" is Lassal­
le's except the word "iron" borrowed from Goethe's "eternal, iron, 
great laws".3  The word iron is a label by which the true believers 
recognise one another. But if I take the law with 
Lassalle's stamp on it and, consequently, in his sense, then I must 
also take it with his substantiation. And what is that? As Lange 
already showed, shortly after Lassalle's death, it is the Malthusian 
theory of population (preached by Lange himself). b But if this 
theory is correct, then again I cannot abolish the law even if I 
abolish wage labour a hundred times over, because the law then 
governs not only the system of wage labour but every social system. 
Basing themselves directly on this, the economists have been 
proving for fifty years and more that socialism cannot abolish 
destitution, which has its basis in nature, but can only make it 
general, distribute it simultaneously over the whole surface of 
society! 
But all this is not the main thing. Quite apart from the false 
Lassallean formulation of the law, the truly outrageous retrogres­
sion consists in the following: 
a Quoted from Goethe's poem Das Göttliche, sixth stanza.— Ed. 
b F. A. Lange, Die Arbeiterfrage in ihrer Bedeutung für Gegenwart und Zukunft, 
Duisburg, 1865, pp. 108-12.— Ed. 

=====第122页=====
92 Karl Marx 
Since Lassalle's death there has asserted itself in our Party the 
scientific understanding that wages are not what they appear to be, 
namely the value, or price, of labour, but only a masked form for 
the value, or price, of labour power. Thereby the whole bourgeois 
conception of wages hitherto, as well as all the criticism hitherto 
directed against this conception, was thrown overboard once for 
all and it was made clear that the wage-worker has permission to 
work for his own subsistence, that is, to live only insofar as he 
works for a certain time gratis for the capitalist (and hence also for 
the latter's co-consumers of surplus value); that the whole capitalist 
system of production turns on increasing this gratis labour by 
extending the working day or by developing productivity, that is, 
increasing the intensity of labour power, etc.; that, consequently, 
the system of wage labour is a system of slavery, and indeed of a 
slavery which becomes more severe in proportion as the social 
productive forces of labour develop, whether the worker receives 
better or worse payment. And after this understanding has gained 
more and more ground in our Party, one returns to Lassalle's 
dogmas although one must have known that Lassalle did not 
know what wages were, but following in the wake of the bour­
geois economists took the appearance for the essence of the 
matter. 
It is as if, among slaves who have at last got behind the secret of 
slavery and broken out in rebellion, a slave still in thrall to 
obsolete notions were to inscribe on the programme of 
the rebellion: Slavery must be abolished because the feeding of 
slaves in the system of slavery cannot exceed a certain low 
maximum! 
Does not the mere fact that the representatives of our Party 
were capable of perpetrating such a monstrous attack on 
the understanding that has spread among the mass of our Party 
prove by itself with what criminal levity and with what lack of con­
science they set to work in drawing up this compromise pro­
gramme! 
Instead of the indefinite concluding phrase of the paragraph, 
"the elimination of all social and political inequality", it ought to 
have been said that with the abolition of class distinctions all social 
and political inequality arising from them would disappear of 
itself. 

=====第123页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 93 
III 
"The German workers' party, in order to 
pave the way for the solution of the social question, 
demands the establishment of producers' co­
operative societies with state aid under the demo­
cratic control of the working  people.  The producers' 
co-operative societies are to be called into being for 
industry and agriculture on such a scale that the 
socialist organisation of the total labour will arise 
from them." 
After the Lassallean "iron law of wages", the panacea of the 
prophet. The way for it is "paved" in worthy fashion. In place of 
the existing class struggle appears a newspaper scribbler's phrase: 
"the social question", for the "solution" of which one "paves the 
way". Instead of arising from the revolutionary process of the 
transformation of society, the "socialist organisation of the total 
labour" "arises" from the "state aid" that the state gives to the 
producers' co-operative societies which the state, not the work­
er, "calls into being". It is worthy of Lassalle's imagination that 
with state loans one can build a new society just as well as a new 
railway!115 
From the remnants of a sense of shame, "state aid" has been 
put—"under the democratic control of the working people". 
In the first place, the "working people" in Germany consist in 
their majority of peasants, and not of proletarians. 
Secondly, "democratic" means in German "volksherrschaftlich" 
["by the rule of the people"]. But what does "control of the working 
people by the rule of the people" mean? And particularly in 
the case of working people who, through these demands that they 
put to the state, express their full consciousness that they neither 
rule nor are ripe for rule! 
It would be superfluous to deal here with the criticism of the 
recipe prescribed by Bûchez in the reign of Louis Philippe in 
opposition to the French Socialists and accepted by the reactionary 
workers of the Atelier. The chief offence does not lie in having 
inscribed this specific nostrum in the programme, but in taking a 
retrograde step at all from the standpoint of a class movement to 
that of a sectarian movement. 
That the workers desire to establish the conditions for 
co-operative production on a social scale, and first of all on a 
national scale, in their own country, only means that they are 
working to transform the present conditions of production, and it 
has nothing in common with the foundation of co-operative 

=====第124页=====
94 Karl Marx 
societies with state aid. But as far as the present co-operative 
societies are concerned, they are of value only insofar as they are 
the independent creations of the workers and not protégés either 
of the governments or of the bourgeois. 
[IV] 
I come now to the democratic section. 
A. "The free basis of the state." 
First of all, according to II, the German workers' party strives for 
"the free state".3 
Free state—what is it? 
It is by no means the purpose of the workers, who have got rid 
of the narrow mentality of humble subjects, to set the state "free". 
In the German Empire the "state" is almost as "free" as in Russia. 
Freedom consists in converting the state from an organ superim­
posed upon society into one completely subordinate to it, and even 
today forms of state are more free or less free to the extent that 
they restrict the "freedom of the state". 
The German workers' party—at least if it adopts the program­
me—shows that its socialist ideas are not even skin-deep, in that, 
instead of treating existing society (and this holds good for any 
future one) as the basis of the existing state (or of the future state 
in the case of future society), it treats the state rather as an 
independent entity that possesses its own "intellectual, ethical and 
libertarian bases". 
And what of the wild abuse which the programme makes of the 
words "present-day state", "present-day society", and of the still more 
riotous misconception it creates in regard to the state to which it 
addresses its demands? 
"Present-day society" is capitalist society, which exists in all 
civilised countries, more or less free from medieval admixture, 
more or less modified by the particular historical development of 
each country, more or less developed. On the other hand, the 
"present-day state" changes with a country's frontier. It is 
different in the Prusso-German Empire from that in Switzerland, 
a See this volume, p.  91.—  Ed. 

=====第125页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 95 
and different in England from that in the United States. "The 
present-day state" is, therefore, a fiction. 
Nevertheless, the different states of the different civilised 
countries, in spite of their motley diversity of form, all have this in 
common that they are based on modern bourgeois society, more or 
less capitalistically developed. They have, therefore, also certain 
essential characteristics in common. In this sense it is possible to 
speak of the "present-day state", in contrast with the future, in which 
its present root, bourgeois society, will have died off. 
The question then arises: what transformation will the state un­
dergo in communist society? In other words, what social func­
tions will remain in existence there that are analogous to pre­
sent state functions? This question can only be answered scienti­
fically, and one does not get a flea-hop nearer to the prob­
lem by a thousandfold combination of the word people with the 
word state. 
Between capitalist and communist society lies the period of the 
revolutionary transformation of the one into the other. Corres­
ponding to this is also a political transition period in which the 
state can be nothing but the revolutionary dictatorship of the 
proletariat. 
Now the programme deals neither with this nor with the future 
state of communist society. 
Its political demands contain nothing beyond the old democratic 
litany familiar to all: universal suffrage, direct legislation, popular 
rights,  a people's militia, etc. They are a mere echo of the 
bourgeois People's Party, of the League of Peace and Freedom. 
They are all demands which, insofar as they are not exaggerated 
in fantastic presentation, have already been implemented. Only the 
state to which they belong does not lie within the borders of the 
German Empire, but in Switzerland, the United States, etc. This 
sort of "state of the future" is a present-day state, although existing 
outside the "framework" of the German Empire. 
But one thing has been forgotten. Since the German workers' 
party expressly declares that it acts within "the present-day 
national state", hence within its own state, the Prusso-German 
Empire—its demands would indeed otherwise be largely meaning­
less, since one only demands what one has not yet got—it should 
not have forgotten the chief thing, namely that all those pretty 
little gewgaws rest on the recognition of what is called sover­
eignty of the people and hence are appropriate only in a democratic 
republic. 
Since one has not the courage—and wisely so, for the 

=====第126页=====
96 Karl Marx 
circumstances demand caution—to demand the democratic repub­
lic, as the French workers' programmes under Louis Philippe and 
under Louis Napoleon did, one should not have resorted to 
the subterfuge, neither "honest"3 nor decent, of demanding 
things which have meaning only in a democratic republic from a 
state which is nothing but a police-guarded military despotism, 
embellished with parliamentary forms, alloyed with a feudal 
admixture and at the same time already influenced by the 
bourgeoisie, and bureaucratically carpentered, and then assuring 
this state into the bargain that one imagines one will be able to force 
such things upon it "by legal means". 
Even vulgar democracy, which sees the millennium in the 
democratic republic and has no suspicion that it is precisely in this 
last form of state of bourgeois society that the class struggle has to 
be fought out to a conclusion—even it towers mountains above 
this kind of democratism which keeps within the limits of what is 
permitted by the police and not permitted by logic. 
That, in fact, by the word "state" is meant the government 
machine or the state insofar as it forms a special organism 
separated from society through division of labour, is shown alone 
by the words 
"the German workers' party demands as the economic basis of the state: a single 
progressive income tax," etc. 
Taxes are the economic basis of the government machinery and 
of nothing else. In the state of the future existing in Switzerland, 
this demand has been pretty well fulfilled. Income tax presup­
poses various sources of income of the various social classes, and 
hence capitalist society. It is, therefore, nothing remarkable that 
the Liverpool FINANCIAL  REFORMERS,  bourgeois headed by Gladstone's 
brother,0 are putting forward the same demand as the prog­
ramme.116 
B. "The German workers' party demands as 
the intellectual and ethical basis of the state: 
1. "Universal and equal education of  the people 
by the state. Universal compulsory school atten­
dance. Free instruction." 
Equal education of  the people?  What idea lies behind these words? Is 
it believed that in present-day society (and it is only with this that 
one is dealing) education can be equal for all classes? Or is it 
a See this volume, p.  68.—  Ed. 
b Robertson Gladstone.— Ed. 

=====第127页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 97 
demanded that the upper classes also shall be compulsorily 
reduced to the modicum of education—the elementary school— 
that alone is compatible with the economic conditions not only of 
the wage labourers but of the peasants as well? 
"Universal compulsory school attendance. Free instruction". 
The former exists even in Germany, the latter in Switzerland and 
in the United States in the case of elementary schools. If in some 
states of the latter country "upper" educational institutions are 
also "free", that only means in fact defraying the cost of the 
education of the upper classes from the general tax receipts. 
Incidentally, the same holds good for "free administration of 
justice" demanded under A, 5. The administration of criminal 
justice is to be had free everywhere; that of civil justice is 
concerned almost exclusively with conflicts over property and 
hence affects almost exclusively the propertied classes. Are they to 
carry on their litigation at the expense of the national coffers? 
The paragraph on the schools should at least have demanded 
technical schools (theoretical and practical) in combination with the 
elementary school. 
"Education of the people by the state" is altogether objectionable. 
Defining by a general law the expenditures on the elementary 
schools, the qualifications of the teaching  staff,  the subjects of 
instruction, etc., and, as is done in the United States, supervising 
the fulfilment of these legal specifications by state inspectors, is a 
very different thing from appointing the state as the educator of 
the people! Government and Church should rather be equally 
excluded from any influence on the school. Particularly, indeed, in 
the Prusso-German Empire (and one should not take refuge in the 
rotten subterfuge that one is speaking of a "state of the future"; 
we have seen how matters stand in this respect) the state has need, 
on the contrary, of a very stern education by the people. 
But the whole programme, for all its democratic clang, is tainted 
through and through by the Lassallean sect's servile belief in the 
state,  or, what is no better, by a democratic belief in miracles, or 
rather it is a compromise between these two kinds of belief in 
miracles, both equally remote from socialism. 
"Freedom of science" says a paragraph, of the Prussian 
Constitution.3 Why, then, here? 
"Freedom of conscience"! If one desired at this time of the 
Kulturkampf 1 to remind liberalism of its old catchwords, it surely 
a Verfassungs-Urkunde für den preußischen Staat vom 31. Januar 1850, Art. 20. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, Berlin, 1850, Nr. 3.— Ed. 
9-1317 

=====第128页=====
98 Karl Marx 
could have been done only in the following form: Everyone 
should be able to attend to his religious as well as his bodily needs 
without the police sticking their noses in. But the workers' party 
ought at any rate in this connection to have expressed its 
awareness of the fact that bourgeois "freedom of conscience" is 
nothing but the toleration of all possible kinds of religious 
unfreedom of  conscience,  and that for its part it endeavours rather to 
liberate the conscience from the witchery of religion. But one 
chooses not to transgress the "bourgeois" level. 
I have now come to the end, for the appendix that now follows 
in the programme does not constitute a characteristic component part 
of it. Hence I can be very brief here. 
2. "Normal working day." 
In no other country has the workers' party limited itself to such 
a vague demand, but has always fixed the length of the working 
day that it considers normal under the given circumstances. 
3. "Restriction of female labour and prohibition 
of child labour." 
The standardisation of the working day must include the 
restriction of female labour, insofar as it relates to the duration, 
breaks, etc., of the working day; otherwise it could only mean 
the exclusion of female labour from branches of industry that are 
especially unhealthy for the female body or are morally objection­
able to the female sex. If that is what was meant, it should have 
been said. 
"Prohibition of child labour"! Here it is absolutely essential to 
state the age limit 
A general prohibition of child labour is incompatible with the 
existence of large-scale industry and hence an empty, pious wish. 
Its implementation—if it were possible—would be reactionary, 
since, with a strict regulation of the working time according to the 
different age groups and other precautionary stipulations for the 
protection of children, an early combination of productive labour 
with education is one of the most potent means for the 
transformation of present-day society. 
4. "State supervision of factory, workshop and 
domestic industry." 
In consideration of the Prusso-German state it should definitely 
have been demanded that the inspectors are to be removable only 

=====第129页=====
Critique of the Gotha Programme 99 
by a court of law; that any worker can have them prosecuted for 
neglect of duty; that they must belong to the medical profession. 
5. "Regulation of prison labour." 
A petty demand in a general workers' programme. In any case, 
it should have been clearly stated that there is no intention from 
fear of competition to allow ordinary criminals to be treated like 
beasts, and especially that there is no desire to deprive them of 
their sole means of betterment, productive labour. This was surely 
the least one might have expected from Socialists. 
6. "An effective liability law." 
It should have been stated what is meant by an "effective" 
liability law. 
Let it be noted, incidentally, that in speaking of the normal 
working day the part of factory legislation that deals with health 
regulations and safety measures, etc., has been overlooked. The 
liability law only comes into operation when these regulations are 
infringed. 
In short, this appendix too is distinguished by slovenly editing. 
Dixi et salvavi animam meam.* 
a I have spoken and saved my soul (Ezekiel 3:18 and 19).— Ed. 

=====第130页=====
100 
Frederick Engels 
[INTRODUCTION TO THE PAMPHLET 
ON SOCIAL RELATIONS IN RUSSIA] 118 
The following lines3  were written on the occasion of a debate 
in which I became involved with a Mr. Peter Nikitich Tkachov. In 
an article about the Russian periodical Forward, published in London 
(Volksstaat, 1874, Nos. 117 and 118), b I had cause to mention this 
gentleman's name quite in passing, but in such a way as to draw 
his esteemed hostility down upon  myself.  Without delay 
Mr. Tkachov issued an "Offener Brief an Herrn Friedrich 
Engels", Zurich, 1874, in which he attributes all manner of odd 
things to me and then, in contrast to my crass ignorance, treats his 
readers to his own opinion on the state of things in general and 
the prospects for social revolution in Russia. Both form and 
content of this concoction bore the usual Bakuninist stamp. As it 
had been published in German, I thought it worth the effort to 
reply in the Volksstaat (cf. Refugee Literature, Nos. IV and V, 
Volksstaat, 1875, No. 36, et seq.). The first part of my reply dealt 
mainly with the Bakuninist approach to literary debate, which is 
simply to accuse your opponent of telling a pack of direct lies. c By 
virtue of being published in the Volksstaat this predominantly 
personal part has been given a sufficient airing. It is for that 
reason that I now set it aside and for this separate impression, 
which has been requested by the publishing house, leave only the 
second part intact, the part which deals mainly with the social 
conditions in Russia as they have taken shape since 1861, since 
what has become known as the emancipation of the peasants. 
Developments in Russia are of the greatest importance for the 
German working class. The existing Russian Empire represents 
a See this volume, pp. 39-50.— Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 19-28.— Ed. 
c Ibid., pp. 29-38.— Ed. 

=====第131页=====
Joviale*  ana  ftttfürtut 
»Ott 
gtiebridj (Sttgetö* 
)tud unb SJertag bet ©enoifenfdjaftS&ucijbrudleret. 
1875. 
The tide-page of Engels' pamphlet On Social Relations in Russia, Leipzig, 

=====第132页=====

=====第133页=====
Introduction to Social Relations in Russia 103 
the last great mainstay of all West European reaction. That was 
demonstrated with striking clarity in 1848 and 1849. Because 
Germany neglected to stir up revolt in Poland in 1848 and to wage 
war on the Russian Tsara  (as the Neue Rheinische Zeitung had 
demanded from the outset 119) that same Tsar was able in 1849 to 
put down the Hungarian revolution, which has advanced to the 
gates of Vienna, to sit in judgement over Austria, Prussia and the 
minor German states at Warsaw in 1850, and to restore the old 
Federal Diet.120 And only a few days ago at the beginning of May 
1875—just the same as 25 years ago, the Russian Tsarb received 
the homage of his vassals in Berlin and proved that he is still 
today the arbiter of Europe's fate.121 No revolution can achieve 
ultimate success in Western Europe whilst the present Russian 
state exists alongside it. But Germany is its closest neighbour, and 
it will therefore be Germany that will feel the first impact of the 
Russian armies of reaction. The overthrow of Tsarist Russia, the 
elimination of the Russian Empire, is therefore one of the first 
conditions of the German proletariat's ultimate triumph. 
It is by no means essential, however, for this overthrow to be 
brought about from outside, although a foreign war could 
accelerate it considerably. Within the Russian Empire itself there 
are elements which are working energetically to bring about its 
ruin. 
First there are the Poles. A century of oppression has placed 
them in a position where they must either be revolutionary, 
supporting every truly revolutionary uprising in the West as a first 
step towards the liberation of Poland, or they must perish. And at 
this very moment they are in a position where they can seek West 
European allies only in the camp of the proletariat. For a century 
now they have been continually betrayed by all the bourgeois 
parties of the West. The bourgeoisie in Germany has only been a 
force to be reckoned with since 1848, and since that time it has 
been hostile towards Poland. As for France, Napoleon betrayed 
Poland in 1812, and, as a consequence of that betrayal, lost his 
campaign, his crown and his empire; in 1830 and 1846 the 
bourgeois royalty followed his example, as did the bourgeois 
republic in 1848, and the Second Empire during the Crimean 
campaign and in 1863. Each betrayed Poland as contemptuously 
as the other. And even today the radical bourgeois republicans of 
France grovel before the Tsar, seeking in reward for a renewed 
betrayal of Poland to bargain on a revanchist alliance against 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
b Alexander  II.—  Ed. 

=====第134页=====
104 Frederick Engels 
Prussia, in just the same way as the German imperial bourgeois 
idolise that same Tsar as the protector of peace in Europe, i.e. of 
German-Prussian annexations. Only amongst the revolutionary 
workers do the Poles find sincere and unreserved support, because 
the two share the same interest in the overthrow of their common 
enemy, and because the liberation of Poland is synonymous with 
that overthrow. 
But the activity of the Poles is confined to a particular locality. It 
is limited to Poland, Lithuania, and Little Russia; the actual core 
of the Russian Empire, Great Russia, remains practically un­
touched by their efforts. The forty million inhabitants of Great 
Russia constitute much too large a people and have had far too 
unique a development to force a movement on them from outside. 
That is not at all necessary, however. Of course, the mass of the 
Russian people, the peasants, have gone on for centuries, from 
generation to generation, living their dull, unimaginative lives in a 
sort of ahistorical torpor; and the only changes that occurred to 
interrupt this desolate condition were isolated and fruitless 
uprisings and new waves of repression carried out by nobility and 
government. The Russian government itself put an end to this 
ahistorical existence (in 1861) with the abolition of serfdom 
which could not be delayed any longer and the redemption of the 
corvée —a measure which was introduced with such amazing cunning 
that it is leading the majority of both the peasants and the nobility 
towards certain ruin. The very conditions themselves, therefore, 
which the Russian peasant is now obliged to face, force him into the 
movement, a movement which, of course, is still in its very initial 
stages, but which is bound to advance thanks to the daily worsening 
economic situation of the mass of the peasants. The rumbling 
dissatisfaction of the peasants is already a fact which must be 
acknowledged by the government, by all those who are disaffected, 
and by the opposition parties alike. 
It follows from this that, if below the discussion centres on 
Russia, then what is meant is not the whole of the Russian Empire 
but Great Russia alone, i.e. the territory whose westernmost 
gubernias are Pskov and Smolensk, and whose southernmost 
gubernias are Kursk and Voronezh. 
Written in the latter half of May 1875 Printed according to the pamph-
_. , ,. , , , let, checked with the 1894 edition 
First published in the pamphlet: F. En­
gels,  Soziales aus Rußland, Leipzig, 1875; Published in English for the first 
reprinted in the book: F. Engels, Inter- time 
nationales aus dem "Volksstaat"  (1871-
75), Berlin, 1894 

=====第135页=====
105 
Frederick Engels 
[LETTER TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S 
ASSOCIATION IN NEW YORK] 
London, August 13, 1875 
122 Regent's Park Road, NW 
TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
OF THE INTERNATIONAL WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION 
Citizens! 
The circulars122  sent to me with the letter from Secretary Speyer 
(June 4, received 21st) have been put into circulation according to 
the instructions, and I have been able to do the following in the 
interests of the cause: 
1. On account of its amalgamation with the Lasselleans and its 
over-generous policy in accepting new members—roughly 120— 
the Working Men's Society (German section) here123 would not be 
suitable for confidential communications, unless one wished them 
to be published immediately. I therefore gave circulars to Lessner 
and Frankel, who agreed with me that the content was not 
suitable for official release to the Society, and that we should have 
to confine ourselves to communicating it to suitable persons, and 
work behind the scenes in other ways to promote the matter in 
question. Since it is fairly certain that no German workers will be 
sent to Philadelphia from here, it will not affect the practical 
consequences in any way. 
2. Our friend Mesa from Madrid, who now lives in Paris, 
happened to be here when the circular arrived. He showed a keen 
interest in the matter; I translated the circular for him, and as he 
knows members of the committee that administers the subscrip­
tions in Paris to the workers' donations to Philadelphia, I dare say 
that, with his well-known energy, he will be able to get something 
done. He is also sending it to Spain. 
3. I could not send it to Belgium, as the whole Belgian 
International supports the Alliancists,124 and it is not in our 
interests to communicate the plan to them. I have no addresses for 

=====第136页=====
106 Frederick Engels 
Portugal and Italy. The Plebe of Lodi has virtually joined the 
Alliancists and would be quite capable of publishing the story 
straightaway.3 
4. As Germany, Austria and Switzerland are not mentioned in 
the instructions, and the General Council has plenty of direct 
contacts with these countries,125 I have taken no steps there, so as 
not to frustrate any action that may have been taken directly on 
the spot. 
5. The circular has been very well received by all who have seen 
it, and the just proposal for a conference is universally regarded 
as the sole practical one. It appears impossible to us here, 
however, to hold a ballot on the issue. The Society here has 
already been mentioned. Other sections in England have all fizzled 
out; the best people have mostly left. In Denmark, France and 
Spain, where the International is officially prohibited, there can be 
no question of a ballot. In Germany there has never been a vote 
on anything like this and, after uniting with the Lassalleans, they 
have totally renounced the already loose connection with the 
International. In these circumstances, the American votes should 
be enough to cover the General Council if it tables the motion for 
a decision, especially since we know from a reliable source that the 
Alliancists are not holding a congress this year either (and 
probably never will again). 
6. Would it not be a good thing if a brief announcement were 
placed in the European party newspapers around the time the 
exhibition opens, to the effect that: "Socialist workers visiting the 
exhibition in Philadelphia are asked to go to ... (address), where 
they will be put in touch with the Philadelphia party comrades", 
or if we founded a "committee for the accommodation of socialist 
workers, or to protect them against trickery" and published its 
address? The latter, in particular, would look very innocent, but a 
few private letters would suffice to make the true state of affairs 
known. 
Fraternal greetings, 
F. Engels 
First published in Briefe und Auszüge aus Printed according to the manu-
Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, script 
Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an «,,.,,.„,.,, 
F. A. Sorge und Andere, Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English for the first 
a See this volume, pp.  174-78.—  Ed 

=====第137页=====
107 
Frederick Engels 
[SPEECH AT THE MEETING HELD TO COMMEMORATE 
THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE POLISH UPRISING 
OF 1863]126 
Citizens! The role of Poland in the history of Europe's 
revolutions is a role that stands apart. Any revolution in the West 
which does not succeed in involving Poland and ensuring its 
independence and liberty is doomed to defeat. Let us take the 
revolution of 1848 as an example. It covered an area more 
extensive than any previous revolution; it swept along in its 
current Austria, Hungary, Prussia. But it came to a halt at the 
borders of Poland occupied by the armies of Russia. When Tsar 
Nicholas received the news of the February Revolution, he said to 
his entourage: Gentlemen, we shall mount our horses.127  At this he 
promptly mobilised his troops and concentrated them in Poland, 
in order to let them overrun rebellious Europe at the opportune 
moment. For their part, the revolutionaries knew perfectly well 
that the ground where the decisive battle would be fought was 
Poland. On May 15 the people of Paris, to cries of "Long Live 
Poland!", invaded the National Assembly to force it to go to war 
for Polish independence. At the same time, in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, Marx and I demanded that Prussia should immediately 
declare war on Russia in order to set Poland free, and we were 
supported by all advanced democrats in Germany. 128 Thus in 
France and Germany they knew perfectly well where the decisive 
point was: with Poland, revolution was assured; without Poland, it 
was bound to fail. But in France M. Lamartine, in Prussia 
Frederick William IV, the Tsar's 3 brother-in-law, and his 
bourgeois minister Mr. Camphausen, had no intention whatever of 
themselves breaking the power of Russia, in which they saw quite 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 

=====第138页=====
108 Frederick Engels 
rightly their last safeguard against the revolutionary tide. Nicholas 
was able to do without getting on his horse; his troops, for the 
time being, could confine themselves to containing Poland and 
threatening Prussia, Austria and Hungary until the moment when 
the progress of the Hungarian insurgents threatened Austrian 
reaction, victorious in Vienna. This was when the Russian armies 
overran Hungary, and by crushing the Hungarian revolution 
ensured the victory of reaction throughout the West. Europe was 
at the Tsar's feet because Europe had abandoned Poland. In 
truth, Poland is not like any other country. As far as revolution is 
concerned, it is the keystone of the European edifice; whichever is 
able to hold its ground in Poland, revolution or reaction, will end 
up by dominating the whole of Europe. And it is this quite special 
character which gives to Poland the importance which it has for all 
revolutionaries and which elicits from us, to this day, the cry: 
"Long Live  Poland!" 
Speech delivered on January 22, 1876 Printed according to the manu­
script, verified with the newspaper First published in the newspaper Bne-
pedh!  (London), No. 27, February 15, Translated from the French 
1876 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第139页=====
Frederick Engels 
PRUSSIAN SCHNAPPS 
IN THE GERMAN REICHSTAG 

=====第140页=====
Written in February 1876 
First published in Der Volksstaat, Nos. 23, 
24 and 25, February 25 and 27 and 
March 1, 1876 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第141页=====
Ill 
I 
On February 4, Mr. von Kardorff questioned the Imperial 
government about the high taxes imposed on German "Sprit"* in 
England and Italy. He drew the attention of the honourable 
gentlemen to the fact that (as reported by the Kölnische Zeitung h) 
"in our eastern and northern provinces vast stretches of somewhat infertile, 
sterile land, covering hundreds of square miles, have, as a result of potato 
cultivation on a very large scale, successfully developed into arable land with a 
relatively high crop yield, and that the reason for growing potatoes here lies in 
turn in the fact that scattered throughout these regions are numerous distilleries 
where Sprit is manufactured as an agricultural side-line. Whereas in earlier times 
there used to be roughly 1,000 people to the square mile living in these parts, the 
land is now able to support roughly 3,000 people per square mile as a result of 
Sprit manufacture, because the distilleries provide an essential market for the 
potatoes which, on account of their bulk, are difficult to transport and cannot be 
transported at all in winter due to the frost. Secondly, the distilleries convert the 
potatoes into valuable and easily transportable alcohol, and, ultimately, make the 
land more fertile thanks to the numerous residues which can be used for fodder. 
Just how important the interests in question are, will be clear to anyone who 
considers that the taxation on spirits provides us with some 36 million marks of 
state revenue, despite the fact that Germany levies the lowest tax on spirits in the 
world, one fifth of that imposed in Russia, for example". 
The Prussian Junkers must really have been getting above 
themselves recently, daring, as they have, to draw the attention of 
the world to their "Sprit industry", commonly known as schnapps 
distilling. 
In the last century only small quantities of schnapps were 
distilled in Germany, and from grain only. Although they did not 
a Spirit.—  Ed. 
b Kölnische Zeitung, No. 36, February 5, 1876 (in the section Verhandlungen des 
Deutschen Reichstages). — Ed. 

=====第142页=====
112 Frederick Engels 
know how to remove the fusel oil which the schnapps also 
contained (we shall be returning to this point later), as they were 
still completely ignorant of the fusel oil's existence; they did know 
from experience that the quality of the schnapps improved 
considerably after it was stored for some time, that it lost its 
burning taste, and that when consumed it was less intoxicating and 
less damaging to one's health. The petty-bourgeois conditions 
under which it was distilled at that time and the still undeveloped 
demand, which was more concerned with quality than quantity, 
made it possible almost everywhere to store the product in cellars 
for years, thus giving it a less harmful character as the more 
damaging constituent parts were converted in a gradual chemical 
process. At the end of the last century we thus find distilling being 
carried out on a fairly wide scale mainly restricted to a few 
towns— Münster, Ulrichstein, Nordhausen and others—and their 
products usually bearing the epithet "old". 
About the beginning of this century the distilleries increased in 
number in the countryside as side-lines of the larger landed 
proprietors and tenants, especially in Hanover and Brunswick. 
They found a market, on the one hand, due to the steady increase 
in the consumption of schnapps, and, on the other hand, due to 
the needs of the ever-growing and ever-warring armies which, 
for their part, again carried the taste for schnapps constantly 
further afield. Thus after the peace of 1814130 the distilling 
industry was able to extend further and further and, in the form 
already described, quite different from that of the old town 
distilleries, to gain a firm foothold as a side-line run by the 
managers of large estates on the Lower Rhine, Prussian Saxony, 
Brandenburg and Lusatia. 
However, the turning-point for the distilling industry was the 
discovery that one could produce schnapps profitably not only 
from grain but also from potatoes. That revolutionised the whole 
industry. On the one hand, the main activity of the distilling 
industry shifted once and for all from the town to the countryside, 
and the petty-bourgeois producers of the good old drink were 
ousted more and more by the infamous producers of potato 
rot-gut, the big landowners. On the other hand, and this is 
historically of much greater significance, the big grain-distilling 
landowner was displaced by the big potato-distilling landowner; the 
distilling industry moved increasingly from the fertile grain-grow­
ing land to the infertile potato-growing land, in other words from 
North-West Germany to North-East Germany—to Old Prussia east 
of the Elbe. 

=====第143页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 113 
This turning-point came at the time of the harvest failure and 
famine of 1816. Despite the improved harvests of the two 
succeeding years, grain prices remained so high as a consequence 
of the continuing export of grain to England and other countries 
that it became almost impossible to use grain for distilling 
purposes. A hogshead of schnapps, which had only cost 39 talers 
in 1813, was sold in 1817 for 70 talers. At this point potatoes 
replaced grain and in 1823 a hogshead of schnapps was to be had 
for as little as 14 to 17 talers! 
How was it, then, that the poor Junkers from the east of the 
Elbe,  allegedly totally ruined by the war and the sacrifices they 
had made for their fatherland, obtained the means with which to 
convert their pressing mortgage debts into lucrative schnapps 
distilleries? It is true that the favourable trading conditions of the 
years 1816 to 1819 brought them very good returns and increased 
their credit as a result of the generally rising price of land, but this 
was far from sufficient. On top of that our patriotic Junkers 
received, in the first instance, state aid in various direct and 
indirect forms, and, secondly, there was a further factor at work, 
to which we must devote our particular attention. It will be 
remembered that in Prussia in 1811 the commutation of statute 
labour, and the dispute between the peasants and the landlords in 
general, were settled in law in such a way that payment in kind 
could be transformed into money payment.3  This could be turned 
into capital and commuted either in cash in specific instalments, or 
by the peasant ceding a piece of land to the lord, or in a 
combination of cash and of land. This law remained a dead letter 
until the high grain prices of 1816 to 1819 put the peasants in a 
position to proceed with commutation. From 1819 onwards 
commutation went ahead rapidly in Brandenburg, more slowly in 
Pomerania, and slower still in Posen and Prussia. The money thus 
lawfully but unjustly misappropriated from the peasants (for they 
had had statute labour unjustly forced upon them), in so far as it 
was not immediately squandered according to traditional aristocra­
tic custom, was employed mainly to finance the setting-up of 
distilleries. The distilling industry also expanded to the same 
extent in the three other provinces mentioned, as the peasants 
provided the financial means for it through the commutation of 
their statute labour. The schnapps industry of the Prussian 
a Edikt die Regulirung der gutsherrlichen und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse betreffend, vom 
14. September, 1811. In: Gesezt-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, 
No. 21, Berlin, 1811.— Ed. 
10-1317 

=====第144页=====
114 Frederick Engels 
Junkers was thus founded literally on the money taken from the 
peasants. And business boomed, particularly after 1825. Just two 
years later, in 1827, 125 million quarts of schnapps were distilled 
in Prussia, that is IOV2 quarts per head of the population, at an 
overall value of 15 million talers; in contrast to this, Hanover, 
fifteen years earlier Germany's first schnapps state, produced a 
mere 18 million quarts. 
It will be evident that from now on the whole of Germany was 
caught in a veritable tidal wave of Prussian potato rot-gut, at least 
wherever the single states or customs unions of single states did 
not manage to stem the flow by raising customs barriers against it. 
Fourteen talers an awm consisting of 180 quarts, that is a quart for 
2 groschen and 4 pfennigs on the wholesale market! Drunkenness, 
which previously had cost three and four times as much, was 
something available, day in day out, even to the very poorest now 
that a man could stay deeply under the influence for a whole week 
at a cost of 15 silver groschen. 
The effects of these quite unprecedentedly low schnapps prices, 
which were felt at different places at different times but almost 
always completely without warning, were quite incredible. I can 
still well remember how, at the end of the twenties, the low cost of 
schnapps suddenly overtook the industrial area of the Lower 
Rhine and the Mark. In the Berg country particularly, and most 
notably in Elberfeld-Barmen, the mass of the working population 
fell victim to drink. From nine in the evening, in great crowds and 
arm in arm, taking up the whole width of the street, the "soused 
men" tottered their way, bawling discordantly, from one inn to the 
other and finally back home. Given the level of education of the 
workers at that time and the utter hopelessness of their situation, 
it was not surprising. Especially in blessed Wuppertal, where for 
sixty years one industry has given way to another, and where as a 
result one section of the workers was constantly oppressed if not 
unemployed, whilst another section (at that time the dye-workers) 
was well paid by the prevailing standards. And if, as was the case 
at that time, the workers of Wuppertal had only a choice between 
the earthly schnapps of the public houses and the divine schnapps 
of the pietistic priests—is it any wonder that they preferred the 
former, as bad as it was? 
And it was very bad. It was sent out and drunk new, just as it 
emerged from the cooling apparatus, without further purification 
and containing all its fusel oils. All schnapps that is distilled from 
the husks of pressed grapes, from beet, grain or potatoes contains 
this fusel oil, which is a mixture of higher alcohols, i.e., of liquids 

=====第145页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 115 
of a similar composition to that of ordinary alcohol but containing 
more carbon and hydrogen (including primary propyl alcohol, 
isobutyl alcohol, but overwhelmingly amyl alcohol). All these types 
of alcohol are more noxious than the normal spirits of wine (ethyl 
alcohol), and the dose required to produce a toxic effect is much 
lower than with the latter. Professor Binz at Bonn proved 
recently,3 after conducting numerous experiments, that the intox­
icating effects of our alcoholic beverages, as well as the unpleasant 
after-effects they produce in the form of a laudable hangover or 
the more serious symptoms of illness and poisoning, are attribut­
able much less to the usual spirits of wine, or ethyl alcohol, than to 
the higher alcohols, in other words fusel oil. Nor do they simply 
have a more intoxicating and more destructive effect, they also 
determine the nature of the intoxication. Everyone knows from his 
own observations, if not from experience, what the different 
effects on the brain are from getting drunk on wine (even 
different sorts of wine), on beer and on schnapps. The more fusel 
oil in the drink and the more unwholesome the composition of 
that fusel oil, the more excessive and wild the intoxication. But it 
is well known that of all distilled spirits new, unpurified potato 
schnapps contains the greatest quantity of fusel oil with the least 
favourable composition. The effect of such unusually large 
quantities of that drink on such an excitable and volatile 
population as that to be found in the Berg country was therefore 
just what one might have expected. The drunkenness proved to 
be of a totally different nature. That merry-making which 
previously ended in good-natured tipsiness and only seldom in 
excess, where of course it was then not uncommon for the knife to 
be involved, that kind of merry-making now degenerated into a 
riot and inevitably ended in a brawl, there never being any lack of 
knife wounds, and the fatal stabbings constantly increasing in their 
frequency. The priests put it down to increasing godlessness, the 
lawyers and other philistines to the dances held in public houses. 
The real cause was Prussian fusel oil flooding onto the scene, 
simply having its normal physiological effect and dispatching 
hundreds of poor souls off to prison, to work on fortress 
construction. 
The acute effect of cheap schnapps continued to be felt for 
years,  until it gradually more or less petered out. But its influence 
a See Carl Binz's speech on the intoxicating effect of alcoholic beverages, Berliner 
klinische Wochenschrift, No. 4, January 24, 1876 (in the section Niederrheinische 
Gesellschaft in Bonn. Sitzung vom 3. Juni 1875).— Ed. 
10* 

=====第146页=====
116 Frederick Engels 
on people's morals lingered on; for the working class schnapps 
was more of a need in life than it had been before, and its quality, 
even if it did improve a little, stayed well below that of the old 
grain spirit. 
And what happened in the Berg country also happened 
elsewhere. At no time were the lamentations of the philistines 
about an increase in excessive schnapps consumption among the 
workers more widespread, more unanimous and more clamorous 
than during the period from 1825 to 1835. It is even open to 
question whether or not that state of dullness in which the North 
German workers passively witnessed the events of 1830, without 
being affected by them, was not due largely to schnapps, which at 
that time had them more than ever in its grip. Serious and 
especially successful uprisings occurred only in wine-producing 
regions, or in those German states which had more or less 
protected themselves against Prussian schnapps by mea'ns of 
tariffs.131 That was not the first time that schnapps had saved the 
Prussian state. 
The only industry to have had more devastating direct 
effects—and even then not on its own people, but on foreigners— 
was the Anglo-Indian opium industry used to poison China. 
In the meantime schnapps production continued on its merry 
way, expanding further and further eastwards, and forcing acre 
upon acre of the North-East German desert of sand and marshes 
to surrender to the potato. Not content with bestowing its favours 
on its own country, it strove to make the blessings of old-Prussian 
fusel oil available to foreign lands. Ordinary schnapps was distilled 
once more, so that part of the water contained in it could be 
removed, and the aqueous and impure spirit of wine thus 
obtained was called Spirit, which is the Prussian translation of the 
word Spiritus. The higher alcohols all have higher boiling points 
than ethyl alcohol. Whilst the latter boils at 78 V 2° on the 
centigrade thermometer, the boiling point of primary propyl 
alcohol is 97°, that of isobutyl alcohol 109° and that of amyl 
alcohol 132°. Now one would think that with careful distillation at 
least the major part of the latter, the main constituent of fusel oil, 
would be left behind along with a part of the isobutyl alcohol, and 
that at the very most a part of the latter would be distilled along 
with most of the primary propyl alcohol, which, however, is 
present in fusel oil in only very small quantities. But even the 
scientific chemists forgo using distillation to separate the three 
lower alcohols concerned here, and can only extract amyl alcohol 
from fusel oil by a process of fractionated distillation, which 

=====第147页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 117 
cannot be applied in a distillery. As it is, distilling in a schnapps 
factory in the country is a pretty unsophisticated business. No 
wonder then that the Sprit produced at the beginning of the 
forties still contained considerable amounts of fusel oil, as anyone 
could easily tell by smelling it; pure or only aqueous spirit of wine 
is almost odourless. 
This Sprit went mainly to Hamburg. What happened to it? Part 
went to countries which did not bar its entry by means of 
tariffs—Stettin was also involved in this export trade; but the 
major portion was used in Hamburg and Bremen for the 
adulteration of rum. Distilled in the West Indies partly from sugar 
cane  itself,  but mainly from the waste products of the cane during 
the sugar-making process, this was the only spirit still able to 
compete, because of its low production costs, with potato schnapps 
as a sort of luxury drink for the masses. Now to produce a "fine" 
but also cheap rum, they would take, for example, a barrel of 
really fine Jamaica rum, three to four barrels of cheap, bad 
Barbary rum and two to three barrels of Prussian potato 
Sprit—and this or a similar mixture produced the required result. 
This "poison", as merchants themselves involved in the adultera­
tion have called it in my presence, was shipped to Denmark, 
Sweden, Norway and Russia. To a very significant extent, 
however, it also made its way up the Elbe or via Stettin to the 
regions from which the noble Sprit had originally come, and was 
partly drunk there as rum, and partly smuggled into Austria and 
Poland. 
The Hamburg merchants did not stop at producing adulterated 
rum. It was their own peculiar kind of ingenuity which made them 
the first to see the world-shaking role that Prussian schnapps was 
destined to play in the future. They had already tried their hands 
at all sorts of other drinks, and even at the end of the thirties 
nobody in the North German territories outside Prussia who knew 
anything about wine would take French white wines from 
Hamburg, because it was generally claimed that they were 
sweetened there with lead acetate and thus contaminated. 
Nevertheless, potato Sprit soon became the basis for an ever­
growing liquor adulteration business. Rum was followed by 
cognac, which required somewhat more skill in its treatment. Soon 
they began treating wine with Sprit, and finally they got round, 
without using any wine at all, to producing port and Spanish wines 
from Sprit, water and vegetable juices, which were often displaced 
by chemicals. Business flourished all the more when such practices 
were either directly forbidden in many countries, or came so close 

=====第148页=====
118 Frederick Engels 
to breaking the law that it was not considered advisable to try 
one's hand at them. But Hamburg was the centre of unrestricted 
free trade, and so "for Hamburg's health and happiness" they 
went on adulterating to their heart's content. 
However, the adulteration business did not remain a monopoly 
for long. After the revolution of 1848, when in France the 
exclusive domination of big finance capital and a few prominent 
industrial magnates was temporarily replaced by the rule of the 
whole bourgeoisie, the French producers and traders began to 
realise what magic powers lay dormant in such a barrel of Prussian 
potato Sprit They began to adulterate their cognac whilst it was 
still at home instead of sending it abroad in its pure state, and 
even more to ennoble the cognac (which is what, for the sake of 
brevity, I call all schnapps distilled from the husks of pressed 
grapes) intended for home consumption by adding considerable 
quantities of Prussian potato Sprit. This made cognac—the only 
spirit to be consumed on a large scale in France—significantly 
cheaper. The Second Empire supported this manoeuvre, of 
course, in the interests of the suffering masses, and thus we find 
on the fall of the Napoleonic dynasty that, thanks to the merciful 
effects of old Prussian schnapps, drunkenness, almost unknown 
there previously, had grown to significant proportions in France. 
An unprecedented series of bad vintages and finally the 
commercial treaty of 1860, which opened up England to the 
French wine trade,132 gave rise to a new advance. The weak wines 
from bad years, whose acidity was not to be removed with sugar, 
needed to have alcohol added to them so that they would keep. 
They were therefore mixed with Prussian Sprit Furthermore, the 
English palate was accustomed to strong wines—the natural 
French country wines, which were now sent for export in great 
quantities, were too weak and too cold for the English. What 
better to give them robustness and warmth than Prussian Sprit? 
Bordeaux increasingly became the centre for the adulteration of 
French, Spanish and Italian wines, which were transformed there 
into "fine Bordeaux", and—for the use of Prussian Sprit 
Indeed, Spanish and Italian wines. Since the consumption of 
French red wines—and no bourgeois will drink any other—has 
increased so enormously in England, North and South America, 
and the colonies, even the almost inexhaustible abundance of 
wines in France no longer suffices. Almost all the useful vintage 
from Northern Spain, including the whole of the vintage from 
Rioja in the Ebro valley, which is rich in wines, goes to Bordeaux. 
And Genoa, Leghorn and Naples send whole shiploads of wine to 

=====第149页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 119 
the same place. Whilst Prussian Sprit makes these wines capable of 
withstanding transport by sea, the export trade forces up the price 
of wine in Spain and Italy to such an extent that it is way beyond 
the means of the working population, who used to drink it every 
day. In its place they drink schnapps, and the main ingredient of 
that schnapps is once again—Prussian potato Sprit Indeed, Mr. 
von Kardorff complains in the Reichstag that in Italy this is not 
yet happening on a large enough scale. 
Wherever we turn we find Prussian Sprit Prussian Sprit extends 
incomparably further than the arm of the imperial German 
government. And wherever we find this Sprit it serves one main 
purpose—that of adulteration. It is used to make Southern 
European wines suitable for shipment and thus to deprive the 
indigenous working population of them. And just as Achilles' 
lance heals the wounds which it has made,133  so Prussian Sprit at 
the same time offers the working classes who have been robbed of 
their wine a substitute in the form of adulterated schnapps! Potato 
Sprit is to Prussia what iron and cottons are to England, the article 
which represents her on the world market. The latest adept and, 
at the same time, regenerator of socialism, Mr. Eugen Dühring, 
may well therefore extol the virtues of distilling as "primarily a ... 
natural link (of industry) with agriculture", and proclaim trium­
phantly: 
"The production of spirits is of such significance that it will tend to be 
underrated rather than overrated!"3 
To be sure, the Prussian for "Anch'io son pittore" (I too am a 
painter, as Correggio said134) is "I too am a schnapps distiller". 
However, we have by no means exhausted the wondrous 
exploits of Prussian potato schnapps. 
"Whereas in earlier times," says Mr. von  Kardorff,  "there used to be roughly 
1,000 people to the square mile living in these parts, the land is now able to 
support roughly 3,000 people per square mile as a result of Sprit manufacture."b 
And on the whole that is correct. I do not know what period 
Mr. von Kardorff refers to when he quotes the population as 
being a thousand per square mile. There must certainly have been 
such a period. If, however, we exclude the provinces of Saxony 
and Silesia, where distilling has a less conspicuous part to play 
a E. Dühring, Cursus der National- und Socialökonomie, Berlin, 1873, pp. 263-
64.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  111.—  Ed. 

=====第150页=====
120 Frederick Engels 
alongside other industries, and also Posen, the greater part of 
which frustrates all government efforts by continuing to display no 
especial desire to be anything other than Polish, then we are left 
with the three provinces of Brandenburg, Pomerania and Prussia. 
Together these three provinces cover a surface area of 2,415 
square miles. In 1817 they had a total population of 3,479,825, or 
1,441 per square mile; in 1871 it was 7,432,407, or 3,078 per 
square mile. We quite agree with Mr. von Kardorff in regarding 
the growth in population mainly as a consequence, direct or 
indirect, of schnapps distilling. If we add the Altmark, northern 
agricultural Lower Silesia, and the predominantly German part of 
Posen, where the population will have developed in a similar way, 
then we have the actual schnapps-producing area, and at one and 
the same time the heart of the Prussian monarchy. And this opens up 
an entirely new perspective. Distilling now reveals itself as being 
the real material basis of present-day Prussia. Without it the 
Prussian Junkers would have perished; their estates would have 
been bought up in part by large land magnates who would have 
formed a less numerous aristocracy along English lines 135; in part 
they would have been broken up and would have formed the basis 
for an independent peasantry. Without it the heart of Prussia 
would have remained a land with a population of about 2,000 
inhabitants to the square mile, incapable of playing any part in 
history, either good or bad, until bourgeois industry developed 
sufficiently to rule the roost socially and perhaps politically here as 
well. Distilling has given a different turn to developments. On 
ground which produces practically nothing except potatoes and 
clod-hopping Junkers, and the latter en masse, it was able to defy 
the competition of the world. Favoured more and more by 
demand—for reasons already explained—it was able to elevate 
itself to the position of the world's central schnapps-producing 
factory. Under the prevailing social relations, this meant nothing 
other than the development, on the one hand, of a class of 
medium-size landowners whose younger sons provided the main 
material for the army officers and for the bureaucracy, i.e., a new 
lease of life for the Junkers, and, on the other hand, the 
development of a relatively rapidly growing class of semi-
bondsmen, from which the mass of the "core regiments" of the 
army are recruited. If anyone is interested in the situation of 
this mass of workers, who are free in name, but for the most 
part kept almost completely in bondage to the squire by means of 
annual contracts, through payments in kind, through housing 
conditions, and finally by the manorial police, which with the 

=====第151页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 121 
advent of the new district regulations136  only assumed a different 
form, he can consult the writings of Professor von der Goltz. 137 In 
short, then, the question is: What was it that enabled Prussia more 
or less to digest the morsels west of the Elbe that it swallowed in 
1815, 138 to stifle the revolution in Berlin in 1848, to assume the 
leadership of German reaction in 1849 despite the uprisings in 
Rhenish Westphalia,139 to wage war with Austria in 1866, and in 
1871 to get the whole of Little Germany140 to accept the 
leadership of this most backward, most stable, least educated, still 
semi-feudal part of Germany? It was the distilling of schnapps. 

=====第152页=====
122 
il 
Meanwhile let us return to the Reichstag.3  The protagonists in 
the debate are Mr. von  Kardorff,  Mr. von Delbrück and the 
Hamburg representative in the Federal Council 141 Krüger. b 
Listening to this debate, it seems almost as if we are doing a shameful 
wrong to Prussian potato spirits. It is not Prussian but rather Russian 
Sprit which is causing all the trouble. Mr. von Kardorff complains 
that Hamburg industrialists are converting Russian schnapps 
(which, as Mr. Krüger expressly emphasises, is distilled from grain, 
not potatoes) into Sprit, "sending it out as German Sprit, and thus 
damaging the reputation of German Sprit". Mr. Delbrück "has 
been told that passing it off as Sprit in this way would involve 
great difficulties, since as yet no one has succeeded in producing 
odourless Sprit from Russian schnapps as has been done with 
German schnapps". However, he added cautiously: "Of course, 
gentlemen, I am in no position to judge." 
So, it is not Prussian potato spirit but Russian grain spirit which 
is causing all the trouble. Prussian potato Sprit is "odourless", i.e. 
free from fusel oil; no one has as yet managed to produce an 
odourless Russian Sprit from grain, and it therefore contains fusel 
oil, and if it is sold as Prussian Sprit, then it detracts from the 
reputation that the latter has as being free from fusel oil. If we 
accept this, however, then we have, in a roguish and most disloyal 
a See this volume, p.  111.—  Ed 
b See the speeches made by W. von  Kardorff,  M. F. R. von Delbrück and 
D. Ch. F. Krüger in the German Reichstag on February 4, 1876, Kölnische Zeitung, 
No. 36, February 5, 1876 (in the section Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstages). — 
Ed 

=====第153页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 123 
manner, slandered Prussian Sprit, free from fusel oil as it is. Let us 
examine the position as it really is. 
Indeed a process exists for removing fusel oil from schnapps by 
treating it with red-hot charcoal. As a consequence of this the 
Sprit which has come onto the market recently has generally 
contained less fusel oil. However, there is the following difference 
between the two kinds of Sprit that we are concerned with here: 
grain spirit can be freed of fusel oil completely without any great 
effort, whilst, on the other hand, removing fusel oil from potato 
Sprit is a much more difficult process, and is actually impossible in 
large-scale production, so that even the purest spirit distilled from 
potato schnapps always leaves behind a smell of fusel oil when 
rubbed onto the hand. Therefore it is a rule that only spirit 
distilled from grain is used by dispensing chemists and in the 
making of fine liqueurs, and never Sprit distilled from potatoes, or 
at least this should be the case (for adulteration takes place here 
too!). 
And a few days after the Kölnische Zeitung reported on the 
above schnapps debate it carried (February 8, first page) in its 
miscellaneous reports the following plaintive cry from a tippler on 
the Rhine: 
"It would be particularly desirable now to prove that potato Sprit is being added to 
weak wine as well. A disconcerting dazed feeling in the head afterwards does indeed 
point to it, too late however. Potato Sprit still has fusel oil in it, the otherwise 
unpleasant smell of which is concealed by the wine's own particular taste. This kind 
of adulteration is among the most common."a 
Finally, in order to pacify the old-Prussian schnapps distillers, 
Mr. Krüger lets the doubtful fact be known that Russian spirit 
distilled from grain is fetching four marks more on the Hamburg 
market than Prussian potato Sprit On February 7 the latter was 
quoted in Hamburg at 35 marks for 100 litres, and that means 
that Russian spirit fetches a price which is 12% better than that 
paid for Prussian Sprit, the reputation of which it is allegedly 
damaging! 
And now, after hearing all these facts, look at the expression of 
injured innocence of this maligned, "odourless", reputation-
conscious and virtuous Prussian product, allegedly so completely 
free of fusel oil, and which costs only 35 pfennigs a litre, cheaper 
than beer! If one examines that debate in the light of these facts, 
a Kölnische Zeitung, No. 39, February 8, 1876 (in the section Vermischte 
Nachrichten). — Ed. 

=====第154页=====
124 Frederick Engels 
is one not tempted to ask: Just exacdy who is making a fool of 
whom? 
The benign influence of Prussian fusel oil is world-embracing, 
for it finds its way, with potato Sprit, into every kind of drink. 
From the sour, weak and badly seasoned Mosel wine and Rhine 
wine, which is magically transformed with the aid of potato sugar 
and potato Sprit into Brauneberger and Niersteiner, from the bad 
red wine which has been flooding England since Gladstone's 
commercial treaty, 142 and which is called "Gladstone" there, to the 
Château Lafitte and champagne, port and Madeira, which the 
bourgeois drink in India, China, Australia and America, there is 
not a drink in whose composition Prussian fusel oil does not play a 
part. The production of these drinks is flourishing wherever wine 
is grown and wherever wine is stored in great quantities, and the 
producers hail potato Sprit with dithyrambic shouts of joy. But 
what about the consumers? Well, the consumers become aware of 
it when they suffer that "disconcerting dazed feeling in the head", 
which is how fusel oil confers its blessings on one, and they try to 
avoid suffering its blessings. In Italy, as Mr. von Kardorff says, the 
commercial treaty 143 is applied in such a way as to make Prussian 
Sprit pay far too high a  tariff.  Belgium, America and England 
make it impossible to export Sprit to them by levying high tariffs. 
In France the customs officials stick red labels on barrels of Sprit, 
so as to distinguish them as Prussian—which is really quite the 
first time that the French customs officials have done anything 
beneficial to the community! In short, things have gone so far that 
Mr. von Kardorff cries out in desperation: 
"Gentlemen, if you visualise the position of the German Sprit industry you will 
find that all countries are closing their borders to our Sprit in the greatest of fear!" 
Naturally enough. The gracious effects of this Sprit have 
gradually become known the world over, and the only way to 
avoid that "disconcerting dazed feeling in the head" is not to allow 
the confounded rot-gut into the country in the first place. 
And now, on top of this, a storm cloud is rising from the East, 
heavy and moist, above the heads of the hard-pressed schnapps 
Junkers. Their big brother in Russia, the last refuge of all 
time-honoured institutions for combatting modern destructive 
mania, has also begun to distill schnapps and to export it, and it is 
grain schnapps, and, what is more, he is supplying it just as 
cheaply as the Prussian Junkers their potato schnapps. The 
production and export of this Russian schnapps is increasing year 
by year, and, though it may so far have been purified into Sprit in 
Hamburg, Mr. Delbrück now tells us that 

=====第155页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 125 
"in the Russian ports ... already in the process of being constructed are a 
number of plants, equipped with first-rate apparatus for the purification of Russian 
schnapps",3 
and he tells the Junker gentlemen to expect Russian competition 
to outstrip them with every passing year. Mr. von Kardorff is only 
too well aware of this and he demands that the government forbid 
the transporting of Russian spirits across Germany forthwith. 
As a free conservative member of parliament, Mr. von Kardorff 
really ought to be in a better position to appreciate the attitude of 
the German imperial government with respect to Russia. After the 
annexation of Alsace-Lorraine, and the scandalous war reparations 
of five thousand million,144 as a result of which France was bound 
to become an ally of each and every enemy of Germany, and given 
the policy of seeking to be respected, or rather feared, but never 
looked on with affection by others, there remained only one 
choice: either quickly to defeat Russia as well, or to secure the 
alliance with Russia (in as much as Russia can be depended upon) 
by becoming the obedient servant of Russian diplomacy. As they 
were unable to decide in favour of the first alternative, they were 
obliged to choose the second. Prussia, and with it the empire, is 
once more as dependent on Russia as it was after 1815 and 1850; 
and just as in 1815 the "Holy Alliance"145 serves as the cloak for 
this dependence. The result of all those glorious victories is that 
Germany continues, as before, to be the fifth wheel on the coach 
of Europe. And then Bismarck is surprised that the German 
public should continue to be concerned about affairs abroad 
where the really crucial decisions are being taken, instead of being 
concerned about the doings of the imperial government, which is 
of no consequence in Europe, and about the speeches in the 
Reichstag, which is of no consequence in Germany! Forbid the 
transporting of Russian Sprit across Germany! I should like to see 
the Imperial Chancellor who would dare such a thing without at 
the same time having a declaration of war against Russia safely in 
his pocket! And with Mr. von Kardorff making such a curious 
demand of the imperial government one might almost be led to 
believe that not only drinking schnapps but even the very act of 
distilling it was sufficient to cloud the mind. For indeed more 
famous distillers of schnapps than Mr. von Kardorff have lately 
made up their minds to do things for which, from their own point 
of view, there has been absolutely no rational explanation. 
a See this volume, p.  122.—  Ed. 

=====第156页=====
126 Frederick Engels 
For the rest, nothing is easier to understand than the fact that 
the Russian competition should be filling our schnapps Junkers 
with an uncanny feeling of dread. In the interior of Russia there 
are great tracts of land where grain is to be had just as cheaply as 
potatoes are in Prussia. In addition to that, fuel is mostly cheaper 
in Russia than in our distilling districts. All the necessary material 
conditions are on hand. Small wonder then that a section of the 
Russian nobility should do just as the Prussian Junkers do and 
invest in distilleries the money advanced by the state as credit to 
the peasants for commutation of statute labour. Nor is it any 
wonder that these distilleries should spread rapidly, given the 
constantly growing market and the preference that there will be 
for schnapps distilled from grain costing the same or slighdy more 
than schnapps distilled from potatoes, and that even now the time 
can be envisaged when their product pushes Prussian potato Sprit 
off the market completely. Complaining and moaning will be to no 
avail. The laws of capitalist production, as long as it continues to 
exist, are just as unrelenting for Junkers as for Jews. Thanks to 
the Russian competition, the day is fast approaching when Holy 
Ilion will collapse, when the glorious Prussian schnapps industry 
will vanish from the world market and continue at most to 
befuddle the home market. But on the day that the distiller's 
helmet is wrested from the Prussian Junkers and they are left only 
with their coats of arms or at most their army helmets, on that day 
Prussia is finished. Irrespective of the course that world history 
might otherwise take, and disregarding the possibility, probability 
or even inevitability of fresh wars or upheavals—the competition 
from Russian schnapps alone is bound to ruin Prussia by 
destroying the industry which keeps the agriculture of the eastern 
provinces at its present level of development. In so doing, it also 
destroys the conditions essential for the life of the Junkers east of 
the Elbe and of their 3,000 bondsmen to the square mile; and in 
doing that, it destroys the basis of the Prussian state: the material 
that goes to make up the officers as well as the non-commissioned 
officers and the soldiers who obey their orders whatever happens, 
and in addition to that the material that goes to make up the core 
of the bureaucracy, the material that stamps its specific character 
on present-day Prussia. With the collapse of schnapps distilling, 
Prussian militarism collapses, and without it Prussia is nothing. 
Then those eastern provinces will sink back into that station in 
Germany that befits them in accordance with their low population 
density, their industry, which is enslaved to agriculture, their 
semi-feudal conditions, and their lack of bourgeois development 

=====第157页=====
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag 127 
and general culture. Then, relieved of the pressure of this 
semi-medieval rule, the remaining regions of the German Empire 
will heave a sigh of relief and assume the position befitting them 
in accordance with their industrial development and more 
advanced culture. The eastern provinces themselves will seek out 
other industries, less dependent on agriculture and conceding less 
ground to the feudal mode of production, and in the intervening 
period they will place their army at the disposal not of the 
Prussian state but of Social-Democracy. The rest of the world will 
rejoice to see the end at last of Prussian fusel-oil poisoning; but the 
Prussian Junkers and the Prussian state, then at last "dissolved into 
Germany",3 will have to console themselves with the words of the 
poet: 
Surviving immortal in song, 
In life it must perish.b 
a Frederick William IV, "An mein Volk und die deutsche Nation, am 21. März 
1848".  In: Reden, Proklamationen, Botschaften, Erlasse und Ordres, Berlin, 1851, 
p. 10.—  Ed. 
b F. Schiller, Die Götter Griechenlands.—Ed. 

=====第158页=====

=====第159页=====
Frederick Engels 
WILHELM WOLFF u 

=====第160页=====
Written between June and September Printed according to the journal, 
1876 checked with the text of the book 
First published in Die Neue Welt, Nos. 27, Published in English for the first 
28, 30, 31, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45 and 47, time 
July 1, 8, 22 and 29, September 30, 
October 7, 14, 21 and 28, November 4 
and 25, 1876; reprinted in the book "Die 
schlesische Milliarde". Von Wilhelm  Wolff. 
Mit Einleitung von Friedrich Engels, Hot­
tingen-Zürich, 1886 
Signed: Frederick Engels 

=====第161页=====
131 
If I am not mistaken it was towards the end of April 1846. Marx 
and I were then living in a Brussels suburb; we were engaged in a 
joint piece of work3  when we were informed that a gentleman 
from Germany wished to speak to us. We found a short but very 
stockily built man; the expression on his face proclaimed both 
goodwill and quiet determination; the figure of an East German 
peasant in the traditional clothes of an East German provincial 
bourgeois. It was Wilhelm  Wolff.  Persecuted for infringing the 
press laws, 147 he had been fortunate enough to evade the Prussian 
prisons. We did not suspect at first sight what a rare man lay 
concealed under this inconspicuous exterior. A few days were 
enough to put us on terms of cordial friendship with this new 
comrade in exile and to convince us that it was no ordinary man 
we were dealing with. His cultured mind schooled in classical 
antiquity, his wealth of humour, his clear understanding of 
difficult theoretical problems, his passionate hatred of all oppres­
sors of the masses, his energetic and yet tranquil nature soon 
revealed themselves; but it took long years of collaboration and 
friendly association in struggle, victory and defeat, in good times 
and bad, to prove the full extent of his unshakable strength of 
character, his absolute, unquestionable reliability, his steadfast 
sense of duty equally exacting towards friend, foe and  self. 
a K. Marx and F. Engels, The German  Ideology.—  Ed 
11* 

=====第162页=====
132 
i 
Wilhelm Wolff was born on June 21, 1809 in Tarnau, near 
Frankenstein in Silesia. His father was an hereditary serf and also 
kept the court kretscham (the inn—Polish karczma—where the 
village assizes took place), which did not save him from having to 
perform statute labour with his wife and children for his worthy 
lord. Wilhelm was thus not only familiar with the frightful plight 
of the East German bondsmen from early childhood, but also 
suffered it  himself.  But he learnt more besides. His mother, of 
whom he always spoke with particular affection and who possessed 
an education unusual for her station, roused and nursed in him 
anger at the shameless exploitation and disgraceful treatment of 
the peasants by the feudal lords. And we shall see how this anger 
fermented and seethed in him all his life when we reach the 
period when he was finally able to give vent to it in public. This 
peasant lad's talents and lust for knowledge soon attracted 
attention; if possible he was to go to grammar school, but what 
obstacles there were to be surmounted before this could be 
achieved! Quite apart from financial difficulties there was the 
worthy lord and his steward, without whom nothing could be 
done. Although serfdom had been abolished in name in 1810, 148 
feudal tributes, statute labour, patrimonial jurisdiction and the 
manorial police remained in existence, thus preserving serfdom in 
practice. And the worthy lord and his officials were far more 
inclined to make peasant lads into swineherds than students. 
However, all barriers were successfully negotiated. Wolff gained 
admission to the grammar school at Schweidnitz and then went to 
university in Breslau. At both of these institutions he had to earn 
the greater part of his living by giving private lessons. At 

=====第163页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 133 
university he preferred to devote his energies to classical 
philology; but he was not one of those hair-splitting philologists of 
the old school; the great poets and prosaists of the Greeks and 
Romans were received by him with genuine understanding and 
remained his favourite reading as long as he lived. 
He had almost concluded his university studies when the 
persecution of the Demagogues149 by the Federal Diet150 and the 
Austrian and Prussian governments, which had died down in the 
twenties, was resumed. A member of the Students' Association,151 
he too was arrested in 1834, dragged from prison to prison for 
years while inquiries proceeded, and finally sentenced. For what? I 
do not think that he ever found it worth the trouble of saying. 
Suffice it to say that he was taken to the fortress at Silberberg. 
There he found comrades in suffering, Fritz Reuter among 
others. A few months before Wolff's death, the latter's Ut mine 
Festungstid came into his hands, and no sooner had he discovered 
the author to be his old fellow-sufferer than he sent news to him 
through the publisher. 152 Reuter answered him straightaway in a 
long and very friendly letter, which I have here in front of me 
and which proves that on January 12, 1864, at least, the old 
Demagogue was certainly not the kind of man to knuckle under 
meekly: 
"I've been sitting here now for nearly thirty years," he writes, "until my hair 
has turned grey, waiting for a thorough-going revolution, documenting the 
people's will energetically once and for all, but to what avail? ... If only the Prussian 
people would at least refuse to pay taxes; it is the only means of getting rid of 
Bismarck and Co. and worrying the old king to death." 153 
At Silberberg Wolff experienced the many sufferings and few 
joys of the incarcerated Demagogues which Fritz Reuter has 
described so vividly and with such humour in the above book. It 
was pitiful compensation for the damp casemates and bitterly cold 
winters that the old cliff side castle had a garrison of old invalids, 
so-called Gamisöner, who were not unduly harsh and were 
sometimes approachable at the price of a schnapps or a four 
groschen piece. Be that as it may, by 1839 Wolff's health had 
suffered so much that he was pardoned. 154 
He went to Breslau and tried to make his way as a teacher. But 
he had reckoned without his host, and his host was the Prussian 
government. Interrupted in the middle of his studies by his arrest, 
he had not been able to complete the prescribed three years at the 
university, let alone take his examinations. And in Prussian China 
only someone who had done all this in accordance with the rules 
and regulations was considered to be a competent scholar. Anyone 

=====第164页=====
134 Frederick Engels 
else,  however learned he might be in his field, as Wolff was in 
classical philology, was outside the guild and prevented from 
making public use of his knowledge. There remained the prospect 
of struggling through as a private tutor. But a government permit 
was needed for that, and when Wolff applied for one it was denied 
him. The Demagogue would have had to starve to death or return 
to do statute labour in his native village if there had been no Poles 
in Prussia. A landowner from Posen 3 took him on as a domestic 
tutor; he spent several years here, of which he always spoke with 
particular pleasure. 155 
Having returned to Breslau, after much tribulation and 
contention he finally obtained the permission of a highly esteemed 
royal government to give private lessons, and could now at least 
earn a modest living. Being a man of very few needs, he did not 
ask for more. This was when he resumed the struggle against the 
prevailing oppression, as far as this was possible under the 
dreadful conditions of the time. He had to restrict himself to 
bringing to public attention isolated instances of the despotism of 
civil servants, landowners and manufacturers, and even then 
encountered obstacles with the censors. But he refused to be 
diverted from his purpose. The newly established High Court of 
Censorship had no more regular and persistent client than  Wolff, 
the private tutor from Breslau. Nothing afforded him greater 
pleasure than to dupe the censors, which, given the stupidity of most 
of them, was not all that difficult as soon as one became somewhat 
familiar with their weak spots. Thus it was he who scandalised 
pious spirits to the limit by discovering the following popular 
"song" of the repentant sinner in an old hymn book which was 
still in use in some places, and publishing it in the Silesian local 
newspapers: 
I really am a gallows-bird, 
One of the truly bad ones, 
And gobble up my sins unheard 
As Russians eat up onions. 
A cringing dog, I pray to Thee, 
Lord, cast the bone of grace to me, 
Do take me by the ear and throw 
Me to Thy Heaven, though I be low.b 
This song spread throughout Germany like wildfire, provoking 
the resounding laughter of the godless and the indignation of 
a Tytus Adam Dzialynski.— Ed. 
b Gesangbuch. See Schlesische Provinzial-Blätter, Breslau, Vol. 112, 1840.— Ed. 

=====第165页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 135 
those "that are quiet in the land".156 The censor received a harsh 
reprimand, and the government once again began to keep a 
watchful eye on this private tutor  Wolff,  this turbulent hare-brain 
whom five years' fortress had failed to tame. And it was not long 
before another pretext was found to put him on trial. After all, 
the old Prussian legislation157 was spread out over the country like 
an ingeniously contrived system of traps, snares, pitfalls and nets 
which not even loyal subjects could always avoid, while the disloyal 
ones were all the more certain to get caught in them. 
The press offence with which Wolff was charged at the end of 
1845 or early 1846 was so trifling that none of us can now recall 
the exact circumstances.158 But the persecution attained such 
dimensions that  Wolff,  who had had quite enough of Prussian 
prisons and fortresses, evaded imminent arrest by leaving for 
Mecklenburg.* Here he found a safe refuge amongst friends until 
his unimpeded passage from Hamburg to London could be 
arranged. In London, where he participated for the first time in a 
public association—the still existing German Communist Workers' 
Educational Society 16°—he did not remain long but then came, as 
we have already related, to Brussels. 
* According to Wermuth-Stieber: Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des 19. 
Jahrhunderts, II, p.  141, 159 Wolff was sentenced to three months' confinement in a 
fortress by the Breslau Supreme Court in 1846 for "offences against the press laws". 
[Added by Engels in 1886.] 

=====第166页=====
136 
il 
In Brussels he soon found employment in a correspondence 
agency161  which had been set up there, supplying German 
newspapers with French, English and Belgian news, edited, as far 
as circumstances permitted, along Social-Democratic lines. When 
the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung placed itself at the disposal of our 
party Wolff worked for that too. In the Brussels German Workers' 
Society, 162 which was founded by us at this time, Wolff was soon 
among the favourite speakers. He would give a weekly survey of 
current events which was always a masterpiece of popular 
presentation, both humorous and powerful, in which he castigated 
in particular, and quite rightly, the pettiness and meanness of both 
masters and subjects in Germany. These political surveys were 
such a favourite theme of his that he would deliver them to any 
society in which he took part, and always with the same mastery of 
popular presentation. 
The February Revolution broke out and found an immediate 
response in Brussels. Every evening crowds of people gathered in 
the Great Market place in front of the City Hall, which was 
occupied by the civil guard and gendarmerie; the numerous public 
houses around the market place were packed. People were 
shouting, "Vive la République!", and singing the Marseillaise* 
pushing and shoving and being shoved back. The government was 
apparently keeping as quiet as a mouse, but called up the reserves 
and men on leave in the provinces. It had the most respected 
Belgian republican, Mr. Jottrand, secretly informed that the King b 
a Claude Joseph Rouget de Lisle, Chant de guerre de l'armée du Rhin 
(Marseillaise). — Ed. 
b Leopold I.— Ed 

=====第167页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 137 
was prepared to abdicate should the people so wish, and that he 
could hear this from the King himself as soon as he liked. Jottrand 
was in fact told by Leopold that he was himself a republican at 
heart and would never stand in the way if Belgium should wish to 
constitute itself a republic; his only wish was that everything 
should take place properly and without bloodshed, and he hoped 
incidentally to receive a decent pension. The news was swiftly and 
secretly put out and had such a soothing effect that no attempt at 
insurrection was made. But scarcely were the reserves gathered 
together and the majority of troops concentrated around Brus­
sels—three or four days were enough in that tiny country—when 
there was no more talk of abdication; suddenly one evening the 
gendarmerie went into action with the flats of their swords against 
the crowds in the market place, and arrests were made right, left 
and centre. Among the first to be beaten and arrested was  Wolff, 
who had been quietly proceeding home. Dragged into the City 
Hall, he was given a further beating by the raging and drunken 
city militia, and, after several days' imprisonment, dispatched over 
the border to France. 
He did not stay long in Paris. The March Revolution in Berlin 
and the preparations for the Frankfurt Parliament and the Berlin 
Assembly prompted him first to go to Silesia to campaign for 
radical elections there.163 As soon as we had started a newspaper, 
whether in Cologne or in Berlin, he wanted to join us. His general 
popularity and his powerful vernacular eloquence succeeded in 
getting radical candidates elected, particularly in the rural 
constituencies, who without him would not have stood a chance. 
In the meanwhile the Neue Rheinische Zeitung appeared on 
June 1 in Cologne, with Marx as editor-in-chief, and Wolff soon 
came to take over his duties on the editorial board. 164 His 
inexhaustible energy, his scrupulous, unswerving conscientiousness 
had the drawback for him that the young people, of whom the 
entire editorial board consisted, sometimes took an extra break in 
the certitude that "Lupus3  will see that the paper comes out", and 
I cannot claim to have been wholly innocent of this  myself.  Thus it 
was that in the early days of the paper Wolff had less to do with 
leading articles than with the day-to-day jobs. But he soon found a 
way of turning these, too, into an independent activity. Under the 
regular heading "Aus dem Reich" the news from the small states 
of Germany was assembled; the small-state and small-town 
narrow-mindedness and philistinism of both the rulers and the 
a Nickname of Wilhelm Wolff (Latin Lupus means "wolf").— Ed. 

=====第168页=====
138 Frederick Engels 
ruled were treated with incomparable humour. At the same time 
he gave his survey of current events in the Democratic Society165 
every week, which soon made him one of the most popular and 
effective speakers here too. 
The stupidity and cowardice of the bourgeoisie, which had been 
rising ever higher since the June battle in Paris,166 had again 
allowed reaction to summon up its strength. The camarillas of 
Vienna, Berlin, Munich, etc., were working hand in hand with the 
noble Imperial Regent3  and behind the scenes was Russian 
diplomacy, pulling the strings on which these puppets danced. 
Now, in September 1848, the moment for action was approaching 
for these gentlemen. Under direct and indirect Russian pressure 
(conveyed by Lord Palmerston) the first Schleswig-Holstein cam­
paign was decided by the ignominious Malmö ceasefire. The 
Frankfurt Parliament stooped so far as to ratify it, thus publicly 
and unquestionably renouncing the revolution. The Frankfurt 
uprising of September 18 was the response; it was put down. 167 
Almost simultaneously the crisis between the Constitutional 
Agreement Assembly and the Crown had broken out. On 
August 9, the Assembly had requested the government in an 
extremely mild, indeed timid resolution to be so good as to do 
something to prevent the reactionary officers from indulging in their 
shameless conduct so publicly and offensively.169 When it demanded 
in September that this resolution be put into effect, the response was 
the appointment of the openly reactionary Pfuel ministry with a 
general at its head (September 19) and the appointment of the 
notorious Wrangel as Supreme General of Brandenburg: two broad 
hints to the Berlin Agreers either to go down on their knees or to 
expect a rude dispersal. General excitement set in. In Cologne, too, 
public meetings were held and a Committee of Public Safety 
appointed.170 The government decided to deliver the first blow in 
Cologne. Consequently on the morning of September 25, a number 
of democrats were arrested, including the present Mayor,b then 
generally known as "Red Becker".0  The excitement mounted. In the 
afternoon a public meeting was held on the Altenmarkt. Wolff 
presided. The civic militia were formed up on all sides, not objecting 
to the democratic movement but giving first priority to their own 
welfare. In response to an inquiry, they stated that they were there to 
protect the public. Suddenly people crowded into the market place 
with the cry: "The Prussians are coming!" Joseph Moll, also arrested 
a Archduke John.— Ed 
b In the 1886 edition: "the recendy deceased, subsequent Mayor".— Ed 
c Hermann Heinrich Becker.— Ed 

=====第169页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 139 
the same morning but freed by the people, who was then speaking, 
shouted: "Citizens, do you intend to run away from the Prussians?" 
"No,  no!" was the answer. "Then we must build barricades!" and 
they set to work at once.—The outcome of the day of barricades in 
Cologne is well known. Provoked by a false alarm, without 
encountering any resistance, without any arms—the civic militia 
went prudently home—the whole movement came, quite bloodless-
ly, to nothing; the government achieved its purpose: Cologne was 
declared in a state of siege, the civic militia disarmed, the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung banned and its editorial staff compelled to go 
abroad. 

=====第170页=====
140 
III 
The state of siege in Cologne was short-lived. It ended on 
October 4. On the 12th the Neue Rheinische Zeitung resumed 
publication. 171 Wolff had gone to Dürkheim in the Palatinate 
where he was left in peace. There was a warrant out for his arrest 
as for several others of the editorial  staff,  for conspiracy, etc.; but 
our Wolff did not bide long in the Palatinate, and when the grape 
harvest was over he suddenly turned up in the editorial office 
again, 17 Unter Hutmacher. He managed to find rooms next 
door, from where he was able to cross the yard into the office 
without setting foot in the street. However, he soon tired of 
captivity; disguised in a long overcoat and a cap with a long peak, 
he sallied out into the darkness nearly every evening on the 
pretext of buying tobacco. He believed that no one recognised 
him, although his curiously gnarled figure and determined gait 
were absolutely unconcealable; anyway he was not betrayed. Thus 
he lived for several months while the warrants out for the rest of 
us were gradually lifted. Finally on March 1, 1849 we were 
informed that there was no longer any danger, and Wolff now 
went before the examining magistrate, who also declared that, 
being based on exaggerated police reports, the whole case had 
been dropped. 172 
Meanwhile the Berlin Assembly had been sent packing and 
Manteuffel's period of reaction had set in.173 One of the first 
measures of the new government was to reassure the feudal lords 
of the Eastern Provinces regarding their disputed right to unpaid 
peasant labour. After the March days the peasants of the Eastern 
Provinces had ceased to perform statute labour, and in places even 
forced the worthy lords to give them a written disclaimer 

=====第171页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 141 
concerning such labour. It was thus merely a matter of declaring 
this existing state of affairs legal, and the long oppressed peasant 
east of the Elbe would be a free man at last. But the Berlin 
Assembly, a full 59 years after August 4, 1789, when the French 
National Assembly had abolished all feudal burdens without 
compensation, had still not been able to summon up the courage 
to take the same step. It somewhat eased the terms for the 
commutation of statute labour; but only a few of the most 
scandalous and infuriating feudal rights were to be abolished 
without compensation. Yet before this Billm was finally passed the 
Assembly was broken up, and Mr. Manteuffel declared that this 
Bill would not be passed into law by the government.3 This 
destroyed the hopes of the Old Prussian peasants subject to statute 
labour, and the need now was to influence them by explaining to 
them the position they were facing. And Wolff was just the man 
for this. Not only was he the son of a bondsman and had himself 
been forced to do statute labour as a child; not only had he 
retained the full fervour of his hatred towards the feudal 
oppressors which this childhood had aroused in him; no one knew 
the feudal method of enslavement so well in all its details as he 
did, and this in the very province that provided a complete 
pattern-card of all its manifold forms—Silesia.b 
a [Declaration of the Prussian ministry regarding "Entwurf eines Gesetzes 
betreffend die unentgeltliche Aufhebung verschiedener Lasten und Abgaben vom 
10. Juli 1848,] Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 223, December 13, 1848 (in the 
section Nichtamtlicher Theil, Deutschland. Preußen). — Ed. 
b In place of the following text, up to "Few of the many inflammatory articles 
in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung..." (see this volume, p. 146), Engels wrote in 1886: 
"Thus Wolff opened the campaign against the feudal lords, which culminated 
in the Silesian Milliard and to which I refer below. It was a campaign which by 
right ought to have been waged by the bourgeoisie. It was, after all, precisely the 
struggle against feudalism that was the mission of this class in world history. But as 
we have seen, it failed to wage it, or only pretended to do so. Thanks to the social 
and political backwardness of Germany, the German bourgeoisie everywhere left its 
own political interests in the lurch, because the proletariat was already looming up 
behind it. The vague hopes and desires of the Parisian workers in February, but 
even more their four-day battle of desperation in June 1848, terrified not only the 
bourgeoisie of France but of all Europe. And in Germany even simple democratic 
demands, such as they had themselves long since carried out legally in Switzerland, 
seemed to the quaking bourgeois to be attacks on their property, their security, 
their lives, etc. As cowardly as ever, the German bourgeois sacrificed their 
common, i.e., political interests so that each might save his private interest, his 
capital. Rather a return to the old bureaucratic-feudal absolutism than a victory of 
the bourgeoisie as a class, than a modern bourgeois state attained in a revolutionary 
way and strengthening the revolutionary class, the proletariat! That was the 
German bourgeoisie's cry of anguish, in the midst of which reaction triumphed all 
along the line. 

=====第172页=====
142 Frederick Engels 
In the issue of December 17, 1848 he opened the campaign in 
an article on the above-mentioned statement by the ministry.3 On 
December 29 there followed a second, more blunt one on the 
imposed "Decree concerning the interim settlement of seignorial-
peasant relations in Silesia". 
This decree, says  Wolff, 
"is an invitation to our lords the princes, counts, barons, etc., to make haste 'in the 
interim' to rob and plunder the rural population under the semblance of law to an 
extent that will enable them, after this fat year, to survive the lean ones all the 
more easily. Before March Silesia was the promised land of the worthy landowners. 
By the redemption laws since 1821 the feudal Junkers had made themselves as 
comfortable as they conceivably could. As a result of the redemptions, which were 
always and everywhere passed and put into effect for the benefit of the privileged 
and the ruination of the rural people, the Silesian Junkers had obtained the tidy 
sum of about 80 millions in hard cash, arable land, and interest from the hands of 
the rural population. And the redemptions were still far from being completed. 
Hence their rage at the godless revolution of 1848. The country people refused to 
go on doing statute labour for the worthy lords like docile cattle, and to go on 
paying the terrible impositions, interest and dues of all kinds. The amounts of 
money flowing into the coffers of the landowners underwent a serious decline." 
The Berlin Assembly took the settlement of these relations in 
hand. 
"There was danger in delay. This was understood by the camarilla of Potsdam, 
which is equally adept at filling its money-bags from the sweat and blood of the 
country folk. So, away with the Assembly! Let us make the laws ourselves as they 
seem most lucrative to us!—And so it happened. The decree for Silesia published 
in the Staats-Anzeiger is nothing but an entangled snare with all the trimmings, in 
which the rural population, should it once venture in, will be irrevocably lost." 
Wolff then demonstrates that the decree essentially marks the 
restoration of the pre-March conditions, concluding: 
"Only what's the use? The worthy lords need money. Winter is here with its 
balls,  masquerades, enticing gambling-tables, etc. The peasants who have furnished 
the funds for amusement hitherto, must go on supplying them. The Junkers wish 
to enjoy at least one more merry carnival and exploit the November achievements 
"Thus the party of the proletariat had to take up the struggle at the point 
where the bourgeoisie had absconded from the batdefield. And Wolff took up the 
struggle against feudalism in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. But not in such a way as 
to afford the bourgeois any joy; no, in truly revolutionary fashion, in such a 
manner that the bourgeoisie was just as appalled at these articles exhaling the spirit 
of the great French Revolution as the feudal lords and the government 
themselves."— Ed. 
a See Wolffs article on Manteuffel's statement against the abolition of feudal 
duties, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 171, December 17, 1848 (in the section 
Deutschland. Köln). — Ed. 
b Here and below Engels quotes Wolffs article  ["Decree  on the Abolition of 
Feudal Duties without Compensation in Silesia",] Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 181, 
December 29, 1848 (in the section Deutschland.  Köln). — Ed 

=====第173页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 143 
of absolutism to the utmost. They are right to make haste, dancing and celebrating 
with defiant arrogance. For soon these divinely favoured aristocratic orgies may be 
mingled with scenes of Galician fury." 176 
There followed on January 20 a new article by  Wolff a which 
dealt with this field. The party of reaction had got a village mayor, 
Krengel from Nessin near Kolberg, and a number of day 
labourers to address an inquiry to the Kingb whether it was true 
that His Majesty really intended to split up landed property and turn 
it over to the propertyless. 
"One can imagine", says  Wolff,  "the mortal terror and sleepless nights of the 
day labourers of Nessin when they heard of such intentions. What? The King 
wants to split up landed property? We day labourers who have up till now tilled the 
field of our worthy lords so joyously for 5 silver groschen a day—are we supposed 
to cease being day labourers and work on our own fields? Our worthy lord, who 
owns 80 to 90 domains and a mere few hundred thousand morgenc —is he to be 
forced to give up so and so many morgen to us?—No, at the mere thought of such 
a frightful disaster our day labourers were atremble in every limb. They had never 
a peaceful moment until they were reassured that they were not to be pitched into 
this bottomless misery, that the menacing  morgen  of land were to be warded off and 
the worthy lords left in peace just as before." 
a "(Das königl. Patent an die Bauern)", Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 200, 
January 20, 1849 (in the section Deutschland. Köln). — Ed. 
b See [An Inquiry from the Electors of Nessin to Frederick William IV, 
"Berlin. 12. Januar"], Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 14, January 14, 1849.— Ed. 
c Morgen  = 0.6 or 0.9 of an acre depending on local variations.— Ed. 

=====第174页=====
144 
IV 
All that, however, was still only skirmishing. Around the 
beginning of 1849 the French Social-Democrats started with 
increasing frequency to raise the proposal made earlier that the 
thousand million francs given by the state to the aristocrats 
returning from emigration in 1825 as compensation for estates lost 
in the Great Revolution should be demanded back and employed 
in the interest of the working masses.3  On March 16, the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung carried a leading article on this question and on 
the very next day Wolff published a piece called The Prussian 
Milliard, 
"The knight Schnapphanski" (Lichnowski) "is dead. 177 But highwaymen we still 
have in plenty. The Junkers of Pomerania and Brandenburg have joined forces with 
the other Prussian Junkers. They have donned the holy coat of the respectable 
bourgeois and call themselves 'Association for the Protection of Property of All 
Classes of the People', feudal property naturally... Their intention is nothing less 
than to cheat the Rhine Province, among others, out of some 20 million talers and to 
pocket the money. The plan is not a bad one. The Rhinelanders may particularly 
pride themselves on the fact that the Junkers of Thadden-Trieglaff in Eastern 
Pomerania, the von Arnims and the von Manteuffels as well as a few thousand 
cabbage Junkers wish to do them the honour of paying their debts in Rhenish 
money." 
The fact of the matter was that Mr. von Bülow-Cummerow, 
then known as Bülow-Kummervoll, b had hit on a little plan c and 
got it accepted by the above association of Junkers—or as Wolff 
a See K. Marx and F. Engels, "The Milliard" (present edition, Vol. 9, 
pp. 79-83).— Ed 
b A play on words: Cummerow is a proper name, Kummervoll —woeful.— Ed 
c [E. G. G. von] Bülow-Cummerow, Die Grundsteuer und Vorschläge zu ihrer 
A usgleichung.—Ed 

=====第175页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 145 
called it, the Junker Parliament—and sent to the government and 
the chambers as a petition, a plan for settling the question of land 
tax in Prussia. On the one hand, the landowning peasants, 
especially of the Western Provinces, were complaining that they 
had to pay too much land tax; on the other, the aristocratic big 
landowners of the Eastern Provinces were paying no land tax at 
all, although the law of October 27, 1810a had imposed it on them 
along with all other landowners. The Junker Parliament had 
found a way of alleviating both evils. Let us listen to  Wolff: 
"The Junkers are willing 'to make sacrifices in order to eliminate the discord 
now prevailing'.b  So they say. Who would have expected such magnanimity of 
them? Of what do these sacrifices consist, however? They propose that the revenue 
from all land-holdings should be fixed by a rough assessment, and then the land 
tax distributed throughout the state at the same percentage of this revenue. Well, 
their generosity is by no means large, since they are now simply intending to do 
what they have been legally obliged to do for the last 38 years. But to continue! Do 
they demand that the Junkers and the landowning knights who have hitherto 
illegally refused to pay tax—should repay this tax, perhaps? No: since from now on 
they are to have the grace to pay Âeir taxes, they should be compensated by an 
appropriate capital payment",—namely, 25 times the amount of the future tax. "On 
the other hand, those who have hitherto been unfairly debited an excessive land 
tax should—not, for instance, have the excess refunded to them—but, on the 
contrary, they should be enabled to discharge the surplus", by buying themselves out 
with a single payment of 18-20 times the amount involved, according to the 
circumstances.— "The higher taxes will be paid by the peasants in the Eastern 
Provinces and, apart from them, particularly by the Rhine Province. The peasants 
of Altland and the Rhinelanders are thus now expected to pay for this with their 
capital too. Hitherto the noble landowners of the Eastern Provinces have been 
paying no land taxes at all, or very little.... And they, then, are to receive the 
money which the Rhinelanders and the peasants are supposed to raise." 
There follows a survey of the land tax paid by the various 
provinces in 1848 and their land areas, from which it emerges: 
"The Rhineland pays for every square mile on average approximately five times 
as much land tax as Prussia, Posen and Pomerania, and four times as much as the 
March of Brandenburg." 
Admittedly the land is better; however, 
"at a conservative estimate, the Rhine Province probably has to pay about a million 
talers more in land tax than would be its due according to the average valuation. 
According to the Bill proposed by the Junker Parliament the Rhinelanders would 
thus have to pay as a punishment for this another 18 to 22 million talers in cash, 
which would flow into the pockets of the Junkers of the Eastern Provinces! The 
state would simply act as the banker. These are the tremendous sacrifices which 
a Edikt über die Finanzen des Staats und die neuen Einrichtungen wegen der Abgaben 
u.s.w. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, No. 2, Berlin, 
1810.—  Ed. 
b [E. G. G. von] Bülow-Cummerow, Die Grundsteuer..., Berlin, 1849, p. 36.— Ed. 
12-1317 

=====第176页=====
146 Frederick Engels 
these cabbage Junkers and pigs are inclined to make; that is the protection which 
they wish to extend to property. Just as every pickpocket protects property.... 
"The Rhinelanders, especially the Rhenish peasants, and no less the 
Westphalian and Silesian ones, would do well to look around without delay to see 
where they can raise the money to pay the Junkers. A hundred million talers are 
not so easy to come by these days. 
"So whilst in France the peasants are demanding a thousand million francs 
from the aristocracy, in Prussia the aristocracy is demanding five hundred million 
francs from the peasants! 
"Three cheers for the Berlin March Revolution!" 
Mere defence, however, was not sufficient to counter the 
insolence of the Prussian Junkers. The Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
sought and found its strength in attack, and thus in the issue of 
March 22, 1849 Wolff commenced a series of articles called The 
Silesian Milliard, in which he calculated what sums of money, 
money-value and landed property the Silesian aristocracy alone 
had wrested from the peasants since the redemption of feudal 
dues began. Few of the many inflammatory articles in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung had such an effect as these, eight in number, 
which appeared between March 22 and April 25. Orders for the 
newspaper from Silesia and the other Eastern Provinces increased 
at a furious rate; individual issues were requested and eventually, 
since the exceptional freedom of the press allowed us by Rhenish 
law was lacking in the other provinces, and there was no question 
of a reprint under their noble local law, someone came up with 
the idea of secretly reprinting in Silesia the entire eight issues as 
near to the original in appearance as possible and disseminating 
them in thousands of copies—a procedure to which the editorial 
board was naturally the last to object. 

=====第177页=====
147 
Va 
In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of March 22, 1849 Wolff 
opened his attack on the Silesian Junkers as follows: 
"Scarcely had the Chamber of the Court and cabbage Junkers" (which met on 
February 26, 1849 on the basis of the imposed constitution and the imposed electoral 
law 178)"been constituted when a motion for the settlement, i.e. redemption of feudal 
dues,  was proposed. The worthy lords are in a hurry. They wish to squeeze enough 
out of the rural population before closing-time to be able to put by a tidy sum for 
any hard times that may be on the way and send it abroad in advance of their per­
sons. 
"For the terror, for the nameless dread which they suffered during the period 
after the March 'misunderstanding' in Berlin and its immediate consequences, they 
are now seeking to extract a doubly dear balsam out of the pockets of their beloved 
village subjects. 
"Silesia, particularly, hitherto the golden land of feudal and industrial barons, is 
to be thoroughly rifled once again in order that the splendour of its land-owning 
knights may shine on, enhanced and fortified. 
"Immediately after the appearance of the imposed provisional Redemption Law 
in December last year, we demonstrated1* that it is solely calculated to benefit the 
worthy landowners, that the so-called litde man is entirely at the mercy of the 
whims and caprices of the powerful, even in the composition of the court of 
arbitration. Nevertheless, the knights are still not content with it. They are 
demanding a law bestowing yet more concessions on the knightly purse. 
"In March and April 1848, many noble lords in Silesia made out written 
documents to their peasants renouncing all tithes and duties previously required of 
those subject to the estate. To save their manors from burning and themselves 
from becoming strange adornments on many a stately lime or courtly poplar, they 
gave away their so-called well-earned rights with a stroke of the pen. Luckily for 
them, paper was very patient at that time too. 
a Sections V-VIII and part of Section IX up to the words: "On May 19 the 
Neue  Rheinische  Zeitung was suppressed..." (see this volume, p. 164) are omitted in the 
1886 edition.— Ed 
b See this volume, p. 142.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第178页=====
148 Frederick Engels 
"When, instead of marching forward, the revolution got stuck in the bog of 
philistinism and complacent temporising, these gentlemen pulled out their deeds of 
renunciation, not in order to fulfil them but to submit them to the criminal court 
as evidence in the inquiry into the rebellious peasant mob." 
Wolff now relates how the bureaucracy, under the leadership of 
the Oberpräsident Pinder and with the aid of mobile military 
columns, forced the peasants to perform their old duties; how the 
peasants were left with no other hope but the Berlin Agreement 
Assembly; how Messrs. Agreers, instead of declaring first and 
foremost all feudal tithes abolished without compensation, frit­
tered away the time with inquiries into the nature, origins, etc. of 
these admirable feudal duties and tithes, until the reactionaries 
had regained sufficient strength to send the entire Assembly 
packing before it had reached any decision at all about the 
abolition of feudal burdens; how the new Redemption Law was 
imposed and how even this arch-reactionary law failed to satisfy 
the worthy lords and they made even more extravagant demands. 
But our lord knights had reckoned without their host, this host 
being 
"the Silesian peasant, not the bourgeois peasant with three, four or more hides of 
land but that mass of smaller peasants, estate gardeners and free gardeners, 
cottagers and livers-in,179 who have hitherto been the real beasts of burden of the big 
landowners and who, according to the plans of the latter, should continue as such in 
future in a different form. 
"In 1848 this mass would have been content with abolition of feudal burdens 
without compensation.... After the bitter apprenticeship of the final months of 
1848 and those that have elapsed of 1849, the Silesian agrarian population, the 
'little man', is increasingly coming to realise that the knightly landowners, instead of 
seizing new riches by means of a cleverly devised Redemption Law, should by right 
return at least that part of the booty with which they lined their pockets with the 
aid of the previous redemption laws.... From village to village people are now 
occupied with the question of how much our lords the robber knights have stolen 
from the rural people over the last thirty years alone." 
The situation is not as simple as in France, where compensation 
of 1,000 million francs in round figures—almost 300 million 
talers —was extorted from the nation, so that "the French peasant 
knows how much he must be refunded in capital and interest". In 
Prussia the exploitation took place year in, year out, and up till 
now only the individual peasant knew what he and his village had 
paid. 
"But now a rough estimate has been made for the whole province, showing that 
in the guise of redemption the rural population has paid the worthy lords more 
than 80 million talers, partly in land and partly in hard cash and interest. In 
addition to this there are the annual tithes and duties of the hitherto 
non-emancipated. For the last thirty years this sum amounts to at least 160 million 
talers,  yielding together with the above a total of approximately 240 million talers. 

=====第179页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 149 
"Now that these calculations have come to their knowledge, the country people 
have seen the light, and its brightness is causing the feudal accomplices to cower in 
fear. They have devoured 240 million from the pockets of the country people and 
'we must get back our 240 million at the first opportunity'—that is now the idea 
circulating among the Silesian country people; it is the demand which is already 
being spoken aloud in thousands of villages. 
"The ever-growing awareness that if there is to be any talk of compensation for 
feudal burdens then it is the peasants who must be compensated for the knightly 
robbery perpetrated on them—this is an 'achievement' which will soon bear fruit. 
It will not be overthrown by any dictatorial wiles. The next revolution will bring it 
to bear in practice, and the Silesian peasants will then probably be able to devise a 
'Compensation Law' restoring not only the stolen capital but also the 'customary 
interests' to the pockets of the people." 
By what "legal title" the Junker gentlemen appropriated this sum 
is the lesson of the second article in the issue of March 25, 1849.a 
"With regard to the manner in which the 'rights' of the robber knights were 
acquired, eloquent testimony is provided not only by every page of mediaeval 
history but by every year right up to recent times. The mediaeval knightly sword 
managed splendidly to ally itself with the goose-quill of the lawyer and the civil 
service horde. Force was transformed with a fortune-teller's sleight of hand into 
'rights',  into 'well-earned rights'. An example from last century. In the eighties in 
Silesia at the initiative of the aristocracy, commissions were created for the 
establishment of land registers,180  the mutual duties and obligations of landowner 
and peasant.... The commissions, composed of nobles and their creatures, worked 
in exemplary fashion—in the interest of the aristocracy. Nevertheless these 
gentlemen by no means succeeded everywhere in producing land registers that 
were 'confirmed' " (recognised by the peasants). "Where they did, though, it was 
solely by force or trickery.... It is rather naively stated in the introduction to a 
number of such deeds that the peasants had not consented to put their crosses to 
them (at that time only very few were able to write) and that they had been forced 
partly by threats and partly by the actual use of armed force to sign these 
documents defrauding themselves and their descendants. On the basis of such 
'well-earned rights' the worthy knights of Silesia have been able over the last thirty 
years to distil that tidy little sum of 240 million talers from the sweat and blood of 
the peasant estate into their ancestral coffers." 
a [Wilhelm Wolff,] "Die schlesische Milliarde", Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 
No. 255, March 25, 1849.— Ed. 

=====第180页=====
150 
vi 
From the direct exploitation of the peasants by the aristocracy, 
Wolff proceeds to the various indirect forms, in which the 
participation of the state plays a major role. 
Firstly, land tax, which was still levied in Silesia in 1849 
according to a land register devised in 1749.181  In this land 
register the acreage entered for the land of the nobles was less 
than the real amount, and for the peasants more, right from the 
outset; the yield of a morgen of pasture or arable land was assessed 
at one taler and the land tax levied on this basis. Woods and 
pastures were exempt. Since then the nobles had cleared whole 
stretches of forestland and brought considerable areas of waste­
land under cultivation. Tax continued to be paid according to the 
acreage of cultivable land entered in the land register of 1749! 
The tax remaining constant for both parties, the peasant with no 
wasteland to bring under cultivation was thus considerably 
overburdened, or to put it bluntly: swindled. Furthermore: 
"A large section of the knights, precisely that section which owns the largest and 
most lucrative estate  complexes,  has hitherto, under the style of 'well-earned rights' as 
mediatised peers not yet paid a penny in land tax 
"If we estimate the land tax which the worthy knights have failed to pay (either 
too little or none at all) over the last thirty years at about 40 million talers —and 
that is probably letting them off lightly—and add to it the 240 million talers stolen 
directly from the pockets of the Silesian country people, we arrive at a total of 
280 million" (Neue Rheinische Zeitung of March 25, 1849). 
Then follows the graduated tax. A Silesian peasant, whom Wolff 
singles out of the masses, 
"owns 8 morgen of land of medium quality, paying a host of tithes annually to his 
'worthy' lord, is obliged to perform a large amount of statute labour every year, 
and still has to pay graduated tax of 7 Sgr. 6 Pf. per month, making 3 talers per 

=====第181页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 151 
annum. Contrasted with him we have a worthy lord with the most extensive estates, 
with forests and meadows, iron-works, zinc ore mines, coal mines, etc., e.g. 
arch-wailer,18s  Russophile, democrat-eater and Deputy to the Second Chamber, 
Count Renard. This man has an annual income of 240,000 talers. He pays on the 
highest grade 144 talers graduated tax annually. Compared with the above peasant 
owner with 8 morgen he should have been paying at least 7,000 talers per year in 
graduated tax, making 140,000 talers over 20 years. Thus in 20 years he has paid 
137,120 talers too little." 
Wolff then compares the amount of graduated tax paid by the 
same Count Renard with the tax paid by a farmhand with a wage 
of 10 talers per year, paying V2 taler or 5 per cent of his cash 
income, and with that of a farm-maid who out of a wage of 
6 talers per year also pays V? taler in graduated tax, or 8  Vs per 
cent of her income. The result is that over 20 years the noble 
count has paid 237,120 talers graduated tax too little compared 
with the farmhand and even 397,120 talers too little compared 
with the maid. 
"According to the sovereign will of Frederick William IV, Eichhorn-Ladenberg 
and the rest of the Christian-Germanic fellowship, primary school" (cf. the 
Eichhorn rescripts until the beginning of 1848) "should be restricted purely to 
reading, writing and the most elementary arithmetic. The first four rules of 
arithmetic, then, would still be allowed to the peasants. There was no need for the 
primary school, however, to teach the peasant the various rules, particularly 
subtraction, or deduction and extraction. In Silesia, at least, the divinely favoured 
robber knights have subtracted so much from around him and out of him that he 
for his part now ought to succeed at the first possible opportunity with flying 
colours in this form of subtraction applied to the worthy lords." 
Wolff then gives another example of this subtraction practice of 
the Silesian nobility: The waste hides. 
"Wherever rustic hosts" (i.e. peasants) "were ruined by war, epidemics, 
conflagrations or other disasters, the seigneur was swiftly at hand in order to 
absorb the land of the farm concerned, either wholly or partly, into his dominion 
as a 'waste hide'. But you lords were careful not to take over land tax, house tax 
and the other burdens. These had to be borne either by the whole community or 
by the subsequent owner, who often only received a third, a sixth or an eighth of 
the previous land area in the bill of sale, but all the previous taxes, tithes and 
services. You did the same with common grazing and arable land when, for 
example, the above-mentioned causes had led to a more or less complete 
depopulation of the village. You seized these and other opportunities to combine as 
many lands as possible. But the communities and the individual peasants had to 
bear communal, school, church, district and other burdens unextenuated, as if they 
had never been deprived of a whit.... The yardstick with which you seek to 
measure us, shall be used to measure you, the peasant will reply to you. 
"In your raging appetite for compensation, you have blindly rushed into a 
veritable hornets' nest of popular damages; if, provoked as they are, they one day 
fly out, you may easily find yourselves suffering scrupulously accurate damages as 
well as a good helping of damage]"a  (Neue Rheinische Zeitung of March 27). 
a A play on words in the original: Entschädigung —compensation, damages, 
Beschädigung —damage, injury.— Ed. 

=====第182页=====
152 Frederick Engels 
In the next article (in the issue of March 29) Wolff describes the 
procedure during redemption of the actual feudal dues. Under 
the notorious General Commissions, which were charged with the 
execution of this business throughout the province, there were the 
Royal Landed Estate Commissaries and their aides, the Royal 
Conductors of Surveying and the actuaries. As soon as the 
application for redemption had been made by the landowner or 
the peasant, these officials appeared in the village, where they 
were straightaway lavishly entertained and suborned by the worthy 
lord up at the manor-house. 
"Often this suborning had already taken place earlier, and since the worthy 
knights do not spare the champagne if anything may be thereby achieved, the 
seignorial efforts to please were generally successful." 
Certainly there were incorruptible officials here and there, yet 
they were exceptions and even then the peasants were not helped. 
"In cases in which the Landed Estate Commissary himself observed the letter of 
the law, it was of little benefit to the peasants as soon as the Conductor or his 
officials were won over by the lord of the dominion. It was even worse for the 
peasants if, as was generally the case, the most cordial understanding prevailed 
between Landed Estate Commissary, Conductor and sovereign. Then the knightly 
heart was gay and rejoiced. 
"In all the plenitude of power with which the Old Prussian bureaucracy was adept 
at decking out its dependents, the Royal Commissary would now enter the district 
kretscham* where the peasants were assembled. He would never fail to remind the 
peasants that he was here 'in the name of the King' to negotiate with them. 
"'In the name of the King!' At this phrase all the sombre figures such as 
gendarmes, executors, seignorial judges, district councillors, etc. appear simultane­
ously in front of the peasant's eyes. Had he not always been oppressed and 
exploited by them all in that name! 'In the name of the King!' That sounded to 
him like the stocks and prison, it sounded like taxes, tithes, statute labour and 
fees. 184 For he was obliged to pay all these 'in the name of the King'. If the 
Commissary's introduction did not do the trick, if the community or the individual 
peasant proved to be refractory and went against the plans of the lord of the 
domain and Commissary, then the latter would be transmogrified into the 
Olympian Thunderer, hurling one holy hell and damnation after the other into the 
midst of the nonplussed peasant throng, then adding more mildly: If you persist in 
such foolish excesses, I tell you that you will pay for it in full. This symbolic seizure 
of the peasant's purse would then generally decide the issue: obligations and 
counter-obligations could now be adjusted to suit the wishes of the lord." 
Now came the surveying, and in the process the corrupt 
Conductor would cheat the peasants for the benefit of the 
landowner. For the assessment of usufruct, land quality, etc. the 
district mayors were brought in as experts, and these too would 
usually deliver judgment in favour of the landowner. After all this 
had been settled and the size in morgen of the land left for the 
a See this volume, p. 132.— Ed. 

=====第183页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 153 
peasants after the deduction of the area to be relinquished to the 
worthy lord as compensation for the loss of feudal dues had 
finally been established, the worthy knights generally prevailed on 
the Landed Estate Commissary to place the fields of the little man, 
if at all possible, on the worst side. The good land was added to 
that of the estate, and in return the peasants would be allocated 
estate fields which were regularly flooded in wet years. And then 
again, the peasants would be tricked out of another part of their 
fields by the Conductor during the final survey. In the vast 
majority of cases the peasants were helpless; as a rule anyone who 
brought a court case was ruined by it; only in quite exceptionally 
favourable circumstances was a peasant able to obtain his rightful 
dues. 
The end of the business came with the drafting and signing of 
all the recesses and documents of settlement by the General 
Commission and—the general expenses account, which betokened 
the real beginning of the countryman's distress. 
"To characterise these accounts there is no other epithet than: shameless. No 
matter how the peasant protested or tore his hair: it was all to no avail. After all, it 
was his purse they were after; the exchequer took its share of stamp duty in 
advance, and the rest went to pay the General Commission, the Landed Estate 
Commission etc. This veritable swarm of officials lived in ease and plenty. Through 
their position as Landed Estate Commissary, poor lads have with the aid of 
knightly nefariousness risen very quickly to become the owners of knightly estates 
themselves. It scarcely needs pointing out that the power in the General 
Commission lay in the hands of the nobles. Without them the little deals of our 
worthy knights would not have prospered so well." 
In good Old Prussian fashion, no account of the total expenses 
of the General Commission has ever been published, so the people 
even do not know how much the redemption of feudal dues, 
insofar as it had been effected by 1848, actually cost them. But the 
individual communities and peasants will never forget how much 
they were forced to "cough up" at this time. 
"For instance, a small village, whose peasants did not even own 30 morgen 
between them, had to pay recess expenses of 137 talers; in another, a peasant with 
7 morgen of fields incurs costs of no less than 29 talers... The robber-knights' 
compensation dish was so delicious that, spiced with a few Christian-Germanic 
ingredients, it will not be missing from the table of the high and noble lords in 
days to come, either. This tastes of more!—say the Silesian robber-knights, wiping 
their whiskers with a chuckle and smacking their chops as the cabbage Junkers do." 
Wolff wrote this 27 years ago, and the events he describes 
belong to the period 1820-48; but on reading them today one 
seems to be reading an account of the procedure by which the 
serfs of Russia were emancipated and became so-called free 

=====第184页=====
154 Frederick Engels 
peasants after 1861. It agrees to the finest detail. In one feature 
after another this cheating of the peasants in favour of the worthy 
lords is the same. And just as in all official and liberal accounts the 
Russian redemption is described as an enormous benefit for the 
peasants, as the greatest step forward in Russian history, in the 
same way official and national-servile historiography describes to 
us that piece of Old Prussian peasant-swindling as a world-
liberating event which puts the great French Revolution—which 
in fact was the cause of the redemption business—in the 
shade! 

=====第185页=====
155 
VII 
The Silesian nobility's list of sins is still not exhausted. In the 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung of April 5, Wolff recounts how the 
introduction of freedom of trade in Prussia 3 offered the robber-
knights a new opportunity to swindle the country folk. 
"As long as he was still under the obligation to join a guild, the rural artisan or 
tradesman paid the worthy landowner an annual fee, as a rule quite high, for his 
craft or business. In return he enjoyed the advantage of being protected by the 
landowner against competition from others through refusal of trading permits; and 
in addition, the landowner had to bring his work to him. This was precisely the 
position faced by the millers, brewers, butchers, smiths, bakers, kretscham- or 
inn-keepers, shopkeepers, etc." 
When freedom of trade was introduced, the protection afforded 
to the privileged artisans ceased and everywhere competition 
sprang up. In spite of this the landowners continued to exact the 
fee paid up till then, under the pretext that it did not relate to the 
craft but to the land, and the courts, likewise overwhelmingly on 
the side of the nobility, recognised these preposterous claims in 
the great majority of cases. Yet this was not enough. In time the 
worthy lords had their own water mills and windmills constructed, 
and later steam-powered mills too, thus constituting unbeatable 
competition for the previously privileged miller, and yet they still 
forced him to go on paying the old tax for the former monopoly, 
under the pretext that it was either ground rent or compensation 
for certain insignificant repairs to the watercourse incumbent on 
the landowner, or such like. Thus Wolff quotes the case of a 
a Edikt über die Einführung einer allgemeinen Gewerbe-Steuer. Vom 28. Oktober 
1810. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, No. 4, Berlin, 
1810.—  Ed 

=====第186页=====
156 Frederick Engels 
water mill with two conduits, without any arable land, which had 
to pay 40 talers per annum to the landowner, although he had 
built a rival mill so that one miller after the other went bankrupt 
at the first mill. All the better for the landowner: the mill had to 
be sold and at every change of hands the worthy lord levied 10% 
of the purchase sum in fees for  himself!  Similarly, a windmill to 
which belonged no more than the ground on which it stood had to 
pay the landowner 53 talers per annum. Such was also the 
situation of the blacksmiths, who had to continue to pay or 
redeem the old monopoly fee, although not only was the 
monopoly abolished but the same landowner who pocketed the fee 
was competing with them with his own smithy—and likewise with 
the other artisans and tradesmen: the fee was either discharged by 
"recess" or still paid, although the other part of the agreement, 
protection against outside competition, had long since been 
dropped. 
So far we have considered only the various forms of exploitation 
which the feudal nobility employed against the landowning 
country people, peasants with two or more hides down to free 
gardeners, free cottagers and meadow cottagers and whatever all 
the people may be called who possess at least a little cottage and 
generally a garden as well. There remained a numerically strong 
class neither in the service of the worthy lord nor owning a cottage 
or even a square foot of land. 
"This is the class of lodgers, the livers-in, in short the tenants; people who have 
rented a room, usually a wretched hovel, for 4-8 talers per year from the peasants, 
gardeners, landless cottagers. Either they are movers, i.e. people who, having 
passed on their farms to relatives or sold them to strangers, have retired into a 
small room there, with or without retaining 'a share' in their former property, 
or—and these are the majority—they are poor day-labourers, village artisans, 
weavers, miners, etc." a 
How to get at these people? Patrimonial jurisdiction, that 
splendid state of affairs (only now due to be abolished by the 
district regulations) whereby the landowner exercises jurisdiction 
over his ex-subjects, had to provide the pretext. It stipulated that 
when the worthy lord delivered one of the subjects of his 
jurisdiction into gaol, then he had to bear the cost of the 
prisoner's keep as well as that of the inquiry. For this the worthy 
lord received all the fees which were payable under patrimonial 
jurisdiction. If the arrested person was a peasant, the worthy lord 
made him pay back all the costs, and in extreme cases had his 
a [Wilhelm Wolff,] "Zur schlesischen Milliarde (Das Schutzgeld)", Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, No. 270, April 12, 1849.—  Ed 

=====第187页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 157 
house and farm sold. But in order to cover the costs which any 
arrested lodgers might cause him, the landowner imposed an 
annual caution money, called by the more genteel name of 
jurisdiction money, on all persons of this class under his 
jurisdiction. 
"Some of the worthy lords," says Wolff (Neue Rheinische Zeitung of April 12), 
"contented themselves with one taler a year; others imposed 1  l/% talers, and others 
took their impertinence so far as to demand 2 talers per year from this section of 
the rural proletariat. With this blood money gathered in there was all the more 
gambling and whoring in the capital and at the spas. 
"When there was no money whatsoever to be squeezed out, the worthy lord or 
his bailiff would convert the caution money into 6, 10 or even 12 gratis days' 
labour" (which the lodger had to work gratis for the worthy lord). "Cash laughs! 
So if the lodger could not pay, the executor was usually set on him to take away his 
last remaining rags, the last bed, table and chair. A few of the worthy lords 
refrained from this barbarism and demanded no caution money, not because it was 
an arrogant right but because in their patriarchal clemency they did not care to 
make use of this alleged right. 
"In this way then, with few exceptions, the lodger has been shamefully 
plundered year in, year out for the benefit of the landowner's purse. The poor 
weaver, for instance, exploited by the factory-owner on the one hand, with a wage 
of 3-4 silver groschen a day, with 1/2  taler of graduated tax for the state, with dues 
to the school, Church and community, was nevertheless forced to pay the worthy 
lord one or two talers caution money, which should be properly called blood 
money. It was the same for the miner, and for all the other landless people. 
"What benefit does he, the lodger, derive from this? The fact that if he has 
been driven by poverty, misery and brutality to stealing or other crimes and is 
brought to justice, then he may remain in prison or house of correction happy in 
the knowledge that he and the class of lodgers to which he belongs have already 
paid the prison costs into the landowner's purse a hundredfold in advance.... The 
lodger who has paid caution money—let us put it at 1 V3 talers per year on 
average—for thirty years without going to gaol has been obliged to throw 40 talers 
cash into the landowner's purse, not counting interest and interest on interest. For 
this the landowner pays interest on capital of more than 1,000 talers borrowed 
from the Landschaft" (the credit association of the knightly landowners). 
"What a lucrative source of income the robber-knights found in caution money 
may be deduced from the fact that in most villages there are as many if not more 
lodgers than householders. We recollect one of the smallest robber-knights who 
owned three domains and extorted from the lodgers in his three villages 240 talers 
per year in caution money, with which he paid off the interest on capital borrowed 
from the Landschaft' (raised on his estate) "of 6,000 talers... 
"After all this the naive may believe that the worthy knights really do pay any 
criminal costs which may arise out of their prenumerando" (by prepayment) "filled 
purses. Such naive faith will be utterly shattered by knightly speculation. Many 
cases are known to us from the twenties and from later years in which the knights 
in their insolence not only raised the caution money from the lodgers but forced 
their beloved village subjects to meet partly l/$, partly V2 and in several villages 2/3 of 
any inquiry and gaol expenses." 

=====第188页=====
158 
VIII 
In the Neue Rheinische Zeitung of April 14, Wolff deals with the 
hunting right, which was abolished without compensation in 1848 and 
whose restoration or purchase with "damages" the noble Junkers 
were then vociferously demanding. 
"The sanctification of game had the consequence that they preferred to shoot 
down a confounded peasant rather than a hare, partridge or similar protected 
creatures. When hunting with drovers, taken from among their beloved village 
subjects, they were not unduly inhibited; even if one of the drovers was shot at or 
stretched out dead there was at most an inquiry and no more was said. Moreover, 
several cases from that patrimonial heyday are known to us in which the noble 
knight fired a charge of buckshot into the legs or hindparts of one drover or 
another—purely for his private delectation. Even beyond the actual hunt the 
worthy knights would indulge in such pastimes with passion. We always recall in 
this connection the baron who fired a round of buckshot into the thigh of a woman 
gleaning corn in one of his harvested fields despite his prohibition, and then 
recounted his heroic exploit at the dinner table in select robber-knighdy company 
with undisguised self-satisfaction.... On the other hand, the beloved village subjects 
had the pleasure of 'roboting' (doing service) as drovers at the great noble hunt. 
Every farmer, i.e. every owner of a field and every cottager, was directed to provide 
a drover 'first thing in the morning' for the great noble hunt for so and so many 
days.  It must certainly have made the worthy knights' hearts beat with ecstasy to 
have a mob of ill-clad, often barefoot, starving villagers trotting along beside them 
on cold, wet October and November days. The whip hung by the hunting bag for 
the good and edification of hounds and drovers. It was usually the latter who 
received the lion's share.... Other knights started large pheasant farms.... Woe to 
the woman or girl who through carelessness or lack of tracking sense came too 
close to one of the count's pheasant nests or alarmed the hen.... I have myself in 
my youth been an eye-witness to how a peasant's wife for the said reason was 
thrashed in a most barbaric and bestial manner and crippled by a young 
robber-knight, without even a cock crowing afterwards. They were a poor people, 
and protesting, i.e. bringing a court-case,requires money, and also some confidence in 
justice, things which in the majority of the Silesian peasants are found sparingly, if at 
all. 

=====第189页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 159 
"Seething with rage, the peasant had to watch as the knightly gentlemen, with 
or without their hunters, or as these alone chased across the field which he had 
cultivated with toil and trouble, trampling and putting to waste, sparing no fruit of 
the field, high or low, thick or thin. Right through the middle or over and away 
they galloped with the hunters and hounds. If the peasant presumed to object, a 
laugh of derision was his answer, in the mildest case; many are those who have 
suffered worse, with beaten bodies to show for it. The cabbage in the peasant's 
field was sought out by the divinely favoured and protected hare as fodder, and 
the peasant planted his trees so as to still the hunger of the hare in winter.... But 
this damage cannot compare with that inflicted on him by deer and wild boar, 
which were protected throughout most of Silesia. Wild boar, red deer and roe deer 
often rooted up, devoured and trampled in a single night what was supposed to 
serve the peasant or the 'little man' as food and payment of taxes and tithes for a 
whole year. Of course, the injured party was free to sue for damages. Indeed, 
individuals and whole communities have tried it. The outcome of such cases will be 
self-evident to anyone who has acquired during his life even a remote idea of the 
old Prussian civil service, judiciary and trial procedure.... After interminable 
writing and petitioning the peasant would obtain judgement in a few years, if 
fortune favoured him, against the noble lord, and if he viewed it in broad daylight 
and added it all up, he would find that he had been cheated to the extreme.... But 
the number of villages on whose rustic fields the divinely favoured wild boar, red 
deer and roe deer have harried and ravaged for thirty years, more severely every 
year, amounts to over a thousand. We know several of them, by no means among 
the largest, which have suffered 200-300 talers worth of damage annually solely on 
account of the protected big game." 
And if the nobility now demands compensation for the abolition 
of this hunting right, then Wolff counters that demand with this 
one: 
"Full compensation for all damage done by game, for all the ravages which 
have been inflicted on our lands for the last thirty years by the divinely favoured 
roe deer, red deer, wild boar and by the worthy knights themselves; to put it in 
round figures: 
"Compensation of at least 20 million talers!" 
The conclusion of the whole thing (Neue Rheinische Zeitung of 
April 25, 1849) is an article on the Polish part of the province, 
Upper Silesia, which in autumn 1847 was struck by a famine as 
severe as that which was simultaneously depopulating Ireland. As 
in Ireland, famine typhus also broke out in Upper Silesia and 
spread like the plague. The following winter it broke out once 
again, yet without any failure of the harvest, flooding or other 
calamity having occurred. What is the explanation? Wolff replies: 
"The greater part of the land is in the hands of big landowners, the fiscus" 
(state) "and in mortmain.185 Only 2/5 of the total landed property is in the hands of 
the peasants, and is overloaded with statute labour and tithes to the landowners, as 
well as taxes to the state, the Church, school, district and community to the most 
incredible and shameless extent, whereas the worthy lords, compared with the 
peasants, pay the state a mere pittance at the most.... When rent-day arrives the 
silver interest is wrung out of the peasant with the knout, should he fail to pay 

=====第190页=====
160 Frederick Engels 
voluntarily. And so lack of capital and credit and an excess of tithes and services to 
the robber-knights as well as to the state and Church, forced the peasant to throw 
himself into the arms of the Jew and perish helplessly struggling in the toils of the 
artful usurer. 
"In the age-old humiliation and servitude to which the rural population of 
Upper Silesia has been subjected by the Christian-Germanic government and its 
robber-knights, the peasant has found his only solace, as well as a restorative and 
half his nourishment, in alcohol. One must give the worthy lords their due: they 
supplied the peasants with ample quantities of this commodity from their 
distilleries at ever cheaper prices.... Alongside the mud-huts of the Water-Polack186 
peasants where famine, typhus and brutishness have made their abode, the 
sumptuous palaces, castles and other properties of the Upper Silesian magnates 
appear all the more romantic... On the one hand, the incredibly rapid 
accumulation of riches and colossal annual revenues of their 'lordships'. On the 
other, the advancing impoverishment of the masses. 
"The day wage for agricultural labourers is mean in the extreme: for a man 5-6 
silver groschen, for a woman 21/%-3 silver groschen may even be regarded as a high 
rate.  Many are compelled to work for a day wage of 4 and 2 silver groschen 
respectively, and even less. Their diet consists almost solely of potatoes and 
schnapps. If only the labourer had even had these two items in sufficient quantity, 
then at least starvation and typhus would have spared Upper Silesia. When, 
however, the staple food became steadily dearer and scarcer as a result of potato 
blight, and the day wage not only failed to rise but actually fell—people had resort 
to plants which they picked in the fields and woods, couch grass and roots, making 
soup with stolen hay and eating the flesh of dead animals. Their strength 
evaporated. Schnapps became more expensive—and even worse than before. 
Schenker is the name given to those persons, most often Jews, who in return for an 
enormous rent to the worthy lords sell the schnapps to the public. The Schenker 
was already accustomed to diluting the schnapps with appropriate amounts of 
water and then strengthening it again with all kinds of ingredients, chief among 
which being oil of vitriol. This poisonous adulteration increased from year to year, 
being carried to an extreme after the outbreak of potato blight. The stomach of the 
peasant, weakened by hay and couch-grass soups, could no longer take such 
medicine. Considering the poor clothing, the filthy, unsanitary housing, the cold in 
winter, and the lack either of work or of strength to work, one realises how, no 
more and no less than in Ireland, these famine conditions very soon gave rise to 
typhus. 'The people had nothing in reserve!' There we have the explanation of it 
all. They were continually exploited and drained dry by the state and the 
robber-knights to such an extent that at the slightest increase in their misery they 
were bound to perish.... The robber-knights, the civil servant caste, and the whole 
divinely favoured royal Prussian government horde did business, drew salaries, 
distributed gratuities, while down below in the common strata of the people, lashed 
by famine and typhus, they started to die off in their hundreds like animals and 
went on dying. 
"Not much better off than the day-labourers are the farmers, or those who 
possess a house with a plot of land, whether larger or smaller. They too derive 
their main sustenance from potatoes and schnapps. They have to sell what they 
produce to raise the tithes payable to the landowner, the state, etc.... And to be 
forced to perform estate service" (for the worthy lord), "to be barbarically 
maltreated by the lord or his officials with the knout, to be forced, toiling, starving 
and beaten, to witness and endure the luxury and arrogance of the robber-knights 
and a snarling caste of officials—this was and is the lot of a great part of the 
Water-Polack population.... 

=====第191页=====
Wilhelm Wolff l&l 
"The sort of treatment meted out to the estate servants, the farmhands and 
maids of the lords may be readily gauged from what the village subjects liable to 
labour service and the so-called wage-labourers had to endure. Here, too, the 
knout is the Alpha and Omega of the robber-knights' gospel.... 
"The robber-knights rule and dispose as they please. From their ranks are 
taken the Landrats; they train the domanial and district police, and the entire 
bureaucracy works in their interests. Then there is the fact that the Water-Polack 
peasant does not have German officialdom over him—which might be too 
humane—but an old Prussian one, with its Prussian language and its own 
provincial law. Exploited, maltreated, derided, whipped and cast into fetters by all 
quarters, the Upper Silesian peasant was bound eventually to reach the point he has 
reached. Starvation and plague were bound to ripen as the final fruits in this 
genuine Christian-Germanic soil. Whoever still has the power to steal, does so. That 
is the only form for the Irishised Upper Silesian to actually put up opposition to 
Christian Teutonism and the robber-knights. The next step is beggary; the 
pauperised figures may be seen moving from one place to another in droves. In 
the third rank we discover those who lack the strength or aptitude for either 
stealing or begging. It is to their beds of mouldering straw that the epidemic angel 
of death pays his most productive visits. These are the fruits of a century of 
divinely favoured monarchist government and the robber knighthood and 
bureaucracy allied with it." 
And as before, Wolff now demands that the knights compensate 
the peasants, that all statute labour and money dues be abolished 
without compensation, and finally that all the large estates of the 
Upper Silesian magnates be broken up. This would naturally not 
occur, he notes, under the Manteuffel-Brandenburg government, 
and thus "the Upper Silesians would continue as before to fall 
prey to famine and famine typhus in huge numbers", which 
proved to be literally true, until the tremendous upsurge of Upper 
Silesian industry in the fifties and sixties entirely revolutionised 
the living conditions of the whole region, and increasingly 
replaced brutal feudal exploitation with civilised, but even more 
thorough, modern bourgeois exploitation. 
13-1317 

=====第192页=====
162 
IX 
We have deliberately quoted large extracts from The Silesian 
Milliard, not only because it conveys with the utmost clarity the 
character of  Wolff,  but also because it gives a true picture of the 
conditions which prevailed until 1848 throughout rural Prussia, 
with the exception of the Rhine Province, in Mecklenburg, 
Hanover, and a few other small states, as well as the whole of 
Austria. Where redemption had taken place the peasant had been 
defrauded; but for half to two-thirds of the peasant population— 
according to locality—feudal service and tithes to the landowner 
remained, with little prospect of a more rapid rate of redemption 
until the thunderbolt of 1848 and the ensuing period of industrial 
development all but swept away these relics of the Middle Ages as 
well. We say "all but" because in Mecklenburg feudalism continues 
to exist with undiminished power, and also in other backward 
areas of Northern Germany there are as likely as not districts where 
redemption has not yet been effected. In 1849 caution money and 
a few other less important feudal dues were abolished without 
compensation in Prussia; the other burdens were redeemed more 
rapidly than before because the nobility, after the experiences of 
1848 and with the constant difficulty of extracting profitable 
labour from the recalcitrant peasants, was now itself pressing for 
redemption. Finally, with the district regulations, there disap­
peared the landowners' seignorial jurisdiction, eliminating, at least 
formally, feudalism in Prussia. 
But only formally. Wherever large-scale landed property is 
prevalent, the big landowners retain a semi-feudal dominance, 
even under otherwise modern bourgeois conditions of manage­
ment. Only the forms of this dominant position vary. They are 

=====第193页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 163 
different in Ireland, where the land is cultivated by small tenant 
farmers, and different in England and Scotland, where moneyed 
tenants run large leasehold farms with the aid of wage labourers. 
The domination of the nobility prevalent in Northern Germany, 
especially in the East, approaches the latter form. The large estates 
are mostly run by the owners themselves and more rarely by large 
tenants, with the aid of servants and day labourers. The servants 
are subject to the Regulations for Servants, which in Prussia date 
from 1810 and are so clearly designed for feudal conditions that 
they expressly  permit "minor acts of violence" by the nobility against 
the servants, while  expressly  forbidding the latter on pain of criminal 
punishment to offer active resistance to assault from their master, 
except if their life or health be endangered! (General Regulations 
for Servants, §§ 77, 79).a Partly by their contracts but partly by the 
predominant system of payment in kind—which also includes 
housing—the day labourers are reduced to a state of dependence 
on the landowner quite equal to that of the servants; and so even 
today there flourishes east of the Elbe the patriarchal treatment of 
farm labourers and domestic servants, with the punches in the 
face,  blows from the stick and cuts of the whip which Wolff has 
described to us in Silesia. Unfortunately the common people are 
getting more and more rebellious and are in some places already 
refusing to tolerate any longer these paternal measures for their 
betterment. 
Since Germany is still preponderantly an agricultural country, 
and the mass of the population therefore gain their livelihood 
from farming and live in the country, it remains the chief but also 
the most difficult task of the workers' party to make the 
agricultural workers' interests and position clear to them. The first 
step towards this is that the party should itself become familiar with 
the interests and position of the agricultural workers. Those party 
comrades whom circumstances permit would be doing the cause a 
great service by comparing Wolff's accounts with present condi­
tions,  collating the changes which have occurred and describing 
the present situation of the agricultural workers. In addition to the 
day labourer proper, the small peasant should not be ignored 
either. How have the redemptions progressed since 1848? Has the 
peasant had his ears boxed as soundly as before in the process? 
Such questions, among others, emerge on their own from reading 
The Silesian Milliard, and if the business of answering them were 
a Gesinde-Ordnung für sämmtliche Provinzen der Preußischen Monarchie. Vom 8. 
November 1810. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, No. 5, 
Berlin, 1810.— Ed. 
13* 

=====第194页=====
164 Frederick Engels 
undertaken seriously and the resulting material published in the 
party organ, this would be a greater service to the workers' cause 
than any number of articles about the organisation in detail of the 
society of the future.187 
One more point is raised by the conclusion of Wolff's articles. 
Since 1849 Upper Silesia has developed into one of the focal 
points of German industry. As in the rest of Silesia, this industry is 
situated mainly in the countryside, in large villages or newly 
emerging towns, far from the urban centres. If we are concerned 
with spreading Social-Democracy in the countryside, Silesia, and 
particularly Upper Silesia, offers the most suitable locality for use 
as a lever. In spite of this, Upper Silesia, at least, seems to have 
been virgin soil for socialist propaganda up till now. The language 
cannot amount to an obstacle; on the one hand, the use of 
German has greatly increased there with the growth of industry, 
on the other, there are surely enough socialists who speak Polish. 
But back to our  Wolff.  On May 19 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
was suppressed after the last issue had appeared printed in red. 
Apart from 23 pending press trials the Prussian police had so 
many other pretexts for seizing each individual member of the 
editorial board that they all left Cologne and Prussia immediately. 
Most of us went to Frankfurt, where the decisive point seemed 
near at hand. The victories of the Hungarians provoked the 
Russian invasion; the conflict between the governments and the 
Frankfurt Parliament on account of the Imperial Constitution had 
given rise to various insurrections, of which those in Dresden, 
Iserlohn and Elberfeld had been suppressed, while those in the 
Palatinate and in Baden were still in progress. Wolff had an old 
Breslau mandate in his pocket as the substitute for that old 
distorter of history, Stenzel; they had only got wailer Stenzel 
through by including the agitator 188 Wolff as his substitute. Like 
all good Prussians, Stenzel had naturally obeyed the Prussian 
government's order of recall from Frankfurt. Wolff now took his 
place.189 
The Frankfurt Parliament, having sunk through its own idling 
and stupidity from the position of the most powerful assembly that 
had ever convened in Germany to the most utter impotence, now 
evident to all the governments, even to the Imperial Government 
it had appointed itself and to the very Parliament  itself,  was at a 
loss what to do, caught between the governments which had 
massed their forces, and the people who had risen to defend the 
Imperial Constitution. There was still everything to be gained if 
only the Parliament and the leaders of the South German 

=====第195页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 165 
movement showed courage and determination. A parliamentary 
decision calling the armies of Baden and the Palatinate to 
Frankfurt to defend the Assembly would have sufficed. The 
Assembly would thereby have regained the confidence of the 
people at a stroke. The defection of the troops of Hesse and 
Darmstadt, and the accession of Württemberg and Bavaria to 
the movement could then have been anticipated with certainty; the 
small states of central Germany would likewise have been brought 
in; Prussia would have had its hands full, and, in the face of such 
a mighty movement in Germany, Russia would have been 
compelled to retain in Poland part of the troops subsequently 
employed with success in Hungary. Thus Hungary could have 
been saved at Frankfurt, and moreover there was every likelihood 
that with the spread of a victorious revolution in Germany, the 
outbreak that was daily expected in Paris would not have dissolved 
into the uncontested defeat of the radical philistines which 
occurred on June 13, 1849. 190 
The prospects were as favourable as they could be. The advice 
to summon the guard of Baden and the Palatinate was given3 in 
Frankfurt, that to march to Frankfurt even without a summons, in 
Mannheim.b But neither the Baden leaders nor the Frankfurt 
parliamentarians had the courage, energy, intelligence or initia­
tive. 0 
a In the 1886 edition Engels added: "by all of us".— Ed. 
b In the 1886 edition Engels added: "by Marx and  myself".—  Ed. 
c See also Engels' "The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution" 
(present edition, Vol. 10).— Ed. 

=====第196页=====
166 
x 
Instead of acting, the Parliament decided—as if it had not 
spoken too much already—to speak again, namely, in a "Procla­
mation to the German Nation". A commission was appointed 
which produced twTo drafts, the one approved by the majority 
having been prepared by Uhland. Both of them were feeble, 
bloodless and powerless, expressing nothing but their own 
helplessness and dejection and the bad conscience of the Assembly 
itself.  At the debate on May 26, they gave our Wolff the 
opportunity to speak his mind to the honourable parliamentarians 
once and for all. The shorthand record of this speech runs3: 
"Wolff of Breslau: 
"'Gentlemen! I have registered my name against the Proclamation to the Nation 
that has been composed by the majority and read out here, because I think it 
utterly inadequate in the present conditions, because I find it too weak—suitable 
solely as an article for publication in those newspapers which represent the party 
that has conceived it, but not as a Proclamation to the German Nation. Since a 
second has now been read out, I shall only remark in passing that I would oppose 
this one even more strongly, for reasons that I do not need to give here.' (Voice 
from the Centre: 'Why not?') 'I am speaking only of the majority proclamation; it is 
after all so moderate that even Mr. Buss could not object to it too much, and that 
is certainly the worst recommendation for any proclamation. No, gentlemen, if you 
wish to retain any influence whatsoever over the people, you must not speak to the 
people in the way you do in the Proclamation; you must not speak of legality, of 
legal grounds and so on, but of illegality, in the same way as the governments, as 
the Russians, and by Russians I mean Prussians, Austrians, Bavarians and 
Hanoverians.' (Commotion and laughter.) 'These are all included under the 
a W. Wolff [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on May 26, 1849], 
Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden National­
versammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, No. 229, May 28, 1849, Vol. 9, Frankfurt am 
Main, 1849, p. 6749.— Ed. 

=====第197页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 167 
common name of Russians.' (Great amusement.) 'Yes, gentlemen, in this Assembly, 
too, the Russians are represented. You must say to them: Just as you adopt the 
legal point of view, so shall we. This is the viewpoint of force, and in parenthesis 
you ought to explain that legality means opposing the cannons of the Russians with 
force, with well-organised storming-parties. If you have to issue a proclamation at 
all, then issue one in which you declare from the very outset the first traitor to 
the people, the Imperial Regent* an outlaw.' ('Order!' Vigorous applause from the 
gallery.) 'And all the ministers too!' (Renewed commotion.) 'Oh no, I will not be 
intimidated. He is the first traitor to the people.' 
"President Reh: 'I think that Mr. Wolff has discarded all respect. He cannot 
describe the Archduke Imperial Regent as a traitor to the people before this 
House, and I must therefore call him to order...' 
"Wolff:  'For my part, I accept the call to order and declare that I intended to be 
out of order, that he and his ministers are traitors.' (From all sides of the House: 
'Order, this is scandalous!') 
"President: 'I must deny you leave to speak.' 
"Wolff:  'Well, I protest; it was my intention to speak here in the name of the 
people and to say what the people are thinking. I protest against every 
proclamation which is worded in this spirit.' " 
These few words descended like a thunderbolt on the terrified 
Assembly. For the first time the real state of affairs had been 
clearly and openly expressed to its members. The treachery of the 
Imperial Regent and his ministers was a public secret; every one 
of those present saw it occurring before their very eyes; but no 
one dared to put into words what he saw. And now comes this 
disrespectful little Silesian and all at once demolishes their whole 
conventional house of cards! Even the "determined Left" could 
not help protesting energetically against the unforgivable breach 
of all parliamentary decorum which this simple statement of the 
truth constituted, through the mouth of their worthy representa­
tive Mr. Karl Vogt (Vogt —the man who was sent a remittance of 
40,000 francs in August, 1859, according to the lists of sums paid 
by Louis Napoleon to his agents, published in 1870  191). Mr. Vogt 
enriched the debate with the following shabbily embarrassed and 
infamously mendacious b protest0: 
" 'Gentlemen, I have requested leave to speak in order to defend the 
crystal-clear stream that has flowed from a poetic soul into this proclamation 
against the unworthy filth that has been thrown into the same or' (!) 'hurled at the 
same' (!), 'to defend these words against the muck which has piled up in this latest 
movement, threatening to swamp and defile everything there. Yes, gentlemen! It is 
a Archduke John.— Ed. 
b A play on words in the original: verlegnen (embarrassed) and verlognen 
(mendacious).— Ed. 
c K. Vogt [Protest against Wolff's speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on 
May 26, 1849], Stenographischer Bericht über die Verhandlungen der deutschen 
constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main, No. 229, May 28, 1849, 
Vol. 9, Frankfurt am Main, 1849, p. 6751.— Ed. 

=====第198页=====
168 Frederick Engels 
muck and filth which are being cast in this' (!) 'way at all that may be considered 
pure,  and I express my most profound indignation that such a thing' (!) 'could 
have happened.' " 
Since Wolff had not mentioned Uhland's editing of the 
proclamation at all, but simply found its content too weak, one is 
at a loss to understand to what Mr. Vogt is actually referring with 
his indignation and his "filth" and "muck". But on the one hand 
there was the memory of the ruthless way in which the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung had always treated false brethren of Vogt's sort; 
on the other, rage at Wolff's straight language, which made the 
time-serving game of these false brethren henceforth impossible. 
Forced to choose between real revolution and reaction, Mr. Vogt 
declares himself in favour of the latter and the Imperial Regent 
and his ministers—of "all that may be considered pure". 
Unfortunately, the reactionaries wanted nothing to do with Mr. 
Vogt. 
The very same day Wolff challenged Mr. Vogt to a duel with 
pistols through the deputy Würth from Sigmaringen, and when 
Mr. Vogt declined to shoot it out, threatened him with physical 
chastisement. Mr. Vogt, although physically a giant compared with 
Wolff,  now fled under the protection of his sister, not showing his 
face anywhere except in her company. Wolff let the loudmouth 
go-
Everyone knows how a few days after the scene, the Assembly 
itself recognised the correctness of Wolff's utterances by fleeing 
from its own Imperial Regent and his government to Stuttgart.192 

=====第199页=====
169 
XI 
We are nearing the end. Wolff remained at his post in Stuttgart 
even when the National Assembly was dispersed by the troops 
from Württemberg, then going to Baden and finally to Switzer­
land with the other refugees. He chose Zurich as his place of 
residence, where he immediately established himself as a private 
tutor, but naturally encountered fierce competition from the many 
other graduate refugees living there. In spite of the indigent life 
which ensued, Wolff would have stayed in Switzerland. But it 
became increasingly obvious that the Swiss Federal Council, 193 
obedient to the voice of European reaction, was determined little 
by little to harry all these refugees out of Switzerland, as Wolff put 
it. For most of them, this meant emigrating to America, and this 
was what the governments wanted. Once the refugees were on the 
other side of the ocean there was no being pestered by them. 
Wolff too often pondered on the idea of emigrating to 
America, which the many friends of his who had gone there 
urged him to do. When the "harrying" became too much for him, 
he arrived, half-decided, in London in June 1851, where we gave 
him a place of abode for the time being. Here too the competition 
as a private tutor was very keen. Wolff was scarcely able to earn 
the paltriest living despite the greatest exertions. He did his 
utmost to keep his position a secret from his friends, as always 
when things were going badly for him. Nonetheless, he had been 
obliged by the end of 1853 to run up debts of about £37 (750 
marks), which weighed very heavily on him; he wrote in his diary 
the same summer: 
"On June 21, 1853 I had to spend my birthday in almost horrible  DISTRESS." 

=====第200页=====
170 Frederick Engels 
His intention of going to America would probably have been 
put into effect, had not a likewise fugitive German doctor in 
Manchester,3  who was a friend of Wolff's from Breslau, obtained 
him enough private lessons in Manchester through his connections 
to enable him at least to live off them. And so he made the move 
in early January 1854. 194 In the beginning, certainly, things were 
rather touch-and-go. But his livelihood was assured, and then 
Wolff,  with his extraordinary flair for getting on with children and 
winning their affection, was able to count on gradually extending 
his sphere of activities just as soon as he was known among the 
Germans there. This did not fail to happen. After a few years he 
found himself in a fairly comfortable material position for his 
demands, adored by his pupils, universally popular and respected 
by young and old, Englishmen and Germans on account of his 
uprightness, sense of duty and his cheerful amiability. It was in 
the nature of things that he mainly came into contact with 
bourgeois, in other words, more or less politically hostile elements; 
but although he never compromised either his character or his 
convictions in the slightest, only very rarely did he have to weather 
any conflicts, and this he did honourably. At that time we were all 
cut off from public political activity; we were silenced by the 
reactionary legislation, utterly ignored by the daily press and 
hardly honoured by a refusal from the publishers in response to 
any of our offers; Bonapartism seemed to have triumphed over 
socialism forever. For several years Wolff was the only comrade I 
had in Manchester with the same views as  myself;  no wonder that 
we met almost daily and that I then again had more than ample 
opportunity of admiring his almost instinctively correct assessment 
of current events. 
Suffice it to take a single instance to illustrate Wolff's 
conscientiousness. He set one of his pupils a sum in arithmetic 
from a textbook. He compared the answer with the one given in 
the so-called key, and found it wrong. But when the boy always 
arrived at the same answer after repeated attempts Wolff did the 
sum himself and discovered that the boy was right; the key 
contained a printer's error. At once Wolff sat down and worked 
through every sum in the book in order to make sure that there 
were no more such errors in the key: "That's never going to 
happen to me again!" 
This conscientiousness was, in fact, the cause of his death, not 
even 55 years old. In the spring of 1864 he started suffering from 
a Louis Borchardt.—  Ed. 

=====第201页=====
Wilhelm Wolff 171 
severe headaches due to overwork, which gradually resulted in 
almost total insomnia. His doctor had gone away; he refused to 
consult any other. All pleas for him to cancel or limit his lessons 
for a while were in vain; whatever he had taken on, he wanted to 
see through. Only when he simply could not endure it any more 
did he occasionally cancel his lessons. But it was too late. The 
headaches caused by saturation of the brain with blood went from 
bad to worse, the insomnia became ever more unremitting. A 
blood-vessel in the cerebrum burst, and after repeated cerebral 
haemorrhages death occurred on May 9, 1864. With him, Marx 
and I lost our most faithful friend, and the German revolution a 
man of irreplaceable worth. 

=====第202页=====
172 
Frederick Engels 
[LETTER TO ENRICO BIGNAMI 
ON THE GERMAN ELECTIONS OF 1877] 
My dear Bignami, 
Your Berlin correspondent3 will have given you all the details of 
the German elections.196 Our triumph has been such as to strike 
terror into the hearts of the bourgeoisie both in Germany and 
abroad; here in London the shock wave has rippled throughout 
the press. The most significant thing is not the number of new 
electoral colleges we have won, although it is worth noting that the 
Emperor William, the King of Saxonyb and the most petty 
princeling in Germany (the prince of Reuss)c  all now reside in 
colleges represented by socialist workers and are, consequently, 
themselves represented by socialists. What is important, as well as 
these majorities, are the strong minorities obtained both in the 
cities and the countryside. In Berlin, 31,500; in Hamburg, 
Barmen-Elberfeld, Nuremberg and Dresden, 11,000 votes each 
city; not only in the countryside of Schleswig-Holstein, Saxony and 
Brunswick but even in the fortress of feudalism, in Mecklenburg, 
we had strong minorities of agricultural workers. On January 10, 
1874 we had 350,000 votes; on January 10, 1877 we had at least 
600,000. 197 The vote enables us to reckon our forces; the battalions 
are now able to tell you what are the army corps of German 
socialism passing in review on election day. The moral effect—on 
the socialist party which registers its progress with delight, on the 
workers who are still indifferent, and on our enemies—is 
enormous; and it is a good thing that once every three years the 
a E. Dörenberg. — Ed. 
b Albert.— Ed. 
<= Heinrich XXII.— Ed. 

=====第203页=====
Letter to Enrico Bignami 173 
mortal sin of going to the polls is committed. The abstentionists l 8 
can say what they like; a single event like the elections of 
January 10 is worth more than all their "revolutionary" phrases. 
And when I say battalions and army corps I am not speaking 
metaphorically. At least half if not more of these men of 25 (the 
minimum age) who voted for us spent two to three years in 
uniform and they know perfectly well how to handle a needle gun 
and a rifled cannon, and they belong to the army reserve. A few 
years more of this sort of progress and we shall have the reserves 
and the Landwehr 199 (three quarters of the war army) with us in 
such a way as tcr immobilise the armed forces as a whole and make 
any kind of offensive war impossible. 
Some people will say: But why not have the revolution right 
away? Because, not having more than 600,000 votes out of 5 and a 
half million, and these votes being scattered in many areas, we 
would certainly be defeated, and we would see ruined by 
foolhardy uprisings and senselessness a movement which only 
requires a little time to lead us to certain victory. It is obvious that 
our adversaries will not let themselves be beaten easily, that the 
Prussians are not going to let their war army become infected with 
socialism without reacting against it. But the more reaction and 
repression there is, the higher the flood will mount, until it sweeps 
away the flood gates. Do you know what happened in Berlin? On 
the night of January 10, all the streets surrounding the socialist 
Committee200 rooms were packed with a crowd which even the 
police put at 22,000. Thanks to our party's perfect organisation 
and discipline, this Committee was the first to have the definitive 
election result. When it was declared, the whole crowd shouted an 
enthusiastic hurrah—for whom?—those elected?—no: "for our 
most active agitator, the King's prosecutor  Tessendorff".  The latter was 
always renowned for his judicial proceedings against the socialists; 
through his violence he doubled our numbers. 
This is how our people respond to the measures of violence: 
they are not worried by them, rather they provoke them as the 
best means of agitation. 
A fraternal greeting from your 
F. Engels 
Written on February 13, 1877 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in La Plebe, No. 7, Feb­
ruary 26, 1877 Translated from the Italian 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第204页=====
9 ïoromrte m 
Frederick Engels 
FROM ITALY 201 
The socialist movement in Italy too has at last been placed on a 
firm foundation and shows every sign of developing rapidly and 
successfully. But to enable the reader to fully grasp the turnabout 
that has taken place, we have to retrace the history of how Italian 
socialism emerged. 
The beginnings of the movement in Italy can be traced back to 
Bakuninist influences. While a passionate but extremely muddled 
class hatred against their exploiters was dominant among the 
working masses, an army of young lawyers, doctors, writers, clerks, 
etc., under Bakunin's personal command, seized the leadership in 
every place where the revolutionary proletarian element appeared. 
All of them, albeit with varying degrees of initiation, were 
members of the secret Bakuninist "Alliance" 202  whose aim was to 
impose its leadership on the entire European workers' movement, 
and thus enable the Bakuninist sect surreptitiously to gain 
dominance in the coming social revolution. A detailed account of 
this can be found in the pamphlet Ein Complot gegen die 
Internationale (published by Bracke in Brunswick). 3 
This worked splendidly as long as the workers' movement itself 
was still in the process of formation. The extravagant Bakuninist 
revolutionary phrases aroused the desired applause everywhere; 
even the elements which stemmed from earlier political revolution­
ary movements were swept along in the current, and alongside 
Spain, Italy became, in Bakunin's own words, "the most revolution­
ary country in Europe".203 Revolutionary in the sense of there 
a See K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the 
International Working Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 23).— Ed 

=====第205页=====
From Italy 175 
being much ado about nothing. In contrast to the essentially 
political struggle by which the English workers' movement, 
followed by the French and finally the German movement, had 
become big and powerful, here all political activity was rejected 
since it implied recognition of "the State", and "the State" was the 
epitome of all evil. Hence, the ban on the formation of a workers' 
party; the ban on the fight for safeguards against exploitation, e.g., 
a standard working day, limitation of female and child labour; and 
above all a ban on participation in any elections. On the other 
hand, we have the command to agitate, organise and conspire for 
the coming revolution, which, when it drops from the skies, should 
be carried through without any provisional government and with the 
total destruction of all state and state-like institutions, solely by the 
initiative (secretly directed by the Alliance) of the working masses. 
"But do not ask me how!"3 
As we have already said, as long as the movement was in its 
infancy this all went splendidly. The vast majority of Italian towns 
are still largely isolated from world traffic, which they know only 
in the shape of tourist traffic. These towns supply the local 
peasants with handicraft products and facilitate the sale of 
agricultural produce over a larger area; moreover, the landowning 
nobility live in these towns and spend their revenue there; and, 
finally, a multitude of foreigners bring their money there. The 
proletarian elements in these towns are not very numerous, still 
less advanced, and moreover include a strong admixture of people 
who have no regular or steady jobs, as is favoured by tourism and 
the mild climate. Ultra-revolutionary phrases, which tacitly implied 
dagger and poison, fell upon fertile soil here to begin with. But 
there are also industrial towns in Italy, especially in the north, and 
as soon as the movement gained a foothold among the truly 
proletarian masses of these towns such a hazy diet could no longer 
suffice, nor could these workers allow those failed young 
bourgeois—who had thrown themselves into socialism because, to 
use Bakunin's words, their "career had reached a deadlock"—to 
patronise them in the long run. 
And so it happened. The dissatisfaction of the North Italian 
workers at the ban on all political action, i.e., on all real action 
which went further than idle talk and conspiratorial humbug, 
grew with every passing day. The German electoral victories of 
1874 204 and the unification of the German socialists achieved in 
their wake did not go unnoticed in Italy either. The elements 
a H. Heine, Buch der Lieder. Junge Leiden, Lieder  VIII.—  Ed. 

=====第206页=====
176 Frederick Engels 
which stemmed from the old republican movement and had only 
reluctantly submitted to the "anarchistic" clamour increasingly 
began to find the opportunity to stress the necessity of political 
struggle and to voice the rising opposition in the newspaper La 
Plebe. This weekly, republican during the first years of its 
existence, had soon joined the socialist movement and kept aloof 
as long as possible from all "anarchical" sectarianism. When, 
finally, the working masses in Northern Italy outgrew their 
obtrusive leaders and created a real movement in place of the 
fantastic one, they found in the Plebe a willing organ prepared 
from time to time to publish heretical hints about the necessity of 
political struggie. 
Had Bakunin been alive, he would have fought this heresy in 
his usual manner. He would have imputed "authoritarianism", a 
craving for domination, ambition and so on to the people 
connected with the Plebe; he would have made all manner of petty 
personal criticisms against them and would have had this repeated 
time and again in all organs of the Alliance in Switzerland, Italy 
and Spain. Only as a secondary thought would he have 
demonstrated that all these crimes were simply the inevitable 
consequences of that original deadly sin—the heresy of recognis­
ing political action; for political action implied recognition of the 
State, and since the State was the embodiment of authoritarianism, 
of domination, it followed that everybody who stood for working-
class political action must logically stand for political domination 
for himself,  and hence be an enemy of the working class—stone 
him! Bakunin used this method, which he borrowed from the late 
Maximilien Robespierre, with great skill, but applied it far too 
often and far too uniformly. This was nevertheless the only 
method which promised at least momentary success. 
But Bakunin had died3  and the secret world government had 
passed into the hands of Mr. James Guillaume of Neuchâtel in 
Switzerland. The cunning man of the world was superseded by a 
strait-laced pedant who applied the fanaticism of the Swiss 
Calvinists to the anarchist doctrine. The true faith had to be 
asserted at all costs and the narrow-minded schoolmaster of 
Neuchâtel had in any case to be recognised as the Pope of this 
true faith. The Bulletin of the Jura Federation^—a Federation with 
an avowedly hardly 200 members as against the  5,000  of the Swiss 
Workers' Association 205—was designated as the official gazette of 
a On July 1, 1876.— Ed. 
b Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne de l'Association internationale des travaille­
urs.— Ed. 

=====第207页=====
From Italy 177 
the sect and began bluntly to "rebuke" those who were vacillating 
in their faith. But the workers of Lombardy who had formed the 
North Italian Federation 206 were no longer willing to tolerate these 
rebukes. And when last autumn the Jurassic bulletin even 
presumed to order the Plebe to get rid of a Paris correspondent 
who had incurred Mr. Guillaume's displeasure,3 the friendship 
came to an end. The bulletin continued to accuse the Plebe and 
the North Italians of heresy, but the latter now knew what was 
what; they knew that the preaching of anarchy and autonomy 
served to conceal the claim of a few plotters to dictate their orders 
to the whole workers' movement. 
"Four short and very calm lines in the note have greatly irritated the Jura 
bulletin, and it tries to make out that we were enraged by it, whereas we were 
merely amused. Indeed, one would have to be very childish to swallow the bait of 
people who, ill with envy, knock at all doors and by means of vilification seek to 
solicit a bit of malice against us and our friends. The hand which has long been 
going around, sowing the seeds of discord and strife, is too well known for anyone to 
be still deceived by its Jesuit (Loyolite) machinations" (La  Plebe,  January 21, 1877).b 
And in the issue of February 26c these same people are called 
"a few narrow-minded anarchistic and—what a monstrous con­
tradiction!—at the same time dictatorial minds"; this is the best 
proof that these gentlemen have been seen for what they are in 
Milan and that they can cause no more mischief there. 
The finishing touches were made by the German elections of 
January 10 and by the concomitant turnabout in the Belgian 
movement—the abandonment of the previous policy of political 
abstention and its replacement by agitation for universal suffrage 
and factory legislation. The North Italian Federation held a 
congress in Milan on February 17 and 18.d In its resolutions the 
congress refrains from all unnecessary and misplaced hostility 
towards the Bakuninist groups of the Italian members of the 
International. They even expressed willingness to send delegates to 
the congress called for in Brussels which will attempt to unite the 
various components of the European workers' movement. But at 
the same time they express three points with the utmost firmness 
which are of decisive importance for the Italian movement, 
namely: 
a "Nouvelles de l'extérieur. Italie", Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne de 
l'Association internationale des travailleurs. No. 51, December 17, 1876.— Ed. 
b "Quattro piccole righe...", La Plebe, No. 3, January 21, 1877.— Ed. 
c "Abbiamo ricevuto...", La Plebe, No. 7, February 26, 1877.— Ed. 
d "Congresso Socialista di Milano", ibid.— Ed. 
14-1317 

=====第208页=====
178 Frederick Engels 
1. that all available means—hence also political means—must 
be used to promote the movement; 
2. that the socialist workers must set up a socialist party, which is 
to be independent of any other political or religious party; 
3. that the North Italian Federation, without prejudice to its 
own autonomy, and on the basis of the original Rules of the 
International,2 considers itself a member of this great association 
and moreover independent of all other Italian associations which, 
however, will as before continue to receive proof of its solidarity.b 
And so—political struggle, organisation of a political party and 
separation from the anarchists. By adopting these resolutions, the 
North Italian Federation has definitively broken with the Bakunin­
ist sect and taken its stand on the common ground of the great 
European workers' movement. And since it embraces the industri­
ally advanced regions of Italy—Lombardy, Piedmont and Vene­
ria—it is bound to be successful. Against the rational means of 
agitation which experience has shown to be effective in all other 
countries, the cliquishness of the Bakuninist quacks will quickly 
reveal its impotence, and in the South of the country too the 
Italian proletariat will throw off the yoke imposed by people who 
derive their mission to lead the workers' movement from their 
position as down-and-out bourgeois. 
Written between March 6 and 11, 1877 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Vorwärts, No. 32, 
March 16, 1877 
a See present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 14-16.— Ed 
b "Congresso Socialista di Milano", La Plebe, No. 7, February 26, 1877.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
179 
Frederick Engels 
[BRITISH AGRICULTURAL LABOURERS WANT 
TO PARTICIPATE IN THE POLITICAL LIFE 
OF THEIR COUNTRY]207 
London, June 5 
At a meeting of delegates of the agricultural associations which 
took place a few days ago at Exeter Hall, Joseph Arch spoke out 
forcefully against the war208 and received rapturous applause. The 
leader of the farm labourers' party revealed himself to be an 
uninhibited advocate of peace, especially because the sacrifices 
which war entails weigh increasingly heavily on the workers more 
than on the other social classes. The agricultural labourers in 
Britain do not yet participate officially in the political life of their 
country, but these impressive demonstrations of opposition to war 
cannot help having a certain influence also on those classes upon 
which the politics of the nation depends. The agricultural 
labourers are beginning to feel the need of playing a direct part in 
this political life themselves, and therefore at their meeting at 
Exeter Hall they also dealt in particular with the extension of 
franchise.209 They still constitute a caste of poor pariahs, not only 
in economic terms but politically too. They therefore hammer at 
the door of Parliament and ask to go in: they no longer want to be 
what they have been up till now. One can easily imagine that their 
claims are not viewed favourably by all those—and they are many, 
particularly among the clergy—who consider the subjection of the 
agricultural labourers to be the basis of the whole British 
politico-economic system. On the other hand, the members of the 
bourgeois parliamentary opposition are coming forward to take 
control of this farm labourers' movement themselves and use it to 
destroy their political opponents currently in government. At the 
head of this bourgeois opposition stands Mr. Bright, who also 
spoke at the Exeter Hall meeting and, deftly leaving out the big 
economic-social issue, made a resounding political accusation 
14* 

=====第210页=====
180 Frederick Engels 
against the men who are at present in power. This is understand­
able:  the economic-social terrain is a highly arduous and tricky one 
for the bourgeoisie. In fact the aristocracy in Britain has always 
shown itself to be far less inhibited on this terrain because its social 
position does not force it to speculate, as the bourgeoisie does, on 
everything and everyone in order to get rich. The workers 
understand this state of affairs perfectly and so when they want to 
wrest concessions they turn more hopefully to the aristocracy than 
to the bourgeoisie, as they have demonstrated in a recent appeal 
to Lord Beaconsfield.210 So long as this situation continues, so long 
as the workers can play see-saw with some small profit between 
bourgeoisie and aristocracy, Britain will certainly not experience 
violent socialist agitations such as occur in other countries, where 
the ruling classes simply constitute, in relation to the workers, a 
great, reactionary, compact and inexorable mass. But once the 
working classes are no longer able to draw any profit from the 
rival competition between the interests of the landed aristocracy 
and the interests of the industrial bourgeoisie, because that 
competition will no longer exist, then we shall have in Britain too 
the start of the real revolutionary period. Up till now the 
aristocracy mollified the working masses with philanthropic 
concessions; now the bourgeoisie is trying its hand by lending 
support to the workers' political tendencies and taking possession 
of them in order to direct them. We are on the brink of the 
period of universal suffrage: and on this terrain the bourgeoisie is 
hastening to display all its skills and wiles, in other words to make 
political concessions in order to safeguard its own economic 
interests and leave the aristocracy behind. Nevertheless, this whole 
mechanism of relations between the three social elements— 
proletarians, bourgeoisie and aristocrats—has had the effect on 
the proletarians of making them feel no longer like children or 
sentimentalists but of realising—as a speaker at Exeter Hall aptly 
put it—that their relations with the bourgeoisie and the aristocra­
cy can only be business relations. 
The social movement in Britain—as you can see—is slow, it is 
evolutionist, not revolutionary, but it is nonetheless a movement 
forwards. 
Written on June 5, 1877 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in La Plebe, No. 18, 
June 8, 1877 Translated from the Italian 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第211页=====
181 
Frederick Engels 
[BRITISH AGRICULTURAL UNION AND 
THE COLLECTIVIST MOVEMENT IN THE COUNTRYSIDE] 
London, June 14 
I realised that my last article3 was incomplete, and therefore feel 
it to be my due to write the present one. I spoke there about the 
Agricultural Union,211 founded 6 years ago by citizen Arch, who is 
now famous throughout Britain for this initiative and for the 
quality of his public speaking: he is a real tribune, somewhat 
unrefined, but powerful in his lack of refinement. 
The Union began its propaganda over the wages question. The 
farm workers earned no more than the equivalent of 16 lire (Italian) 
a week. Arch, with the help of some able friends, increased the 
membership of the Agricultural Union by over 50 thousand in 3 or 4 
years and was able to organise a strike of 30 thousand men. The 
strike was successful, and wages rose by two and a half lire a week in 
the Eastern counties. At the same time provisions were adopted to let 
farm workers emigrate to America and Australia or move from one 
English county to another. These transfers obtained the desired 
effect of raising wages where manpower decreased. This struggle 
was conducted to good effect until 1874.212 But after this date things 
changed. There was an attempt to tackle the question of an 
expropriation of the land in favour of the State, as the famous 
economist Stuart Mill had already proposed.1* The questions of 
universal suffrage and popular education were also raised. Note, 
however, a very significant circumstance, namely that the movement 
in favour of collective property was almost exclusively the work of 
those who broke away from citizen Arch, whose constant 
a See this volume, pp. 179-80.— Ed. 
b J. S. Mill, Principles of Political Economy with Some of Their Applications to Social 
Philosophy, London, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第212页=====
182 Frederick Engels 
predilection was for those issues which did not touch the holy altar of 
the individual ownership of land. Indeed, in the presence of the 
collectivist movement, he felt disposed to preach a sort of conciliation 
between agricultural labourers and their exploiters; in the presence, 
in other words, of the revolutionary idea of collectivism he felt 
himself to be a conservative: he reserved all his hostility for the 
upper aristocracy. He thought it useful to woo the tenant farmers a 
little,  to avoid having them as avowed enemies in the parliamentary 
elections. It is therefore not unlikely that we shall see citizen Arch in 
the House of Commons: there is already a certain amount of 
agitation in this direction and Arch is willing to stand as a candidate 
for membership. All this does not stop the collectivist movement 
from making headway: indeed even at the recent MEETING of the 
Agricultural Union 213 something was said about it. After recognising 
the need for great improvements in agriculture, the desire was 
expressed for a law which would place all cultivable land in the hands 
of a representative body and indemnify the owners. This 
expropriation would be intended to benefit the working people— 
those people, in other words, in whose hands the future prosperity 
of agriculture lies. 
I have been concerned to set this out for you because I want the 
Italian socialists to have a clear idea of the spirit of our 
Agricultural Union and the movement agitating round it. 
Written on June 14, 1877 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in La Plebe, No. 19, 
June 18, 1877 Translated from the Italian 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第213页=====
183 
Frederick Engels 
KARL MARX214 
Karl Marx, the man who was the first to give socialism, and 
thereby the whole workers' movement of our day, a scientific 
foundation, was born in Trier in 1818. He studied in Bonn and 
Berlin, at first taking up jurisprudence, but he soon devoted 
himself exclusively to the study of history and philosophy, and in 
1842 was on the point of qualifying as a dozent in philosophy 
when the political movement which had arisen since the death of 
Frederick William III directed his life into a different career. With 
his collaboration, the leaders of the Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie, 
Messrs. Camphausen, Hansemann, and others had founded in 
Cologne the Rheinische Zeitung, and in the autumn of 1842, Marx, 
whose criticism of the proceedings of the Rhine Province 
Assembly 3 had attracted very great attention, was put at the head 
of the paper. The Rheinische Zeitung naturally appeared under 
censorship, but the censors could not cope with it.* The Rheinische 
Zeitung almost always got through the articles which mattered; the 
censor was first supplied with insignificant fodder for him to strike 
out, until he either gave way of himself or was compelled to give way 
by the threat that then the paper would not appear the next day. Ten 
newspapers with the same courage as the Rheinische Zeitung and 
whose publishers allowed a few hundred talers extra to be expended 
on typesetting—and censorship would have been made impossible 
* The first censor of the Rheinische Zeitung was Police Councillor Dolleschall, the 
same man who once struck out an advertisement in the Kölnische Zeitung of the 
translation of Dante's Divine Comedy by Philalethes (later King John of Saxony) 
with the remark: One must not make a comedy of divine affairs. 
a K. Marx, "Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly".— Ed. 

=====第214页=====
184 Frederick Engels 
in Germany as early as 1843. But the German newspaper owners 
were petty-minded, timid philistines, and the Rheinische Zeitung 
carried on the struggle alone. It wore out one censor after another; 
finally it came under a double censorship; after the first censorship 
the Regierungspräsident 3 had once more and finally to censor it. 
Even that was to no avail. In early 1843, the government declared 
that it was impossible to cope with this newspaper and suppressed it 
without further ado. 
Marx, who in the meanwhile had married the sister of von 
Westphalen, later a reactionary minister, moved to Paris, and 
there, in conjunction with A. Ruge, published the Deutsch-
Französische Jahrbücher, in which he opened the series of his 
socialist writings with a Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. h 
Further, together with F. Engels, The Holy Family. Against Bruno 
Bauer and Co., c a satirical criticism of one of the latest forms 
assumed by the German philosophical idealism of the time. 
The study of political economy and of the history of the Great 
French Revolution215 still allowed Marx time enough for occasion­
al attacks on the Prussian government216; the latter revenged itself 
in the spring of 1845 by securing from Guizot's ministry—Mr. 
Alexander von Humboldt is said to have acted as inter­
mediary217 —his expulsion from France. Marx shifted his domicile 
to Brussels and published there in French in 1848 "Discours sur le 
libre échange" (Speech on the Question of Free Trade) 218 and in 
1847 Misère de la philosophie, 6 a criticism of Proudhon's Philosophie 
de la misère e (Philosophy of Poverty). At the same time he made 
use of the opportunity to found a German workers' association in 
Brussels 219 and so commenced practical agitation. The latter 
became still more important for him when he and his political 
friends in 1847 entered the secret Communist League, which had 
already been in existence for a number of years. Its whole 
structure was now radically changed; this association, which 
previously had been more or less conspiratorial, was transformed 
into a simple organisation of communist propaganda, which was 
a Carl Johann Heinrich Eduard von Gerlach. — Ed. 
b K. Marx, "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. 
Introduction".— Ed. 
c K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. 
Against Bruno Bauer and Company.—Ed. 
d K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon.—Ed. 
e P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou la Philosophie de la 
misère. —Ed. 

=====第215页=====
1878. 
Volks-kalniikr. 
IP Braunschweig. 
Druck und Verlag vou W. Bracke jr. 
'*--*_,-
The title-page of Volks-Kalender, Brunswick, 1878 

=====第216页=====

=====第217页=====
Karl Marx 187 
only secret because necessity compelled it to be so, the first 
organisation of the German Social-Democratic Party. The League 
existed wherever German workers' associations were to be found; 
in almost all of these associations in England, Belgium, France and 
Switzerland, and in very many of the associations in Germany, the 
leading members belonged to the League and the share of the 
League in the fledgling German workers' movement was very 
considerable. Moreover, our League was the first to emphasise the 
international character of the whole workers' movement and 
implement it in practice, having Englishmen, Belgians, Hun­
garians, Poles, etc., as members and organising international 
workers' meetings, especially in London. 
The transformation of the League took place at two congresses 
held in 1847,220  the second of which resolved on the elaboration 
and publication of the fundamental principles of the Party in a 
manifesto to be drawn up by Marx and Engels. Thus appeared 
Manifesto of the Communist Party, which first saw the light of day in 
1848,  shortly before the February Revolution, and has since been 
translated into almost all European languages. 
The Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, in which Marx participated and 
which mercilessly exposed the blessings of the police regime of the 
fatherland, caused the Prussian government to try to effect Marx's 
expulsion once more, but in vain. When, however, the February 
Revolution resulted in popular movements also in Brussels, and a 
radical change appeared to be imminent in Belgium, the Belgian 
government arrested Marx without ceremony and deported him. 
In the meantime, the French Provisional Government had sent 
him through Flocon an invitation to return to Paris, and he 
accepted this call. 
In Paris he came out especially against the swindle, widespread 
among the Germans there, of wanting to form the German 
workers in France into armed legions in order to carry the 
revolution and the republic into Germany. On the one hand, 
Germany had to make her revolution  herself,  and, on the other 
hand, every revolutionary foreign legion formed in France was 
betrayed in advance by the Lamartines of the Provisional 
Government to the government which was to be overthrown, as 
occurred in Belgium and Baden. 
After the March Revolution, Marx went to Cologne where he 
founded the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, which was in existence from 
June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849—the only paper which represented 
the standpoint of the proletariat within the democratic movement 
of the time, as shown e.g. in its unreserved support for the Paris 

=====第218页=====
188 Frederick Engels 
June insurgents of 1848,221  which cost the paper the defection of 
almost all its shareholders. In vain the Kreuz-Zeitung* pointed to 
the "Chimborazo b insolence" with which the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung attacked everything sacred, from the King and Imperial 
Regent 0 down to the gendarme, and that, too, in a Prussian 
fortress with a garrison of  8,000  at that time; in vain was the rage 
of the Rhenish liberal philistines, who had suddenly become 
reactionary; in vain was the paper suspended for a lengthy period 
by martial law in Cologne in the autumn of 1848; in vain the 
Imperial Ministry of Justice in Frankfurt denounced article after 
article to the Cologne Public Prosecutor in order that judicial 
proceedings should be taken; under the very eyes of the police the 
paper calmly went on being edited and printed, and its 
distribution and reputation increased with the vehemence of its 
attacks on the government and the bourgeoisie. When the 
Prussian coup d'état took place in November 1848, 222 the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung called at the head of each issue upon the people 
to refuse to pay taxes and to meet force with force. In the spring 
of 1849, both on this account and because of another article, 0 it 
was made to face a jury, but on both occasions was acquitted. 
Finally, when the May revolts of 1848 in Dresden and the Rhine 
Province had been suppressed, and the Prussian campaign against 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising had been inaugurated by the 
concentration and mobilisation of considerable masses of troops,223 
the government believed itself strong enough to suppress the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung by force. The last number—printed in red— 
appeared on May 19. 
Marx again went to Paris, but only a few weeks after the 
demonstration of June 13, 1849, he was faced by the French 
government with the choice of either moving his residence to 
Brittany or leaving France. He preferred the latter and moved to 
London, where he has lived uninterruptedly ever since. 
An attempt to continue to issue the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in 
the form of a review (in Hamburg in 1850) e had to be given up 
after a while in view of the ever-increasing onslaughts of the 
reaction. Immediately after the coup d'état in France in December 
1851,  Marx published The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte 
a Neue Preußische Zeitung. — Ed. 
b A peak in the Andes. — Ed. 
c Frederick William IV and Archduke John of Austria.— Ed. 
d "Arrests", Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 35, July 5, 1848.— Ed. 
e Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. — Ed. 

=====第219页=====
Karl Marx 189 
(New York, 1852; second edition, Hamburg, 1869, shortly before 
the war). In 1853 he wrote Revelations Concerning the Communist 
Trial in Cologne (first printed in Basle, later in Boston and again 
recently in Leipzig). 
After the condemnation of the members of the Communist 
League in Cologne, Marx withdrew from political agitation and 
for ten years devoted  himself,  on the one hand, to the study of the 
rich treasures offered by the library of the British Museum in the 
sphere of political economy, and, on the other hand, to writing for 
the New-York Tribune, which up to the outbreak of the American 
Civil War published not only contributions signed by him but also 
numerous leading articles on conditions in Europe and Asia from 
his pen. His attacks on Lord Palmerston, based on an exhaustive 
study of British official documents, were reprinted in London in 
pamphlet form.3 
As the first fruit of his many years studying economics, there 
appeared in 1859 A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, 
Part One (Berlin, Duncker). This work contains the first coherent 
exposition of the Marxian theory of value, including the doctrine 
of money. During the Italian War224  Marx, in the German 
newspaper Das Volk, appearing in London, attacked Bonapartism, 
which at that time posed as liberal and played the part of liberator 
of the oppressed nationalities, and also the Prussian policy of the 
day, which under the cover of neutrality was seeking to fish in 
troubled waters. In this connection it was necessary to attack also 
Herr Karl Vogt, who at that time, on the commission of Prince 
Napoleon (Plon-Plon) and in the pay of Louis Napoleon, was 
carrying on agitation for the neutrality, and indeed the sympathy, 
of Germany. When Vogt heaped upon him the most abominable 
and deliberately false calumnies, Marx answered with Herr Vogt 
(London, I860), in which Vogt and the other gentlemen of the 
imperial sham-democratic gang were exposed, and Vogt himself 
on the basis of both external and internal evidence was convicted 
of receiving bribes from the December Empire . b The confirmation 
came just ten years later: in the list of the Bonaparte hirelings, 
found in the Tuileries in 1870 and published by the September 
government, there was the following entry under the letter V: 
"Vogt —in August 1859 there were remitted to him—Frs. 
40,000." 225 
a See present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 341-406.— Ed. 
b The empire of Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第220页=====
190 Frederick Engels 
At last, in 1867, there appeared in Hamburg: Capital. A Critique 
of Political Economy, Volume I, Marx's chief work, which expounds 
the foundations of his economic and socialist conceptions and the 
main features of his criticism of existing society, the capitalist 
mode of production and its consequences. The second edition of 
this epoch-making work appeared in 1872; the author is engaged 
in the elaboration of the second volume. 
Meanwhile the workers' movement in various countries of 
Europe had regained strength to the extent that Marx could 
entertain the idea of realising a long-cherished wish: the founda­
tion of a Workers' Association embracing the most advanced 
countries of Europe and America, which would demonstrate 
bodily, so to speak, the international character of the socialist 
movement both to the workers themselves and to the bourgeois 
and the governments—for the encouragement and strengthening 
of the proletariat, for striking fear into the hearts of its enemies. A 
public meeting in favour of Poland, which had just then again 
been crushed by Russia, held on September 28, 1864, in St. 
Martin's Hall, London, provided the occasion for bringing forward 
the matter, which was enthusiastically taken up. The International 
Working Men's Association was founded; a Provisional General 
Council, with its seat in London, was elected at the meeting, and 
Marx was the soul of this as of all subsequent General Councils up 
to the Hague Congress. He drafted almost every one of the 
documents issued by the General Council of the Internation­
al, from the Inaugural Address, 1864, to the Address on the 
Civil War in France, 1871. To describe Marx's activity 
in the International is to write the history of this Association it­
self, which in any case lives on in the memory of European 
workers. 
The fall of the Paris Commune put the International in an 
impossible position. It was thrust into the forefront of European 
history at a moment when it had everywhere been deprived of all 
possibility of successful practical action. The events which raised it 
to the position of the seventh Great Power simultaneously forbade 
it to mobilise its fighting forces and employ them in action, on 
pain of inevitable defeat and the setting back of the workers' 
movement for decades. In addition, from various sides elements 
were pushing themselves forward that sought to exploit the 
suddenly enhanced fame of the Association for the purpose of 
gratifying personal vanity or personal ambition, without under­
standing the real position of the International or without regard 
for it. A heroic decision had to be taken, and it was again Marx 

=====第221页=====
Karl Marx 191 
who took it and who carried it through at the Hague Congress. In 
a solemn resolution, the International disclaimed all responsibility 
for the doings of the Bakuninists, who formed the centre of those 
unreasonable and unsavoury elements. Then, in view of the 
impossibility of also meeting, in the face of the general reaction, 
the increased demands which were being imposed upon it, and 
of maintaining its complete efficacy other than by a series of 
sacrifices which would have drained the workers' movement of its 
life-blood—in view of this situation, the International withdrew 
from the stage for the time being by transferring the General 
Council to America.3 The results proved the correctness of this 
decision—which was at the time, and has been since, so often 
censured. On the one hand, it put a stop then and since to all 
attempts to make useless putsches in the name of the International, 
while, on the other hand, the continuing close intercourse between 
the socialist workers' parties of the various countries proved that 
the consciousness of the identity of interests and of the solidarity 
of the proletariat of all countries evoked by the International is 
able to assert itself even without the bond of a formal international 
association, which for the moment has become a fetter. 
After the Hague Congress, Marx at last found peace and leisure 
again for resuming his theoretical work, and it is to be hoped he 
will be able before long to have the second volume of Capital 
ready for the press. 
Of the many important discoveries through which Marx has 
inscribed his name in the annals of science, we can here dwell on 
only two. 
The first is the revolution brought about by him in the whole 
conception of world history. The entire view of history hitherto 
was based on the conception that the ultimate causes of all 
historical changes are to be sought in the changing ideas of human 
beings, and that of all historical changes political changes are the 
most important and dominate the whole of history. But the 
question was not asked as to whence the ideas come into men's 
minds and what the driving causes of the political changes are. 
Only upon the newer school of French, and partly also of English, 
historians had the conviction forced itself that, since the Middle 
Ages at least, the driving force in European history had been 
the struggle of the developing bourgeoisie with the feudal 
aristocracy for social and political domination. Now Marx has 
proved that the whole of history hitherto is a history of class 
a See present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 250-52.— Ed. 

=====第222页=====
192 Frederick Engels 
struggles, that in all the manifold and complicated political 
struggles the only thing at issue has been the social and political 
rule of classes of society, the maintenance of domination by older 
classes and the conquest of domination by newly arising classes. To 
what, however, do these classes owe their origin and their 
continued existence? They owe it to the particular material, 
physically sensible conditions in which society in a given period 
produces and exchanges its means of subsistence. The feudal rule 
of the Middle Ages rested on the self-sufficient economy of small 
peasant communities, which themselves produced almost all their 
requirements, in which there was almost no exchange and which 
received from the arms-bearing nobility protection from without 
and national or at least political cohesion. When the towns arose 
and with them separate handicraft industry and trade, at first 
internal and later international, the urban bourgeoisie de­
veloped, and already during the Middle Ages achieved, in struggle 
with the nobility, its inclusion in the feudal order as a likewise 
privileged estate. But with the discovery of the extra-European 
lands,  from the middle of the fifteenth century onwards, this 
bourgeoisie acquired a far more extensive sphere of trade and 
therewith a new spur for its industry; in the most important 
branches handicrafts were supplanted by manufacture, now on a 
factory scale, and this again was supplanted by large-scale 
industry, which became possible owing to the discoveries of the 
previous century, especially that of the steam engine. Large-scale 
industry, in its turn, had an effect on trade, driving out the old 
manual labour in backward countries and creating the present-day 
new means of communication: steam engines, railways, electric 
telegraphy, in the more developed ones. Thus the bourgeoisie 
came more and more to combine social wealth and social power in 
its hands, while it still for a long period remained excluded 
from political power which was in the hands of the nobility and 
the monarchy supported by the nobility. But at a certain stage—in 
France since the Great Revolution — it also conquered political 
power, and now in turn became the ruling class over the 
proletariat and small peasants. From this point of view all the 
historical phenomena are explicable in the simplest possible 
way—with sufficient knowledge of the particular economic condi­
tion of society, which it is true is totally lacking in our professional 
historians—and in the same way the conceptions and ideas of each 
historical period are most simply to be explained from the 
economic conditions of life and from the social and political 
relations of the period, which are in turn determined by these 

=====第223页=====
Karl Marx 193 
economic conditions. History was for the first time placed on its 
real basis; the palpable but previously totally overlooked fact that 
men must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, 
therefore must work, before they can fight for domination, pursue 
politics, religion, philosophy, etc.—this palpable fact at last came 
into its historical right. 
This new conception of history, however, was of supreme 
significance for the socialist outlook. It showed that all history 
hitherto revolved around class antagonisms and class struggles, 
that there have always existed ruling and ruled, exploiting and 
exploited classes, and that the great majority of mankind has 
always been condemned to arduous labour and little enjoyment. 
Why is this? Simply because in all earlier stages of development of 
mankind production was so little developed that historical 
development could proceed only in this antagonistic form, that 
historical progress on the whole was assigned to the activity of a 
small privileged minority, while the great mass remained con­
demned to producing by their labour their own meagre means of 
subsistence and also the increasingly rich means of the privileged. 
But the same investigation of history, which in this way provides a 
natural and reasonable explanation of class rule hitherto, other­
wise only explicable from the wickedness of man, also leads to the 
realisation that, in consequence of the so tremendously increased 
productive forces of the present time, even the last pretext has 
vanished, at least in the most advanced countries, for a division of 
mankind into rulers and ruled, exploiters and exploited; that the 
ruling big bourgeoisie has fulfilled its historic mission, that it is no 
longer capable of the leadership of society and has even become a 
hindrance to the development of production, as the trade crises, 
and especially the last great crash, 26 and the depressed condition 
of industry in all countries have proved; that historical leadership 
has passed to the proletariat, a class which, owing to its whole 
position in society, can only free itself by abolishing altogether all 
class rule, all servitude and all exploitation; and that the 
productive forces of society, which have outgrown the control of 
the bourgeoisie, are only waiting for the associated proletariat to 
take possession of them in order to bring about a state of things in 
which every member of society will be enabled to participate not 
only in production but also in the distribution and administration 
of social wealth, and which so increases the productive forces of 
society and their yield by planned operation of the whole of 
production that the satisfaction of all reasonable needs will be 
assured to everyone in an ever-increasing measure. 
15-1317 

=====第224页=====
194 Frederick Engels 
The second important discovery of Marx is the final elucidation 
of the relation between capital and labour, in other words, the 
demonstration how, within present society and under the existing 
capitalist mode of production, the exploitation of the worker by 
the capitalist takes place. Ever since political economy had put 
forward the proposition that labour is the source of all wealth and 
of all value, the question became inevitable: How is this then to be 
reconciled with the fact that the wage labourer does not receive 
the whole sum of value created by his labour but has to surrender 
a part of it to the capitalist? Both the bourgeois economists and 
the socialists exerted themselves to give a scientifically valid answer 
to this question, but in vain, until at last Marx came forward with 
the solution. This solution is as follows: The present-day capitalist 
mode of production presupposes the existence of two social 
classes—on the one hand, that of the capitalists, who are in 
possession of the means of production and subsistence, and, on 
the other hand, that of the proletarians, who, being excluded from 
this possession, have only a single commodity for sale, their labour 
power, and who therefore have to sell this labour power of theirs 
in order to obtain possession of means of subsistence. The value of 
a commodity is, however, determined by the socially necessary 
quantity of labour embodied in its production, and, therefore, also 
in its reproduction; the value of the labour power of an average 
human being during a day, month or year is determined, 
therefore, by the quantity of labour embodied in the quantity of 
means of subsistence necessary for the maintenance of this labour 
power during a day, month or year. Let us assume that the means 
of subsistence of a worker for one day require six hours of labour 
for their production, or, what is the same thing, that the labour 
contained in them represents a quantity of labour of six hours; 
then the value of labour power for one day will be expressed in a 
sum of money which also embodies six hours of labour. Let us also 
assume that the capitalist who employs our worker pays him this 
sum in return, that is the full value of his labour power. If now 
the worker works six hours of the day for the capitalist, he has 
completely replaced the latter's outlay—six hours' labour for six 
hours'  labour. But then there would be nothing in it for the 
capitalist, and the latter therefore looks at the matter quite 
differently. He says: I have bought the labour power of this 
worker not for six hours but for a whole day, and accordingly he 
makes the worker work 8, 10, 12, 14 or more hours according to 
circumstances, so that the product of the seventh, eighth and 
following hours is a product of unpaid labour and finds its way, to 

=====第225页=====
Karl Marx 195 
begin with, into the pocket of the capitalist. Thus the worker in 
the service of the capitalist not only reproduces the value of his 
labour power, for which he receives pay, but over and above that 
he also produces a surplus value which, appropriated in the first 
place by the capitalist, is subsequently divided according to definite 
economic laws among the whole capitalist class and forms the basic 
stock from which arise ground rent, profit, accumulation of 
capital, in short, all the wealth consumed or accumulated by the 
non-labouring classes. But this proved that the acquisition of 
riches by the present-day capitalists consists just as much in the 
appropriation of the unpaid labour of others as that of the 
slaveowner or the feudal lord exploiting serf labour, and that all 
these forms of exploitation are only to be distinguished by the 
difference in manner and method by which the unpaid labour is 
appropriated. This, however, also removed the last justification for 
all the hypocritical phrases of the possessing classes to the effect 
that in the present social order right and justice, equality of rights 
and duties and a universal harmony of interests prevail, and 
present-day bourgeois society, no less than its predecessors, was 
exposed as a grandiose institution for the exploitation of the huge 
majority of the people by a small, ever-diminishing minority. 
Modern, scientific socialism is based on these two important 
facts.  In the second volume of Capital, these and other hardly less 
important scientific discoveries concerning the capitalist system of 
society will be further developed, and thereby those aspects of 
political economy not touched upon in the first volume will also 
undergo révolutionisation. May it be vouchsafed to Marx to be 
able soon to have it ready for the press. 
Written in mid-June 1877 Printed according to the text of the 
first publication First published in the Volks-Kalender, 
Brunswick, 1878 
15* 

=====第226页=====
196 
Karl Marx 
[LETTER TO OTECHESTVENNIYE ZAPISKI] 
Dear Sir,a 
The authorb  of the article "Karl Marx Before the Tribunal of 
Mr. Zhukovsky" is obviously an intelligent man and, had he found 
a single passage in my account of "primitive accumulation" to 
support his conclusions, he would have quoted it. For want of such 
a passage he considers it necessary to seize hold of an annexe, a 
polemical sortie against a Russian "belletrist" c printed in the 
appendix to the first German edition of Capital What do I there 
reproach this writer for? The fact that he discovered "Russian" 
communism not in Russia but in the book by Haxthausen,d  the 
adviser to the Prussian Government, and that in his hands the 
Russian community serves only as an argument to prove that the 
old, rotten Europe must be regenerated by the victory of 
Pan-Slavism. My appreciation of this writer may be correct, it may 
be wrong, but in neither case could it provide the key to my views 
on the efforts "pyccKHxt Aio^eft HaÜTH AAJI CBoero OTe^ecTBa nyTb 
pa3BHTiH, OTAHHHblH OTT» TOrO, KOTOpblMT» IIIAa H H^CTb 3ana4Ha» 
Eßpona etc."e 
In the Afterword to the second German edition of Capital— 
which the author of the article about Mr. Zhukovsky knows, 
a M. Ye. Saltykov-Shchedrin.— Ed. 
b N. K. Mikhailovsky.— Ed 
c A. I. Herzen. — Ed 
d A. Haxthausen, Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und insbesondere 
die ländlichen Einrichtungen Rußlands. — Ed 
e "of Russians to find a path of development for their country which will be 
different from that which Western Europe pursued and still pursues  etc."—Ed. 

=====第227页=====
1 
f* "^ "^ ~* • » ,i • - njT I»—f** 
- — **-*- -*a T3SC ^  * 
^^JI^K^-V^-*.  v-*.•*•» 
*-**  *»» ***** 
*^* «.^v-*«"-,—» ^"5 V " ,,  .VAS»,  • 
*wM  «MJV^J-A v •'.  fc<* ^-i«^î3*-^<  V-*J 
The first page  of Marx's "Letter  to Otechestvenniye Zapiski" 

=====第228页=====

=====第229页=====
Letter to Otechestvenniye Zapiski 199 
because he quotes it—I speak of "a great Russian scholar and 
critic" 3 with the high esteem which he deserves. In his 
noteworthy articlesb the latter dealt with the question whether 
Russia should start, as its liberal economists wish, by destroying the 
rural community in order to pass to a capitalist system or whether, 
on the contrary, it can acquire all the fruits of this system without 
suffering its torments, by developing its own historical conditions. 
He comes out in favour of the second solution. And my 
honourable critic would have been at least as justified in inferring 
from my esteem for this "great Russian scholar and critic" that I 
shared his views on this question as he is in concluding from my 
polemic against the "belletrist" and Pan-Slavist that I rejected 
them. 
Be that as it may, as I do not like to leave anything to 
"guesswork", I shall speak straight out. In order to reach an 
informed judgment of the economic development of contempor­
ary Russia, I learned Russian and then spent several long years 
studying official publications and others with a bearing on this 
subject. I have arrived at this result: if Russia continues along the 
path it has followed since 1861, it will miss the finest chance that 
history has ever offered to a nation, only to undergo all the fatal 
vicissitudes of the capitalist system.0 
il 
The chapter on primitive accumulation does not pretend to do 
more than trace the road by which in Western Europe the 
capitalist economic order emerged from the entrails of the feudal 
economic order. It thus describes the historical movement which 
by divorcing the producers from their means of production 
transforms them into wage-workers (proletarians in the modern 
sense of the word) and the owners of the means of production into 
capitalists. In this history, "every revolution which acts as a lever for 
the advancement of the capitalist class in its process of formation 
marks an epoch; above all that which, by stripping great masses of 
men of their traditional means of production and subsistence, 
suddenly hurls them on the labour market. But the basis of this 
whole development. is the expropriation of the agricultural 
a N. G. Chernyshevsky.— Ed. 
b H. HepHbimeBCKift, TIucbMa  6e3t>  adpeca, LJiopHX-b, 1874.— Ed. 
c This paragraph is crossed out in Marx's manuscript.— Ed. 

=====第230页=====
200 Karl Marx 
producer. To date this has not been accomplished in a radical 
fashion anywhere except in England ... but all the other countries of 
Western Europe are undergoing the same process etc." (Capital, 
French edition, p. 315). At the end of the chapter the historical 
tendency of capitalist production is summed up thus: That it "itself 
begets its own negation with the inexorability which governs the 
metamorphoses of nature"; that it has itself created the elements of a 
new economic order, by giving the greatest impulse at once to the 
productive forces of social labour and to the integral development of 
every individual producer; that capitalist property, which actually 
rests already on a collective mode of production, can only be 
transformed into social property. 
I do not give any proof at this point for the very good reason 
that this assertion itself is nothing but a summary recapitulation of 
long developments previously set out in the chapters on capitalist 
production. 
Now, in what way was my critic3 able to apply this historical 
sketch to Russia? Only this: if Russia is tending to become a 
capitalist nation, on the model of the countries of Western 
Europe,—and in recent years it has gone to great pains to move in 
this direction—it will not succeed without having first transformed 
a large proportion of its peasants into proletarians; and after that, 
once it has been placed in the bosom of the capitalist system, it will 
be subjected to its pitiless laws, like other profane peoples. That is 
all! But this is too little for my critic. It is absolutely necessary for 
him to metamorphose my historical sketch of the genesis of 
capitalism in Western Europe into a historico-philosophical theory 
of general development, imposed by fate on all peoples, whatever 
the historical circumstances in which they are placed, in order to 
eventually attain this economic formation which, with a tremen­
dous leap of the productive forces of social labour, assures the most 
integral development of every individual producer. But I beg his 
pardon. This does me too much honour, and yet puts me to 
shame at the same time. Let us take an example. In various places 
in Capital I allude to the destiny of the plebeians of Ancient 
Rome. They were originally free peasants cultivating their own 
plots of land on their own account. In the course of Roman 
history they were expropriated. The same movement which cut 
them off from their means of production and subsistence involved 
not only the formation of large landed property but also the 
formation of large money capital. Thus, one fine morning, there 
a N. K. Mikhailovsky.— Ed 

=====第231页=====
Letter to Otechestvenniye Zapiski 201 
were on the one hand free men stripped of everything except 
their labour power, and on the other, in order to exploit this 
labour, the owners of all the acquired wealth. What happened? 
The Roman proletarians became not wage labourers but an idle 
"MOB", more abject than the former "POOR WHITES"228 of the 
southern states of America; and alongside them there developed a 
mode of production that was not capitalist but based on slavery. 
Thus events strikingly analogous, but occurring in different 
historical milieux, led to quite disparate results. By studying each 
of these evolutions on its own, and then comparing them, one will 
easily discover the key to the phenomenon, but it will never be 
arrived at by employing the all-purpose formula of a general 
historico-philosophical theory whose supreme virtue consists in 
being supra-historical. 
Written presumably in November 1877 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in Vestnik Narodnoi Voli, 
No. 5, Geneva, 1886 
Translated from the French 

=====第232页=====
202 
Karl Marx 
[TO AN EDITORIAL BOARD IN LONDON] 
[London,] December 19, 1877 
41 Maitland Park Road, N. W. 
Gentlemen, 
Herewith a letter sent me from Breslau 3 for forwarding to you. 
The sender, Horovitz, though not known to me, has written saying 
he is a member of the Breslau section of the Social-Democratic 
Party. 
With kind regards, 
Karl Marx 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, script 
Moscow, 1964 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Polish name: Wroclaw.— Ed. 

=====第233页=====
•MM.  (Attw.y»tob)  Mimo,  22 6w»i* 1878.  (Att«.P«tab)  »—.  ». 
LA PLEBE ÎS 
it.» kJSSâRt» ' «WWA S6GMUMB& EBDOMADARIA - : :" '" '"'-"t^n 
Frederick Engels 
[ON THE SOCIALIST MOVEMENT IN GERMANY, FRANCE, 
THE UNITED STATES AND RUSSIA]229 
The socialist movement in Germany is making admirable 
progress. There are currently 62 socialist periodicals, of which 46 
are daily newspapers, 1 is a magazine and 15 are organs of societies 
of resistance. Moreover, 4 German-language newspapers and 1 
magazine are published in Switzerland, 3 in Austria, 1 in 
Hungary, 6 in America. The total number of socialist periodical 
publications in German is: 
Germany 62 
Austria 3 
Hungary 1 > 75 
Switzerland 3 
America 6 
and therefore the periodical literature of German socialism has 
more organs than all the other languages put together. I am not 
including in these figures the more or less socialist newspapers of 
the university professors (Kathedersocialisten)231 but only the recog­
nised organs of the party. 
When a bourgeois wrote to me after the attempt on Bismarck's 
life 232: "All (bourgeois) Germany is rejoicing that Bismarck was 
not killed", I replied: "We are pleased too, because he works for 
us as if he were paid for the job." You know I was right, because 
without the persecutions and the sufferings, without the militarism 
and the ever-increasing taxes, we would never have reached this 
point. 
Although the crisis in France has obtained a less than 
satisfactory result, I believe that a state of affairs will follow from 

=====第234页=====
204 Frederick Engels 
it which will allow the French socialists to act by means of the 
press,  public meetings and associations, and to organise into a 
working-class party, which is all that we can achieve at present, after 
the slaughter of 1871. Moreover, it is an accepted fact that France 
has made two main kinds of progress: the republicanism of the 
peasants and the formation of a republican army. The coup d'état 
of Ducrot, Batbie and company failed because the soldiers 
resolutely refused to march against the people. 233 
The worker question has been put on the agenda in America 
with the bloody strike of the employees of the big railways.234 This 
will turn out to have been an epoch-making event in American 
history: the formation of a working-class party is thereby making 
great strides in the United States. It is advancing rapidly in that 
country, and we must follow its progress, to avoid being taken by 
surprise by the important successes which will soon be produced. 
Russia, I believe, will play the most important part in the near 
future. The situation produced by the so-called emancipation of 
the serfs3 was already intolerable before the war. This great 
reform had been so well managed that it ended up ruining nobles 
and peasants. It was followed by another reform which, on the 
pretext of providing provinces and districts with an administration 
based on elections that were to be more or less independent from the 
Central Government, had done nothing except raise the already 
unbearable levels of taxation. 
The provinces were simply lumbered with the expenses of their 
own administration, so that the state paid less while continuing to 
receive the same tax revenues; hence there were new taxes for 
provincial and local expenditure. To this was added the general 
compulsion of military service, which was equivalent to a new and 
more severe tax and a new and more numerous army. 
In this way financial ruin drew near with great strides. The 
country was already in a state of bankruptcy before the war. 
Russian high finance, after taking a lavish part in the fraudulent 
speculations of the 1871-73 period, plunged the nation into the 
financial crisis which erupted in 1873 in Vienna and Berlin and 
ruined Russian industry and commerce for years. In this state of 
affairs the Holy War against the Turk began,236 and since no 
foreign loans were obtainable and domestic loans were insufficient, 
the nation had to resort to the millions held in Bank (reserve 
funds) and to the printing of credit notes. The result is that the 
value of paper money is falling daily and will soon reach its 
a See this volume, p. 8.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
Socialist Movement in Germany, France, U.S. and Russia 205 
minimum levels, in no more than a year or two. In short, we have 
all the ingredients for a Russian 1789, necessarily to be followed 
by a  1793. 237 Whatever the outcome of the war, the Russian 
revolution is ready and it will break out soon, perhaps this year; it 
will begin, contrary to Bakunin's predictions, from above, in the 
palace, in the heart of the impoverished and frondeuse nobility. 
But once set in motion, it will sweep over the peasants, and you 
will then witness scenes in comparison with which those of '93 will 
pall. Once Russia has been pushed into revolution, the whole face 
of Europe will change. The old Russia has been up till now the 
great reserve army of European reaction; it performed this role in 
1798,  in 1805, in 1815, in 1830, in 1848. Once this reserve army is 
destroyed—just wait and see what will happen! 
Written on January 12, 1878 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in La Plebe, No. 3, 
January 22, 1878 Translated from the Italian 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第236页=====

=====第237页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE WORKINGMEN OF EUROPE IN 1877 

=====第238页=====
Written between March 3 and 31, 1878 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labor Standard 
(New York), March 3, 10, 17, 24 and 31, 
1878 

=====第239页=====
THE LABOR STANDARD. 
Bm*a« to <fca I^Mks *M » toiMiil «t «w  WHM—  »»•»!•• 
The past year has been an eventful and a fruitful one for the 
Working Class of Europe. Great progress has been made in almost 
all countries with regard to the organization and extension of a 
Workingmen's Party; unity, threatened at one time by a small but 
active sect,a239 has been virtually restored; the working-class 
movement has forced itself more and more into the foreground of 
every-day politics, and, a sure sign of approaching triumph, 
political events, no matter what turn they took, always turned out, 
in some way or other, favorable to the progress of that movement. 
At its very outset, the year 1877 was inaugurated by one of the 
greatest victories ever gained by workingmen. On the 10th of 
January, the triennial elections, by universal suffrage, for the 
German Parliament (Reichstag) took place; elections which, ever 
since 1867, have given the German Workingmen's Party an 
opportunity of counting their strength and parading before the 
world their well organized and ever increasing battalions. In 1874, 
four hundred thousand votes fell to the candidates of labor; in 
1877, more than six hundred thousand. Ten workingmen 
candidates15 were elected on the 10th, while twenty-four more had 
to be ballotted for in the supplementary elections which took place 
a fortnight after. Of these twenty-four, only a few were actually 
returned,0 all other parties uniting against them. But the 
important fact remained, that in all the large towns and industrial 
centres of the Empire the working-class movement had advanced 
a See this volume, p. 213.— Ed. 
b I. Auer, W. Bios, W. Bracke, A. Demmler, F. W. Fritzsche, W. Hasenclever, 
W. Liebknecht, J. Most, J. Motteier (Hasenclever received two mandates).— Ed. 
c A. Bebel, A. Kapell, M. Rittinghausen.— Ed. 
16-1317 

=====第240页=====
210 Frederick Engels 
with giant strides, and that all these electoral districts were certain 
to fall into their hands at the next ballotting in 1880. Berlin, 
Dresden, the whole of the Saxon manufacturing districts, and 
Solingen had been conquered; in Hamburg, Breslau, Nuremberg, 
Leipzig, Brunswick, in Schleswig-Holstein and the manufacturing 
districts of Westfalia and the Lower Rhine, a coalition of all the 
parties had scarcely sufficed to defeat the working-class candidates 
by bare majorities. German democratic socialism was a power, and 
a rapidly growing one, with which henceforth all other powers in 
the country, governing or otherwise, would have to reckon. The 
effect of these elections was enormous. The middle class were 
seized with a perfect panic, all the more so as their press had 
constantly represented social democracy as dwindling down into 
insignificance. The working class, elated at their own victory, 
continued the struggle with renewed vigor and upon every 
available battlefield; while the workingmen of other countries, as 
we shall see, not only celebrated the victory of the Germans as a 
triumph of their own, but were stimulated by it to fresh exertions 
in order not to be left behind in the race for the emancipation of 
labor. 
The rapid progress of the Workingmen's Party in Germany is 
not bought without considerable sacrifices on the part of those 
who take a more active part in it. Government prosecutions and 
sentences of fine, and oftener of imprisonment, hail down upon 
them, and they have long since had to make up their minds to 
passing the greater part of their lives in prison. Although most of 
these sentences are for short terms, a couple of weeks to three 
months, long terms are by no means of rare infliction. Thus, in 
order to protect the important mining and manufacturing district 
of Saarbrücken from the infection by social democratic poison, two 
agitators 3 have recently been sentenced to two years and a half 
each, for having ventured upon this forbidden ground. The elastic 
laws of the Empire offer plenty of pretexts for such measures, and 
where they are not sufficient, the judges are mostly quite willing 
to stretch them to the point required for a conviction. 
A great advantage to the German movement is that the Trades' 
organization works hand in hand with the political organization. 
The immediate advantages offered by the Trades' organization 
draw many an otherwise indifferent man into the political 
movement, while the community of political action holds together, 
a H. Kaulitz and R. Hackenberger.— Ed. 

=====第241页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 211 
and assures mutual support to, the otherwise isolated Trades 
Unions. 
The success obtained in the elections to the German Parliament 
has encouraged our German friends to try their chance on other 
electoral fields. Thus, in two of the State Parliaments, in the 
smaller States of the Empire, they have succeeded in electing 
workingmen, and have also penetrated into a good many Town 
Councils; in the Saxon manufacturing districts, many a town is 
governed by a social democratic Council. The suffrage being 
restricted in these elections, no great result can be hoped for; still, 
every seat carried, helps to prove to the governments and the 
middle class that henceforth they will have to reckon with the 
workingmen. 
But the best proof of the rapid advance of conscious working-
class organization is in the growing number of its periodical 
organs in the press. And here we have to overstep the boundaries 
of Bismarck's "Empire", for the influence and action of German 
social democracy is in no ways limited by these. There were 
publishing in the German language on the 31st of December 1877, 
in all, not less than seventy-five periodicals in the service of the 
Workingmen's Party. Of these in the German Empire 62 (amongst 
which 15 organs of as many Trades Unions), in Switzerland 3, in 
Austria 3, Hungary 1, America 6; 75 in all, more than the number 
of workingmen's organs in all other languages put together. 
After the battle of Sedan,240 in September 1870, the Executive 
Committee of the German Workingmen's Party told their con­
stituents that by the results of the war the centre of gravity of the 
European working-class movement had been shifted from France 
to Germany, and that the German workmen had thus become 
invested with a higher trust and with new responsibilities which 
required on their part renewed exertions.3 The year 1877 has 
proved the truth of this, and has proved, at the same time, the 
proletariat of Germany to have been in no wise inferior to the task 
of temporary leadership imposed upon it. Whatever mistakes some 
of the leaders may have made—and they are both numerous and 
manifold—the masses themselves have marched onwards resolute­
ly, unhesitatingly and in the right direction. Their conduct, 
organization and discipline, form a marked contrast to the 
weakness, irresolution, servility and cowardice so characteristic of 
a "Manifest des Ausschusses der sozial-demokratischen Arbeiterpartei. An alle 
deutschen Arbeiter" [September 5, 1870], Der Volksstaat, No. 73, September 11, 
1870.—  Ed. 
16* 

=====第242页=====
212 Frederick Engels 
all middle-class movements in Germany. But while the German 
middle class has closed its career by sinking down into a more 
than Byzantine adulation of "William the Victorious"3 and by 
surrendering  itself,  bound hand and foot to the wayward will of 
the one Bismarck,241 the working class is marching from victory to 
victory, helped onwards and strengthened even by the very 
measures which government and middle class contrive in order to 
suppress it. 
a William I.— Ed. 

=====第243页=====
213 
il 
Great as was the effect of the German elections in the country 
itself,  it was far greater abroad. And in the first instance, it 
restored that harmony to the European working-class movement 
which had been disturbed, for the last six years, by the pretensions 
of a small but extremely busy sect. 
Those of our readers who have followed the history of the 
International Workingmen's Association, will recollect that, im­
mediately after the fall of the Paris Commune, there arose 
dissensions in the midst of the great labor organization, which led 
to an open split, at the Hague Congress 1872, and to consequent 
disintegration.242 These dissensions were caused by a Russian, 
Bakounine, and his followers, pretending to supremacy, by fair 
means or by foul, over a body of which they formed but a small 
minority. Their chief nostrum was an objection, on principle, to 
all political action on the part of the working class; so much so, 
that in their eyes, to vote at an election, was to commit an act of 
treason against the interests of the proletariat. Nothing, but 
downright, violent revolution would they admit as means of action. 
From Switzerland, where these "anarchists", as they called 
themselves, had first taken root, they spread to Italy and Spain, 
where, for a time, they actually dominated the working-class 
movement. They were more or less supported, within the 
"International", by the Belgians, who, though from different 
motives, also declared in favor of political abstention. After the 
split they kept up a show of organization and held congresses,243 in 
which a couple of dozen men, always the same, pretending to 
represent the working class of all Europe, proclaimed their 
dogmas in its name. But already the German elections of 1874, 

=====第244页=====
214 Frederick Engels 
and the great advantage which the German movement experi­
enced from the presence of nine3 of its most active members in 
Parliament, had thrown elements of doubt in the midst of the 
"anarchists". Political events had repressed the movement in 
Spain,b which disappeared without leaving scarcely a trace; in 
Switzerland the party in favor of political action, which worked 
hand in hand with the Germans, became stronger every day and 
soon outnumbered the few anarchists at the rate of 300 to 1; in 
Italy, after a childish attempt at "social revolution" (Bologna, 
1874) 244 at which neither the sense nor the pluck of the 
"anarchists" showed to advantage, the real working-class element 
began to look out for more rational means of action. In Belgium, 
the movement, thanks to the abstentionist policy of the leaders, 
which left the working class without any field for real action, had 
come to a dead stand. In fact, while the political action of the 
Germans led them from success to success, the working class of 
those countries, where abstention was the order of the day, 
suffered defeat after defeat, and got tired of a movement barren 
of results; their organizations dropped into oblivion, their press 
organs disappeared one after the other. The more sensible portion 
of these workmen could not but be struck by this contrast; 
rebellion against the "anarchist" and abstentionist doctrine broke 
out in Italy as well as in Belgium, and people began to ask 
themselves and each other, why for the sake of a stupid 
dogmatism they should be deprived of applying the very means of 
action which had proved itself the most efficacious of all. This was 
the state of things when the grand electoral victory of the 
Germans settled all doubts, overcame all hesitation. No resistance 
was possible against such a stubborn fact. Italy and Belgium 
declared for political action; the remnants of the Italian absten-
tionists, driven to despair, attempted another insurrection near 
Naples; some thirty anarchists proclaimed the "social revolution", 
but were speedily taken care of by the police.245 All they attained 
was the complete breakdown of their own sectarian movement in 
Italy. Thus the anarchist organization, which had pretended to 
rule the working-class movement from one end of Europe to the 
other, was again reduced to its original nucleus, some two 
hundred men in the Jura district of Switzerland, where from the 
isolation of their mountain recesses, they continue to protest 
a A. Bebel, A. Geib, W. Hasenclever, W. Hasselmann, W. Liebknecht, J. Most, 
J. Motteler, O. Reimer, J. Vahlteich.— Ed 
b See this volume, p. 49.— Ed. 

=====第245页=====
The Workingmen  of Europe  in 1877 215 
against  the  victorious heresy  of the  rest  of the  world,  and to 
uphold  the  true orthodoxy  as  laid down  by the  Emperor 
Bakounine,  now  defunct.  And  when  in September last  the 
Universal Socialist Congress  met at  Ghent,  in Belgium246—a 
congress which they themselves  had  convoked—they found 
themselves  an  insignificant minority, face  to  face with  the 
delegates  of the  united  and  unanimous great working-class 
organizations  of Europe.  The  Congress, while energetically  re­
pudiating their ridiculous doctrines  and  their arrogant preten­
sions,  and  establishing  the  fact that they repudiated merely  a small 
sect, extended  to them,  in the end, a  generous toleration. 
Thus,  after  a four years' intestine struggle, complete harmony 
was restored  to the  action  of the  working class  of Europe,  and the 
policy proclaimed  by the  majority  of the  last Congress  of the 
International  was  thoroughly vindicated  by events.  A basis  was 
now recovered upon which  the  workingmen  of the  different 
European countries could again  act firmly together,  and  give each 
other that mutual support which constitutes  the  principal strength 
of the  movement.  The  International Workingmen's Association 
had been rendered  an  impossi-[...]a many, which forbade  the 
workmen  of these countries  to enter into  any  such international 
bond.  The  Governments might have spared themselves  all this 
trouble.  The  working-class movement  had  outgrown  not  only  the 
necessity  but  even  the  possibility  of any  such formal bond;  but not 
only has the  work  of the  great Proletarian organization been fully 
accomplished,  it continues  to live  itself,  more powerful than ever, 
in the far  stronger bond  of union  and  solidarity,  in the  community 
of action  and  policy which  now  animates  the  working class  of all 
Europe,  and  which  is emphatically  its own and its  grandest work. 
There  is plenty  of variety  of views amongst  the  workmen  of the 
different countries,  and  even  of those  of each country taken  by 
itself; but  there  are no  longer  any  sects,  no more pretensions  to 
dogmatic orthodoxy  and  supremacy  of doctrine,  and  there  is a 
common plan  of action originally traced  by the  International  but 
now universally adopted because everywhere  it has  grown 
consciously  or unconsciously  out of the  struggle  of the  necessities 
of the  movement;  a plan which, while adapting itself freely  to the 
varying conditions  of each nation  and  each locality,  is nevertheless 
the same everywhere  in its  fundamental traits,  and  thus secures 
unity  of purpose  and  general congruence  of the  means applied  to 
obtain  the  common  end, the  emancipation  of the  working class 
through  the  working class  itself. 
a One or two  lines  are  missing  in the  newspaper.—  Ed. 

=====第246页=====
216 
III 
In the preceding article, we have already foreshadowed the 
principal facts of interest connected with the history of the 
working-class movement in Italy, Spain, Switzerland and Belgium. 
Still, something remains to be told. 
In Spain, the movement had rapidly extended between 1868 
and 1872, when the International boasted of more than 30,000 
paying members. But all this was more apparent than real, the 
result more of momentary excitement, brought on by the 
unsettled political state of the country than by real intellectual 
progress. Involved in the Cantonalist (federalist-republican) rising 
of 1873, 247 the Spanish International was crushed along with it. 
For a time it continued in the shape of a secret society, of which, 
no doubt, a nucleus is still in existence. But as it has never given 
any sign of life save sending three delegates to the Ghent 
Congress,248 we are driven to the conclusion that these three 
delegates represent the Spanish working class much in the same 
way as whilom the three tailors of Tooley-street represented the 
People of England.249 And whenever a political revulsion will give 
the workingmen of Spain the possibility of again playing an active 
part, we may safely predict that the new departure will not come 
from these "anarchist" spouters, but from the small body of 
intelligent and energetic workmen who, in 1872, remained true to 
the International250 and who now bide their time instead of 
playing at secret conspiracy. 
In Portugal the movement remained always free from the 
"anarchist" taint, and proceeded upon the same rational basis as 
in most other countries. The Portuguese workmen had numerous 
International sections and Trades' Unions; they held a very 

=====第247页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 217 
successful Congress in January 1877,251 and had an excellent 
weekly: "O Protesto" (The Protest). Still, they too were hampered 
by adverse laws, restrictive of the press and of the right of 
association and public meeting. They keep struggling on for all 
that, and are now holding another Congress at Oporto, which will 
afford them an opportunity of showing to the world that the 
working class of Portugal takes its proper share in the great and 
universal struggle for the emancipation of labor. 
The workmen of Italy, too, are much obstructed in their action 
by middle-class legislation. A number of special laws252 enacted 
under the pretext of suppressing brigandage and wide-spread 
secret brigand organizations, laws which give the government 
immense arbitrary powers, are unscrupulously applied to work­
men's associations; their more prominent members equally with 
brigands are subjected to police supervision and banishment 
without judge or jury. Still the movement proceeds, and, best sign 
of life, its centre of gravity has been shifted from the venerable, 
but half-dead cities of Romagna to the busy industrial and 
manufacturing towns of the North, a change which secured the 
predominance of the real working-class element over the host of 
"anarchist" interlopers of middle-class origin who previously had 
taken the lead. The workmen's clubs and Trades' Unions, ever 
broken up and dissolved by the government, are ever reformed 
under new names. The Proletarian Press, though many of its 
organs are but short-lived in consequence of the prosecutions, 
fines and sentences of imprisonment against the editors, springs 
up afresh after every defeat, and, in spite of all obstacles, counts 
several papers of comparatively old standing. Some of these 
organs, mostly ephemeral ones, still profess "anarchist" doctrines, 
but that fraction has given up all pretensions to rule the 
movement and is gradually dying out, along with the Mazzinian or 
middle-class Republican party, and every inch of ground lost by 
these two factions is so much ground won by the real and 
intelligent working-class movement. 
In Belgium, too, the centre of gravity of working-class action has 
been shifted, and this action itself has undergone an important 
change in consequence. Up to 1875, this centre lay in the 
French-speaking part of the country, including Brussels, which is 
half French and half Flemish; the movement was, during this 
period, strongly influenced by Proudhonist doctrines, which also 
enjoin abstention from political interference, especially from 
elections. There remained, then, nothing but strikes, generally 
repressed by bloody intervention of the military, and meetings in 

=====第248页=====
218 Frederick Engels 
which the old stock phrases were constantly repeated. The 
work-people got sick of this and the whole movement gradually 
fell asleep. But since 1875 the manufacturing towns of the 
Flemish-speaking portion entered into the struggle with a greater 
and, as was soon to be proved, a new spirit. In Belgium there are 
no factory laws whatever to limit the hours of labor of women or 
children; and the first cry of the factory voters of Ghent and 
neighborhood was for protection for their wives and children, who 
were made to slave fifteen and more hours a day in the Cotton 
Mills. 3 The opposition of the Proudhonist doctrinaires who 
considered such trifles as far beneath the attention of men 
occupied with transcendent revolutionism, was of no avail, and was 
gradually overcome. The demand of legal protection for factory-
children became one of the points of the Belgian working-class 
platform, and with it was broken the spell which hitherto had 
tabooed political action. The example of the Germans did the rest, 
and now the Belgian workmen, like those of Germany, Switzer­
land, Denmark, Portugal, Hungary, Austria and part of Italy, are 
forming themselves into a political party, distinct from, and 
opposed to, all other political parties, and aiming at the conquest 
of their emancipation by whatever political action the situation 
may require. 
The great mass of the Swiss workmen—the German-speaking 
portion of them—had for some years been formed into a 
"Workmen's Confederation" which at the end of 1876 counted 
above  5,000  paying members. There was, alongside of them 
another organization, the "Griitli Society",253 originally formed by 
the middle-class radicals for the spread of Radicalism amongst 
workmen and peasants; but gradually social democratic ideas 
penetrated into this widely-spread association and finally con­
quered it. In 1877, both these societies entered into an alliance, 
almost a fusion, for the purpose of organizing a Swiss political 
labor party; and with such vigor did they act that they carried, at 
the national vote, the new Swiss Factory Law, of all existing factory 
acts the one which is most favorable to the work-people. 54 They 
are now organizing a vigilant supervision to secure its due 
execution against the loudly proclaimed ill-will of the mill owners. 
The "anarchists", from their superior revolutionary standpoint,as 
a matter of course violently opposed all this action, denouncing it 
as a piece of arrant treason against what they call "the 
a "Manifest der sozialistischen Partei in Brabant (Belgien)", Vorwärts, Nos. 10 
and 11, January 25 and 27, 1878.— Ed 

=====第249页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 219 
Revolution"; but as they number 200 at the outside and here as 
elsewhere are but a general staff of officers without an army, this 
made no difference.—The programme of the Swiss workingmen's 
Party is almost identical with that of the Germans, only too 
identical, having adopted even some of its more imperfect and 
confused passages. But the mere wording of the programme 
matters little, so long as the spirit which dominates the movement, 
is of the right sort. 
The Danish workingmen entered the lists about 1870 and at 
first made very rapid progress.255 By an alliance with the small 
peasant proprietors' party, amongst which they succeeded in 
spreading their views, they attained considerable political influ­
ence,  so much so that the "United Left", of which the peasant 
party formed the nucleus, for a number of years had the majority 
in parliament.256 But there was more show than solidity in this 
rapid growth of the movement. One day it was found out that two 
of the leaders3 had disappeared after squandering the money 
collected for party purposes from the workingmen. The scandal 
caused by this was extreme, and the Danish movement has not yet 
recovered from the discouragement consequent upon it. Anyhow, 
if the Danish workingmen's party is now proceeding in a more 
unobtrusive way than before, there is every reason to believe that 
it is gradually replacing the ephemeral and apparent domination 
over the masses, which it has now lost, by a more real and more 
lasting influence. 
In Austria and Hungary the working class has the greatest 
difficulties to contend with. Political liberty, as far as the press, 
meetings and associations are concerned, is there reduced to the 
lowest level consistent with a sham constitutional monarchy. A 
code of laws of unheard-of elasticity enables the Government to 
obtain convictions against even the mildest expression of the 
demands and interests of the working class. And yet the 
movement there, as well as elsewhere, goes on irrepressibly. The 
principal centres are the manufacturing districts of Bohemia, 
Vienna, and Pesth. Workingmen's periodicals are published in the 
German, the Bohemian and the Hungarian languages. From 
Hungary the movement has spread to Servia, where, before the 
war, a weekly newspaper was published in the Servian language,13 
but when the war broke out the paper was simply suppressed. 
Thus,  wherever we look in Europe, the working-class movement 
a L. Pio and P. Geleit— Ed. 
b Hapodna eoiiha.— Ed. 

=====第250页=====
220 Frederick Engels 
is progressing, not only favorably but rapidly, and what is more, 
everywhere in the same spirit. Complete harmony is restored, and 
with it constant and regular intercourse, in one way or another, 
between the workmen of the different countries. The men who 
founded, in 1864, the International Working Men's Association, 
who held high its banner during years of strife, first against 
external, then against internal foes, until political necessities even 
more than intestine feuds brought on disruption and seeming 
retirement-—these men can now proudly exclaim: "The Interna­
tional has done its work; it has fully attained its grand aim—the 
union of the Proletariat of the whole world in the struggle against 
their oppressors." 

=====第251页=====
221 
IV 
Our readers will have noticed that in the three preceding 
articles there has been scarcely any mention made of one of the 
most important countries of Europe—France, and for this reason: 
In the countries hitherto treated of, the action of the working 
class,  though essentially a political action, is not intimately mixed 
up with general, or so to say official politics. The working class of 
Germany, Italy, Belgium etc., is not yet a political power in the 
State; it is a political power only prospectively, and if the official 
parties in some of these countries, Conservatives, Liberals, or 
Radicals, have to reckon with it, it is merely because its rapid 
onward progress makes it evident, that in a very short time the 
Proletarian party will be strong enough to make its influence felt. 
But in France it is different. The workmen of Paris, seconded by 
those of the large provincial towns, have ever since the great 
Revolution been a power in the State. They have been for nearly 
ninety years the fighting army of progress; at every great crisis of 
French history, they descended into the streets, armed themselves 
as best as they could, threw up barricades and provoked the battle, 
and it was their victory or defeat which decided the future of 
France for years to come. From 1789 to 1830, the revolutions of 
the middle class were fought out by the workmen of Paris; it was 
they who conquered the Republic in 1848, having mistaken that 
Republic to mean emancipation of labor, they were cruelly 
undeceived by the defeat inflicted on them, in June of the same 
year257 ; they resisted on the barricades Louis Napoleon's Coup 
d'État  1851 258 and were again defeated; they swept away in 

=====第252页=====
222 Frederick Engels 
September 1870 the defunct Empire259 which the middle-class 
Radicals were too cowardly to touch. In March 1871 Thiers' 
attempt to take away from them the arms with which they had 
defended Paris against foreign invasion, forced them into the 
revolution of the Commune and the protracted struggle which 
ended with its bloody extinction. 
A national working class which thus, for nearly a century, not 
only has taken a decisive part in every crisis of the history of its 
own country, but at the same time has always been the advanced 
guard of European Revolution, such a working class cannot live 
the comparatively secluded life which is still the proper sphere of 
action of the rest of the continental workmen. Such a working 
class as that of France is bound to its past history and by its past 
history. Its history, no less than its acknowledged decisive fighting 
power, has mixed it up indissolubly with the general political 
development of the country. And thus, we cannot give a retrospect 
of the action of the French working class without entering into 
French politics generally. 
Whether the French working class had been fighting its own 
battle or the battle of the Liberal, Radical, or Republican middle 
class,  every defeat it suffered has hitherto been followed by an 
oppressive political reaction, as violent as it was enduring. Thus, 
the defeats of June 1848 and December 1851 were succeeded by 
the eighteen years of the Bonapartist Empire, during which the 
press was fettered, the right of meeting and of association 
suppressed and the working class consequently deprived of every 
means of inter-communication and organization. The necessary 
result was that when the revolution of September 1870 came, the 
workmen had no other men to put into office, but those 
middle-class radicals who under the Empire had formed the 
official parliamentary opposition and who as a matter of course 
betrayed them and their country. After the stamping-out of the 
Commune, the working class, disabled for years in their fighting 
power, had but one immediate interest: to avoid the recurrence of 
such another protracted reign of repression, and with it the 
necessity of again fighting, not for their own direct emancipation, 
but for a state of things permitting them to prepare for the final 
emancipatory struggle. Now, in France there are four great 
political parties: three monarchist, the Legitimists, Orleanists and 
Bonapartists, each with a separate pretender to the crown; and the 
Republican party. Whichever of the three pretenders3 were to 
a Chambord, Napoleon Eugène Bonaparte and the Count of Paris.— Ed 

=====第253页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 223 
ascend the throne, he would in every case be supported by a small 
minority only of the people, he would consequently have to rely 
upon force only. Thus, the reign of violence, the suppression of 
all public liberties and personal rights, which the working class 
must wish to avoid, was the necessary concomitant of every 
Monarchist restoration. On the other hand the maintenance of the 
established Republican government left them at least the chance of 
obtaining such a degree of personal and public liberty as would 
allow them to establish a working-class press, an agitation by 
meetings and an organization as an independent political party, 
and moreover, the conservation of the Republic would save them 
the necessity of delivering a separate battle for its future 
re-conquest. 
It was thus another proof of the high instinctive political 
intelligence of the French working class, that as soon as, on the 
16th May last,260 the great conspiracy of the three Monarchist 
factions declared war against the Republic, the workmen, one and 
all, proclaimed the maintenance of the Republic to be their chief 
immediate object. No doubt in this they acted as the tail of the 
middle-class Republicans and Radicals, but a working class which 
has no press, no meetings, no clubs, no political societies, what else 
can it be but the tail of the Radical middle-class party? What can it 
do, in order to gain its political independence, but support the 
only party which is bound to secure to the people generally, and 
therefore, to the workmen too, such liberties as will admit of 
independent organization? Some people say, the workmen at the 
last election ought to have put up their own candidates, but even 
in those places where they could have done so successfully, where 
were the working-class candidates, well known enough amongst 
their own class to find the necessary support? Why, the 
government since the Commune have taken good care to arrest, 
as a participator in that insurrection, every workman who made 
himself known even by private agitation in his own district of 
Paris. 
The victory of the Republicans at the elections last November261 
was signal. It was followed by still more signal triumphs at the 
departmental, municipal and supplementary elections which fol­
lowed it. The Monarchist conspiracy would, perhaps, not have 
given way for all that; but its hand was lamed by the unmistakable 
attitude of the army. Not only were there numerous Republican 
officers especially in the lower grades; but, what was more 
decisive, the mass of the soldiers refused to march against the 
Republic. That was the first result of the reorganization of the 

=====第254页=====
224 Frederick Engels 
army, by which bought substitutes had been done away with and 
the army transformed into a fair representation of the young men 
of all classes.262 Thus, the conspiracy broke down without having 
to be broken up by force. And this, too, was much in the interest 
of the working class which, too weak yet after the blood-letting of 
1871,  can have no wish to waste again its greatest, its fighting 
power, in struggles for the benefit of others or to engage in a 
series of violent collisions before it has recovered its full strength. 
But this Republican victory has yet another significance. It 
proves that since 1870 the country people have made a great step 
in advance. Hitherto, every working-class victory gained in Paris, 
was nullified in a very short time by the reactionist spirit of the 
small peasantry who form the great mass of the French 
population. Since the beginning of this century, the French 
peasantry had been Bonapartist. The second Republic, established 
by the Paris workingmen in February 1848, had been cancelled by 
the six million peasant votes given to Louis Napoleon in December 
following. But the Prussian invasion of 1870 has shaken the 
Imperialist faith of the peasantry, and the elections of November 
last prove that the mass of the country population had become 
Republican, and this is a change of the highest importance. It does 
not only mean that henceforth all Monarchist restoration has 
become hopeless in France. It means also the approaching alliance 
between the workingmen of the towns and the peasantry of the 
country. The small peasant proprietors established by the great 
Revolution are proprietors of the soil, but in name. Their farms 
are mortgaged to usurers; their crops are spent in the payment of 
interest and law-expenses; the notary, the attorney, the  bailiff,  the 
auctioneer are constantly threatening at their doors. Their position 
is fully as bad as that of the workingmen, and almost as insecure. 
And if these peasants now turn from Bonapartism to the Republic, 
they show by this that they no longer expect an improvement of 
their condition from those Imperialist miracles which Louis 
Napoleon ever promised and never performed. Thiers' faith in 
the mysterious powers of salvation held by an "Emperor of 
peasants" has been rudely dispelled by the second Empire. The 
spell is broken. The French peasantry are at last in a state of mind 
rational enough to look out for the real causes of the chronic 
distress and for the practical means to do away with it; and once 
set a thinking they must soon find out that their only remedy lies 
in an alliance with the only class that has no interest in their 
present miserable condition, the working class of the town. 
Thus,  however contemptible the present Republican govern-

=====第255页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 225 
ment of France may be, the final establishment of the Republic 
has at last given the French workingmen the ground upon which 
they can organize themselves as an independent political party, 
and fight their future battles, not for the benefit of others, but for 
their own; the ground, too, upon which they can unite with the 
hitherto hostile mass of the peasantry and thus render future 
victories not, as heretofore, short-lived triumphs of Paris over 
France, but final triumphs of all the oppressed classes of France, 
led by the workmen of Paris and the large provincial towns. 

=====第256页=====
226 
v 
(CONCLUSION) 
There is still another important European country to be 
considered—Russia. Not that there exists in Russia a working-class 
movement worth speaking of. But the internal and external 
circumstances in which Russia is placed are most peculiar and big 
with events of the highest importance with regard to the future, 
not only of the Russian workingmen, but those of all Europe. 
In 1861 the government of Alexander II carried out the 
emancipation of the serfs, the transformation of the immense 
majority of the Russian people from bondsmen, attached to the 
soil and subject to forced labour for their landlord, into free 
peasant proprietors. This change, the necessity of which had long 
been evident, was effected in such a way that neither the former 
landlords nor the former serfs were the gainers by it. The peasant 
villages received allotments of soil, which henceforth were to be 
their own, while the landlords were to be paid for the value of the 
land thus ceded to the villages, and also, to a certain extent, for 
the claim they hitherto had possessed to the peasant's labor. As the 
peasants evidently could not find the money to pay the landlords, 
the State stepped in. One portion of this payment was effected by 
transferring to the landlord a portion of the land hitherto 
cultivated by the peasants for their own account; the rest was paid 
in the shape of government bonds, advanced by the State, and to 
be repaid to it with interest, in yearly instalments, by the peasants. 
The majority of the landlords sold these bonds and spent the 
money; they are thus not only poorer than before, but cannot find 
laborers to till their estates, the peasants actually declining to work 
upon them and to leave their own fields uncultivated. As to the 
peasants, their shares of land had not only been reduced in size 

=====第257页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 227 
from what they had been before, and very often to an extent 
which, under Russian circumstances, left them insufficient to 
maintain a family; these shares had, in most instances, been taken 
from the very worst land on the estate, from bogs or other 
unclaimed lands, while the good land, hitherto owned by the 
peasants and improved by their labor, had been transferred to the 
landlords. Under these circumstances, the peasants, too, were 
considerably worse off than before; but besides this, they were 
expected to pay every year to the government the interest and 
part of the capital advanced by the State for buying them off, and, 
moreover, the taxes levied upon them increased from year to year. 
Furthermore, before emancipation, the peasants had possessed 
certain common rights on the estate lands of pasture for their 
cattle, the hewing of timber for building and other purposes, etc. 
These rights were expressly taken from them by the new 
settlement; if they wanted to exercise them again, they had to 
bargain with their former landlord. 
Thus,  while the majority of the landed proprietors became even 
more indebted, in consequence of the change, than they had been 
before, the peasantry were reduced to a position in which they 
could neither live nor die. The great act of emancipation, so 
universally extolled and glorified by the Liberal press of Europe, 
had created nothing but the groundwork and the absolute 
necessity of a future revolution. 
This revolution, the government did all in its power to hasten 
on—the corruption pervading all official spheres, and leaving 
whatever power for good they might be supposed to possess—this 
hereditary corruption remained as bad as ever, and came to light 
glaringly in every public department at the outbreak of the 
Turkish war.263 The finances of the empire, completely disordered 
at the end of the Crimean war,3 were allowed to go from bad to 
worse. Loan after loan was contracted, until there was no other 
means of paying the interest of the old debts except by contracting 
new ones. During the first years of Alexander'sb reign, the old 
imperial despotism had been somewhat relaxed; the press had 
been allowed more freedom, trial by jury established and 
representative bodies, elected by the nobility, the citizens of the 
towns, and the peasants respectively, had been permitted to take 
some share in local and provincial administration. Even with the 
Poles some political flirtation had been carried on. But the public 
a in 1856.—Ed. 
b Alexander IFs.— Ed. 
17* 

=====第258页=====
228 Frederick Engels 
had misunderstood the benevolent intentions of the government. 
The press became too outspoken. The juries actually acquitted 
political prisoners which the government had expected them to 
convict against evidence. The local and provincial assemblies, one 
and all, declared that the government, by its act of emancipation, 
had ruined the country, and that things could not go on in that 
way any longer. A national assembly was even hinted at as the only 
means of getting out of troubles fast becoming insupportable. And 
finally, the Poles refused to be bamboozled with fine words, and 
broke out into a rebellion264 which it took all the forces of the 
empire, and all the brutality of the Russian generals, to quell in 
torrents of blood. Then the government turned round again. 
Stern repression once more became the order of the day. The 
press was muzzled, the political prisoners were handed over to 
special courts, consisting of judges packed for the purpose, the 
local and provincial assemblies were ignored. But it was too late. 
The government, having once shown signs of fear, had lost its 
prestige. The belief in its stability, and in its power of absolutely 
crushing all internal resistance, had gone. The germ of a future 
public opinion had sprung up. The forces could not be brought 
back to the former implicit obedience to government dictation. 
Discussion of public matters, if only in private circles, had become 
a habit among the educated classes. And finally, the government, 
with all its desire to return to the unbridled despotism of the reign 
of Nicholas, still pretended to keep up, before the eyes of Europe, 
the appearances of the liberalism initiated by Alexander. The 
consequence was a system of vacillation and hesitation, of 
concessions made to-day and retracted to-morrow, to be again 
half-conceded and half-retracted in turns, a policy changing from 
hour to hour, bringing home to everybody the intrinsic weakness, 
the want of insight and of will, on the part of a government which 
was nothing unless it was possessed of a will and of the means to 
enforce it. What was more natural than that every day should 
increase the contempt felt for a government which, long since 
known to be powerless for good and obeyed only through fear, 
now proved that it doubted of its power of maintaining its own 
existence, that it had at least as much fear of the people as the 
people had of it? There was only one way of salvation for the 
Russian government, the way open to all governments brought 
face to face with overwhelming popular resistance—foreign war. 
And foreign war was resolved upon; a war, proclaimed before 
Europe as undertaken for the deliverance of Christians from 
protracted Turkish misrule, but proclaimed before the Russian 

=====第259页=====
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 229 
people as carried on for the bringing home of their Slavonic 
brethren in race from Turkish bondage into the fold of the Holy 
Russian Empire. 
This war, after months of inglorious defeat, has now come to an 
end through the equally inglorious crushing of Turkish resistance, 
partly by treachery, partly by immensely superior numbers. But 
the Russian conquest of the greater part of Turkey in Europe is 
itself only the prelude to a general European war. Either Russia, 
at the impending European Conference (if that Conference ever 
meets),  will have to recede so much from the position now gained, 
that the disproportion between the immense sacrifices and the 
puny results must bring the popular discontent to a violent 
revolutionary outburst; or else, Russia will have to maintain her 
newly conquered position in a European war. More than half 
exhausted as she is already, her government cannot carry her 
through such a war—whatever may be its final result—without 
important popular concessions. Such concessions, in the face of a 
situation as that described above, mean the commencement of a 
revolution. From this revolution the Russian government cannot 
possibly escape, if even it may succeed in delaying its outbreak for 
a year or two. But a Russian revolution means more than a mere 
change of government in Russia  herself.  It means the disappear­
ance of a vast, though unwieldy, military power which, ever since 
the French Revolution, has formed the backbone of the united 
despotisms of Europe. It means the emancipation of Germany 
from Prussia, for Prussia has already been the creature of Russia, 
and has only existed by leaning upon her. It means the 
emancipation of Poland. It means the awakening of the smaller 
Slavonic nationalities of Eastern Europe from the Panslavist 
dreams fostered among them by the present Russian government. 
And it means the beginning of an active national life among the 
Russian people themselves, and along with it the springing up of a 
real working-class movement in Russia. Altogether, it means such 
a change in the whole situation of Europe as must be hailed with 
joy by the workingmen of every country as a giant step towards 
their common goal—the universal emancipation of Labor. 

=====第260页=====
230 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
HERR BUCHER265 
TO THE EDITOR3  OF THE DAILY NEWS 
Sir, 
According to a telegram of Reuter's,b 
"Herr Bucher, Councillor of Legation, is designated for the post of secretary and 
keeper of the records of the Congress." 266 
Should this "Herr Bucher" be the same Lothar Bucher who, 
during his long London exile, shone as a staunch partisan of the late 
Mr. David Urquhart, whose anti-Russian doctrines he held forth 
week by week in the Berlin National Gazette c; the same Lothar 
Bucher who, on his return to Berlin, turned so ardent a votary of 
Ferdinand Lassalle that the latter named him his testamentary 
executor, bequeathed him an annual revenue, and transferred the 
copyright of his works to Lothar Bucher 267? Soon after Lassalle's 
death Lothar Bucher entered the Prussian Foreign Office, was 
made a "Councillor of Legation", and became Bismarck's confi­
dential man-of-all-work. 
He had the naivete to address a letter to  myself,  inviting me, of 
course with the sanction of his master, to undertake the money 
article of the Prussian official Staats-Anzeiger. 
The pecuniary terms were left to my discretion, while I was 
expressly told I should enjoy full liberty of treating the operations 
and the operators of the money market from my own "scientific" 
a W. K. Hales.— Ed 
b "We have received the following telegrams through Reuter's Agency: Eastern 
Affairs, Berlin, June 11." In the section Latest Intelligence, The Times, No. 29279, 
June 12, 1878.— Ed. 
c National-Zeitung.—Ed. 

=====第261页=====
Herr Bucher 231 
standpoint. Since this odd incident I felt not a little amused at seeing 
Lothar Bucher's contributions as a member of the "International 
Working Men's Association" daily and yearly chronicled in the 
columns of the Vorbote* an organ of the International, edited by 
Johann Philipp Becker at Geneva. If this be not a case of mistaken 
identity, and if there be anything in the reports that the Russian and 
German Governments, à propos of the attempts of Hoedel and 
Nobiling, 268 intend to propose to the Congress international 
measures against the spread of Socialism, then Herr Bucher is the 
very man to tell the Congress authoritatively that the organisation, 
the action, and the doctrines of the German Social-Democratic party 
have no more to do with these attempts than with the sinking of the 
Grosser  Kurfürst, 269 or with the meeting of the Congress at Berlin; that 
the panic-mongering arrests throughout Germany and the whirlwind 
of dust raised by the Press-reptiles 270 serve the exclusive purpose of 
an electioneering cry for a Reichstag ready to sanction at last the 
solution, long since elaborated by Prince Bismarck, of the paradox 
problem how to endow the German Government with all the 
financial resources of a modern State, while, at the same time, 
reimposing upon the German people the ancient political regime 
scattered to pieces by the hurricane of 1848. 
I am, Sir, your obedient servant, 
Karl Marx 
London, June 12 
First published in The Daily News, Reproduced from the newspaper 
No. 10030, June 13, 1878 
a "Empfangsbescheinigungen der für die Zentralkasse von Außen eingegange­
nen Beträge", Der Vorbote, No. 9, September 1867; No. 10, October  1871.—  Ed. 

=====第262页=====
232 
Karl Marx 
[REPLY TO BUCHER'S "DECLARATION"] 
Mr. Lothar Bucher has published a "declaration" in the 
Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung of June 21, a which in the first 
instance establishes the unpleasant circumstance that my letter to 
The Daily News was reprinted by the National-Liberal and 
Party-of-Progress newspapers.15  Mr. Bûcher declares that 
3,000 lines would be required in order to straighten out the 
distortions I had compressed together. Thirty lines are more than 
sufficient to establish once and for all the truth of Bucher's 
"corrections" and "supplementary statements". 
The letter in which Mr. Bûcher tries to bring me to heel for the 
Staats-Anzeiger is dated October 8, 1865, and thus originates from 
the period of the conflict between the Prussian liberal and 
Party-of-Progress bourgeoisie and Mr. von Bismarck. The letter 
says,  amongst other things: 
"With regard to the content, it goes without saying that you only follow your 
scientific conviction; however, consideration for the readers—haute finance0—not 
the editorial office, will make it advisable that you allow the innermost core to shine 
through only for those properly versed in these matters." 
By contrast, Mr. Bucher's "correction" says that he 
"asked Mr. Marx if he would supply the articles requested, in which it was 
important for the treatment to be objective. There is not a word in my letter 
pertaining to Mr. Marx's 'own scientific standpoint' ". 
a A. L. Bücher [Declaration concerning Karl Marx's letter in The Daily News], 
Berlin, den 20. Juni, Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 145, June 21, 1878.— Ed 
b Berliner Freie Presse, No. 138, June 16 and Vossische Zeitung, No. 139, 
June 16, 1878.— Ed 
c Finance aristocracy.— Ed. 

=====第263页=====
Reply to Bucher's "Declaration" 233 
Further, the same letter says: 
" The Staats-Anzeiger requires a monthly report on the movements in the money 
market (and, of course, also in the commodity market, inasmuch as the two are 
inseparable). I was asked if I could not perhaps recommend someone, and replied 
that no one would do it better than you. I have consequently been asked to contact 
you." 
According to his own unambiguous words therefore, 
Mr. Bûcher began his "correspondence" with me at the request of 
someone or other. By contrast, his "correction" asserts: 
"No one, not even the editor of the Staats-Anzeiger, 3 knew anything of this 
correspondence or learned anything about it." 
So much on Mr. Bucher's method of making corrections. And 
now a sample of his method when it comes to making 
supplementary statements! 
My letter to The Daily News mentions only Mr. Bucher's "naive" 
inquiry of me, but refrains from mentioning a word about my 
answer to him. He, however, in his anxiety to make the "curious 
occurrence" appear in a trivial light, has to "supplement" me and 
therefore invents the following: 
"Mr. Marx replied that he would not write for a reactionary newspaper." 
How am I to answer with such banalities a letter whose 
"innermost core" doesn't "only" shine through, but flashes 
through blindingly in the following closing passage: 
"Progress" (he means the liberal or Party-of-Progress bourgeoisie) "will cast its 
skin many times before it dies; and therefore anyone who wishes to have an effect 
within the state in his lifetime, must rally round the government" 
Karl Marx 
London, June 27 
Published in the Frankfurter Zeitung und Printed according to the manu-
Handelsblatt, No. 180, June 29, 1878; script 
Vossische Zeitung, No. 152, July 2, 1878; 
Vorwärts, No. 78, July 5, 1878 Published in English for the first 
time 
3 Adolf Rutenberg. — Ed. 

=====第264页=====
234 
Karl Marx 
MR. GEORGE HOWELL'S HISTORY OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL WORKING-MEN'S ASSOCIATION  272 
I believe it worth while to illustrate by a few notes the most 
recent contribution—see the Nineteenth Century of July last—to 
the extensive spurious literature on the International's History, 
because its last expounder, Mr. George Howell, an ex-workman 
and ex-member of the General Council of that Association, may 
erroneously be supposed to have drawn his wisdom from sources 
not generally accessible. 
Mr. Howell sets about his "History" by passing by the facts that, 
on September 28th, 1864, I was present at the foundation-meeting 
of the International, was there chosen a member of the provisional 
General Council, and soon after drew up the "Inaugural 
Address", and the "General Statutes" of the Association,3 first 
issued at London in 1864, then confirmed by the Geneva Congress 
of 1866. 
So much Mr. Howell knew, but, for purposes of his own, 
prefers to make "a German Doctor named Karl Marx" first 
appear at the London "Congress opened on September 25th, 
1865".b273  There and then, he avers, the said "doctor" had "sown 
the seeds of discord and decay by the introduction of the Religious 
Idea". 
In the first instance, no "Congress" of the International took 
place in September, 1865. A few delegates from the main 
a The reference is to the "Inaugural Address of the Working Men's 
International Association" and the "Provisional Rules of the Association" (see 
present edition, Vol. 20).— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx quotes Howell's article "The History of the 
International Association", The Nineteenth Century. A Monthly Review, Vol. IV, 
London, 1878.— Ed. 

=====第265页=====
Mr. George Howell's History of the I.W.M.A. 235 
continental branches of the Association met at London for the sole 
purpose of conferring with the General Council on the Pro­
gramme of the "First Congress", which was to assemble at Geneva, 
in September, 1866. The real business of the Conference was 
transacted in private sittings, not at the semi-public meetings in 
Adelphi Terrace, exclusively made mention of by the exact 
historian, Mr. George Howell. 
Like the other representatives of the General Council, I had to 
secure the acceptance by the Conference of our own programme, 
on its publication thus characterised, in a letter to the Siècle, by the 
French historian, Henri Martin: 
" The breadth of view and the high moral, political, and economical conceptions 
which have decided the choice of questions composing the programme of the 
International Congress of Workingmen, which is to assemble next year, will strike 
with a common sympathy all friends of progress, justice, and liberty in Europe."3 
By the way, a paragraph of the programme which I had the 
honour to indite for the General Council, runs thus: 
" The necessity of annihilating the Muscovite influence in Europe, by the application 
of the principle of the right of nations to dispose of themselves, and the 
reconstruction of Poland upon a democratic and socialist basis."274 
Upon this text Henri Martin put the gloss: 
"We will take the liberty of remarking that the expression, 'democratic and 
socialist basis', is a very simple one as regards Poland, where the social framework 
needs reconstruction quite as much as the political framework, and where this basis 
has been laid down by the decrees of the anonymous government of  1863, b and 
accepted by all classes of the nation. This, then, is the reply of true socialism, of 
social progress in harmony with justice and liberty, to the advances of the 
Communist despotism of Muscovy. This secret of the people of Paris is now 
becoming the common secret of the peoples of Europe." 
Unfortunately, the "people of Paris" had kept their "secret" so 
well that, quite unaware of it, two of the Paris delegates to the 
Conference, Tolain, now a senator of the French Republic, and 
Fribourg, now a simple renegade, inveighed against the very 
proposition which was to call forth the enthusiastic comment of 
the French historian. 
The programme of the General Council contained not one 
syllable on "Religion", but at the instance of the Paris delegates 
the forbidden dish got into the bill of fare in store for the 
prospective Congress, in this dressing: 
a H. Martin, "L'Association Internationale des Travailleurs", Le Siècle, 
No. 11171,  October 14, 1865.— Ed. 
b Centralny Narodowy Komitet jako tymczasowy Rzad Narodowy.—Ed. 

=====第266页=====
236 Karl Marx 
"Religious Ideas (not "The Religious Idea", as Howell's spurious version has it), 
their influence on the social, political and intellectual movement." 
The topic of discussion thus introduced by the Paris delegates 
was left in their keeping.275 In point of fact, they dropped it at the 
Geneva Congress of 1866, and no one else picked it up. 
The London "Congress" of 1865, the "Introduction" there by 
"a German Doctor named Karl Marx" of the "Religious Idea", 
and the fierce feud thence arising within the International—this, 
his triple myth, Mr. George Howell caps by a legend. He says: 
"In the Draft Address to the American people with regard to the abolition of 
slavery, the sentence, 'God made of one blood all nations of men', was struck out, 
etc." 
Now the General Council issued an address, not to the 
American people, but to its President, Abraham Lincoln, which he 
gracefully acknowledged. The address, written by me,a underwent 
no alteration whatever. As the words "God made of one blood all 
nations of men" had never figured in it, they could not be "struck 
out". 
The attitude of the General Council in regard to the "Religious 
Idea" is clearly shown by the following incident:—One of the 
Swiss branches of the Alliance, founded by Michael Bakunin,276 
and calling itself Section des athées  Socialistes,  requested its admission 
to the International from the General Council, but got the reply: 
"Already in the case of the Young Men's Christian Association the 
Council has declared that it recognizes no theological sections. (See 
page 13 of Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale Circulaire du 
Conseil Général, printed at Geneva. 0)" 
Even Mr. George Howell, at that time not yet become a convert 
by close study of the Christian Reader, consummated his divorce 
from the International, not at the call of the "Religious Idea", but 
on grounds altogether secular. At the foundation of the Common­
wealth as the "special organ" of the General Council, he canvassed 
keenly the "proud position" of Editor. Having failed in his 
"ambitious" attempt, he waxed sulky, his zeal grew less and less, 
and soon after he was no more heard of. During the most eventful 
period of the International he was therefore an outsider. 
Conscious of his utter incompetence to trace the history of the 
Association, but at the same time eager to spice his article with 
a K. Marx, "To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of 
America".— Ed 
b K. Marx and F. Engels, Fictitious Splits in the International (see present edition, 
Vol. 23, p.  93).—  Ed 

=====第267页=====
Mr. George Howell's History of the I.W.M.A. 237 
strange revelations, he catches at the appearance, during the 
Fenian troubles,277 of General Cluseret in London where, we are 
told, at the Black Horse, Rathbone Place, Oxford-street, the 
General met "a few men—fortunately Englishmen", in order to 
initiate them into his "plan" of "a general insurrection". I have 
some reason to doubt the genuineness of the anecdote, but 
suppose it to be true,278 what else would it prove but that Cluseret 
was not such a fool as to intrude his person and his "plan" upon 
the General Council, but kept both of them wisely in reserve for 
"a few Englishmen" of Mr. Howell's acquaintance, unless the 
latter himself be one of these stout fellows in buckram3 who, by 
their "fortunate" interference, contrived to save the British 
Empire and Europe from universal convulsion. 
Mr. George Howell has another dark secret to disclose. 
At the beginning of June, 1871, the General Council put forth 
an Address on the Civil War in France* welcomed on the part of the 
London press by a chorus of execration. One weekly fell foul of 
"the infamous author", cowardly concealing his name behind the 
screen of the General Council. Thereupon I declared in The Daily 
News that I was the author.0 This stale secret Mr. George Howell 
reveals, in July, 1878, with all the consequentiality of the man 
behind the curtain. 
"The writer of that Address was Dr. Karl Marx. ...Mr. George Odger and Mr. 
Lucraft, both of whom were members of the Council when it (sic!) was adopted, 
repudiated it on its publication."d 
He forgets to add that the other nineteen British members 
present acclaimed the "Address". 
Since then, the statements of this Address have been fully borne 
out by the Enquêtes of the French Rural Assembly, 279 the evidence 
taken before the Versailles Courts-Martial, the trial of Jules Favre, 
and the memoirs of persons far from hostile to the victors. 
It is in the natural order of things that an English historian of 
Mr. George Howell's sound erudition should haughtily ignore 
French prints, whether official or not. But I confess to a feeling of 
disgust when, on such occasions for instance as the Hödel and 
a Shakespeare, King Henry IV, Part I, Act II, Scene IV. (When telling an 
invented story about his skirmish with a band of fellows, each time Falstaff 
increased their number and described them as dressed either in buckrams or in 
jackets made of Kendal cloth.) — Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol. 22.— Ed. 
c K. Marx, "To the Editor of The Daily News" (see present edition, Vol. 22, 
p. 370).— Ed. 
d G. Howell, op. cit., The Nineteenth Century, Vol. IV, p.  35.—  Ed. 

=====第268页=====
238 Karl Marx 
Nobiling attempts, 280 I behold great London papers ruminating 
the base calumnies, which their own correspondents, eye-witnesses, 
had been the first to refute. 
Mr. Howell reaches the climax of snobbism in his account of the 
exchequer of the General Council.3 
The Council, in its published Report to the Congress of Basle 
(1869),  ridicules the huge treasure with which the busy tongue of 
the European police and the wild imagination of the capitalist had 
endowed it. It says, 
"If these people, though good Christians, had happened to live at the time of 
nascent Christianity, they would have hurried to a Roman bank there to pry into 
St. Paul's balance."1» 
Mr. Ernest Renan who, it is true, falls somewhat short of Mr. 
George Howell's standard of orthodoxy, even fancies the state of 
the primitive Christian communes sapping the Roman Empire 
might be best illustrated by that of the International Sections. 
Mr. George Howell, as a writer, is what the crystallographer 
would call a "Pseudomorph",281 his outer form of penmanship 
being but imitative of the manner of thought and style "natural" 
to the English moneyed man of sated virtue and solvent morals. 
Although he borrows his array of "figures" as to the resources of 
the General Council from the accounts yearly laid by that same 
Council before a public "International Congress", Mr. George 
Howell must not derogate from his "imitative" dignity by stooping 
to touch the obvious question: howr came it to pass that, instead of 
taking comfort from the lean budgets of the General Council, all 
the governments of Continental Europe took fright at "the 
powerful and formidable organisation of the International Work­
ing-men's Association, and the rapid development it had attained 
in a few years". (See Circular0 of the Spanish Foreign Minister6 to the 
representatives of Spain in Foreign Countries.282) Instead of laying the 
Red Ghost by the simple process of shaking at its face the sorry 
returns of the General Council, why, in the name of common 
sense, did the Popee and his bishops exorcise the International,283 
the French Rural Assembly outlaw it, Bismarck—at the Salzburg 
a G. Howell, op. cit., pp. 31-35.— Ed. 
b K. Marx, "Report of the General Council to the Fourth Annual Congress 
of the International Working Men's Association" (see present edition, Vol. 21, 
p. 70).—  Ed 
c See Gaceta de  Madrid,  No. 17, January 17, 1872 (in the section Ministerio de la 
Gobernacion).— Ed. 
d Bonifacio.— Ed. 
« Pius IX.— Ed. 

=====第269页=====
Mr. George Howell's History of the I.W.M.A. 239 
meeting of the emperors of Austria and Germany3—threaten it 
with a Holy Alliance Crusade,284 and the White Czarb commend it 
to his terrible "Third Division", then presided over by the 
emotional Schouvaloff? 
Mr. George Howell condescends to admit: "Poverty is no crime, 
but it is fearfully inconvenient."0 I admit, he speaks by book. The 
prouder he ought to have felt of his former fellowship with a 
Working-men's Association, which won world-wide fame and a 
place in the history of mankind, not by length of purse, but by 
strength of mind and unselfish energy. 
However, from the lofty standpoint of an insular "philistine", 
Mr. George Howell reveals to the "cultured people" of the 
"Nineteenth Century", that the International was a "failure", and 
has faded away. In reality, the social democratic working-men's 
parties organised on more or less national dimensions, in 
Germany, Switzerland, Denmark, Portugal, Italy, Belgium, Hol­
land, and the United States of America, form as many internation­
al groups, no longer single sections thinly scattered through 
different countries and held together by an eccentric General 
Council, but the working masses themselves in continuous, active, 
direct intercourse, cemented by exchange of thought, mutual 
services, and common aspiration.285 
After the fall of the Paris Commune, all working class 
organisation in France was of course temporarily broken, but is 
now in an incipient state of reforming. On the other hand, despite 
all political and social obstacles, the Slavs, chiefly in Poland, 
Bohemia, and Russia, participate at present in this international 
movement to an extent not to be foreseen by the most sanguine in 
1872.  Thus, instead of dying out, the International did only pass 
from its first period of incubation to a higher one where its 
already original tendencies have in part become realities. In the 
course of its progressive development, it will yet have to undergo 
many a change, before the last chapter of its history can be 
written. 
Written at the beginning of July 1878 Reproduced from the journal 
First published in The Secular Chronicle, 
And Record of Freethought  Progress,  Vol. X, 
No. 5, August 4, 1878 
a Francis Joseph I and William I.— Ed. 
b Alexander II.— Ed. 
c G. Howell, op. cit., p. 32.— Ed. 

=====第270页=====
240 
Karl Marx 
[THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE 
ON THE ANTI-SOCIALIST LAW 
(OUTLINE OF AN ARTICLE)] 286 
REICHSTAG SITTING OF SEPTEMBER 16 AND 17, 1878 
Vice-Bismarck—von Stolberg spoke for 4 minutes, 7 seconds. 
FROM THE STENOGRAPHIC REPORT 
Reichstag. 4th sitting. Monday, September 16, 1878. Speaker: Forckenbeck. 
11 House met 11.30. Adjourned 3.40.11* 
Deputising for the Imperial Chancellor, Minister of  State,  Count Stolberg-Wernigerode: 
"What will matter is ... ensuring that in future no one can engage in such 
agitation with the slightest semblance of legality." 
FROM THE SPEECHES AT THE SITTING OF SEPTEMBER 16 
ASSASSINATION ATTEMPT 
Bebel: "Gentlemen, at the beginning of today's debate attention was specifically 
drawn by the Imperial Chancellor's deputy to the attempted assassinations,287 as was 
similarly done a few days since in the King's Speech288 and likewise in the preamble 
to the Bill submitted to us; everyone who has spoken today has likewise more or 
less touched on the assassination attempts, and everyone has designated those 
assassination attempts as the immediate occasion for this exceptional law,289 nor 
could anything be more evident than that they were the cause thereof.—In that 
case,  Gentlemen, the government might justly have been expected to express itself 
clearly and accurately in this respect, to give evidence as to what discoveries it had 
made, what facts incriminating us had been brought to light that might prove the 
existence of just one, if only an ideological, connection between the would-be 
assassins'3 and Social-Democracy. To this day, however, nothing of the kind has 
been done, all we have been given has been empty words and  accusations.  Similarly, we 
hear the parrot-cry: 'The assassination attempts were instigated by the Social-
Democrats.' This is to accuse the Social-Democrats of 'being the party of regicides', 
etc....  We are quite unwilling to put up with the silence that has been maintained 
until this very day.... First and foremost, we are vitally concerned to know what is 
contained in the numerous records made in writing in connection with the assassination 
attempts. In particular, we insist on knowing what came to light during the 
extraordinarily numerous interrogations that took place in various parts of Germany of 
a Square brackets encountered in Marx's actual manuscript have been replaced 
with two oblique lines.— Ed. 
b Emil Heinrich Max Hödel and Dr. Karl Eduard Nobiling.— Ed. 

=====第271页=====
Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law 241 
members of our party and non-party members, of men of the most diverse political leanings 
who had any connection, however remote, with the would-be assassins. We, upon whom the 
guilt and the responsibility is being  foisted,  insist that the matter be finally clarified. 
And this in particular as regards the last assassination attempt which was the immediate 
occasion of the fresh elections to the Reichstag and the submission of this Bill... 
"I went away //from the Vorwärts where he had been making inquiries about 
Dr. Nobiling—this, late at night on the 2nd of June (1878)// very satisfied with what 
I had heard and, a few minutes later, came to a shop where, to my intense 
surprise, I found a despatch posted up which read: 
"'Berlin, 2 o'clock in the morning. In the course of a later judicial examination, 
the would-be assassin, Nobiling, confessed that he subscribed to socialist tendencies, 
also that he had repeatedly attended socialist meetings here and that he had, for a 
week or more, already been intending to shoot His Imperial Majesty3 because he 
regarded the removal of the Head of State to be in the interests of the public weal.' 
"...The despatch that precipitated this piece of news into the world is explicitly 
designated an official one. Here, in my hand, I have the despatch which was 
officially delivered to the editorial board of the Kreuz-ZeitungbZ90 with comments 
written by the Kreuz-Zeitung's editor.c There is not a shadow of doubt as to the 
official nature of this despatch. Now, sundry trustworthy reports have shown that 
Nobiling was not subjected to any kind of judicial examination on the day of the 
attempted assassination or in the course of the ensuing night, that nothing was 
ascertained that could in any way be seriously regarded as a clue to the murderer's 
motives and his political convictions. Every one of you, Gentlemen, knows the 
nature of Wolffs Telegraphic Agency (Hear, hear!), everyone of you knows that 
despatches of this kind simply cannot go through without being officially approved. 
And that very word 'official' has, for good measure, been authoritatively appended 
to this despatch. Hence there can, in my view, be no doubt whatsoever that the said 
despatch was a deliberate and witting forgery on the part of the authorities, and was 
sent out into the world as such. (Hear, hear!) The despatch contains one of the 
most infamous calumnies ever to have been unloosed on the world from official 
sources and this, moreover, with the intention of casting the most odious suspicions 
on the whole of a large party, and of branding it as an accessory to a crime. 
"Again, I would ask how it was possible that the government organs, the entire 
semi-official and official press and, in their wake, almost the whole of the rest of 
the press should, on the strength of the above-mentioned despatches, have been 
allowed, for weeks and months on end, to go on hitting out at us day after day in 
the most outrageous and libellous fashion; that it could, day after day, unloose 
upon the world the most hair-raising and disquieting accounts of plots discovered, 
fellow culprits, etc., without the government's ever, etc.... Rather, the government did 
all in its power to disseminate and implant in the minds of an ever wider public a belief in 
the accuracy of the untrue allegations; and, up till this very hour, the government's 
official representatives have not so much as deigned to cast any light whatsoever on 
the present obscurities...." 
Bebel now turns to the question of harassment (p. 39, Col­
umn II). 
"It is clear that every effort was made to provoke disturbances; the intention was 
to annoy us to the extreme, thus inciting us to acts of violence of one kind or another. 
a William I.— Ed. 
b Neue Preußische Zeitung. —Ed. 
c Edwin von Niebelschütz. — Ed. 
18-1317 

=====第272页=====
242 Karl Marx 
The attempted assassinations were patently not enough. Had we been incited to acts of 
violence by that harassment, certain circles would have undoubtedly rejoiced at 
having been thus provided with an even greater wealth of material incriminating 
ourselves and hence with an excuse for the most drastic intervention, etc." 
Thereupon Bebel demands "that the  records  should at long last be brought to light and 
that these be submitted, in printed form, to the Reichstag and in particular to the 
commission entrusted with the task of examining the Bill under discussion. The 
demand I am making here is similar to that which, a few days ago, during the 
debate on the Grosser Kurfürst disaster, 291 was voiced, with complete justification 
and the assent of almost all sections of the House, with reference to the said 
disaster and which was  expressly  admitted to be allowable by the Minister for Naval Affairs 
(von Stosch),3 insofar as it lay within his competence (!)." 
//Bebel's request was greeted by the Reichstag with cries of 
"Quite right! Capital!"// 
//And what was the Prussian government's reply to this crushing 
accusation? With Eulenburg for its mouthpiece, it replied that it 
would not submit the records and that there was no incriminating 
material whatever to hand.// 
Minister of the Interior, Count zu Eulenburg: "As regards the first point," 
//information obtained by the representatives of the federal 
governments, "concerning the examination to which the criminal, 
Nobiling, since deceased, was subjected"//.0 
1. "As regards the first point, I have to tell you that, if submission be demanded, it 
would be for the Prussian judiciary to give a ruling as to the feasibility or admissibility of 
disclosing the transactions of the proceedings that were instituted against Nobiling. This 
much, however, I am able to tell you, Gendemen, and that is that Nobiling was 
subjected to one examination and that, in the course of that examination, insofar as 
I have any knowledge of it, he stated that he had participated in Social-Democratic 
meetings and found the doctrines put forward there to his liking. Having regard to 
the fact that it is for the Prussian judiciary to give a ruling as to the submission of the 
files, I must refrain from giving any further information." 
//All that Eulenburg is actually saying is: 1. that "one" examina­
tion took place; he is careful not to say a "judicial" examination. 
Equally, he omits to say when that one examination took place (no 
doubt after the bullet that went through his head had blown out 
part of his brains).// But the words attributed by Eulenburg to 
Nobiling in the course of this "one" examination (assuming that 
Nobiling was in a condition to give an account of himself) prove, 
firstly, that he did not describe himself as a Social-Democrat, or as a 
member of the Social-Democratic Party; all he said was that he had 
attended some of the latter's MEETINGS like many other philistines 
a The name has been inserted by Marx.— Ed. 
b See Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags, 
Vol. 1, Berlin, 1878, pp.  50-51.—  Ed. 

=====第273页=====
Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law 243 
and had found "the doctrines put forward there to his liking". 
Hence those doctrines were not his doctrines. His attitude towards 
them was that of a newcomer. Secondly, that he never suggested 
there was any connection between his "assassination attempt" and 
the MEETINGS or the doctrines put forward there. 
But that is not the end of the curious tale: Mr. Eulenburg is 
fabricating the "this much" he is able to tell, or saying 
problematically "that, in the course of that examination, insofar as 
I have any knowledge of it, he stated". According to this, therefore, 
Mr. Eulenburg has never seen the  record;  he knows it only from 
hearsay and can only tell as much "as has come to his knowledge 
in this way". But he at once proceeds to give himself the lie. 
Having just told everything "insofar as he had any knowledge of 
it", he goes on in his very next sentence to say: 
"Having regard to the fact that it is for the Prussian judiciary to give a ruling as 
to the submission of the files, I must refrain from giving any further information." 
In other words, he would compromise the government were he 
to "give" what he knows. 
Incidentally: If only one interrogation took place, we also know 
"when", namely on the day when Nobiling was arrested with 
bullets in his brain and a sabre cut in the head, namely on the day, 
the same day that the notorious telegram was released,3 at 2  o'clock 
in the morning, on June 2. Later, however, the government sought 
to make the ultramontane party292 responsible for Nobiling. The 
interrogation, therefore, had revealed no connection of any descrip­
tion between Nobiling's assassination attempt and the Social-
Democrats. 
But Eulenburg has not yet concluded his confessions. He has to 
"expressly point out that, as early as May, I stated from this place293 that the 
statement did not go so far as to say that these acts had been directly instigated by the 
Social-Democrats; neither am I now in a position to make such statement nor, indeed, to 
add anything new along the same lines." 
Bravo! Eulenburg roundly admits that, for all the disgraceful 
harassment by police and interrogators which took place between 
Hödel's assassination attempt and the Reichstag MEETING, not one 
shred of factual evidence was produced in support of the govern­
ment's pet "theory" regarding the attempted assassinations! 
Eulenburg and Co., whose tender "regard" for the powers of 
the "Prussian judiciary" is such that the latter is assumed, after 
Hödel's decapitation and Nobiling's death, 294 to present an obstacle 
a "Die Frevelthat vom ; 2. Juni", Neue Preußische Zeitung, No. 126, June 4, 
1878.—  Ed. 
18* 

=====第274页=====
244 Karl Marx 
to submitting the "records" to the Reichstag, the investigation thus 
being closed for good, did not scruple on the very day of 
Nobiling's assassination attempt, when the investigation of his case 
had barely begun, to issue a tendentiously worded "telegram", 
purportedly about the initial interrogation of Nobiling, thereby 
evoking delirium tremens in the German philistines and causing 
their press to build an edifice of lies thereon! What respect for the 
judiciary and more particularly for the similarly accused 
government! 
Having thus declared that there is no factual evidence arising out 
of these attempted assassinations upon which to base an accusation 
against the Social-Democrats—and therefore refused to produce 
the records which would cast a grotesque light on this abhorrent 
circumstance, Mr. Eulenburg proceeds to say that the Bill in fact 
rests simply upon a "theory", the government's theory that 
"the line of vehement agitation adopted by Social-Democracy in the dissemination of 
its doctrines would be well-calculated to induce in unruly spirits the maturation of such 
tragic fruits as we, to our most profound regret, have had to witness." 
//Tragic fruits such as Sefeloge, Tschech, Schneider, Becker, 
Kullmann, Cohen (alias Blind)?// 
"And I believe that in so saying, Gentlemen, I am still today of one mind with the 
entire German press," 
//i.e.  insofar as it has been reptilized,295 i.e. with the single 
exception of independent papers of all complexions// 
"with the sole exception of the Social-Democratic section  thereof". 
(Outright lies, as before!) 
//The meetings attended by Nobiling, like any other, took place 
under the supervision of a policeman; hence there was nothing 
insidious about them; the doctrines he listened to can only have 
related to the subjects on the agenda.// 
After these factually false pronouncements about the "entire 
German press", Mr. Eulenburg may be 
"certain of encountering no contradiction from that quarter". 
In reply to Bebel, he has to "recall the attitude adopted towards these events by 
the Social-Democratic press" in order to prove "that Social-Democracy" does not, 
as it claims, "abhor murder in whatever guise". 
Proof: 
1. "The organs of Social-Democracy began by trying to demonstrate that the 
attempted assassinations were a put-up job"  (CROWN PRINCE3). 
a Frederick William.— Ed. 

=====第275页=====
Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law 245 
//The Norddeutsche Allgemeine [Zeitung]'s complaints concerning 
the legal nature of German Social-Democratic agitation.// 296 
2. "When they saw that this offered no means of escape..., they changed their 
tune and asserted that neither of the criminals could be held accountable, depicting 
them as isolated lunatics and their deeds as manifestations such as had always 
occurred from time to time in every era" 
//haven't they?// 
"and for which no one could be held responsible." 
//(Proves love of "murder".) (Many non-Social-Democratic 
journals did the same.)// 
Instead of producing the "records" of which, according to his 
previous statement, he has no knowledge—or must, out of regard 
for the "Prussian judiciary", refrain from blabbing about—Mr. 
Eulenburg now demands that credence be attached, on the 
grounds of these "records" withheld by him, to the following: 
"Gentlemen, the investigation which has been carried out has not yielded the 
slightest indication that the two men were in any way incapable of reflecting upon 
the consequences and implications of their acts. On the contrary, all that it has been 
possible to establish is that they were fully accountable for their actions and, in the 
latter case, //not, then, in that of the executed man, Hödel?// acted with deliberate 
malice aforethought such as has seldom been seen before." 
3. "There has been a tendency in many of the organs of Social-Democracy to 
excuse these actions, to exculpate their  perpetrators.  Not they, but society" 
//they were exculpated by the government in that the latter does 
not hold them responsible but "the doctrines of Social-Democracy" 
and the agitators of the working class—i.e. one section of  society  and 
its "doctrines"—// 
"was held responsible for the crimes" 
//i.e.  the exculpation was not extended to the  acts,  otherwise they 
would not have been regarded as "crimes", and the question of 
"guilt" would not have been discussed at all// 
"which had been committed." 
{Quotes from Vorwärts* with complete justification, with refer­
ence to Hödel.) 
After all this clap-trap: 
4. "Side by side with this, Gentlemen, there appeared comments on the heinous 
acts perpetrated or attempted against high-ranking officials in Russia. With 
reference to Vera Zasulich's assassination attempt" 
//the St. Petersburg jury and the press throughout the world!!// 
"and the murder of General Mezentsov"297 
a Eulenburg quotes "Das Attentat" in Vorwärts, No. 57, May 17, 1878.— Ed. 

=====第276页=====
246 Karl Marx 
//more about this below, re Bismarck3// 
"you will have seen in a paper published here the question: 'Well, what else 
could they have done? What other recourse did they have?'"b 
5. "Finally, Social-Democracy abroad has explicitly and in so many words 
expressed its sympathy with these acts. The Congress of the Jura Federation, which 
met at Fribourg in July of this  year,  explicitly declared the acts of Hödel and Nobiling 
to be revolutionary acts which had its full sympathy, etc." 298 
But is German Social-Democracy "responsible" for the state­
ments and MOVEMENTS of a clique hostile to it whose "assassinations" 
and [the  like] c in Italy, Switzerland, Spain //likewise Russia: 
Nechayev// have hitherto been confined exclusively to members of 
"the Marxian tendency"?299 
//In referring to these same anarchists, Mr. Eulenburg had 
already remarked that one had had to relinquish the view that 
"the attempted assassinations were a put-up job", "when even Social-Democratic 
organs abroad—I shall presently provide an example of this—expressed the 
conviction that nothing of the kind was the case"; 
he forgets to provide "the example".// 
There now follows a fine passage on 
the "Marxian tendency" and the "tendency of the so-called Anarchists" 
(p. 51, Column I). They are different, but 
"it cannot be denied that there is a certain" (what? hostile) "connection between all 
these associations" 
as, indeed, there is a certain connection between all the mani­
festations of one and the same epoch. If they want to make a cas 
pendable 6 of this "connection", they must first of all show it to have 
a distinctive character, and not rest content with a phrase that is 
applicable to anything and everything in the universe where a 
"certain" connection exists between absolutely everything. The 
"Marxian tendency" has demonstrated that there is a definite 
connection between the "Anarchists' " doctrines and actions and 
those of the European "police". When the details of this 
connection were exposed in the report The Alliance, etc., e the 
entire reptilian and respectable press held its peace. These 
"revelations" did not fit in with their idea of a "connection". 
a For Bismarck's speech at the Reichstag sitting of September 17, 1878 see 
Stenographische Berichte..., Vol. 1, Berlin, 1878, p. 70.— Ed. 
b See "Das Henkerbeil", Berliner Freie  Presse,  No. 195, August 23, 1878.— Ed. 
c Not easily decipherable in the MS.— Ed. 
d Capital offence.— Ed. 
e K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International 
Working Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 23).— Ed. 

=====第277页=====
Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law 247 
(Hitherto this clique has confined its attempted murders solely to 
members of the "Marxian" tendency.) 
After this faux fuyant* Mr. Eulenburg proceeds, via an 
unobtrusive "and", to tack on a sentence which seeks to 
demonstrate the said "connection" by means of a false locus 
communis 0 and one, moreover, that was expressed in an exception­
ally "critical" form: 
"...and", he goes on, "and in such movements, experience based upon the law of 
gravity" 
//a movement may be based on the law of gravity, e.g. the 
movement of a fall, but an experience is based prima faciec only on 
the phenomenon of the fall// 
"has shown that more extreme tendencies" 
//e.g.  self-mutilation in Christianity// 
"gradually gain the upper hand, and that the more moderate ones are unable to 
hold their own against them." 
Firstly, to say that in historical movements it is the so-called 
extreme tendencies in any timely movement that gain the upper 
hand,— Luther versus Thomas Münzer, the Puritans versus the 
LEVELLERS,  the Jacobins versus the Hébertistes 30°—is a false locus 
communis. History proves precisely the opposite. Secondly, however, 
the "anarchist" tendency is not an "extreme tendency" of German 
Social-Democracy,— something which Eulenburg should prove 
rather than insinuate. What is involved in the one case is the 
genuine historical movement of the working class; the other is a 
phantom of a jeunesse sans issue d intent on making history, and 
merely shows how the ideas of French socialism are caricatured 
in the hommes déclassés* of the upper classes. As a result, 
anarchism has suffered an almost universal eclipse, and continues 
to exist only where there is as yet no proper workers' movement. 
This is a fact. 
All that Mr. Eulenburg proves is how dangerous it can be when 
the "police" take to "philosophising". 
See the immediately ensuing sentence (Column I, p. 51) in 
which Eulenburg speaks quasi re bene gestae 
a Red herring.— Ed. 
b Commonplace.— Ed. 
c On the face of it.— Ed. 
d Young people in a predicament.— Ed. 
e Déclassé men.— Ed. 
f As though all was as it should be.— Ed. 

=====第278页=====
248 Karl Marx 
He now seeks to prove that "the doctrines and objectives of 
Social-Democracy are harmful in all respects"! And how? With three 
quotations. 
But first let us look at the splendid way in which he makes the 
transition: 
"And if you take a somewhat closer look at these doctrines and objectives of 
Social-Democracy, you will find that the objective is not, as said just now, peaceful 
development, but that peaceful development is only a stage intended to lead on to the 
final objectives which are unattainable by any means other than those of force." 
//In the same way, perhaps, as the "National Association"301  was 
a "stage" intended to lead on to the forcible Prussification of 
Germany,— that's how Mr. Eulenburg looks at the matter [with] 
"Blood and Iron". 3// 
If one takes the first part of the sentence, what he is saying is 
merely a tautology or an absurdity: If development has an 
"objective" — "final objectives"—then those "objectives" are its 
"objectives", the nature of the development being neither 
"peaceful" nor otherwise. What Eulenburg is in fact trying to say 
is: Peaceful development towards an objective is only a stage which 
is intended to lead on to the forcible development of the objective, 
and indeed, according to Mr. Eulenburg, this subsequent change 
from "peaceful" to "forcible" development is inherent in the 
objective it is seeking to attain. The objective in the case under 
consideration is the emancipation of the working class and the 
revolution (transformation) of society implicit therein. An histori­
cal development can remain "peaceful" only for so long as its 
progress is not forcibly obstructed by those wielding social power 
at the time. If in England, for instance, or the United States, the 
working class were to gain a majority in PARLIAMENT or CONGRESS, 
they could, by lawful means, rid themselves of such laws and 
institutions as impeded their development, though they could only 
do so insofar as society had reached a sufficiently mature 
development. However, the "peaceful" movement might be 
transformed into a "forcible" one by resistance on the part of 
those interested in restoring the former state of affairs; if (as in 
the American Civil War and French Revolution 302) they are put 
down by force, it is as rebels against "lawful" force. 
But what Eulenburg advocates is forcible reaction on the part of 
those in power against development while still at the "peaceful 
a An allusion to Bismarck's statement regarding the way of unifying Germany. See 
his speech at the 94th session of the Budget Commission of the Prussian Chamber of 
Deputies on September 30, 1862, Berliner Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 458, October 2, 
1862 (morning issue).— Ed. 

=====第279页=====
Parliamentary Debate on the Anti-Socialist Law 249 
stage", and this for the purpose of preventing subsequent 
"forcible" conflicts; the war cry of forcible counter-revolution 
against actually "peaceful" development; indeed, the government 
is seeking to suppress by force a development it dislikes but cannot 
lawfully attack. This is the necessary prelude to forcible revolu­
tions. 
It is an old story 
which yet remains eternally new.3 
Mr. Eulenburg now adduces three quotations in proof of 
Social-Democracy's doctrines of force: 
1. In his work on capital, Marx says: "Our aims etc." 
//But "our" aims is said, not in the name of German 
Social-Democracy, but in that of the Communist Party.// The 
passage is not from Capital which appeared in 1867, but from the 
Communist Manifesto which had appeared in "1847",303 i.e. twenty 
years before the "German Social-Democracy" was actually formed. 
2. And in another passage, which is quoted in Mr. Bebel's work, Unsere Ziele, we 
read, as an assertion made by Marx: 
//He [Eulenburg]  himself,  who quotes from Capital a passage 
that is not in it, naturally quotes passage that does appear in it as 
an assertion quoted elsewhere. (Cf. passage in Capital, 2nd 
edition^)//  But the passage in Bebel runs: 
"Thus we see that force plays its role at various periods of history, and it is 
probably not without good reason that K. Marx (in his book, 'Das Kapital' in which 
he depicts the course of development of capitalist production) exclaims: 'Force is the 
midwife of every old  society  pregnant with a new one. It is itself an economic power'." c 
3. Quotation from Bebel: What Unsere Ziele (Column I, p. 51) 
quotes is, in fact, the following: 
"The course of this development depends on the intensity (power) with which 
the circles involved take hold of the movement; it depends on the resistance encountered 
by the movement from its opponents. Of one thing we may be sure: The more vigorous 
the resistance, the more forcibly will the new conditions be brought about The problem will 
not at all be solved by a sprinkling of rose water." 
//Eulenburg quotes this from BebeVs "Unsere Ziele". It is to be 
found on p. 16, see passage side-lined on p. 16, ditto 15; see ditto, 
passage side-lined, p. 43.// Again "falsified" because quoted out of 
context. 
a H. Heine, "Ein Jungling liebt ein Mädchen...", Buch der Lieder, Hamburg, 
1839.—  Ed. 
b K. Marx, Das Kapital, Hamburg, 1872, p. 782 (see Capital, Vol. I, Part VIII, , 
Chapter XXXI, present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed. 
c A. Bebel, Unsere Ziele, 4th ed., Leipzig, 1874, p. 16.— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
250 Karl Marx 
After this forceful performance, see the puerile and  self-
demolishing twaddle about Bismarck's "contacts" with the "leaders 
of Social-Democracy" (p. 51, Column  II). 304 
At the same sitting: 
Stolberg's speech was followed by Reichensperger's. His chief 
fear—that the law whereby everything was made subject to the 
police be also applied to other parties displeasing to the 
government; in addition, unending Catholic balderdash. (See 
side-lined passages, pp. 30-35). 
Reichensperger was followed by von Helldorff-Bedra. Utterly 
naive: 
"Gentlemen, the present law has the character of a preventive law in the most 
eminent sense of the word; it contains no penal clauses, but simply empowers the 
police to issue prohibitions and attaches penalties to infringements of these patently 
unmistakable prohibitions" (p. 36, Column I). 
//It allows only the police to prohibit everything and does not 
punish the infringement of any law, but rather the "infringement" 
of the police ukase. A highly successful way of rendering penal 
laws superfluous.// 
The "danger", admits Mr. von  Helldorf f, lies in the electoral 
victories of the Social-Democrats 305 which were not even preju­
diced by the harassment consequent upon the assassination 
attempts! That calls for disciplinary action. Use of general suffrage 
in a manner displeasing to the government! (36, Column II). 
However, the laddie concedes that Reichensperger is right and 
the "Complaints office", the "Federal Council Commission", 
nonsense. 
"The only question to be settled here is one that concerns the police, and to 
circumscribe such an authority by guaranteeing rights—quite definitely wrong"; abuse 
can be combatted by showing "confidence in politically highly placed officials" (37, I 
and II). Demands "amendment of our suffrage" (38, I). 
Written on about September 24, 1878 
First published, in Russian, in Marx-
Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), 1932 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第281页=====
251 
Frederick Engels 
[THE ANTI-SOCIALIST LAW IN GERMANY.— 
THE SITUATION IN RUSSIA]306 
London, March 21 
...The last socialist elections in Germany prove that one cannot 
kill socialism just by stopping its mouth.30 Indeed the law against 
the socialists will be a great success for us. It will complete the 
revolutionary education of the German workers... 
With great effort and great sacrifices they had won the degree 
of freedom of the press, of association and assembly which they 
enjoyed. It was a continuous struggle, but in the end victory 
always remained on the side of the workers. They could organise, 
and whenever there was a general election it was a new triumph 
for them. 
This legal agitation, however, made some people believe that it 
was no longer necessary to do anything else in order to obtain the 
final victory of the proletariat. This, in a country as poor in 
revolutionary traditions as Germany, could have been dangerous. 
Luckily, Bismarck's brutal action and the cowardice of the German 
bourgeoisie who support him have changed things. The German 
workers have proved just how much constitutional liberties are 
worth when the proletariat takes them seriously and uses them to 
combat capitalist domination. If any illusions still existed in this 
respect, our friend Bismarck has abruptly dispelled them. I say 
our friend Bismarck because no one has ever rendered so many 
services to socialism in Germany as he has. After preparing the 
revolution with the most advanced and intolerable militarism, with 
constantly increasing taxes, with an alliance between the State and 
the most shameless stock-jobbing, with a return to the most feudal 
and repressive traditions of the old Prussia, with persecutions as 
numerous as they were petty, and with public degradation and 
revilement inflicted on a bourgeoisie which, it must be said, 

=====第282页=====
252 Frederick Engels 
deserved no better,— after preparing the revolution in this way he 
crowns his labours by forcing the German proletariat to set out on 
the revolutionary road. 
Our friend Bismarck can rest assured. The revolution he has so 
well prepared will be carried out by the German workers. When 
the signal is given by Russia, they will be ready. 
For some years now I have been bringing the state of Russia, 
where a decisive movement is being prepared, to the attention of 
European socialists. The struggle between the government and the 
secret societies has taken on so violent a character there that it 
cannot last. The movement seems to be on the brink of exploding. 
The government agents are committing incredible atrocities. 
Against such wild animals one must defend oneself as one can, 
with powder and lead. Political assassination in Russia is the only 
means which men of intelligence, dignity and character possess to 
defend themselves against the agents of an unprecedented 
despotism.308 
Powerful conspiracies in the army and even in the imperial 
Court, national opinion humiliated by the diplomatic defeats 
following the war,309 the treasury empty, credit in ruins, the 
bankers refusing to grant loans unless they are guaranteed by a 
national assembly, and finally destitution. This is the balance of 
Russia. 
Written on March 21, 1879 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in La Plebe, No. 12, 
March 30, 1879 Translated from the Italian 
Signed: F. Engels Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第283页=====
253 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
CIRCULAR LETTER 
TO AUGUST BEBEL, WILHELM LIEBKNECHT, 
WILHELM BRACKE AND OTHERS 310 
Dear Bebel, 
The delay in replying to your letter of August 20a has been 
due,  on the one hand, to Marx's prolonged absence311  and, on the 
other, to a number of incidents: first, the arrival of the "Richter" 
Jahrbuch, secondly that of Höchberg  himself. 312 
I can only conclude that Liebknecht did not show you the last 
letter I wrote him, although I specifically instructed him to do so. 
Otherwise you would certainly not have adduced the same reasons 
as had been put forward by Liebknecht, and to which I had 
already replied in the aforesaid letter. 313 
Let us now run through the individual points with which we are 
concerned here. 
I. THE NEGOTIATIONS WITH CARL HIRSCH 
Liebknecht asked Hirsch whether he would undertake to edit 
the party organ that was about to be founded in Zurich. Hirsch 
sought information as to the financing of the paper: what funds 
were available and who was providing them? Firstly, so as to know 
whether the paper might not peter out within a few months. 
Secondly, to ascertain who held the purse-strings, thus having the 
final say as to the paper's stance. Liebknecht's reply, telling Hirsch 
that "everything is in order; you will be getting further 
information from Zurich" (Liebknecht to Hirsch, July 28), didn't 
arrive. 314 But what did reach Hirsch from Zurich was a letter from 
a The original erroneously has: "August 29".— Ed. 

=====第284页=====
254 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Bernstein (July 24) in which Bernstein informed him that "  We* 
are being entrusted with the production and supervision (of the 
paper)".  A discussion had taken place "between Viereck, Singer 
and ourselves" during which it was suggested 
"that your position might be rendered somewhat difficult by the differences of 
opinion which you, as a Laterne man, have had with individual comrades, though J 
myself do not consider this objection carries much weight". 
Not a word about the financing. 
Hirsch answered by return on July 26, enquiring about the 
paper's material circumstances. Which comrades had undertaken 
to cover the deficit? Up to what amount and for how long?—The 
question of the editor's salary didn't enter into this at all; Hirsch 
merely wanted to know whether "means have been secured to 
ensure the paper's continued existence for at least a year". 
On July 31, Bernstein replied, saying that any deficit there 
might be would be covered by voluntary contributions of which 
some (!) had already been subscribed. Hirsch's remarks about the 
stance he thought the paper should adopt, of which more below, 
elicited deprecating remarks and injunctions: 
"It is all the more necessary for the supervisory committee315 to insist on it in that 
it, in turn, is subject to control, i.e. is responsible. On these points, therefore, you 
must come to an understanding with the supervisory committee." 
They asked him to reply by return, preferably by telegraph. 
Hence, instead of getting a reply to his justified questions, 
Hirsch was informed that he was to be editor under a supervisory 
committee based in Zurich, with views differing very materially 
from his own and members of whose names he wasn't even 
informed! 
Hirsch, quite justifiably outraged by this treatment, chose rather 
to come to an understanding with the Leipzigers. His letter of 
August 2 to Liebknecht must be known to you, since Hirsch 
expressly demanded that it be shown to you and Viereck. Hirsch is 
even willing to submit to a supervisory committee in Zurich, 
inasmuch as the latter is to put its comments to the editor in 
writing and these may be referred for decision to the controlling 
committee in Leipzig. 316 
In the meantime Liebknecht had written to Hirsch on July 28: 
"Of course finance is available for the undertaking, seeing that it is backed by 
the entire  party+(INCLUSIVE)  Höchberg. But I'm not concerned with the details." 
Nor does Liebknecht's next letter contain anything about the 
financing—only an assurance that the Zurich committee is not an 
a Eduard Bernstein, Karl Höchberg and Karl August Schramm.— Ed. 

=====第285页=====
?S* V 
•?£E 
^-._ /L-Ac ^-ti *•**  **•- -•• 
/-«>••>-->  •'••-  -*•*• 
. ^ -- — •••  -< : * 
+**ls  *&4JL  ft, • j» ^ -^ —;*-  »* 
^•^  y"' j&: ~y~~~jr~ 
••/•"** 
£., xi. —"• ^* 
*/*?£? % 
Jt 
v >•; 
A page  of the  "Circular Letter  to August Bebel, Wilhelm Liebknecht, Wilhelm 
Bracke  and Others"  by Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels 

=====第286页=====

=====第287页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 257 
editorial committee, but is only to be entrusted with administration 
and the financial side. As late as August 14, Liebknecht wrote to 
me along the same lines, and asked that we persuade Hirsch to 
accept. You  yourself,  as late as August 20 were still so little 
acquainted with the actual circumstances that you wrote to me 
saying: 
"He"  (Höchberg) "has no more say in the editing of the paper than any other 
well-known member of the party." 
Finally, Hirsch received a letter from Viereck, dated August 11, 
containing the admission that 
"the 3 men domiciled in Zurich are to, qua editorial committee, apply themselves 
to founding the paper and, subject to the agreement of the three Leipzigers, select 
an editor ... so far as I recall, the resolutions that were sent them also asserted that 
the (Zurich) founding committee mentioned under 2., was to assume both political 
and financial responsibility towards the party.... From this state of affairs it follows, 
or so it seems to me, that ... there can be no question of anyone assuming the 
editorship without the concurrence of the 3 men domiciled in Zurich and entrusted 
with the founding by the party". 
Here at last was something definite, at least, for Hirsch to go on, if 
only in regard to the position of the editor vis-à-vis the Zürichers. 
They were an editorial committee; they were also politically 
responsible; without their concurrence no one could assume the 
editorship. In short, Hirsch was simply instructed to come to an 
understanding with three men in Zurich whose names had still not 
been disclosed to him. 
But to make the confusion worse, Liebknecht added a postscript 
to Viereck's letter: 
"Singer from Berlin was here just now and informed us that the supervisory 
committee in Zurich is not, as Viereck imagines, an editorial committee, but 
essentially an administrative committee which is financially responsible to the party, 
i.e. to ourselves, for the paper; of course, its members also have the right and the 
duty to discuss the editing with you (a right and a duty of which, by the way, every 
member is possessed); they are not empowered to place you under their 
guardianship." 
The Zurich trio and one member of the Leipzig committee—the 
only onea  present at the discussions—insist that Hirsch is to be 
subject to official direction by Zurich, while another Leipzig 
member b contests this outright. And yet Hirsch is to make up his 
mind before these gentlemen are agreed amongst themselves! The 
fact that Hirsch was entitled to acquaint himself with the 
resolutions they had adopted and which embodied the conditions 
with which he was expected to comply, was entirely overlooked, 
a Louis Viereck. — Ed. 
b Wilhelm Liebknecht. — Ed. 
19-1317 

=====第288页=====
258 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the more so since it never seems to have occurred to the 
Leipzigers that they themselves should become properly acquainted 
with those resolutions. How, otherwise, can the above-mentioned 
inconsistency be accounted for? 
If the Leipzigers were unable to agree upon the powers vested 
in the Zurich people, the latter harboured no doubts on this score. 
Schramm to Hirsch, August 14: 
"Had you not written at one time that in a similar case" (as that of Kayser),a 
"you would do just as you had done before, thus holding out the prospect of a 
similar modus operandi?1"1 we would not be wasting words on the subject. As it is, 
however, and in view of that statement of yours, we must reserve the right to have 
the casting vote as to what articles the new paper should take." 
The letter to Bernstein in which Hirsch was alleged to have said 
this was dated July 26, long after the conference in Zurich at 
which the Zurich trio's powers were laid down. But so much were 
those in Zurich already revelling in the sense of their own 
bureaucratic authority that, in reply to this subsequent letter of 
Hirsch's, they were already laying claim to new powers, namely the 
decision as to what articles should be included. The editorial 
committee was already a censorship committee. 
Not until Höchberg arrived in Paris did Hirsch learn from him 
the names of the members of the two committees. 318 
If, then, discussions with Hirsch broke down, what was the 
cause? 
1. The obstinate refusal, on the part of both Leipzig and Zurich, 
to give him any hard and fast information about the paper's 
financial basis and hence the likelihood of keeping it afloat, if only 
for a year. Not until he was over here did he learn from me 
(following your communication to meb ) how much had been 
subscribed. Hence, the only conclusion it was really possible to 
draw from previous communications (the party + Höchberg) was 
either that the paper was already being largely financed by 
Höchberg or that it would soon be entirely dependent on his 
subsidies. And this latter eventuality is still far from being 
excluded. The sum of—if I read it right—800 marks is precisely 
the same (40 pounds sterling) as had to be contributed by the local 
association, Freiheit? 19 during the first half year. 
2. Liebknecht's repeated assurances, which have since proved 
totally erroneous, that Zurich was to have no official control 
whatever over the editorship, and the resulting comedy of errors; 
3. The certainty finally established that not only were the Zurich 
a See this volume, pp.  260-61.—  Ed. 
b This refers to August Bebel's letter to Engels of August 20, 1879.— Ed. 

=====第289页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 259 
people to control the editing, they were actually to censor it, and 
that the only role that would redound upon him, Hirsch, would be 
that of the man of straw. 
His refusal at that juncture is something we cannot but approve. 
The Leipzig committee, or so we hear from Höchberg, ° has 
received reinforcements in the shape of two more who do not live 
in the place 3 and hence that committee can intervene quickly only 
if the three Leipzigers are agreed. As a result, the real centre of 
gravity has altogether shifted to Zurich, and Hirsch or, for that 
matter, any true revolutionary and proletarian-minded editor, 
would not have been able to work with the people there for any 
length of time. More about this later. 
II. THE PROPOSED STANCE OF THE PAPER 
As early as July 24 Bernstein had informed Hirsch that the 
differences he, as a Laterne man, had had with individual comrades 
would render his position more difficult. 
Hirsch replied b that in his view the paper's stance would in 
general have to be the same as that of the Laterne, i.e. such as to 
avoid prosecution in Switzerland and not cause undue alarm in 
Germany. He inquired who those comrades might be and 
continued: 
"I know of only one and can promise you that in a similar case of undisciplined 
conduct I should deal with him in exactly the same way." 
Whereupon Bernstein, conscious of his newly acquired dignity 
as official censor, replied: 
"Now as regards the paper's stance, it is the view of the supervisory committee 
that the Laterne should not serve as a model; in our view the paper should be less 
taken up with political radicalism, but rather adopt a line that is socialist on 
principle. Instances such as the attack upon Kayser, which was frowned on by all 
comrades without exception" (!), "must under all circumstances be avoided." 0 
And so on and so forth. Liebknecht called the attack on Kayser 
"a bloomer", and so dangerous did it seem to Schramm that he 
immediately imposed censorship on Hirsch. d 
Hirsch again wrote to Höchberg, saying that a case such as that 
of Kayser 
"could not occur should an official party organ exist, whose lucid expositions 
and friendly hints could not be so presumptuously brushed aside by a deputy". 
a Ignaz Auer and Karl Grillenberger.— Ed. 
b On July 26, 1879.— Ed. 
c Eduard Bernstein's letter to Carl Hirsch of July 31, 1879.— Ed. 
d See this volume, p.  258.—  Ed. 
19* 

=====第290页=====
260 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Viereck also wrote, saying that what was required of the new 
paper was that it adopt a 
"dispassionate attitude and, in so far as possible, bury the hatchet"; it ought not 
to be an "enlarged version of the Laterne" and "the most Bernstein can be 
reproached with is that he holds views that are too moderate, if reproach it be at a 
time when we cannot, after all, crowd on sail". 
Well, now, what is this Kayser case, this unpardonable crime 
Hirsch is supposed to have committed? In the Reichstag, Kayser 
spoke in favour of and voted for protective tariffs, the only one of 
the Social-Democratic deputies to do so. Hirsch accused him of 
having infringed party discipline, in that Kayser 
1. voted for indirect taxation, the abolition of which is expressly 
demanded by the party programme3; 
2. voted Bismarck funds, thus infringing the first and funda­
mental rule of our party tactics: not a farthing for this 
government. 
Hirsch is undeniably right on both counts. And, after Kayser 
had spurned, on the one hand, the party programme to which the 
deputies, by their resolution in congress, had in effect been 
solemnly pledged and, on the other hand, the most imperative 
and all-important rule of party tactics, after he had voted 
Bismarck funds, out of gratitude for the Anti-Socialist Law, 321 Hirsch 
was again perfectly justified in our opinion in handling him as 
roughly as he did. 
We have never understood how it was that this attack upon 
Kayser could have aroused such a furore in Germany. I am now 
told by Höchberg that it was the "faction" which gave Kayser 
permission to act as he did, and Kayser is held to be covered by 
that permission. 
If such is the case, then it is really too bad. In the first place, 
Hirsch could have known no more than the rest of the world 
about this secret resolution. 0 Then, again, the discredit incurred by 
the party, for which previously Kayser alone could have been 
blamed, is all the greater for this affair, as is Hirsch's merit in 
having brought to light in public and for all the world to see 
Kayser's preposterous phraseology and his even more preposter­
ous vote, thus saving-the honour of the party. Or has German 
a See "Programm der sozialistischen Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands", Der Volks­
staat, No. 59, May 28, 1875.—  Ed. 
b Deleted in the manuscript: "Even admitting that two or three other 
Social-Democratic deputies (for it is unlikely that any more were there) had allowed 
themselves to be misled into permitting Kayser to recite his inanities in front of all 
and sundry, and vote Bismarck funds, it was their duty publicly to assume 
responsibility for this and then wait and see what Hirsch would  say."—Ed. 

=====第291页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 261 
Social-Democracy indeed been infected with the parliamentary 
disease, believing that, with the popular vote, the Holy Ghost is 
poured upon those elected, that meetings of the faction are 
transformed into infallible councils and factional resolutions into 
sacrosanct dogma? 
Admittedly, a bloomer has been made—not by Hirsch, however, 
but by the deputies who gave Kayser the protection of their 
resolution. And if those upon whom, above all others, it is 
incumbent to see that party discipline is maintained, themselves so 
glaringly infringe that party discipline by a resolution of this kind, 
then so much the worse. But it is even worse still if they have the 
audacity to believe that it was not Kayser, by his speech and vote, 
or the other deputies by their resolution, who infringed party 
discipline, but Hirsch, inasmuch as he attacked Kayser despite that 
resolution about which, moreover, he knew nothing. 
For the rest, there can be no doubt that the policy the party had 
adopted towards the question of protective tariffs was as muddled 
and vacillating as it has always been in regard to virtually all 
economic questions—e.g. state railways322 —when they have be­
come a practical issue. The reason for this is that the party organs, 
notably Vorwärts, rather than subject such questions to a thorough 
discussion, have preferred to apply themselves to the construction 
of the future social order. When, subsequent to the Anti-Socialist 
Law, the question of protective tariffs suddenly became a live 
issue, views on the subject diverged, assuming a wide variety of 
nuances, and there was absolutely no one to hand possessing the 
qualification that would have enabled him to form a lucid and 
accurate opinion, namely a knowledge of conditions in German 
industry and the latter's position in the world market. Again, as 
was bound to happen, protectionist tendencies cropped up here 
and there amongst the electorate, tendencies which, it was felt, 
ought also to be taken into consideration. The only possible way 
out of the confusion would have been to take a purely political 
view of the question (as was done in the Laterne), but this was not 
pursued with any determination. Thus it was inevitable that in this 
debate, the party acted for the first time in a hesitant, uncertain 
and muddled way and ended up by thoroughly discrediting itself 
through the person of and in company with Kayser. 
The attack on Kayser is now being used as a pretext to 
admonish Hirsch, in tones ranging through the whole gamut, to 
the effect that the new paper must on no account repeat the 
excesses of the Laterne, must be less taken up with political 
radicalism and rather adopt a line that is dispassionate and 

=====第292页=====
262 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
socialist on principle. And this from Viereck no less than from 
Bernstein who, precisely because he is too moderate, appears to 
the former to be the right man, seeing that just now we cannot, 
after all, crowd on sail. 
But why go abroad at all, unless one intends to crowd on sail? 
Abroad, there's nothing to prevent this being done. In Switzerland 
there are no German press, combination and penal laws. Hence, 
not only can one say things there, which could not, even before 
the Anti-Socialist Law, be said at home because of the ordinary 
German laws, but one is actually duty-bound to do so. For here one 
is under the eyes, not of Germany alone, but of Europe and it is 
one's duty, insofar as the Swiss laws allow, openly to proclaim for 
Europe's benefit the methods and aims of the German party. 
Anyone in Switzerland seeking to abide by the German laws would 
only prove that he is deserving of those German laws and that he 
has, in effect, nothing to say save what he was allowed to say in 
Germany before the Exceptional Law. Nor should any account be 
taken of the possibility that the editors might be temporarily 
deprived of the chance to return to Germany. Anyone who is not 
prepared to run that risk is not fit to occupy so exposed and 
honourable a post. 
More. If the German party was ostracised by the Exceptional 
Law, this was precisely because it was the only serious opposition 
party in Germany. If, in an organ published abroad, it renders 
thanks to Bismarck by abandoning its role as the only serious 
opposition party, by behaving in a nice, docile manner and 
adopting a dispassionate stance when kicked, it only proves that it 
deserved to be kicked. Of all the German émigré papers that have 
appeared abroad since 1830, the Laterne is undoubtedly one of the 
most moderate. If, however, even the Laterne was too insolent— 
then the new organ could not but compromise the party in the 
eyes of sympathisers in non-German countries. 
III. THE MANIFESTO OF THE ZURICH TRIO 
In the meantime we have received Höchberg's Jahrbuch, 
containing an article, "Rückblicke auf die sozialistische Bewegung 
in Deutschland," 3 which, as Höchberg himself informed me, was 
actually written by the three members of the Zurich committee. 5 
a See this volume, p. 253. Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, Jg. 1, 1. 
Hälfte, Zurich-Oberstrass, 1879, pp. 75-96. The parentheses, abridgements and italics 
in the following quotations are by Engels. — Ed 
b Höchberg, Bernstein and Schramm.— Ed 

=====第293页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 263 
Here we have their authentic critique of the movement up till 
now, and hence their authentic programme for the new paper's 
stance insofar as this is dependent on them. 
At the very start we read: 
"The movement, regarded by Lassalle as an eminently political one, to which he 
sought to rally not only the workers but all honest democrats, and in the van of 
which were to march the independent representatives of science and all men imbued 
with a true love of mankind, was trivialised under the chairmanship of J. B. von 
Schweitzer into a one-sided struggle of the industrial workers to promote their own 
interests."  a 
I shall not inquire whether and to what extent this is historically 
true.  The specific charge against Schweitzer is that Schweitzer 
trivialised Lassalleanism, here regarded as a bourgeois democratic-
philanthropic movement, into a one-sided struggle of the industri­
al workers to promote their own interests—trivialised it by 
emphasising its character as a class struggle of industrial workers 
against the bourgeoisie.15 He is further charged with having 
"repudiated bourgeois democracy".0 But has bourgeois democracy 
any business to be in the Social-Democratic Party at all? If it 
consists of "honest men", it surely cannot wish to join, and if it 
nevertheless wishes to join, this can only be for the purpose of 
stirring up trouble. 
The Lassallean party "chose to present itself in a most one-sided 
manner as a workers' party".d The gentlemen who wrote those 
a Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 84.— Ed. 
b These two sentences were substituted by the authors for the following passage 
deleted in the manuscript: "Schweitzer was a great blackguard, but very talented 
intellectually. His particular merit consisted in his having broken free of the original, 
narrow Lassalleanism with its limited panacea of state aid... Whatever wrong he may 
have done out of corrupt motives and however much, too, he may have clung to the 
Lassallean panacea of state aid in order to preserve his domination, he nevertheless 
had the merit of having broken free of the original, narrow Lassalleanism, of having 
broadened the party's economic horizons and thus paved the way for its subsequent 
merger with the German party as a whole. The class struggle between proletariat and 
bourgeoisie, that pivot of all revolutionary socialism, had already been advocated by 
Lassalle. If Schweitzer stressed this point even more strongly it was, at any rate, a step 
forward so far as the cause was concerned, however much of a pretext he may thus 
have afforded dangerous individuals for calling his dictatorship in question. It may 
rightly be said that he turned Lassalleanism into a one-sided struggle of the industrial 
workers to promote their own interests. But one-sided only in the sense that, for 
reasons that were politically corrupt, he wished to have nothing to do with the farm 
workers' struggle to promote their own interests vis-à-vis the big landowners. It is not 
that with which he is reproached here; rather the 'trivialisation' consists in his 
emphasising its character as a class struggle of industrial workers against the 
bourgeoisie."— Ed. 
c Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 84.— Ed. 
<» Ibid., p. 85.—  Ed. 

=====第294页=====
264 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
words are themselves members of a party which presents itself in 
the most one-sided manner as a workers' party, and now hold 
office in the same. Here we have a complete incompatibility. If 
they think as they write, they ought to leave the party or at least 
resign from office. If they don't, it is tantamount to admitting that 
they intend to use their official position to combat the party's 
proletarian character. Hence the party is betraying itself if it allows 
them to remain in office. 
Thus,  in the view of these gentlemen, the Social-Democratic 
Party ought not to be a one-sided workers' party but a many-sided 
party of "all men imbued with a true love of mankind". This it is 
to prove, above all, by divesting itself of crude proletarian passions 
and applying  itself,  under the direction of educated philanthropic 
bourgeois, "to the formation of good taste" and "the acquisition 
of good manners" (p. 85). After which the "seedy appearance" of 
some of the leaders would give way to a respectable "bourgeois 
appearance".3 (As though the outwardly seedy appearance of 
those referred to here were not the least that could be held against 
them!) After which, too, 
"there will be an influx of supporters from the ranks of the educated and 
propertied classes. These, however, must first be won over if the ... agitation engaged 
in is to have perceptible results...". German socialism has laid "too much stress on 
winning over the masses, thus omitting to prosecute vigorous" (!) "propaganda 
amongst the so-called upper strata of society". For "the party still lacks men who 
are fit to represent it in the Reichstag". It is, however, "desirable and necessary to 
entrust the mandates to men who have had the time and the opportunity to 
become thoroughly conversant with the relevant material. Only rarely and in 
exceptional cases does ... the simple working man and small master craftsman have 
sufficient leisure for the purpose".b 
Therefore elect bourgeois! 
In short, the working class is incapable of emancipating itself by 
its own efforts. In order to do so it must place itself under the 
direction of "educated and propertied" bourgeois who alone have 
"the time and the opportunity" to become conversant with what is 
good for the workers. And, secondly, the bourgeois are not to be 
combatted—not on your life—but won over by vigorous prop­
aganda. 
If, however, you wish to win over the upper strata of society, or 
at least their well-intentioned elements, you mustn't frighten 
them—not on your life. And here the Zurich trio believe they have 
made a reassuring discovery: 
a Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p. 86.— Ed. 
b Ibid., pp. 87-89.— Ed. 

=====第295页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 265 
"Now, at the very time it is oppressed by the Anti-Socialist Law, the party is 
showing that it does not wish to pursue the path of forcible, bloody revolution, but 
rather is determined ... to tread the path of legality, i.e. of reform."* 
If, therefore, the 5-600,000 Social-Democratic voters, Vio to Vs 
of the total electorate—and dispersed, what is more, over the 
length and breadth of the country—have sense enough not to 
beat their heads against a wall and attempt a "bloody revolution" 
with the odds at one to ten, this is supposed to prove that they 
will, for all time, continue to deny themselves all chance of 
exploiting some violent upheaval abroad, a sudden wave of 
revolutionary fervour engendered thereby, or even a people's 
victory won in a clash arising therefrom! Should Berlin ever be so 
uneducated as to stage another March  18,323  it would behove the 
Social-Democrats not to take part in the fighting as "louts besotted 
with barricades" (p. 88) but rather to "tread the path of legality", 
to placate, to clear away the barricades and, if necessary, march 
with the glorious army against the one-sided, crude, uneducated 
masses. Or if the gentlemen insist that that's not what they meant, 
then what did they mean? 
But there's better in store. 
"Hence, the more calm, sober and considered it (the Party) shows itself to be in 
its criticism of existing circumstances and its proposals to change the same, the less 
likelihood is there of a repetition of the present successful move" (introduction of the 
Anti-Socialist Law) "by means of which conscious reaction has scared the bourgeoisie 
out of their wits by holding up the red spectre" (p. 88). 
In order to relieve the bourgeoisie of the last trace of anxiety, it 
is to be shown clearly and convincingly that the red spectre really is 
just a spectre and doesn't exist. But what is the secret of the red 
spectre, if not the bourgeoisie's fear of the inevitable life-and-
death struggle between itself and the proletariat, fear of the 
unavoidable outcome of the modern class struggle? Just abolish 
the class struggle, and the bourgeoisie and "all independent 
persons" will "not hesitate to go hand in hand with the 
proletarians"  !b In which case the ones to be hoodwinked would be 
those self-same proletarians. 
Let the party, therefore, prove, by its humble and subdued 
demeanour, that it has renounced once and for all the "improp­
rieties and excesses"0 which gave rise to the Anti-Socialist Law. If 
it voluntarily undertakes to remain wholly within the bounds of 
the Anti-Socialist Law, Bismarck and the bourgeoisie will, no 
a Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, pp. 87-88.— Ed. 
b Ibid., p. 88.—  Ed. 
c Ibid., p. 87.— Ed. 

=====第296页=====
266 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
doubt, oblige by rescinding what would then be a redundant law! 
"Let no one misunderstand us"; we don't want "to relinquish our party and our 
programme,3 but in our opinion we shall have enough to do for years to come if 
we concentrate our whole strength, our entire energies, on the attainment of 
certain immediate objectives which must in any case be won before there can be 
any thought of realising more ambitious aspirations."13 
Then, too, the bourgeois, petty-bourgeois and workers, who "are 
now scared off ... by ambitious demands",0 will join us en masse. 
The programme is not to be relinquished, but merely postponed— 
for some unspecified period. They accept it—not for themselves 
in their own lifetime but posthumously, as an heirloom for their 
children and their children's children. Meanwhile they devote 
their "whole strength and energies" to all sorts of trifles, tinkering 
away at the capitalist social order so that at least something should 
appear to be done without at the same time alarming the 
bourgeoisie. Here I can only commend that communist, Miquel, 
who gives proof of his unshakable belief in the inevitable downfall 
of capitalist society within the next few hundred years by 
swindling it for all he's worth, contributing manfully to the crash 
of 1873, and thus really doing something towards the collapse of 
the existing order.324 
Another offence against good manners was the "exaggerated 
attacks on the Gründer" ?A who, after all, were "only children of 
their time"; hence "the vilification of Strousberg and suchlike men 
... would have been better omitted".0 Sadly we are all "children of 
our time", and if this be sufficient grounds for excuse, it is no 
longer permissible to attack anyone, and we for our part would 
have to desist from all polemic, all struggle; we would calmly 
submit whenever kicked by our opponents, because we would 
know in our wisdom that they are "only children of their time" 
and cannot act otherwise than they do. Instead of repaying them 
their kicks with interest, we should rather, it seems, feel sorry for 
the poor fellows. 
Similarly, our support for the Commune had one drawback, at 
any rate, namely 
"that it put off people otherwise well-disposed towards us, and generally 
increased the hatred felt for us by the bourgeoisie". Moreover, the party "cannot be 
wholly exonerated from having brought about the October Law,325 for it had 
needlessly exacerbated the hatred of the bourgeoisie" .e 
a "Programm der sozialistischen Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands". — Ed. 
b Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik, p.  88.—  Ed. 
c Ibid.— Ed. 
d Ibid., p.  95.—  Ed. 
e Ibid., pp. 95, 96.— Ed. 

=====第297页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 267 
There you have the programme of the three censors of Zurich. 
As regards clarity, it leaves nothing to be desired. Least of all so 
far as we're concerned, since we are still only too familiar with all 
these catch-phrases of 1848. There are the voices of the 
representatives of the petty bourgeoisie, terrified lest the pro­
letariat, impelled by its revolutionary situation, should "go too 
far". Instead of resolute political opposition—general conciliation; 
instead of a struggle against government and bourgeoisie—an 
attempt to win them over and talk them round; instead of defiant 
resistance to maltreatment from above—humble subjection and 
the admission that the punishment was deserved. Every historically 
necessary conflict is reinterpreted as a misunderstanding and 
every discussion wound up with the assurance: we are, of course, 
all agreed on the main issue. The men who in 1848 entered the 
arena as bourgeois democrats might now just as well call 
themselves Social-Democrats. To the former, the democratic 
republic was as unattainably remote as the overthrow of the 
capitalist order is to the latter, and therefore utterly irrelevant to 
present political practice; one can conciliate, compromise, philan­
thropise to one's heart's content. The same thing applies to the 
class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie. On paper it is 
recognised because there is no denying it any longer, but in 
practice it is glossed over, suppressed, emasculated. The Social-
Democratic Party should not be a workers' party, it should not 
bring upon itself the hatred of the bourgeoisie or, for that matter, 
of anyone else; above all, it should prosecute vigorous propaganda 
amongst the bourgeoisie; instead of laying stress on ambitious 
goals which are calculated to frighten off the bourgeoisie, and 
unattainable anyway in our own generation, it should rather 
devote all its strength and energies to those petty-bourgeois 
stop-gap reforms which provide new props for the old social order 
and which might, perhaps, transform the ultimate catastrophe into 
a gradual, piecemeal and, as far as possible, peaceable process of 
dissolution. These are the same people who keep up an 
appearance of ceaseless activity, yet not only do nothing them­
selves but also try to ensure that nothing at all is done 
save—chin-wagging; the same people whose fear of any kind of 
action in 1848 and '49 held back the movement at every step and 
finally brought about its downfall; the same people who never see 
reaction and then are utterly dumbfounded to find themselves at 
last in a blind alley in which neither resistance nor flight is 
possible; the same people who want to confine history within their 
narrow philistine horizons, and over whose heads history invari-

=====第298页=====
268 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ably proceeds to the order of the day. 
As for their socialist import, this has already been adequately 
criticised in the Manifesto, Chapter: "German, or 'True' Socialism". 
Wherever the class struggle is thrust aside as a distasteful, "crude" 
manifestation, the only basis still left to socialism will be a "true 
love of mankind" and empty phrases about "justice". 
It is an inevitable manifestation, and one rooted in the process 
of development, that people from what have hitherto been the 
ruling class also join the militant proletariat and supply it with 
educative elements. We have already said so clearly in the 
Manifesto. But in this context there are two observations to be 
made: 
Firstly, if these people are to be of use to the proletarian 
movement, they must introduce genuinely educative elements. 
However, in the case of the vast majority of German bourgeois 
converts, this is not the case. Neither the Zukunft nor the Neue 
Gesellschaft has contributed anything that might have advanced the 
movement by a single step. Here we find a complete lack of 
genuinely educative matter, either factual or theoretical. In place 
of it, attempts to reconcile superficially assimilated socialist ideas 
with the most diverse theoretical viewpoints which these gentlemen 
have introduced from the university or elsewhere, and of which 
each is more muddled than the last thanks to the process of decay 
taking place in what remains of German philosophy today. Instead 
of first making a thorough study of the new science, each man 
chose to adapt it to the viewpoint he had brought with him, not 
hesitating to produce his own brand of science and straightaway 
assert his right to teach it. Hence there are, amongst these 
gentlemen, almost as many viewpoints as there are heads; instead 
of elucidating anything, they have only made confusion worse—by 
good fortune, almost exclusively amongst themselves. The party 
can well dispense with educative elements such as these for whom 
it is axiomatic to teach what they have not learnt. 
Secondly, when people of this kind, from different classes, join 
the proletarian movement, the first requirement is that they 
should not bring with them the least remnant of bourgeois, 
petty-bourgeois, etc., prejudices, but should unreservedly adopt 
the proletarian outlook. These gentlemen, however, as already 
shown, are chock-full of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois ideas. In a 
country as petty-bourgeois as Germany, there is certainly some 
justification for such ideas. But only outside the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party. If the gentlemen constitute themselves a Social-
Democratic petty-bourgeois party, they are fully within their 

=====第299页=====
Circular Letter to Bebel, Liebknecht, Bracke and Others 269 
rights:  in that case we could negotiate with them and, according to 
circumstances, form an alliance with them, etc. But within a 
workers' party they are an adulterating element. Should there be 
any reason to tolerate their presence there for a while, it should be 
our duty only to tolerate them, to allow them no say in the Party 
leadership and to remain aware that a break with them is only a 
matter of time. That time, moreover, would appear to have come. 
How the Party can suffer the authors of this article to remain any 
longer in their midst seems to us incomprehensible. But should 
the Party leadership actually pass, to a greater or lesser extent, 
into the hands of such men, then the Party will be emasculated no 
less, and that will put paid to its proletarian grit. 
As for ourselves, there is, considering all our antecedents, only 
one course open to us. For almost 40 years we have emphasised 
that the class struggle is the immediate motive force of history 
and, in particular, that the class struggle between bourgeoisie and 
proletariat is the great lever of modern social revolution; hence we 
cannot possibly co-operate with men who seek to eliminate that 
class struggle from the movement. At the founding of the 
International we expressly formulated the battle cry: The emanci­
pation of the working class must be achieved by the working class 
itself.3  Hence we cannot co-operate with men who say openly that 
the workers are too uneducated to emancipate themselves, and 
must first be emancipated from above by philanthropic members 
of the upper and lower middle classes. If the new party organ is to 
adopt a policy that corresponds to the opinions of these 
gentlemen, if it is bourgeois and not proletarian, then all we could 
do—much though we might regret it—would be publicly to 
declare ourselves opposed to it and abandon the solidarity with 
which we have hitherto represented the German Party abroad. 
But we hope it won't come to that. 
It is intended that this letter should be communicated to all five 
members of the committee in Germany,326  and also to Bracke.... 
Nor have we any objection to its being communicated to the 
people in Zurich. 
Written on September 17-18, 1879 Published according to Engels' 
manuscript First published in Die Kommunistische 
Internationale, XII. Jahrg., Heft 23, Published in English in full 
June 15, 1931 for the first time 
a See present edition, Vol. 20, p.  14.—  Ed. 

=====第300页=====
270 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[ABOUT KARL BLIND] 327 
The article ought to be headed, not "Prince Napoleon etc.",3 but 
"I". For every once the name of Prince Napoleon occurs in it, the 
pronoun "I" occurs at least 20 times, not to count its inflected 
cases and derived forms. What it says of Prince Napoleon, has all 
been printed more than once, and what it says about "I", has, alas, 
also been related, printed, and published more than once in 
England, as the proprietors and editors of sundry reviews, defunct 
and alive, know to their sorrow.328 
Deprived of its false pretence, the paper gives a new version of 
Mr. Blind's old tale: How Karl Blind, by various untoward 
circumstances, was unfortunately prevented from changing the 
course of history. First comes the oft repeated story which forms 
his chief stock-in-trade, how he was sent on a diplomatic mission 
by the moribund provisional governments of the South 
German insurrection of 1849329 ostensibly to the then government 
of the French Republic, but in reality to the revolutionary 
government of Ledru-Rollin which, it was expected, would be 
shortly installed by a popular commotion. Alas! the government 
which had sent him, was unceremoniously chased into Swiss exile 
by the Prussians, and the demonstration of the 13th June, which 
was to establish the government to which he was really accredited, 
was equally unceremoniously put down.330 Of his rather grotesque 
mission from a dead to an unborn government, he had the good 
fortune to be relieved by the existing French government who 
arrested him as a participator in the "pacific" demonstration of 
a K. Blind, "Prince Napoleon and European Democracy", Fraser's Magazine, 
Vol. 20, London, 1879, pp.  504-21.—  Ed. 

=====第301页=====
About Karl Blind 271 
the unarmed Paris national guard on the 13th June, [and] finally 
expelled [from] the country. Had the government which sent him 
but remained alive, and had the government to which he was 
really sent, but come into existence, what would not Karl Blind 
have been enabled to do? By procuring himself from somebody in 
Baden a sham mission to somebody in Paris, he had contrived to 
eschew "diplomatically" even the least possibility of a dangerous 
encounter with the approaching Prussian army. At all events he 
had done something.3 
Again, in 1870, on the outbreak of the Franco-German war, 
there was a chance of Italy joining France. But Karl Blind 
watched. "Had King Victor Emmanuel etc." (page 519). But 
again, it was an embassy from one non-existing government to 
another. Louis Napoleon refused Rome to Victor Emmanuel, thus 
forcing the latter to take the town in the teeth of France, and 
rendering the Italian alliance impossible.331 Again, the services and 
offers of Karl Blind, whatever these offers may have been worth, 
were declined, and that eternal diplomatist in partibus? instead of 
changing the route of history, had to be satisfied with the 
"warmest thanks" of Mazzini. 
Who can help being reminded of the braggart who, when 
involved in a fracas, shouted: "Hold me back, friends, or else I 
shall commit some fearful deed!" Unfortunately for the world, but 
perhaps fortunately for Mr. Karl Blind, whenever he is about to 
step into the foreground of historical action, some untoward event 
prevents him from accomplishing that "fearful deed" which was to 
render him immortal. 
Let us hope that this is the last lucubration, at least in English, 
written by Karl B. on K. B. in the interest of K. B. 
Written between October 5 and 9, 1879 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 17, 
Moscow, 1960 
a The last two sentences were written by Marx. In the margin of the previous 
page of Engels' manuscript, Marx wrote another version: "By getting his opportune 
acceptance of a sham mission abroad, he had contrived to render impossible any 
encounter of Karl Blind with the Prussian troops then invading Baden."—Ed 
b In partibus infidelium—literally: in parts inhabited by unbelievers. The words 
are added to the title of Roman Catholic bishops appointed to purely nominal 
dioceses in non-Christian countries.— Ed Reproduced from the manu­
script 

=====第302页=====
M. 7. - 2- Strie. UKBRT* — «OUDAJUT* — JUSTICB 3 M»« 1Ä8Q. 
L'ÉGALITÉ 
ORGANE COLLECTIVISTE RÉVOLUTIONNAIRE 
PARAISSANT LE MERCREDI 
Frederick Engels 
THE SOCIALISM OF MR. BISMARCK 332 
I. THE CUSTOMS TARIFF 
In the debate on the notorious law which places the German 
socialists outside the law,333 Mr. Bismarck declared that repression 
alone was not enough to crush socialism; what was needed, in 
addition, were measures to remedy the undeniable social ills, to 
ensure the regularity of work, to forestall industrial crises and 
what have you. He promised to introduce these "positive" 
measures of social welfare.3 For, he said, when one has directed 
the affairs of one's country for 17 years, as I have done, one is 
entitled to consider oneself a competent judge in matters of 
political economy; which is like someone saying that eating 
potatoes for 17 years is enough to give one a thorough knowledge 
of agronomy. 
In any case, this time Mr. Bismarck was true to his word. He 
has bestowed on Germany two grand "social measures", and he 
has not finished yet. 
The first was a customs  tariffb  which was to ensure that German 
industry was allowed exclusive rights to the domestic market. 
Until 1848 Germany had had no large-scale industry properly 
speaking. Labour dominated. Steam, mechanisation were simply 
a See O. Bismarck's speeches in the Reichstag on the Anti-Socialist Law on 
September 17 and October 9, 1878, Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen 
des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. Legislatur-Periode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band. Berlin, 
1878,  pp. 70,  125.—  Ed. 
b "Gesetz, betreffend den Zolltarif des Deutschen Zollgebiets und den Ertrag 
der Zölle und der Tabacksteuer. Vom 15. Juli 1879", Reichs-Gesetzblatt, No. 27, 
1879.—  Ed. 

=====第303页=====
The Socialism of Mr. Bismarck 273 
the exception. In 1848 and 1849, having incurred a shameful 
defeat in the political sphere because of its cowardice, the German 
bourgeoisie consoled itself by launching eagerly into large-scale 
industry. The face of the country was rapidly transformed. 
Anyone who had not seen Rhenish Prussia, Westphalia, Royal 
Saxony, High Silesia, Berlin and the seaports since 1849 could no 
longer recognise them in 1864. Steam and machines had invaded 
the entire country. Large factories had mostly supplanted the 
small workshops. Steamships gradually replaced sailing vessels, 
first in coastal traffic, then in transatlantic trade. Railways 
multiplied; in the construction yards, in the coal and iron-ore 
mines there was activity the like of which the sluggish Germans 
would hitherto not have believed themselves capable of. Compared 
with the development of large-scale industry in England and even 
in France, all this was small beer; but anyway it was a beginning. 
Moreover, all this had been done without any help from the 
governments, without any grants or export subsidies, and under a 
customs tariff which, compared with the tariffs of other continen­
tal countries, might be considered very free-trade indeed. 
This industrial movement, let it be said in passing, did not fail 
to have the social consequences which it has had everywhere. The 
German industrial workers had, until then, vegetated in conditions 
reminiscent of the Middle Ages. Generally speaking, they still had 
some chance of gradually becoming petty bourgeois, masters of 
their trade, owners of several hand looms, etc. Now all this 
disappeared. The workers, becoming the employees of the big 
capitalists, started to form a permanent class, a real proletariat. 
But he who says "proletariat" says "socialism". Furthermore, there 
still remained a trace of the liberties which the workers had won at 
the barricades in 1848. Thanks to these two circumstances German 
socialism, which before 1848 had had to restrict itself to 
underground propaganda and a secret organisation whose mem­
bers were few, was now able to unfold in the full light of day and 
to penetrate into the masses. Hence 1863 is the year which saw the 
recommencement of socialist agitation by Lassalle. 334 
Then came the war of 1870, the peace of 1871 and the 
milliards.335  If France was far from ruining herself by paying 
them, Germany came within a hair's breadth of its demise by 
receiving them. Recklessly squandered by a government of 
upstarts in an upstart empire, the milliards fell into the hands of 
high finance, which hastened to make them bear fruit on the 
Stock Exchange. Berlin saw the return of the heyday of Crédit 
mobilier. 336 It was a race to see who could start more public and 
20-1317 

=====第304页=====
274 Frederick Engels 
mixed liability companies, banks, building societies and financial 
institutions, railway construction companies, factories of all kinds, 
shipyards, companies speculating in land and buildings, and other 
things whose industrial trappings were no more than an excuse 
for the most bare-faced jobbing. The alleged public needs of 
commerce, communications, consumption, etc., simply served as a 
cloak for the frantic need of the Stock Exchange wolves to make 
these milliards work as long as they had them in their hands. 
Besides, all this was seen in Paris in the glorious days of Péreire 
and Fould; the same jobbers were at work in Berlin, reappearing 
under the names of Bleichroeder and Hansemann. 
What had happened in Paris in 1867, what had happened many 
times in London and New York, happened all over again in 1873 
in Berlin: unbridled speculation terminated in a general collapse. 
Companies went bankrupt in their hundreds; the shares of those 
which survived became unsaleable; the rout was complete all along 
the line. But in order to speculate it had been necessary to create 
the means of production and communication, the factories, 
railways, etc., whose shares had been the object of this speculation. 
At the time of the crash it was found that the public need which 
had served as a pretext had been outstripped by far; that in four 
years more railways, factories, mines, etc., had been created than 
the normal development of industry would have produced in a 
quarter of a century. 
After the railways, to which we shall return below, speculation 
had been chiefly directed at the iron and steel industry. The mills 
had multiplied rapidly; more than one plant had been set up that 
put Creuzot in the shade. Unfortunately, on the day of the crisis it 
turned out that there were no consumers for this gigantic 
production. The large manufacturing companies found themselves 
on the verge of bankruptcy. As the good German patriots they 
were, their directors sought help from the government: protective 
tariffs that would secure for them the exploitation of the domestic 
market against competition from English iron. But if one 
demanded protective tariffs for iron, one could not deny other 
industries, even agriculture, the same protection. So noisy 
agitation for tariff protection was organised throughout Germany, 
agitation which allowed Mr. Bismarck to introduce a customs tariff 
which was supposed to fulfil this purpose. This  tariff,  which 
became law in the summer of 1879, is now in force.337 
But German industry, such as it was, had always lived in the 
fresh air of free competition. Arriving last on the scene, after 
England and France, it had been obliged to confine itself to filling 

=====第305页=====
The Socialism of Mr. Bismarck 275 
the small gaps left for it by its predecessors; to providing, on a 
large scale, articles that were too paltry for the English, too tawdry 
for the French; to manufacturing on a small scale products that 
were always changing, cheap goods at a low price. Let it not be 
thought that this is merely an assertion of our own: these are the 
very words of the official assessment of German products as set 
out in Philadelphia (1876) by the official commissioner of the 
German Government, Mr. Reuleaux, a man with a European 
scientific reputation.3 
An industry of this kind can only assert itself in neutral markets 
if there is free trade at home. If one expects German textiles, 
processed metals and machinery to withstand foreign competition 
abroad, then all the raw materials necessary for their production, 
cotton, linen or silk thread, pig iron or metal wire, must be 
available at the same low price at which their foreign competitors 
buy them. So you have the choice of two things. If you wish to 
continue exporting textiles and the products of the metal industry, 
then free trade is necessary, at the risk of seeing these industries 
use materials taken from abroad. If, on the other hand, you wish 
to protect spinning and the production of crude metals in 
Germany with customs tariffs—then you will soon have ruled out 
the possibility of exporting the products of which thread and 
crude metal are the raw materials. 
By protecting spinning and metallurgy with his notorious  tariff, 
Mr. Bismarck destroyed the last chance which German textiles, 
processed metals, needles and machinery had until then of finding 
an outlet abroad. But the Germany whose agriculture produced a 
surplus for export in the first half of the century cannot now do 
without a supplement of foreign agricultural products. If Mr. Bis­
marck forbids his industry to produce for export, with what will 
he pay for these imports and many others which all the tariffs in 
the world will not prevent him from needing. 
To solve this question called for nothing less than the genius of 
Mr. Bismarck combined with that of his Stock Exchange friends 
and advisers. This is how it is done: 
Let us take iron. The period of speculation and feverish 
production has bestowed on Germany two firms (the Dortmund 
Union and Laurahütte), each of which has the capacity to 
produce, on its own, enough on average to satisfy the country's 
entire consumption. Then there is the gigantic Krupp concern in 
Essen, another similar one in Bochum, and then an infinite 
a See F. Reuleaux, Briefe aus Philadelphia, Brunswick, 1877, p. 5.— Ed. 
20* 

=====第306页=====
276 Frederick Engels 
number of smaller ones. As a result, domestic iron consumption is 
covered three or four times over, at least. One might say that this 
is a situation necessitating most urgently unlimited free trade, 
which is alone capable of securing an outlet for this enormous 
excess production. One might say so—but this is not the opinion 
of those involved. Since there are at most a dozen companies that 
matter and which dominate the others, one forms what the 
Americans call a RING: an association to maintain prices at home 
and regulate exports. 
As soon as there is a bid for rails or other products of their 
factories, the Committee designates by turns the member who is to 
undertake the work, and fixes the price at which he is to do so. 
The other associates submit tenders at a higher price, similarly 
agreed in advance. As a result, all competition ceases; there is an 
absolute monopoly. The same thing goes for exports. To ensure 
the implementation of this plan, each member of the  RING  deposits 
with the Committee a blank bill for 125,000 francs, to be put into 
circulation and presented for payment as soon as the signatory has 
broken the agreement. In this way the price of the monopoly 
extorted from the German consumers will permit the factories to 
sell abroad their excess production at prices that even the English 
refuse—and the German philistine (who anyway deserves it) pays 
the piper. This is how German exports are becoming possible 
again, thanks to the same protective tariffs which in the eyes of 
the common people appear to be destroying it. 
Do you want examples? Last year an Italian railway company, 
which we could name, needed 30,000 or 40,000 tons (of 1,000 kg) 
of rails. After long negotiations an English factory took 10,000; 
the rest of the order went to the Dortmund Union, which offered 
delivery at a price that was turned down in England. An English 
competitor, asked why he could not offer better terms than the 
German concern, replied: "Who on earth can compete with a 
bankrupt?" 
In Scotland a railway bridge was to be constructed across an arm 
of the sea near Edinburgh. 10,000 tons of Bessemer steel were 
needed for this bridge. Who accepted the lowest price, who 
defeated all competitors, and on the native soil of the great iron 
industry, England? A German, protected by Bismarck in more 
ways than one, Mr. Krupp of Essen, the "Cannon King". 
So much for iron. It goes without saying that this fine system 
can only delay the inevitable bankruptcy of these big conspiring 
companies for a few years. Meanwhile, as the other industries 
imitate them, they will ruin not the foreign competition but their 

=====第307页=====
The Socialism of Mr. Bismarck 277 
own country. It is almost like living in a country of madmen; yet 
all the facts recounted above have been taken from bourgeois 
free-trade newspapers in Germany  herself.  Organising the demoli­
tion of German industry on the pretext of protecting it—are they 
wrong, then, those German socialists who have been repeating for 
years that Mr. Bismarck is working for socialism, as if he were in 
their pay? 
II. THE STATE RAILWAYS 
From 1869 to 1873, during the rising tide of speculation in 
Berlin, two institutions, at times hostile, at times in alliance, shared 
the domination of the Stock Exchange: the Discount Society338  and 
the Bleichroeder bank. These were, so to speak, the Péreires and 
the Mirés of Berlin. Speculation being chiefly directed at the 
railways, these two banks had the idea of making themselves 
indirect masters of most of the major lines already in existence or 
under construction. By buying and holding a certain number of 
shares in each one they would dominate their boards of directors; 
the shares themselves would be the deposit for loans with which to 
buy new shares, and so on. A pure repetition, of course, of the 
ingenious little operation which first brought the two Péreires to 
the height of success and ended with the Crédit mobilier crisis, as 
we know. At the beginning the Berlin Péreires met with the same 
success. 
In 1873 the crisis came. Our two banks found themselves 
burdened with their heaps of railway shares which could no longer 
be made to cough up the millions which they had swallowed. The 
plan to subjugate the railway companies had failed. So they 
changed their tack, and tried to sell them to the state. The plan to 
concentrate all the railways in the hand of the Imperial 
Government has its origin not in the social welfare of the country 
but in the individual welfare of two insolvent banks. 
The implementation of the plan was not too difficult. They had 
"interested" a good many members of parliament in the new 
companies, thus dominating the national liberal and moderate 
conservative parties, in other words the majority. Some high 
officials of the Empire, some Prussian ministers, had had a hand 
in the shady deals whereby these companies were founded. In the 
last resort, Bleichroeder was Mr. Bismarck's banker and financial 
factotum. So they were not short of means. 
Meanwhile, to make it worthwhile selling the railway shares to 

=====第308页=====
278 Frederick Engels 
the Empire, it was necessary to raise the price of the shares. So, in 
1873,  they created an "imperial railways office"339; its head,3 a 
well-known shady speculator, at once raised the fares on all 
German railways by 20%, which was supposed to increase net 
revenue and hence also the value of the shares by about 35%. This 
was the only step which this gentleman took; it was the only 
reason why he had accepted his duties; therefore he resigned 
shortly afterwards. 
Meanwhile, they had succeeded in giving Bismarck a taste for 
the plan. But the petty kingdoms'3 resisted; the Federal Council340 
refused point-blank. A new change of tack: it was resolved that 
Prussia should first buy all the Prussian railways, selling them, 
should the occasion arise, to the Empire. 
Moreover, there was another ulterior motive for the Imperial 
Government to wish to acquire the railways. And this is related to 
the French milliards. 
Out of these milliards they had kept back some considerable 
sums in order to form three "imperial funds", one for the 
construction of a parliament building, the second for fortresses, 
and finally, the third for the invalids of the last three wars. The 
total sum amounted to 926 million francs. 
The most important and at the same time the strangest of these 
three funds was the one for the invalids. It was designed to eat 
itself up; that is to say, the day the last of these invalids was dead, 
the fund  itself,  capital and interest, would also have disappeared. 
A fund which consumes itself sounds like the invention of 
madmen once more. But these were no madmen; it was the shady 
speculators of the Discount Society who had invented it, and for a 
good reason. This is why it took nearly a year to get the 
government to accept the idea. 
However, it seemed to our jobbers that the fund would not 
devour itself fast enough. Moreover, they believed it was their 
duty to endow the other two funds with the same fine property of 
devouring themselves. The means was simple. Even before a law 
had laid down the nature of the securities in which these funds 
would be invested, a commercial company owned by the Prussian 
Government341 was authorised to buy up suitable stocks and 
shares. This company turned to the Discount Society, which sold, 
for the three imperial funds, 300 million francs worth of railway 
shares, at that time unsaleable, which we could specify. 
a Alfred Scheele.— Ed. 
b Bavaria, Saxony and Württemberg. — Ed. 

=====第309页=====
The Socialism of Mr. Bismarck 279 
Among these shares were 120 millions in Magdeburg-
Halberstadt and amalgamated lines, an almost bankrupt railway 
which had served to ensure enormous profits to the speculators, 
but had scarcely any chance of bringing in any return at all to the 
shareholders. This may be imagined when one bears in mind that 
the board of directors had issued shares to a value of 16 millions 
to meet the cost of constructing three branch lines and that this 
money disappeared entirely without the lines even having been 
started. And the invalid fund is the proud owner of a good many 
of these shares in non-existent railways. 
The acquisition of these lines by the Prussian State would 
legalise at a stroke the purchase of shares in them by the Empire; 
it would give them a certain real value. This is the interest of the 
Imperial Government in the affair. Hence the line which we are 
concerned with here was among the first whose purchase was 
proposed by the Prussian Government and ratified by the 
chambers. 
The price paid to the shareholders by the State was well above 
the real value, even of the good lines. Which is demonstrated by 
the constant rise in their shares as soon as the resolution to buy 
them was known and especially once the conditions of sale were 
announced. Two major lines, whose shares were worth 103 and 
108 respectively in December 1878, were subsequently bought by 
the State; today they are quoted at 148 and 158. Hence nothing 
was more difficult for the shareholders than to conceal their joy 
while the deal was being negotiated. 
It goes without saying that this rise brought happiness mainly to 
the big jobbers of Berlin who were in on the secret intentions of 
the government. The Stock Exchange, still rather depressed in the 
spring of 1879, gained new life. Before finally parting with their 
dear shares, the speculators made use of them to organise a new 
orgy of jobbing. 
It is plain to see: the German Empire is just as completely under 
the yoke of the Stock Exchange as was the French Empire in its 
day. It is the stockbrokers who prepare the projects which the 
Government has to carry out—for the profit of their pockets. Yet 
in Germany they have an advantage which the Bonapartist Empire 
lacked: if the Imperial Government encounters resistance among 
its princelings it turns into the Prussian Government, which will 
certainly not find any in its own chambers, true branches of the 
Stock Exchange that they are. 
What's that? Hasn't the General Council of the International 
said it already, immediately after the war of 1870: "You, 

=====第310页=====
280 Frederick Engels 
Mr. Bismarck, have only overthrown the Bonapartist régime in 
France in order to re-establish it in your own country  t"342 
Written in late February 1880 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in L'Egalité, Nos. 7 and 
10, March 3 and 24, 1880 Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第311页=====
Frederick Engels 
SOCIALISM: 
UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC 

=====第312页=====
Written between January and the first Reproduced from the text of the 
half of March 1880 authorised English edition of 1892, 
checked with the 1880 French and First published in the journal La Revue lg91  German editions 
socialiste, Nos. 3, 4 and 5, March 20, 
April 20 and May 5, 1880, and as a 
separate pamphlet in French: F. Engels, 
Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique, 
Paris,  1880 

=====第313页=====
SOCIALISM 
UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC 
BY 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
TR ANS LA TED BY EDWARD AVELING 
D.Se.,  Ft/law of Univtrtity  CotUgr,  Luiden 
WITH A SPECIAL INTRODUCTION BY THE AUTHOR 
LONDON ; 
SWAN SONNENSCHEIN & CO. 
NEW YORK: CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS 
1892 
The title-page of the authorised English edition of Engels' Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific 

=====第314页=====

=====第315页=====
285 
I 
Modern Socialism is, in its essence, the direct product of the 
recognition, on the one hand, of the class antagonisms, existing in 
the society of to-day, between proprietors and non-proprietors, 
between capitalists and wage-workers; on the other hand, of the 
anarchy existing in production. But, in its theoretical form, 
modern Socialism originally appears ostensibly as a more logical 
extension of the principles laid down by the great French 
philosophers of the eighteenth century. Like every new theory, 
modern Socialism had, at first, to connect itself with the 
intellectual stock-in-trade ready to its hand, however deeply its 
roots lay in material economic facts. 
The great men, who in France prepared men's minds for the 
coming revolution, were themselves extreme revolutionists. They 
recognised no external authority of any kind whatever. Religion, 
natural science, society, political institutions, everything, was 
subjected to the most unsparing criticism: everything must justify 
its existence before the judgment-seat of reason, or give up 
existence. Reason became the sole measure of everything. It was 
the time when, as Hegel says, the world stood upon its head*; 
* This is the passage on the French Revolution: "Thought, the concept of law, 
all at once made itself felt, and against this the old scaffolding of wrong could 
make no stand. In this conception of law, therefore, a constitution has now been 
established, and henceforth everything must be based upon this. Since the sun had 
been in the firmament, and the planets circled round him, the sight had never 
been seen of man standing upon his head—i.e., on the Idea—and building reality 
after this image. Anaxagoras first said that the Nous, reason, rules the world; but 
now, for the first time, had man come to recognise that the Idea must rule the 
mental reality. And this was a magnificent sunrise. All thinking Beings have 

=====第316页=====
286 Frederick Engels 
first, in the sense that the human head, and the principles arrived 
at by its thought, claimed to be the basis of all human action and 
association; but by and by, also, in the wider sense that the reality 
which was in contradiction to these principles had, in fact, to be 
turned upside down. Every form of society and government then 
existing, every old traditional notion was flung into the lumber-
room as irrational; the world had hitherto allowed itself to be led 
solely by prejudices; everything in the past deserved only pity and 
contempt. Now, for the first time, appeared the light of day, the 
kingdom of reason; henceforth superstition, injustice, privilege, 
oppression, were to be superseded by eternal truth, eternal Right, 
equality based on Nature and the inalienable rights of man. 
We know to-day that this kingdom of reason was nothing more 
than the idealised kingdom of the bourgeoisie; that this eternal 
Right found its realisation in bourgeois justice; that this equality 
reduced itself to bourgeois equality before the law; that bourgeois 
property was proclaimed as one of the essential rights of man; and 
that the government of reason, the Contrat Social of Rousseau, 345 
came into being, and only could come into being, as a democratic 
bourgeois republic. The great thinkers of the eighteenth century 
could, no more than their predecessors, go beyond the limits 
imposed upon them by their epoch. 
But, side by side with the antagonism of the feudal nobility and 
the burghers, who claimed to represent all the rest of society, was 
the general antagonism of exploiters and exploited, of rich idlers 
and poor workers. It was this very circumstance that made it 
possible for the representatives of the bourgeoisie to put 
themselves forward as representing, not one special class, but the 
whole of suffering humanity. Still further. From its origin, the 
bourgeoisie was saddled with its antithesis: capitalists cannot exist 
without wage-workers, and, in the same proportion as the 
mediaeval burgher of the guild developed into the modern 
bourgeois, the guild journeyman and the day-labourer, outside the 
guilds, developed into the proletarian. And although, upon the 
whole, the bourgeoisie, in their struggle with the nobility, could 
participated in celebrating this holy day. A sublime emotion swayed men at that 
time,  an enthusiasm of reason pervaded the world, as if now had come the 
reconciliation of the Divine Principle with the world." [Hegel: "Philosophy of 
History", 1840, p. 535.a] Is it not high time to set the Anti-Socialist Law344 in action 
against such teachings, subversive and to the common danger, by the late Professor 
Hegel? 
a G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte (Werke, 2. Aufl., 
Bd. IX, Berlin, 1840, S. 535-36).— Ed. 

=====第317页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 287 
claim to represent at the same time the interests of the different 
working-classes of that period, yet in every great bourgeois 
movement there were independent outbursts of that class which 
was the forerunner, more or less developed, of the modern 
proletariat. For example, at the time of the German Reformation 
and the Peasants' War, the Anabaptists 346  and Thomas Münzer; in 
the great English Revolution, the Levellers 347; in the great French 
Revolution,  Babeuf. 
There were theoretical enunciations corresponding with these 
revolutionary uprisings of a class not yet developed; in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, Utopian pictures of ideal 
social conditions348; in the eighteenth, actual communistic theories 
(Morelly and Mably).a The demand for equality was no longer 
limited to political rights; it was extended also to the social 
conditions of individuals. It was not simply class privileges that 
were to be abolished, but class distinctions themselves. A Com­
munism, ascetic, denouncing all the pleasures of life, Spartan, was 
the first form of the new teaching. Then came the three great 
Utopians: Saint-Simon, to whom the middle-class movement, side 
by side with the proletarian, still had a certain significance; 
Fourier; and Owen, who in the country where capitalist produc­
tion was most developed, and under the influence of the 
antagonisms begotten of this, worked out his proposals for the 
removal of class distinction systematically and in direct relation to 
French materialism. 
One thing is common to all three. Not one of them appears as a 
representative of the interests of that proletariat, which historical 
development had, in the meantime, produced. Like the French 
philosophers, they do not claim to emancipate a particular class to 
begin with, but all humanity at once. Like them, they wish to bring 
in the kingdom of reason and eternal justice, but this kingdom, as 
they see it, is as far as heaven from earth, from that of the French 
philosophers. 
For, to our three social reformers, the bourgeois world, based 
upon the principles of these philosophers, is quite as irrational and 
unjust, and, therefore, finds its way to the dust-hole quite as 
readily as feudalism and all the earlier stages of society. If pure 
reason and justice have not, hitherto, ruled the world, this has 
been the case only because men have not rightly understood them. 
What was wanted was the individual man of genius, who has now 
arisen and who understands the truth. That he has now arisen, 
a See Morelly, Code de la nature, Paris, 1841 and Mably, De la législation, ou 
principes des loix, Amsterdam, 1776.— Ed. 

=====第318页=====
288 Frederick. Engels 
that the truth has now been clearly understood, is not an 
inevitable event, following of necessity in the chain of historical 
development, but a mere happy accident. He might just as well 
have been born 500 years earlier, and might then have spared 
humanity 500 years of error, strife, and suffering. 
We saw how the French philosophers of the eighteenth century, 
the forerunners of the Revolution, appealed to reason as the sole 
judge of all that is. A rational government, rational society, were 
to be founded; everything that ran counter to eternal reason was 
to be remorselessly done away with. We saw also that this eternal 
reason was in reality nothing but the idealised understanding of 
the eighteenth-century citizen,3 just then evolving into the 
bourgeois. The French Revolution had realised this rational society 
and government. 
But the new order of things, rational enough as compared with 
earlier conditions, turned out to be by no means absolutely 
rational. The State based upon reason completely collapsed. 
Rousseau's Contrat Social had found its realisation in the Reign of 
Terror, from which the bourgeoisie, who had lost confidence in 
their own political capacity, had taken refuge first in the 
corruption of the Directorate, 349 and, finally, under the wing of 
the Napoleonic despotism. The promised eternal peace was turned 
into an endless war of conquest. The society based upon reason 
had fared no better. The antagonism between rich and poor, 
instead of dissolving into general prosperity, had become inten­
sified by the removal of the guild and other privileges, which had 
to some extent bridged it over, and by the removal of the 
charitable institutions of the Church. The "freedom of property" 
from feudal fetters, now veritably accomplished, turned out to be, 
for the small capitalists and small proprietors, the freedom to sell 
their small property, crushed under the overmastering competi­
tion of the large capitalists and landlords, to these great lords, and 
thus,  as far as the small capitalists and peasant proprietors were 
concerned, became "freedom from property". The development 
of industry upon a capitalistic basis made poverty and misery of 
the working masses conditions of existence of society. Cash 
payment became more and more, in Carlyle's phrase,b the sole 
nexus between man and man. The number of crimes increased 
from year to year. Formerly, the feudal vices had openly stalked 
about in broad daylight; though not eradicated, they were now at 
a The German edition of 1891 has: "the idealised understanding of the middle 
burgher".— Ed. 
b See Th. Carlyle, Past and Present, London, 1843, p. 198.— Ed. 

=====第319页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 289 
any rate thrust into the background. In their stead, the bourgeois 
vices,  hitherto practised in secret, began to blossom all the more 
luxuriantly. Trade became to a greater and greater extent 
cheating. The "fraternity" of the revolutionary motto350 was 
realised in the chicanery and rivalries of the battle of competition. 
Oppression by force was replaced by corruption; the sword, as the 
first social lever, by gold. The right of the first night was 
transferred from the feudal lords to the bourgeois manufacturers. 
Prostitution increased to an extent never heard of. Marriage itself 
remained, as before, the legally recognised form, the official cloak 
of prostitution, and, moreover, was supplemented by rich crops of 
adultery. 
In a word, compared with the splendid promises of the 
philosophers, the social and political institutions born of the 
"triumph of reason" were bitterly disappointing caricatures. All 
that was wanting was the men to formulate this disappointment, 
and they came with the turn of the century. In 1802 Saint-Simon's 
Geneva letters appeared; in 1808 appeared Fourier's first work, 
although the groundwork of his theory dated from 1799; on 
January 1, 1800, Robert Owen undertook the direction of New 
Lanark.351 
At this time, however, the capitalist mode of production, and 
with it the antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat, was still very incompletely developed. Modern Indus­
try, which had just arisen in England, was still unknown in France. 
But Modern Industry develops, on the one hand, the conflicts 
which make absolutely necessary a revolution in the mode of 
production, and the doing away with its capitalistic character— 
conflicts not only between the classes begotten of it, but also 
between the very productive forces and the forms of exchange 
created by it. And, on the other hand, it develops, in these very 
gigantic productive forces, the means of ending these conflicts. If, 
therefore, about the year 1800, the conflicts arising from the new 
social order were only just beginning to take shape, this holds still 
more fully as to the means of ending them. The "have-nothing" 
masses of Paris, during the Reign of Terror, were able for a 
moment to gain the mastery, and thus to lead the bourgeois 
revolution to victory in spite of the bourgeoisie themselves. But, in 
doing so, they only proved how impossible it was for their 
domination to last under the conditions then obtaining. The 
proletariat, which then for the first time evolved itself from these 
"have-nothing" masses as the nucleus of a new class, as yet quite 
incapable of independent political action, appeared as an oppressed, 
21-1317 

=====第320页=====
290 Frederick Engels 
suffering order, to whom, in its incapacity to help  itself,  help 
could, at best, be brought in from without, or down from above. 
This historical situation also dominated the founders of Social­
ism. To the crude conditions of capitalistic production and the 
crude class conditions corresponded crude theories. The solution 
of the social problems, which as yet lay hidden in undeveloped 
economic conditions, the Utopians attempted to evolve out of the 
human brain. Society presented nothing but wrongs; to remove 
these was the task of reason. It was necessary, then, to discover a 
new and more perfect system of social order and to impose this 
upon society from without by propaganda, and, wherever it was 
possible, by the example of model experiments. These new social 
systems were foredoomed as Utopian; the more completely they 
were worked out in detail, the more they could not avoid drifting 
off into pure phantasies. 
These facts once established, we need not dwell a moment 
longer upon this side of the question, now wholly belonging to the 
past. We can leave it to the literary small fry to solemnly quibble 
over these phantasies, which to-day only make us smile, and to 
crow over the superiority of their own bald reasoning, as 
compared with such "insanity". For ourselves, we delight in the 
stupendously grand thoughts and germs of thought that 
everywhere break out through their phantastic covering, and to 
which these Philistines are blind. 
Saint-Simon was a son of the great French Revolution, at the 
outbreak of which he was not yet thirty. The Revolution was the 
victory of the third estate, i.e., of the great masses of the nation, 
working in production and in trade, over the privileged idle 
classes, the nobles and the priests. But the victory of the third 
estate soon revealed itself as exclusively the victory of a small part 
of this "estate", as the conquest of political power by the socially 
privileged section of it, i.e., the propertied bourgeoisie. And the 
bourgeoisie had certainly developed rapidly during the Revolu­
tion, partly by speculation in the lands of the nobility and of the 
Church, confiscated and afterwards put up for sale, and partly by 
frauds upon the nation by means of army contracts. It was the 
domination of these swindlers that, under the Directorate, brought 
France3  to the verge of ruin, and thus gave Napoleon the pretext 
for his coup d'état. 
Hence, to Saint-Simon the antagonism between the third estate 
and the privileged classes took the form of an antagonism between 
a The German edition of 1891 further has: "and the Revolution".— Ed. 

=====第321页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 291 
"workers" and "idlers". The idlers were not merely the old 
privileged classes, but also all who, without taking any part in 
production or distribution,3  lived on their incomes. And the 
workers were not only the wage-workers, but also the manufactur­
ers, the merchants, the bankers. That the idlers had lost the 
capacity for intellectual leadership and political supremacy had 
been proved, and was by the Revolution finally settled. That the 
non-possessing classes had not this capacity seemed to Saint-Simon 
proved by the experiences of the Reign of Terror. Then, who was 
to lead and command? According to Saint-Simon, science and 
industry, both united by a new religious bond, destined to restore 
that unity of religious ideas which had been lost since the time of 
the Reformation—a necessarily mystic and rigidly hierarchic "new 
Christianity". But science, that was the scholars; and industry, that 
was, in the first place, the working bourgeois, manufacturers, 
merchants, bankers. These bourgeoisie were, certainly, intended 
by Saint-Simon to transform themselves into a kind of public 
officials, of social trustees; but they were still to hold, vis-à-vis of 
the workers, a commanding and economically privileged position. 
The bankers especially were to be called upon to direct the whole 
of social production by the regulation of credit. This conception 
was in exact keeping with a time in which Modern Industry in 
France and, with it, the chasm between bourgeoisie and proletariat 
was only just coming into existence. But what Saint-Simon 
especially lays stress upon is this: what interests him first, and 
above all other things, is the lot of the class that is the most 
numerous and the most poor ("la classe la plus nombreuse et la plus 
... 359 
pauvre ). 
Already, in his Geneva letters, Saint-Simon lays down the 
proposition that 
"all men ought to work". 
In the same work he recognises also that the Reign of Terror 
was the reign of the non-possessing masses. 
"See,"  says he to them, "what happened in France at the time when your 
comrades held sway there; they brought about a famine."b 
But to recognise the French Revolution as a class war, and not 
simply one between nobility and bourgeoisie, but between nobility, 
a The German edition of 1891 has "commerce" instead of "distribution".— Ed. 
b Engels quotes the second letter from Saint-Simon's Lettres d'un habitant de 
Genève à ses contemporains, Paris [1803]. In the edition: G. Hubbard, Saint-Simon, sa 
vie et ses travaux (Paris, 1857), these quotations are on pages 143 and 135.—  Ed. 
21* 

=====第322页=====
292 Frederick Engels 
bourgeoisie, and the non-possessors, was, in the year 1802, a most 
pregnant discovery. In 1816, he declares that politics is the science 
of production, and foretells the complete absorption of politics by 
economics.353 The knowledge that economic conditions are the 
basis of political institutions appears here only in embryo. Yet 
what is here already very plainly expressed is the idea of the 
future conversion of political rule over men into an administration 
of things and a direction of processes of production—that is to 
say, the "abolition of the State", about which recently there has 
been so much noise. 
Saint-Simon shows the same superiority over his contemporaries, 
when in 1814, immediately after the entry of the allies into Paris, 
and again in 1815, during the Hundred Days' War,354 he 
proclaims the alliance of France with England, and then of both 
these countries with Germany, as the only guarantee for the 
prosperous development and peace of Europe.3  5 To preach to the 
French in 1815 an alliance with the victors of Waterloo required as 
much courage as historical foresight.356 
If in Saint-Simon we find a comprehensive breadth of view, by 
virtue of which almost all the ideas of later Socialists, that are not 
strictly economic, are found in him in embryo, we find in Fourier 
a criticism of the existing conditions of society, genuinely French 
and witty, but not upon that account any the less thorough. 
Fourier takes the bourgeoisie, their inspired prophets before the 
Revolution, and their interested eulogists after it, at their own 
word. He lays bare remorselessly the material and moral misery of 
the bourgeois world. He confronts it with the earlier philosophers' 
dazzling promises of a society in which reason alone should reign, 
of a civilisation in which happiness should be universal, of an 
illimitable human perfectibility, and with the rose-coloured 
phraseology of the bourgeois ideologists of his time. He points out 
how everywhere the most pitiful reality corresponds with the most 
high-sounding phrases, and he overwhelms this hopeless fiasco of 
phrases with his mordant sarcasm. 
Fourier is not only a critic; his imperturbably serene nature 
makes him a satirist, and assuredly one of the greatest satirists of 
all time. He depicts, with equal power and charm, the swindling 
speculations that blossomed out upon the downfall of the 
Revolution, and the shopkeeping spirit prevalent in, and charac­
teristic of, French commerce at that time. Still more masterly is his 
criticism of the bourgeois form of the relations between the sexes, 
and the position of woman in bourgeois society. He was the first to 
declare that in any given society the degree of woman's 

=====第323页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 293 
emancipation is the natural measure of the general émancipa-
tion. 357 
But Fourier is at his greatest in his conception of the history of 
society. He divides its whole course, thus far, into four stages of 
evolution—savagery, barbarism, the patriarchate, civilisation. This 
last is identical with the so-called civil, or bourgeois, society of 
to-day—i.e., with the social order that came in with the sixteenth 
century. He proves 
"that the civilised stage raises every vice practised by barbarism in a simple 
fashion into a form of existence, complex, ambiguous, equivocal, hypocritical" a— 
that civilisation moves in "a vicious circle", in contradictions 
which it constantly reproduces without being able to solve them; 
hence it constantly arrives at the very opposite to that which it 
wants to attain, or pretends to want to attain,*5 so that, e.g., 
"under civilisation poverty is born of superabundance  itself".0 
Fourier, as we see, uses the dialectic method in the same 
masterly way as his contemporary, Hegel. Using these same 
dialectics, he argues, against the talk about illimitable human 
perfectibility, that every historical phase has its period of ascent 
and also its period of descent,6 and he applies this observation to 
the future of the whole human race. As Kant introduced into 
natural science the idea of the ultimate destruction of the earth, 
Fourier introduced into historical science that of the ultimate 
destruction of the human race. 
Whilst in France the hurricane of the Revolution swept over the 
land, in England a quieter, but not on that account less 
tremendous, revolution was going on. Steam and the new 
tool-making machinery were transforming manufacture into mod­
ern industry, and thus revolutionising the whole foundation of 
bourgeois society. The sluggish march of development of the 
manufacturing period changed into a veritable storm and stress 
period of production. With constantly increasing swiftness the 
splitting-up of society into large capitalists and non-possessing 
proletarians went on. Between these, instead of the former stable 
middle-class, an unstable mass of artisans and small shopkeepers, 
a See Ch. Fourier, Théorie de l'unité universelle, Vols. 1 and 4. In: Oeuvres 
complètes, Vol. 2, Paris, 1843, pp. 78-79 and Vol. 5, Paris, 1841, pp. 213-14.— Ed. 
b See Ch. Fourier, Le nouveau monde industriel et  sociétaire,  ou invention du procédé 
d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées. In: Oeuvres complètes, 
Vol. 6, Paris, 1845, pp. 27-46, 390.— Ed. 
0 Ibid., p. 35.— Ed. 
d Ibid., Vol. 1, Paris, 1841, p. 50 et seq.— Ed. 

=====第324页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
the most fluctuating portion of the population, now led a 
precarious existence. 
The new mode of production was, as yet, only at the beginning 
of its period of ascent; as yet it was the normal, regular method of 
production—the only one possible under existing conditions. 
Nevertheless, even then it was producing crying social abuses—the 
herding together of a homeless population in the worst quarters of 
the large towns; the loosening of all traditional moral bonds, of 
patriarchal subordination, of family relations; overwork, especially 
of women and children, to a frightful extent; complete demoral­
isation of the working-class, suddenly flung into altogether new 
conditions, from the country into the town, from agriculture into 
modern industry, from stable conditions of existence into insecure 
ones that changed from day to day. 
At this juncture there came forward as a reformer a manufac­
turer 29 years old—a man of almost sublime, childlike simplicity 
of character, and at the same time one of the few born leaders of 
men. Robert Owen had adopted the teaching of the materialistic 
philosophers: that man's character is the product, on the one 
hand, of heredity, on the other, of the environment of the 
individual during his lifetime, and especially during his period of 
development. In the industrial revolution most of his class saw 
only chaos and confusion, and the opportunity of fishing in these 
troubled waters and making large fortunes quickly. He saw in it 
the opportunity of putting into practice his favourite theory, and 
so of bringing order out of chaos. He had already tried it with 
success, as superintendent of more than five hundred men in a 
Manchester factory. From 1800 to 1829, he directed the great 
cotton mill at New Lanark, in Scotland, as managing partner, 
along the same lines, but with greater freedom of action and with 
a success that made him a European reputation. A population, 
originally consisting of the most diverse and, for the most part, 
very demoralised elements, a population that gradually grew to 
2,500, he turned into a model colony, in which drunkenness, 
police, magistrates, lawsuits, poor laws, charity, were unknown. 
And all this simply by placing the people in conditions worthy of 
human beings, and especially by carefully bringing up the rising 
generation. He was the founder of infant schools, and introduced 
them first at New Lanark. At the age of two the children came to 
school, where they enjoyed themselves so much that they could 
scarcely be got home again. Whilst his competitors worked their 
people thirteen or fourteen hours a day, in New Lanark the 
working-day was only ten and a half hours. When a crisis in cotton 

=====第325页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 295 
stopped work for four months, his workers received their full 
wages all the time. And with all this the business more than 
doubled in value, and to the last yielded large profits to its 
proprietors. 
In spite of all this, Owen was not content. The existence which 
he secured for his workers was, in his eyes, still far from being 
worthy of human beings. 
"The people were slaves at my mercy." 
The relatively favourable conditions in which he had placed 
them were still far from allowing a rational development of the 
character and of the intellect in all directions, much less of the 
free exercise of all their faculties. 
"And yet, the working part of this population of 2,500 persons was daily 
producing as much real wealth for society as, less than half a century before, it 
would have required the working part of a population of 600,000 to create. I asked 
myself,  what became of the difference between the wealth consumed by 2,500 
persons and that which would have been consumed by 600,000?" * 
The answer was clear. It had been used to pay the proprietors 
of the establishment 5 per cent on the capital they had laid out, in 
addition to over £300,000 clear profit. And that which held for 
New Lanark held to a still greater extent for all the factories in 
England. 
"If this new wealth had not been created by machinery, imperfectly as it has 
been applied, the wars of Europe, in opposition to Napoleon, and to support the 
aristocratic principles of society, could not have been maintained. And yet this new 
power was the creation of the working-classes."** 
To them, therefore, the fruits of this new power belonged. The 
newly-created gigantic productive forces, hitherto used only to 
enrich individuals and to enslave the masses, offered to Owen the 
foundations for a reconstruction of society; they were destined, as 
the common property of all, to be worked for the common good 
of all. 
Owen's Communism was based upon this purely business 
foundation, the outcome, so to say, of commercial calculation. 
Throughout, it maintained this practical character. Thus, in 1823, 
Owen proposed the relief of the distress in Ireland by Communist 
colonies, and drew up complete estimates of costs of founding 
* From "The Revolution in Mind and Practice", p. 21, a memorial addressed to 
all the "red Republicans, Communists and Socialists of Europe", and sent to the 
provisional government of France, 1848, and also "to Queen Victoria and her 
responsible advisers".358 
** Note, 1. c, p. 22. 

=====第326页=====
296 Frederick Engels 
them, yearly expenditure, and probable revenue.3 And in his 
definite plan for the future, the technical working out of details is 
managed with such practical knowledge—ground plan, front and 
side and bird's-eye views all includedb—that the Owen method of 
social reform once accepted, there is from the practical point of 
view little to be said against the actual arrangement of details. 
His advance in the direction of Communism was the turning-
point in Owen's life. As long as he was simply a philanthropist, he 
was rewarded with nothing but wealth, applause, honour, and 
glory. He was the most popular man in Europe. Not only men of 
his own class, but statesmen and princes listened to him 
approvingly. But when he came out with his Communist theories, 
that was quite another thing. Three great obstacles seemed to him 
especially to block the path to social reform: private property, 
religion, the present form of marriage. He knew what confronted 
him if he attacked these—outlawry, excommunication from 
official society, the loss of his whole social position. But nothing of 
this prevented him from attacking them without fear of consequ­
ences,  and what he had foreseen happened. Banished from official 
society, with a conspiracy of silence against him in the press, 
ruined by his unsuccessful Communist experiments in America, in 
which he sacrificed all his fortune, he turned directly to the 
working-class and continued working in their midst for thirty 
years.  Every social movement, every real advance in England on 
behalf of the workers links itself on to the name of Robert Owen. 
He forced through in 1819, after five years' fighting, the first law 
limiting the hours of labour of women and children in factories.359 
He was president of the first Congress at which all the Trade 
Unions of England united in a single great trade association.360 He 
introduced as transition measures to the complete communistic 
organisation of society, on the one hand, co-operative societies for 
retail trade and production. These have since that time, at least, 
given practical proof that the merchant and the manufacturer are 
socially quite unnecessary. On the other hand, he introduced 
labour bazaars for the exchange of the products of labour through 
the medium of labour-notes, whose unit was a single hour of 
work361; institutions necessarily doomed to failure, but completely 
anticipating Proudhon's bank of exchange of a much later 
a See R. Owen, Report of the Proceedings at the Several Public Meetings, held in 
Dublin ... on the 18th March, 12th April, 19th April and 3rd May, Dublin,  1823.—  Ed. 
b See R. Owen, The Book of the New Moral  World,  Containing the Rational System 
of Society, Founded on Demonstrable Facts, Developing the Constitution and  LMWS  of 
Human Nature and of Society, London, 1842-1844, parts 1-7.— Ed. 

=====第327页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 297 
period, 6 and differing entirely from this in that it did not claim 
to be the panacea for all social ills, but only a first step towards a 
much more radical revolution of society. 
The Utopians' mode of thought has for a long time governed the 
socialist ideas of the nineteenth century, and still governs some of 
them. Until very recently all French and English Socialists did 
homage to it. The earlier German Communism, including that of 
Weitling, was of the same school. To all these Socialism is the 
expression of absolute truth, reason, and justice, and has only to 
be discovered to conquer all the world by virtue of its own power. 
And as absolute truth is independent of time, space, and of the 
historical development of man, it is a mere accident when and 
where it is discovered. With all this, absolute truth, reason, and 
justice are different with the founder of each different school. 
And as each one's special kind of absolute truth, reason, and 
justice is again conditioned by his subjective understanding, his 
conditions of existence, the measure of his knowledge and his 
intellectual training, there is no other ending possible in this 
conflict of absolute truths than that they shall be mutually 
exclusive one of the other. Hence, from this nothing could come 
but a kind of eclectic, average Socialism, which, as a matter of fact, 
has up to the present time dominated the minds of most of the 
socialist workers in France and England. Hence, a mish-mash 
allowing of the most manifold shades of opinion; a mish-mash of 
such critical statements, economic theories, pictures of future 
society by the founders of different sects as excite a minimum of 
opposition; a mish-mash which is the more easily brewed the more 
the definite sharp edges of the individual constituents are rubbed 
down in the stream of debate, like rounded pebbles in a brook. 
To make a science of Socialism, it had first to be placed upon a 
real basis. 

=====第328页=====
298 
II 
In the meantime, along with and after the French philosophy of 
the eighteenth century had arisen the new German philosophy, 
culminating in Hegel. Its greatest merit was the taking up again of 
dialectics as the highest form of reasoning. The old Greek 
philosophers were all born natural dialecticians, and Aristotle, the 
most encyclopaedic intellect of them, had already analysed the 
most essential forms of dialectic thought. The newer philosophy, 
on the other hand, although in it also dialectics had brilliant 
exponents (e.g. Descartes and Spinoza), had, especially through 
English influence, become more and more rigidly fixed in the 
so-called metaphysical mode of reasoning, by which also the 
French of the eighteenth century were almost wholly dominated, 
at all events in their special philosophical work. Outside 
philosophy in the restricted sense, the French nevertheless 
produced masterpieces of dialectic. We need only call to mind 
Diderot's "Le Neveu de Rameau", 363 and Rousseau's "Discours sur 
l'origine et les fondemens de l'inégalité parmi les hommes". We 
give here, in  brief,  the essential character of these two modes of 
thought. 
When we consider and reflect upon nature at large, or the 
history of mankind, or our own intellectual activity, at first we see 
the picture of an endless entanglement of relations and reactions, 
permutations and combinations, in which nothing remains what, 
where, and as it was, but everything moves, changes, comes into 
being and passes away. We see, therefore, at first the picture as a 
whole, with its individual parts still more or less kept in the 
background; we observe the movements, transitions, connections, 
rather than the things that move, combine, and are connected. 

=====第329页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 299 
This primitive, naive, but intrinsically correct conception of the 
world is that of ancient Greek philosophy, and was first clearly 
formulated by Heraclitus: everything is and is not, for everything 
is fluid, is constantly changing, constantly coming into being and 
passing away.a 
But this conception, correctly as it expresses the general 
character of the picture of appearances as a whole, does not 
suffice to explain the details of which this picture is made up, and 
so long as we do not understand these, we have not a clear idea of 
the whole picture. In order to understand these details we must 
detach them from their natural or historical connection and 
examine each one separately, its nature, special causes, effects, etc. 
This is, primarily, the task of natural science and historical 
research; branches of science which the Greeks of classical times, 
on very good grounds, relegated to a subordinate position, 
because they had first of all to collect materials for these sciences 
to work upon. A certain amount of natural and historical material 
must be collected before there can be any critical analysis, 
comparison, and arrangement in classes, orders, and species. The 
foundations of the exact natural sciences were, therefore, first 
worked out by the Greeks of the Alexandrian period,364 and later 
on, in the Middle Ages, by the Arabs. Real natural science dates 
from the second half of the fifteenth century, and thence onward 
it has advanced with constantly increasing rapidity. The analysis of 
Nature into its individual parts, the grouping of the different 
natural processes and objects in definite classes, the study of the 
internal anatomy of organised bodies in their manifold forms— 
these were the fundamental conditions of the gigantic strides in 
our knowledge of Nature that have been made during the last 
four hundred years. But this method of work has also left us as 
legacy the habit of observing natural objects and processes in 
isolation, apart from their connection with the vast whole; of 
observing them in repose, not in motion; as constants, not as 
essentially variables; in their death, not in their life. And when this 
way of looking at things was transferred by Bacon and Locke from 
natural science to philosophy, it begotb the narrow, metaphysical 
mode of thought peculiar to the last century. 
To the metaphysician, things and their mental reflexes, ideas, 
are isolated, are to be considered one after the other and apart 
a Heraclitus, Fragmente. —Ed. 
b The French edition of 1880 and the German edition of 1891 further have: "the 
specific narrow-mindedness of the last centuries, the metaphysical mode of 
thought".— Ed. 

=====第330页=====
300 Frederick Engels 
from each other,  are  objects  of investigation fixed, rigid, given 
once  for all. He  thinks  in absolutely irreconcilable antitheses.  "His 
communication  is 'yea, yea; nay, nay'; for  whatsoever  is more than 
these cometh  of evil."a  For him a  thing either exists  or does  not 
exist;  a thing cannot  at the  same time  be itself  and  something else. 
Positive  and  negative absolutely exclude  one  another; cause  and 
effect stand  in a  rigid antithesis  one to the  other. 
At first sight this mode  of thinking seems  to us  very luminous, 
because  it is  that  of so-called sound commonsense. Only sound 
commonsense, respectable fellow that  he is, in the  homely realm  of 
his own  four walls,  has  very wonderful adventures directly  he 
ventures  out  into  the  wide world  of research.  And the  metaphysi­
cal mode  of thought, justifiable  and  necessary  as it is in a  number 
of domains whose extent varies according  to the  nature  of the 
particular object  of investigation, sooner  or later reaches  a limit, 
beyond which  it becomes one-sided, restricted, abstract, lost  in 
insoluble contradictions.  In the  contemplation  of individual things, 
it forgets  the  connection between them;  in the  contemplation  of 
their existence,  it forgets  the  beginning  and end of  that existence; 
of their repose,  it forgets their motion.  It cannot  see the  wood  for 
the trees. 
For everyday purposes  we know  and can say, e.g.,  whether  an 
animal  is alive  or not. But,  upon closer inquiry,  we find that this 
is, in many cases,  a very complex question,  as the  jurists know very 
well. They have cudgelled their brains  in vain  to discover  a 
rational limit beyond which  the  killing  of the  child  in its  mother's 
womb  is murder.  It is  just  as impossible  to determine absolutely 
the moment  of death,  for physiology proves that death  is not an 
instantaneous, momentary phenomenon,  but a  very protracted 
process. 
In like manner, every organic being  is every moment  the  same 
and not the  same; every moment  it assimilates matter supplied 
from without,  and  gets  rid of  other matter; every moment some 
cells of its  body  die and  others build themselves anew;  in a  longer 
or shorter time  the  matter  of its  body  is completely renewed,  and 
is replaced  by other molecules'5  of matter,  so that every organic 
being  is always  itself, and yet  something other than  itself. 
Further,  we find upon closer investigation that  the two  poles  of 
an antithesis, positive  and  negative,  e.g., are as  inseparable  as they 
are opposed,  and  that despite  all their opposition, they mutually 
a Matthew 5:37.—  Ed. 
b In the  French (1880)  and  German (1891) editions: "atoms".—  Ed. 

=====第331页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 301 
interpenetrate. And we find, in like manner, that cause and effect 
are conceptions which only hold good in their application to 
individual cases; but as soon as we consider the individual cases in 
their general connection with the universe as a whole, they run 
into each other, and they become confounded when we contemp­
late that universal action and reaction in which causes and effects 
are eternally changing places, so that what is effect here and now 
will be cause there and then, and vice versa. 
None of these processes and modes of thought enters into the 
framework of metaphysical reasoning. Dialectics, on the other 
hand, comprehends things and their representations, ideas, in 
their essential connection, concatenation, motion, origin, and 
ending. Such processes as those mentioned above are, therefore, 
so many corroborations of its own method of procedure. 
Nature is the proof of dialectics, and it must be said for modern 
science3  that it has furnished this proof with very rich materials 
increasing daily, and thus has shown that, in the last resort, 
Nature works dialectically and not metaphysically; that she does 
not move in the eternal oneness of a perpetually recurring circle, 
but goes through a real historical évolution. 0 In this connection 
Darwin must be named before all others. He dealt the metaphysi­
cal conception of Nature the heaviest blow by his proof that all 
organic beings, plants, animals, and man  himself,  are the products 
of a process of evolution going on through millions of y ears. c liut 
the naturalists who have learned to think dialectically are few and 
far between, and this conflict of the results of discovery with 
preconceived modes of thinking explains the endless confusion 
now reigning in theoretical natural science, the despair of teachers 
as well as learners, of authors and readers alike. 
An exact representation of the universe, of its evolution, of the 
development of mankind, and of the reflection of this evolution in 
the minds of men, can therefore only be obtained by the methods 
of dialectics with its constant regard to the innumerable actions 
and reactions of life and death, of progressive or retrogressive 
changes. And in this spirit the new German philosophy has 
worked. Kant began his career by resolving the stable solar system 
of Newton and its eternal duration, after the famous initial 
impulse had once been given, into the result of a historic process, 
a In the French (1880)' and German (1891) editions: "modern natural 
science".— Ed. 
b The 1891 German edition has: "a real history".— Ed. 
c See Ch. Darwin, On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, or the 
Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life, London, 1859.— Ed. 

=====第332页=====
302 Frederick Engels 
the formation of the sun and all the planets out of a rotating 
nebulous mass. From this he at the same time drew the conclusion 
that, given this origin of the solar system, its future death followed 
of necessity. His theory half a century later was established 
mathematically by Laplace, and half a century after that the 
spectroscope proved the existence in space of such incandescent 
masses of gas in various stages of condensation. 65 
This new German philosophy culminated in the Hegelian 
system. In this system—and herein is its great merit—for the first 
time the whole world, natural, historical, intellectual, is re­
presented as a process, i.e., as in constant motion, change, 
transformation, development; and the attempt is made to trace out 
the internal connection that makes a continuous whole of all this 
movement and development. From this point of view the history 
of mankind no longer appeared as a wild whirl of senseless deeds 
of violence, all equally condemnable at the judgment-seat of 
mature philosophic reason, and which are best forgotten as quickly 
as possible; but as the process of evolution of man  himself.  It was 
now the task of the intellect to follow the gradual march of this 
process through all its devious ways, and to trace out the inner law 
running through all its apparently accidental phenomena. 
That the Hegelian system did not solve the problem it 
propounded is here immaterial. Its epoch-making merit was that it 
propounded the problem. This problem is one that no single 
individual will ever be able to solve. Although Hegel was—with 
Saint-Simon—the most encyclopaedic3 mind of his time, yet he 
was limited, first, by the necessarily limited extent of his own 
knowledge, and, second, by the limited extent and depth of the 
knowledge and conceptions of his age. To these limits a third must 
be added. Hegel was an idealist. To him the thoughts within his 
brain were not the more or less abstract pictures of actual things 
and processes, but, conversely, things and their evolution were 
only the realised pictures of the "Idea", existing somewhere from 
eternity before the world was. This way of thinking turned 
everything upside down, and completely reversed the actual 
connection of things in the world. Correctly and ingeniously as 
many individual groups of facts were grasped by Hegel, yet, for 
the reasons just given, there is much that is botched, artificial, 
laboured, in a word, wrong in point of detail. The Hegelian 
system, in  itself,  was a colossal miscarriage—but it was also the last 
of its kind. It was suffering, in fact, from an internal and 
a The German edition of 1891 has: "universal".— Ed. 

=====第333页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 303 
incurable contradiction. Upon the one hand, its essential proposi­
tion was the conception that human history is a process of 
evolution, which, by its very nature, cannot find its intellectual 
final term in the discovery of any so-called absolute truth. But, on 
the other hand, it laid claim to being the very essence of this 
absolute truth. A system of natural and historical knowledge, 
embracing everything, and final for all time, is a contradiction to 
the fundamental law of dialectic reasoning. This law, indeed, by 
no means excludes, but, on the contrary, includes the idea that the 
systematic knowledge of the external universe can make giant 
strides from age to age. 
The perception of the fundamental contradiction in German 
idealism led necessarily back to materialism, but nota bene, not to 
the simply metaphysical, exclusively mechanical materialism of the 
eighteenth century. Old materialism looked upon all previous 
history as a crude heap of irrationality and violence a; modern 
materialism sees in it the process of evolution of humanity, and 
aims at discovering the laws  thereof.  With the French of the 
eighteenth century, and even with Hegel, the conception obtained 
of Nature as a whole, moving in narrow circles, and forever 
immutable, with its eternal celestial bodies, as Newton, and 
unalterable organic species, as Linnaeus, taught.366 Modern materi­
alism embraces the more recent discoveries of natural science, 
according to which Nature also has its history in time, the celestial 
bodies, like the organic species that, under favourable conditions, 
people them, being born and perishing. And even if Nature, as a 
whole, must still be said to move in recurrent cycles, these cycles 
assume infinitely larger dimensions. In both aspects, modern 
materialism is essentially dialectic, and no longer requires the 
assistance of that sort of philosophy which, queen-like, pretended 
to rule the remaining mob of sciences. As soon as each special 
science is bound to make clear its position in the great totality of 
things and of our knowledge of things, a special science dealing 
with this totality is superfluous or unnecessary. That which still 
survives of all earlier philosophy is the science of thought and its 
laws—formal logic and dialectics. Everything else is subsumed in 
the positive science of Nature and history. 
Whilst, however, the revolution in the conception of Nature 
could only be made in proportion to the corresponding positive 
materials furnished by research, already much earlier certain 
a In the French (1880) and German (1891) editions this part of the sentence 
reads as follows: "In contrast to naively revolutionary, simple rejection of all 
previous history".— Ed. 

=====第334页=====
304 Frederick Engels 
historical facts had occurred which led to a decisive change in the 
conception of history. In 1831, the first working-class rising took 
place in Lyons367; between 1838 and 1842, the first national 
working-class movement, that of the English Chartists,368 reached 
its height. The class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie 
came to the front in the history of the most advanced countries in 
Europe, in proportion to the development, upon the one hand, of 
modern industry, upon the other, of the newly-acquired political 
supremacy of the bourgeoisie. Facts more and more strenuously 
gave the lie to the teachings of bourgeois economy as to the 
identity of the interests of capital and labour, as to the universal 
harmony and universal prosperity that would be the consequence 
of unbridled competition. All these things could no longer be 
ignored, any more than the French and English Socialism, which 
was their theoretical, though very imperfect, expression. But the 
old idealist conception of history, which was not yet dislodged, 
knew nothing of class struggles based upon economic interests, 
knew nothing of economic interests; production and all economic 
relations appeared in it only as incidental, subordinate elements in 
the "history of civilisation". 
The new facts made imperative a new examination of all past 
history. Then it was seen that all past history, with the exception 
of its primitive stages, was the history of class struggles; that these 
warring classes of society are always the products of the modes of 
production and of exchange3—in a word, of the economic 
conditions of their time; that the economic structure of society 
always furnishes the real basis, starting from which we can alone 
work out the ultimate explanation of the whole superstructure of 
juridical and political institutions as well as of the religious, 
philosophical, and other ideas of a given historical period. Hegel 
had freed history from metaphysics—he had made it dialectic; but 
his conception of history was essentially idealistic. But now 
idealism was driven from its last refuge, the philosophy of 
historyb; now a materialistic treatment of history was propounded, 
and a method found of explaining man's "knowing" by his 
"being", instead of, as heretofore, his "being" by his "knowing". 
From that time forward Socialism was no longer an accidental 
discovery of this or that ingenious brain, but the necessary 
outcome of the struggle between two historically developed 
classes—the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. Its task was no longer 
a The German edition of 1891 has: "and of intercourse".— Ed. 
b The German edition of 1891 has: "the conception of history".— Ed. 

=====第335页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 305 
to manufacture a system of society as perfect as possible, but to 
examine the historico-economic succession of events from which 
these classes and their antagonism had of necessity sprung, and to 
discover in the economic conditions thus created the means of 
ending the conflict. But the Socialism of earlier days was as 
incompatible with this materialistic conception as the conception of 
Nature of the French materialists was with dialectics and modern 
natural science. The Socialism of earlier days certainly criticised 
the existing capitalistic mode of production and its consequences. 
But it could not explain them, and, therefore, could not get the 
mastery of them. It could only simply reject them as bad. The 
more strongly this earlier Socialism denounced the exploitation of 
the working-class, inevitable under Capitalism, the less able was it 
clearly to show in what this exploitation consisted and how it 
arose. But for this it was necessary—(1) to present the capitalistic 
method of production in its historical connection and its inevi-
tableness during a particular historical period, and therefore, also, 
to present its inevitable downfall; and (2) to lay bare its essential 
character, which was still a secret. This was done by the discovery 
of surplus-value. It was shown that the appropriation of unpaid 
labour is the basis of the capitalist mode of production and of the 
exploitation of the worker that occurs under it; that even if the 
capitalist buys the labour-power of his labourer at its full value as 
a commodity on the market, he yet extracts more value from it 
than he paid for; and that in the ultimate analysis this 
surplus-value forms those sums of value from which are heaped 
up the constantly increasing masses of capital in the hands of the 
possessing classes. The genesis of capitalist production and the 
production of capital were both explained. 
These two great discoveries, the materialistic conception of 
history and the revelation of the secret of capitalistic production 
through surplus-value, we owe to Marx. With these discoveries 
Socialism became a science. The next thing was to work out all its 
details and relations. 
22-1317 

=====第336页=====
306 
III 
The materialist conception of history starts from the proposition 
that the production of the means to support human lifea and, next 
to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis of all 
social structure; that in every society that has appeared in history, 
the manner in which wealth is distributed and society divided into 
classes or orders, is dependent upon what is produced, how it is 
produced, and how the products are exchanged. From this point 
of view the final causes of all social changes and political 
revolutions are to be sought, not in men's brains, not in man's 
better insight into eternal truth and justice, but in changes in the 
modes of production and exchange. They are to be sought, not in 
the philosophy, but in the economics of each particular epoch. The 
growing perception that existing social institutions are unreason­
able and unjust, that reason has become unreason, and right 
wrong,b is only proof that in the modes of production and 
exchange changes have silently taken place, with which the social 
order, adapted to earlier economic conditions, is no longer in 
keeping. From this it also follows that the means of getting rid of 
the incongruities that have been brought to light, must also be 
present, in a more or less developed condition, within the changed 
modes of production themselves. These means are not to be 
invented by deduction from fundamental principles, but are to be 
discovered in the stubborn facts of the existing system of 
production^ 
a The words "of the means to support human life" are missing in the German 
edition of  1891.—  Ed. 
b Goethe, Faust, Erster Teil, "Studierzimmer". — Ed. 
c In the German edition of 1891 this sentence reads: "These means are not to be 
invented in the head, but are to be discovered with the help of the head in the existing 
material facts of production."—Ed 

=====第337页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 307 
What is, then, the position of modern Socialism in this 
connexion? 
The present structure of society—this is now pretty generally 
conceded—is the creation of the ruling class of to-day, of the 
bourgeoisie. The mode of production peculiar to the bourgeoisie, 
known, since Marx, as the capitalist mode of production, was 
incompatible witha the feudal system, with the privileges it 
conferred upon individuals, entire social ranks and local corpora­
tions,  as well as with the hereditary ties of subordination which 
constituted the framework of its social organisation. The 
bourgeoisie broke up the feudal system and built upon its ruins 
the capitalist order of society, the kingdom of free competition, of 
personal liberty,*5 of the equality, before the law, of all commodity 
owners,0 of all the rest of the capitalist blessings. Thenceforward 
the capitalist mode of production could develop in freedom. Since 
steam, machinery, and the making of machines by machinery0 
transformed the older manufacture into modern industry, the 
productive forces evolved under the guidance of the bourgeoisie 
developed with a rapidity and in a degree unheard of before. But 
just as the older manufacture, in its time, and handicraft, 
becoming more developed under its influence, had come into 
collision with the feudal trammels of the guilds, so now modern 
industry, in its more complete development, comes into collision 
with the bounds within which the capitalistic mode of production 
holds it confined. The new productive forces have already 
outgrown the capitalistic mode of using them. And this conflict 
between productive forces and modes of production is not a 
conflict engendered in the mind of man, like that between original 
sin and divine justice. It exists, in fact, objectively, outside us, 
independently of the will and actions even of the men that have 
brought it on. Modern Socialism is nothing but the reflex, in 
thought, of this conflict in fact; its ideal reflection in the minds, 
first, of the class directly suffering under it, the working-class. 
Now, in what does this conflict consist? 
Before capitalistic production, i.e., in the Middle Ages, the 
a In the German edition of 1891 the end of this sentence reads as follows: "the 
local and social-estate privileges as well as with the mutual personal ties of the 
feudal system".— Ed. 
b The French (1880) and German (1891) editions have: "the freedom of 
movement".— Ed. 
c The German edition of 1891 has: "the equality of commodity owners".— Ed. 
d In the French (1880) and German (1891) editions the beginning of the 
sentence reads as follows: "Since steam and the new machine tools".— Ed. 
22* 

=====第338页=====
308 Frederick Engels 
system of petty industry obtained generally, based upon the 
private property of the labourers in their means of production; in 
the country, the agriculture of the small peasant, freeman or  serf; 
in the towns, the handicrafts organised in guilds.3 The instruments 
of labour—land, agricultural implements, the workshop, the 
tool—were the instruments of labour of single individuals, 
adapted for the use of one worker, and, therefore, of necessity, 
small, dwarfish, circumscribed. But, for this very reason they 
belonged, as a rule, to the producer  himself.  To concentrate these 
scattered, limited means of production, to enlarge them, to turn 
them into the powerful levers of production of the present 
day—this was precisely the historic role of capitalist production 
and of its upholder, the bourgeoisie. In the fourth section of 
Capital13 Marx has explained in detail, how since the fifteenth 
century this has been historically worked out through the three 
phases of simple co-operation, manufacture, and modern industry. 
But the bourgeoisie, as is also shown there, could not transform 
these puny means of production into mighty productive forces, 
without transforming them, at the same time, from means of 
production of the individual into social means of production only 
workable by a collectivity of men. The spinning-wheel, the 
handloom, the blacksmith's hammer, were replaced by the 
spinning-machine, the power-loom, the steam-hammer; the indi­
vidual workshop, by the factory implying the co-operation of 
hundreds and thousands of workmen. In like manner, production 
itself changed from a series of individual into a series of social 
acts,  and the products from individual to social products. The 
yarn, the cloth, the metal articles that now came out of the factory 
were the joint product of many workers, through whose hands 
they had successively to pass before they were ready. No one 
person could say of them: "I made that; this is my product." 
But where, in a given society, the fundamental form of 
production is that spontaneous division of labour which creeps in 
gradually and not upon any preconceived plan, there the products 
take on the form of commodities, whose mutual exchange, buying 
and selling, enable the individual producers to satisfy their manifold 
wants.  And this was the case in the Middle Ages. The peasant, e.g., 
sold to the artisan agricultural products and bought from him the 
products of handicraft. Into this society of individual producers, 
of commodity-producers, the new mode of production thrust 
a The words "organised in guilds" were added in the English edition.— Ed 
b K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part IV (present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed 

=====第339页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 309 
itself.  In the midst of the old division of labour, grown up 
spontaneously and upon no definite plan, which had governed the 
whole of society, now arose division of labour upon a definite plan, 
as organised in the factory; side by side with individual production 
appeared social production. The products of both were sold in the 
same market, and, therefore, at prices at least approximately 
equal. But organisation upon a definite plan was stronger than 
spontaneous division of labour. The factories working with the 
combined social forces of a collectivity of individuals produced 
their commodities far more cheaply than the individual small 
producers. Individual production succumbed in one department 
after another. Socialised production revolutionised all the old 
methods of production. But its revolutionary character was, at the 
same time, so little recognised, that it was, on the contrary, 
introduced as a means of increasing and developing the produc­
tion of commodities. When it arose, it found ready-made, and 
made liberal use of, certain machinery for the production and 
exchange of commodities: merchants' capital, handicraft, wage-
labour. Socialised production thus introducing itself as a new form 
of the production of commodities, it was a matter of course that 
under it the old forms of appropriation remained in full swing, 
and were applied to its products as well. 
In the mediaeval stage of evolution of the production of 
commodities, the question as to the owner of the product of 
labour could not arise. The individual producer, as a rule, had, 
from raw material belonging to  himself,  and generally his own 
handiwork, produced it with his own tools, by the labour of his 
own hands or of his family. There was no need for him to 
appropriate the new product. It belonged wholly to him, as a 
matter of course. His property in the product was, therefore, 
based upon his own labour. Even where external help was used, this 
was, as a rule, of little importance, and very generally was 
compensated by something other than wages. The apprentices and 
journeymen of the guilds worked less for board and wages than 
for education, in order that they might become master craftsmen 
themselves. 
Then came the concentration of the means of production and of 
the producers in large workshops and manufactories, their 
transformation into actual socialised means of production and 
socialised producers.3 But the socialised producers and means of 
a The words "and of the producers" and "and socialised producers" are 
missing in the German edition of  1891.—  Ed. 

=====第340页=====
310 Frederick Engels 
production and their products3 were still treated, after this 
change, just as they had been before, i.e., as the means of 
production and the products of individuals. Hitherto, the owner 
of the instruments of labour had himself appropriated the 
product, because, as a rule, it was his own product and the 
assistance of others was the exception. Now the owner of the 
instruments of labour always appropriated to himself the product, 
although it was no longer his product but exclusively the product 
of the labour of others. Thus, the products now produced socially 
were not appropriated by those who had actually set in motion the 
means of production and actually produced the commodities, but 
by the capitalists. The means of production, and production  itself, 
had become in essence socialised. But they were subjected to a 
form of appropriation which presupposes the private production 
of individuals, under which, therefore, every one owns his own 
product and brings it to market. The mode of production is 
subjected to this form of appropriation, although it abolishes the 
conditions upon which the latter rests.* 
This contradiction, which gives to the new mode of production 
its capitalistic character, contains the germ of the whole of the social 
antagonisms of  to-day.  The greater the mastery obtained by the new 
mode of production over all important fields of production and in 
all manufacturing countries, the more it reduced individual 
production to an insignificant residuum, the more clearly was brought 
out the incompatibility of  socialised  production with capitalistic appropria­
tion. 
The first capitalists found, as we have said, alongside of other 
forms of labour,b wage-labour ready-made for them on the 
market. But it was exceptional, complementary, accessory, transit­
ory wage-labour. The agricultural labourer, though, upon occa­
sion, he hired himself out by the day, had a few acres of his own 
* It is hardly necessary in this connexion to point out, that, even if the form of 
appropriation remains the same, the character of the appropriation is just as much 
revolutionised as production is by the changes described above. It is, of course, a very 
different matter whether I appropriate to myself my own product or that of another. 
Note in passing that wage-labour, which contains the whole capitalistic mode of 
production in embryo, is very ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form it existed for 
centuries alongside of slave-labour. But the embryo could duly develop into the 
capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary historical pre-conditions had 
been furnished. 
a In the German edition of 1891 the beginning of the sentence reads as follows: 
"But the socialised means of production and products".— Ed 
b The words "alongside of other forms of labour" were added in the English 
edition.— Ed 

=====第341页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 311 
land on which he could at all events live at a pinch. The guilds 
were so organised that the journeyman of to-day became the 
master of to-morrow. But all this changed, as soon as the means of 
production became socialised and concentrated in the hands of 
capitalists. The means of production, as well as the product, of the 
individual producer became more and more worthless; there was 
nothing left for him but to turn wage-worker under the capitalist. 
Wage-labour, aforetime the exception and accessory, now became 
the rule and basis of all production; aforetime complementary, it 
now became the sole remaining function of the worker. The 
wage-worker for a time became a wage-worker for life. The 
number of these permanent wage-workers was further enormously 
increased by the breaking-up of the feudal system that occurred at 
the same time, by the disbanding of the retainers of the feudal 
lords,  the eviction of the peasants from their homesteads, etc. The 
separation was made complete between the means of production 
concentrated in the hands of the capitalists on the one side, and 
the producers, possessing nothing but their labour-power, on the 
other. The contradiction between socialised production and capitalistic 
appropriation manifested itself as the antagonism of proletariat and 
bourgeoisie. 
We have seen that the capitalistic mode of production thrust its 
way into a society of commodity-producers, of individual produc­
ers, whose social bond was the exchange of their products. But 
every society, based upon the production of commodities, has this 
peculiarity: that the producers have lost control over their own 
social inter-relations. Each man produces for himself with such 
means of production as he may happen to have, and for such 
exchange as he may require to satisfy his remaining wants. No one 
knows how much of his particular article is coming on the market, 
nor how much of it will be wanted. No one knows whether his 
individual product will meet an actual demand, whether he will be 
able to make good his cost of production or even to sell his 
commodity at all. Anarchy reigns in socialised production. 
But the production of commodities, like every other form of 
production, has its peculiar, inherent laws inseparable from it; and 
these laws work, despite anarchy, in and through anarchy. They 
reveal themselves in the only persistent form of social inter­
relations, i.e., in exchange, and here they affect the individual 
producers as compulsory laws of competition. They are, at first, 
unknown to these producers themselves, and have to be discov­
ered by them gradually and as the result of experience. They 
work themselves out, therefore, independently of the producers, 

=====第342页=====
312 Frederick Engels 
and in antagonism to them, as inexorable3 natural laws of their 
particular form of production. The product governs the pro­
ducers. 
In mediaeval society, especially in the earlier centuries, produc­
tion was essentially directed towards satisfying the wants of the 
individual. It satisfied, in the main, only the wants of the producer 
and his family. Where relations of personal dependence existed, as 
*in the country, it also helped to satisfy the wants of the feudal 
lord. In all this there was, therefore, no exchange; the products, 
consequently, did not assume the character of commodities. The 
family of the peasant produced almost everything they wanted: 
clothes and furniture, as well as means of subsistence. Only when 
it began to produce more than was sufficient to supply its own 
wants and the payments in kind to the feudal lord, only then did 
it also produce commodities. This surplus, thrown into socialised 
exchange and offered for sale, became commodities. 
The artisans of the towns, it is true, had from the first to 
produce for exchange. But they, also, themselves supplied the 
greatest part of their own individual wants. They had gardens and 
plots of land. They turned their cattle out into the communal 
forest, which, also, yielded them timber and firing. The women 
spun flax, wool, and so forth. Production for the purpose of 
exchange, production of commodities, was only in its infancy. 
Hence, exchange was restricted, the market narrow, the methods 
of production stable; there was local exclusiveness without, local 
unity within; the mark* in the country, in the town, the guild. 
But with the extension of the production of commodities, and 
especially with the introduction of the capitalist mode of produc­
tion, the laws of commodity-production, hitherto latent, came into 
action more openly and with greater force. The old bonds were 
loosened, the old exclusive limits broken through, the producers 
were more and more turned into independent, isolated producers 
of commodities. It became apparent that the production of society 
at large was ruled by absence of plan, by accident, by anarchy; and 
this anarchy0 grew to greater and greater height. But the chief 
means by aid of which the capitalist mode of production 
intensified this anarchy of socialised production, was the exact 
* See Appendix.1" 
a The German edition of 1891 has: "blindly working".— Ed 
b Here Engels refers to his work The Mark (see this volume, pp. 439-56).— Ed 
c In the German edition of 1891 the beginning of the sentence reads as follows: 
"The anarchy of socialised production became apparent and".— Ed 

=====第343页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 313 
opposite of anarchy. It was the increasing organisation of 
production, upon a social basis, in every individual productive 
establishment. By this, the old, peaceful, stable condition of things 
was ended. Wherever this organisation of production was intro­
duced into a branch of industry, it brooked no other method of 
production by its side.3 The field of labour became a battle­
ground. The great geographical discoveries, and the colonisation 
following upon them, multiplied markets and quickened the 
transformation of handicraft into manufacture. The war did not 
simply break out between the individual producers of particular 
localities. The local struggles begot in their turn national conflicts, 
the commercial wars of the seventeenth and the eighteenth 
369 
centuries. 
Finally, modern industry and the opening of the world-market 
made the struggle universal, and at the same time gave it an 
unheard-of virulence. Advantages in natural or artificial conditions 
of production now decide the existence or non-existence of 
individual capitalists, as well as of whole industries and countries. 
He that falls is remorselessly cast aside. It is the Darwinian 
struggle of the individual for existence transferred from Nature to 
society with intensified violence. The conditions of existence 
natural to the animal appear as the final term of human 
development. The contradiction between socialised production and 
capitalistic appropriation now presents itself as an antagonism 
between the organisation of production in the individual workshop and 
the anarchy of production in society generally. 
The capitalistic mode of production moves in these two forms of 
the antagonism immanent to it from its very origin. It is never 
able to get out of that "vicious circle", which Fourier had already 
discovered.b What Fourier could not, indeed, see in his time is, that 
this circle is gradually narrowing; that the movement becomes 
more and more a spiral, and must come to an end, like the 
movement of the planets, by collision with the centre. It is the 
compelling force of anarchy in the production of society at largec 
that more and more completely turns the great majority of men 
into proletarians; and it is the masses of the proletariat again who 
a The German edition of 1891 has one more sentence here: "Wherever it took 
possession of handicraft, it destroyed its old form."—Ed. 
b See Ch. Fourier, Le nouveau monde industriel et  sociétaire,  ou invention du procédé 
d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées. In: Oeuvres complètes, 
Vol. 6.— Ed. 
c The German edition of 1891 has here: "It is the compelling force of the social 
anarchy of production".— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
314 Frederick Engels 
will finally put an end to anarchy in production. It is the 
compelling force of anarchy in social production that turns the 
limitless perfectibility of machinery under modern industry into a 
compulsory law by which every individual industrial capitalist must 
perfect his machinery more and more, under penalty of ruin. 
But the perfecting of machinery is the making human labour 
superfluous. If the introduction and increase of machinery means 
the displacement of millions of manual, by a few machine, 
workers, improvement in machinery means the displacement of 
more and more of the machine-workers themselves. It means, in 
the last instance, the production of a number of available 
wage-workers in excess of the average needs of capital, the 
formation of a complete industrial reserve army, as I called it in 
1845,*  available at the times when industry is working at high 
pressure, to be cast out upon the street when the inevitable crash 
comes, a constant dead weight upon the limbs of the working-class 
in its struggle for existence with capital, a regulator for the 
keeping of wages down to the low level that suits the interests of 
capital. Thus it comes about, to quote Marx, that machinery 
becomes the most powerful weapon in the war of capital against 
the working-class; that the instruments of labour constantly tear 
the means of subsistence out of the hands of the labourer; that the 
very product of the worker is turned into an instrument for his 
subjugation.b Thus it comes about that the economising of the 
instruments of labour becomes at the same time, from the outset, 
the most reckless waste of labour-power, and robbery based upon 
the normal conditions under which labour functions0; that 
machinery, "the most powerful instrument for shortening labour-
time,  becomes the most unfailing means for placing every moment 
of the labourer's time and that of his family at the disposal of the 
capitalist for the purpose of expanding the value of his capital" 
(Capital, English edition, p. 406). Thus it comes about that 
over-work of some becomes the preliminary condition for the 
idleness of others, and that modern industry, which hunts after 
* "The Condition of the. Working-Class in England" (Sonnenschein & Co.), 
p. 84. a 
a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844. With Preface 
written in 1892. Translated by Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky, London, Swan 
Sonnenschein and Co., 1892 (see present edition, Vol. 4, p. 384).— Ed 
h K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part IV, Chapter XV, Sections 5 and 9 (present edition, 
Vol. 35).— Ed 
c Ibid., Part IV, Chapter XV, Section 8, Sub-section "b": "Reaction of the Factory 
System on Manufacture and Domestic Industries".— Ed. 

=====第345页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 315 
new consumers over the whole world, forces the consumption of 
the masses at home down to a starvation minimum, and in doing 
thus destroys its own home market. "The law that always 
equilibrates the relative surplus population, or industrial reserve 
army, to the extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the 
labourer to capital more firmly than the wedges of Vulcan did 
Prometheus to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, 
corresponding with accumulation of capital. Accumulation of 
wealth at one pole is, therefore, at the same time, accumulation of 
misery, agony of toil, slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degrada­
tion, at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the class that 
produces its own product in the form of capital" (Marx's Capital 
[Sonnenschein & Co.], p. 661). And to expect any other division of 
the products from the capitalistic mode of production is the same 
as expecting the electrodes of a battery not to decompose 
acidulated water, not to liberate oxygen at the positive, hydrogen 
at the negative pole, so long as they are connected with the 
battery. 
We have seen that the ever-increasing perfectibility of modern 
machinery is, by the anarchy of social production, turned into a 
compulsory law that forces the individual industrial capitalist 
always to improve his machinery, always to increase its productive 
force. The bare possibility of extending the field of production is 
transformed for him into a similar compulsory law. The enormous 
expansive force of modern industry, compared with which that of 
gases is mere child's play, appears to us now as a necessity for 
expansion, both qualitative and quantitative, that laughs at all 
resistance. Such resistance is offered by consumption, by sales, by 
the markets for the products of modern industry. But the capacity 
for extension, extensive and intensive, of the markets is primarily 
governed by quite different laws that work much less energetically. 
The extension of the markets cannot keep pace with the extension 
of production. The collision becomes inevitable, and as this cannot 
produce any real solution so long as it does not break in pieces the 
capitalist mode of production, the collisions become periodic. 
Capitalist production has begotten another "vicious circle". 
As a matter of fact, since 1825, when the first general crisis 
broke out, the whole industrial and commercial world, production 
and exchange among all civilised peoples and their more or less 
barbaric hangers-on, are thrown out of joint about once every ten 
years.  Commerce is at a standstill, the markets are glutted, 
products accumulate, as multitudinous as they are unsaleable, hard 
cash disappears, credit vanishes, factories are closed, the mass of 

=====第346页=====
316 Frederick Engels 
the workers are in want of the means of subsistence, because they 
have produced too much of the means of subsistence; bankruptcy 
follows upon bankruptcy, execution upon execution. The stagna­
tion lasts for years; productive forces and products are wasted and 
destroyed wholesale, until the accumulated mass of commodities 
finally filter off, more or less depreciated in value, until 
production and exchange gradually begin to move again. Little by 
little the pace quickens. It becomes a trot. The industrial trot 
breaks into a canter, the canter in turn grows into the headlong 
gallop of a perfect steeplechase of industry, commercial credit, 
and speculation, which finally, after breakneck leaps, ends where it 
began—in the ditch of a crisis. And so over and over again. We 
have now, since the year 1825, gone through this five times, and 
at the present moment (1877) we are going through it for the 
sixth time. And the character of these crises is so clearly defined 
that Fourier hit all of them off, when he described the first as 
"crise pléthorique", a crisis from plethora. 3 
In these crises, the contradiction between socialised production 
and capitalist appropriation ends in a violent explosion. The 
circulation of commodities is, for the time being, stopped. Money, 
the means of circulation, becomes a hindrance to circulation. All 
the laws of production and circulation of commodities are turned 
upside down. The economic collision has reached its apogee. The 
mode of production is in rebellion against the mode of exchange. 
The fact that the socialised organisation of production within 
the factory has developed so far that it has become incompatible 
with the anarchy of production in society, which exists side by side 
with and dominates it, is brought home to the capitalists 
themselves by the violent concentration of capital that occurs 
during crises, through the ruin of many large, and a still greater 
number of small, capitalists. The whole mechanism of the capitalist 
mode of production breaks down under the pressure of the 
productive forces, its own creations. It is no longer able to turn all 
this mass of means of production into capital. They lie fallow, and 
for that very reason the industrial reserve army must also lie 
fallow. Means of production, means of subsistence, available 
labourers, all the elements of production and of general wealth, 
are present in abundance. But "abundance becomes the source of 
distress and want" (Fourier), because it is the very thing that 
prevents the transformation of the means of production and 
a See Ch. Fourier, Le nouveau monde industriel et  sociétaire,  ou invention du procédé 
d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées. In: Oeuvres complètes, 
Vol. 6, pp. 393-94.— Ed. 

=====第347页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 317 
subsistence into capital. For in capitalistic society the means of 
production can only function when they have undergone a 
preliminary transformation into capital, into the means of 
exploiting human labour-power. The necessity of this transforma­
tion into capital of the means of production and subsistence stands 
like a ghost between these and the workers. It alone prevents the 
coming together of the material and personal levers of produc­
tion; it alone forbids the means of production to function, the 
workers to work and live. On the one hand, therefore, the 
capitalistic mode of production stands convicted of its own 
incapacity to further direct these productive forces. On the other, 
these productive forces themselves, with increasing energy, press 
forward to the removal of the existing contradiction, to the 
abolition of their quality as capital, to the practical recognition of 
their character as social productive forces. 
This rebellion of the productive forces, as they grow more and 
more powerful, against their quality as capital, this stronger and 
stronger command that their social character shall be recognised, 
forces the capitalist class itself to treat them more and more as 
social productive forces, so far as this is possible under capitalist 
conditions. The period of industrial high pressure, with its 
unbounded inflation of credit, not less than the crash  itself,  by the 
collapse of great capitalist establishments, tends to bring about that 
form of the socialisation of great masses of means of production 
which we meet with in the different kinds of joint-stock 
companies. Many of these means of production and of distribution 
are, from the outset, so colossal, that, like the railroads, they 
exclude all other forms of capitalistic exploitation. At a further 
stage of evolution this form also becomes insufficient. The 
producers on a large scale in a particular branch of industry in a 
particular country unite in a "Trust", a union for the purpose of 
regulating production. They determine the total amount to be 
produced, parcel it out among themselves, and thus enforce the 
selling price fixed beforehand. But trusts of this kind, as soon as 
business becomes bad, are generally liable to break up, and, on 
this very account, compel a yet greater concentration of associa­
tion. The whole of the particular industry is turned into one 
gigantic joint-stock company; internal competition gives place to 
the internal monopoly of this one company. This has happened in 
1890 with the English alkali production, which is now, after the 
fusion of 48 large works, in the hands of one company, conducted 
upon a single plan, and with a capital of £6,000,000. 
In the trusts, freedom of competition changes into its very 

=====第348页=====
318 Frederick Engels 
opposite—into monopoly; and the production without any defi­
nite plan of capitalistic society capitulates to the production upon a 
definite plan of the invading socialistic society. Certainly this is so 
far still to the benefit and advantage of the capitalists. But in this 
case the exploitation is so palpable that it must break down. No 
nation will put up with production conducted by trusts, with so 
barefaced an exploitation of the community by a small band of 
dividend-mongers. 
In any case, with trusts or without, the official representative of 
capitalist society—the State—will ultimately have to undertake the 
direction of production.* This necessity for conversion into 
State-property is felt first in the great institutions for intercourse 
and communication—the post-office, the telegraphs, the railways. 
If the crises demonstrate the incapacity of the bourgeoisie for 
managing any longer modern productive forces, the transforma­
tion of the great establishments for production and distribution3 
into joint-stock companies, trusts, and State property, shows how 
unnecessary the bourgeoisie are for that purpose. All the social 
functions of the capitalist are now performed by salaried 
employees. The capitalist has no further social function than that 
of pocketing dividends, tearing off coupons, and gambling on the 
Stock Exchange, where the different capitalists despoil one 
* I say "have to". For only when the means of production and distribution 
have actually outgrown the form of management by joint-stock companies, and 
when, therefore, the taking them over by the State has become economically inevi­
table, only then—even if it is the State of to-day that effects this—is there an econ­
omic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the taking over of 
all productive forces by society  itself.  But of late, since Bismarck went in 
for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a kind of spurious Socialism has 
arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkeyism, that without 
more ado declares all State-ownership, even of the Bismarckian sort, to be 
socialistic. Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is 
socialistic, then Napoleon and Metternich must be numbered among the founders 
of Socialism. If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, 
itself constructed its chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic 
compulsion, took over for the State the chief Prussian lines, simply to be the 
better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up the railway employees 
as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a new 
source of income independent of parliamentary votes—this was, in no sense, a 
socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or unconsciously. Otherwise, 
the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the 
regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was 
seriously proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William Ill's reign, the taking over by 
the State of the brothels. 
a The German edition of 1891 has here: "communication".— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 319 
another of their capital. At first the capitalistic mode of 
production forces out the workers. Now it forces out the 
capitalists, and reduces them, just as it reduced the workers, to the 
ranks of the surplus population, although not immediately into 
those of the industrial reserve army. 
But the transformation, either into joint-stock companies and 
trusts,  or into State-ownership, does not do away with the 
capitalistic nature of the productive forces. In the joint-stock 
companies and trusts this is obvious. And the modern State, again, 
is only the organisation that bourgeois society takes on in order to 
support the external conditions of the capitalist mode of produc­
tion against the encroachments, as well of the workers as of 
individual capitalists. The modern State, no matter what its form, 
is essentially a capitalist machine, the state of the capitalists, the 
ideal personification of the total national capital.3 The more it 
proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more does it 
actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it 
exploit. The workers remain wage-workers—proletarians. The 
capitalist relation is not done away with. It is rather brought to a 
head. But, brought to a head, it topples over. State-ownership of 
the productive forces is not the solution of the conflict, but 
concealed within it are the technical conditions that form the 
elements of that solution. 
This solution can only consist in the practical recognition of the 
social nature of the modern forces of production, and therefore in 
the harmonising the modes of production, appropriation, and 
exchange with the socialised character of the means of production. 
And this can only come about by society openly and directly taking 
possession of the productive forces which have outgrown all 
control except that of society as a whole. The social character of 
the means of production and of the products to-day reacts against 
the producers, periodically disrupts all production and exchange, 
acts only like a law of Nature working blindly, forcibly, destruc­
tively. But with the taking over by society of the productive forces, 
the social character of the means of production and of the 
products will be utilised by the producers with a perfect 
understanding of its nature, and instead of being a source of 
disturbance and periodical collapse, will become the most powerful 
lever of production  itself. 
Active social forces work exactly like natural forces: blindly, 
a The French (1880) and German (1891) editions have: "the ideal total 
capitalist".— Ed. 

=====第350页=====
320 Frederick Engels 
forcibly, destructively, so long as we do not understand, and 
reckon with, them. But when once we understand them, when 
once we grasp their action, their direction, their effects, it depends 
only upon ourselves to subject them more and more to our own 
will, and by means of them to reach our own ends. And this holds 
quite especially of the mighty productive forces of to-day. As long 
as we obstinately refuse to understand the nature and the 
character of these social means of action—and this understanding 
goes against the grain of the capitalist mode of production and its 
defenders—so long these forces are at work in spite of us, in 
opposition to us, so long they master us, as we have shown above 
in detail. 
But when once their nature is understood, they can, in the 
hands of the producers working together, be transformed from 
master demons into willing servants. The difference is as that 
between the destructive force of electricity in the lightning of the 
storm, and electricity under command in the telegraph and the 
voltaic arc; the difference between a conflagration, and fire 
working in the service of man. With this recognition at last of the 
real nature of the productive forces of to-day, the social anarchy 
of production gives place to a social regulation of production upon 
a definite plan, according to the needs of the community and of 
each individual. Then the capitalist mode of appropriation, in 
which the product enslaves first the producer and then the 
appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of the 
products that is based upon the nature of the modern means of 
production; upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as 
means to the maintenance and extension of production—on the 
other, direct individual appropriation, as means of subsistence and 
of enjoyment. 
Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more 
completely transforms the great majority of the population into 
proletarians, it creates the power which, under penalty of its own 
destruction, is forced to accomplish this revolution. Whilst it forces 
on more and more the transformation of the vast means of 
production, already socialised, into State property, it shows itself 
the way to accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat seizes 
political power and turns the means of production into State property. 
But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all 
class distinctions and class antagonisms, abolishes also the State as 
State. Society thus far, based upon class antagonisms, had need of 
the State. That is, of an organisation of the particular class which 
was pro tempore the exploiting class, an organisation for the 

=====第351页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 321 
purpose of preventing any interference from without with the 
existing conditions of production, and therefore, especially, for the 
purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited classes in the condition 
of oppression corresponding with the given mode of production 
(slavery, serfdom, wage-labour). The State was the official 
representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together 
into a visible embodiment. But it was this only in so far as it was 
the State of that class which itself represented, for the time being, 
society as a whole; in ancient times, the State of slave-owning 
citizens; in the middle ages, the feudal lords; in our own time, the 
bourgeoisie. When at last it becomes the real representative of the 
whole of society, it renders itself unnecessary. As soon as there is 
no longer any social class to be held in subjection; as soon as class 
rule,  and the individual struggle for existence based upon our 
present anarchy in production, with the collisions and excesses 
arising from these, are removed, nothing more remains to be 
repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no longer 
necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really 
constitutes itself the representative of the whole of society—the 
taking possession of the means of production in the name of 
society—this is, at the same time, its last independent act as a 
State. State interference in social relations becomes, in one domain 
after another, superfluous, and then dies out of  itself;  the 
government of persons is replaced by the administration of things, 
and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is not 
"abolished". It dies out This gives the measure of the value of the 
phrase "a free State",3 both as to its justifiable use at times by 
agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of 
the demands of the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the 
State out of hand. 
Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of 
production, the appropriation by society of all the means of 
production has often been dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by 
individuals, as well as by sects, as the ideal of the future. But it 
could become possible, could become a historical necessity, only 
when the actual conditions for its realisation were there. Like 
every other social advance, it becomes practicable, not by men 
understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction to 
justice, equality, etc., not by the mere willingness to abolish these 
classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. The 
separation of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a 
a See this volume, pp. 71 and 94-96.— Ed. 
23-1317 

=====第352页=====
322 Frederick Engels 
ruling and an oppressed class, was the necessary consequence of 
the deficient and restricted development of production in former 
times.  So long as the total social labour only yields a produce 
which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence 
of all; so long, therefore, as labour engages all or almost all the 
time of the great majority of the members of society—so long, of 
necessity, this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the 
great majority, exclusively bond slaves to labour, arises a class 
freed from directly productive labour, which looks after the 
general affairs of society: the direction of labour, State business, 
law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the law of division of labour 
that lies at the basis of the division into classes. But this does not 
prevent this division into classes from being carried out by means 
of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud. It does not prevent 
the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating 
its power at the expense of the working-class, from turning their 
social leadership into an intensified exploitation of the masses. 
But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain 
historical justification, it has this only for a given period, only 
under given social conditions. It was based upon the insufficiency 
of production. It will be swept away by the complete development 
of modern productive forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes 
in society presupposes a degree of historical evolution, at which 
the existence, not simply of this or that particular ruling class, but 
of any ruling class at all, and, therefore, the existence of class 
distinction itself has become an obsolete anachronism. It presup­
poses,  therefore, the development of production carried out to a 
degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of 
the products, and, with this, of political domination, of the 
monopoly of culture, and of intellectual leadership by a particular 
class of society, has become not only superfluous, but economical­
ly, politically, intellectually a hindrance to development. 
This point is now reached. Their political and intellectual 
bankruptcy is scarcely any longer a secret to the bourgeoisie 
themselves. Their economic bankruptcy recurs regularly every ten 
years.  In every crisis, society is suffocated beneath the weight of its 
own productive forces and products, which it cannot use, and 
stands helpless, face to face with the absurd contradiction that the 
producers have nothing to consume, because consumers are 
wanting. The expansive force of the means of production bursts 
the bonds that the capitalist mode of production had imposed 
upon them. Their deliverance from these bonds is the one 
precondition for an unbroken, constantly-accelerated development 

=====第353页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 323 
of the productive forces, and therewith for a practically unlimited 
increase of production  itself.  Nor is this all. The socialised 
appropriation of the means of production does away, not only 
with the present artificial restrictions upon production, but also 
with the positive waste and devastation of productive forces and 
products that are at the present time the inevitable concomitants 
of production, and that reach their height in the crises. Further, it 
sets free for the community at large a mass of means of 
production and of products, by doing away with the senseless 
extravagance of the ruling classes of to-day, and their political 
representatives. The possibility of securing for every member of 
society, by means of socialised production, an existence not only 
fully sufficient materially, and becoming day by day more full, but 
an existence guaranteeing to all the free development and exercise 
of their physical and mental faculties—this possibility is now for 
the first time here, but it is here.* 
With the seizing of the means of production by society, 
production of commodities is done away with, and, simultaneously, 
the mastery of the product over the producer. Anarchy in social 
production is replaced by systematic, definite organisation. The 
struggle for individual existence disappears. Then for the first 
time,  man, in a certain sense, is finally marked off from the rest of 
the animal kingdom, and emerges from mere animal conditions of 
existence into really human ones. The whole sphere of the 
conditions of life which environ man, and which have hitherto 
ruled man, now comes under the dominion and control of man, 
who for the first time becomes the real, conscious lord of Nature, 
because he has now become master of his own social organisation. 
The laws of his own social action, hitherto standing face to face 
with man as laws of Nature foreign to, and dominating, him, will 
then be used with full understanding, and so mastered by him. 
Man's own social organisation, hitherto confronting him as a 
* A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive 
force of the modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure. According 
to Mr. Giffen,372 the total wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round 
numbers, in 
1814 to £2,200,000,000. 
1865 to £6,100,000,000. 
1875 to £8,500,000,000. 
As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during 
a crisis, the total loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis 1873-78, was 
given at the second German Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21, 1878) as 
£22,750,000. 
23* 

=====第354页=====
324 Frederick Engels 
necessity imposed by Nature and history, now becomes the result 
of his own free action. The extraneous objective forces that have 
hitherto governed history pass under the control of man  himself. 
Only from that time will man  himself,  more and more consciously, 
make his own history—only from that time will the social causes 
set in movement by him have, in the main and in a constantly 
growing measure, the results intended by him. It is the ascent of 
man from the kingdom of necessity to the kingdom of freedom. 
Let us briefly sum up our sketch of historical evolution.3 
I. Mediaeval Society.— Individual production on a small scale. 
Means of production adapted for individual use; hence primitive, 
ungainly, petty, dwarfed in action. Production for immediate 
consumption, either of the producer himself or of his feudal lord. 
Only where an excess of production over this consumption occurs 
is such excess offered for sale, enters into exchange. Production of 
commodities, therefore, only in its infancy. But already it contains 
within  itself,  in embryo, anarchy in the production of  society  at large. 
II. Capitalist Revolution.—Transformation of industry, at first by 
means of simple co-operation and manufacture. Concentration of 
the means of production, hitherto scattered, into great workshops. 
As a consequence, their transformation from individual to social 
means of production—a transformation which does not, on the 
whole, affect the form of exchange. The old forms of appropria­
tion remain in force. The capitalist appears. In his capacity as 
owner of the means of production, he also appropriates the 
products and turns them into commodities. Production has 
become a social act. Exchange and appropriation continue to be 
individual acts, the acts of individuals. The social product is 
appropriated by the individual capitalist. Fundamental contradiction, 
whence arise all the contradictions in which our present-day 
society moves, and which modern industry brings to light. 
A. Severance of the producer from the means of production. 
Condemnation of the worker to wage-labour for life. Antagonism 
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. 
B. Growing predominance and increasing effectiveness of the 
laws governing the production of commodities. Unbridled compe­
tition. Contradiction between socialised organisation in the individual 
factory and social anarchy in production as a whole. 
C. On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by 
competition compulsory for each individual manufacturer, and 
a The German edition of 1891 has: "of the course of development".— Ed. 

=====第355页=====
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 325 
complemented by a constantly growing displacement of labourers. 
Industrial reserve army. On the other hand, unlimited extension of 
production, also compulsory under competition, for every man­
ufacturer. On both sides, unheard of development of productive 
forces, excess of supply over demand, over-production, glutting of 
the markets, crises every ten years, the vicious circle: excess here, 
of means of production and products—excess there, of labourers, 
without employment and without means of existence. But these 
two levers of production and of social well-being are unable to 
work together, because the capitalist form of production prevents 
the productive forces from working and the products from 
circulating, unless they are first turned into capital—which their 
very superabundance prevents. The contradiction has grown into 
an absurdity. The mode of production rises in rebellion against the form 
of exchange. The bourgeoisie are convicted of incapacity further to 
manage their own social productive forces. 
D. Partial recognition of the social character of the productive 
forces forced upon the capitalists themselves. Taking over of the 
great institutions for production and communication, first by 
joint-stock companies, later on by trusts, then by the State. The 
bourgeoisie demonstrated to be a superfluous class. All its social 
functions are now performed by salaried employees. 
III. Proletarian Revolution.—Solution of the contradictions. The 
proletariat seizes the public power, and by means of this 
transforms the socialised means of production, slipping from the 
hands of the bourgeoisie, into public property. By this act, the 
proletariat frees the means of production from the character of 
capital they have thus far borne, and gives their socialised 
character complete freedom to work itself out. Socialised produc­
tion upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The 
development of production makes the existence of different 
classes of society thenceforth an anachronism. In proportion as 
anarchy in social production vanishes, the political authority of the 
State dies out. Man, at last the master of his own form of social 
organisation, becomes at the same time the lord over Nature, his 
own master—free. 
To accomplish this act of universal emancipation is the historical 
mission of the modern proletariat. To thoroughly comprehend the 
historical conditions and thus the very nature of this act, to impart 
to the now oppressed proletarian class a full knowledge of the 
conditions and of the meaning of the momentous act it is called 
upon to accomplish, this is the task of the theoretical expression of 
the proletarian movement, scientific Socialism. 

=====第356页=====
326 
Karl Marx 
[NOTE ON THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY] 
The Poverty of Philosophy by Karl Marx appeared in 1847a 
shortly after the Economic Contradictions by Proudhon,b  which bore 
the sub-title Philosophy of  Poverty.  What prompted us to reprint this 
book, the first edition of which is out of print, was the fact that it 
contains the seeds of the theory developed after twenty years' 
work in Capital Reading the Poverty of  Philosophy  and the Manifesto 
of the Communist Party, published by Marx and Engels in 1848, 
might thus serve as an introduction to the study of Capital and the 
works of other modern socialists who, like Lassalle, have derived 
their ideas from them. By authorising this republication in our 
journal, Marx wished to give us a token of his sympathy. 
We must say a few more words about the drastic tone of this 
polemic against Proudhon. On the one hand, Proudhon, while 
attacking the official economists such as Dunoyer, Blanqui the 
Academician and the whole clique around the Journal des 
Économistes, 0 knew how to appeal to their vanity at the same time 
as he heaped coarse insults on the Utopian socialists and 
communists whom Marx honoured as the forebears d of modern 
socialism. On the other hand, to prepare the way for the critical 
and materialist socialism which alone can render the real, historical 
a K. Marx, Misère de la philosophie. Réponse à la philosophie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon, Paris, Brussels, 1847.— Ed. 
b P. J. Proudhon, Système des contradictions économiques, ou philosophie de la misère, 
Vols.  1-2, Paris, 1846.— Ed. 
c Léon Faucher, Charles Duchâtel, Louis François Benoiston de Châteauneuf, 
Maurice Rubichon, and Edelestand Duméril. — Ed 
d L'Egalité has here: "initiators".— Ed 

=====第357页=====
Note on The Poverty of Philosophy 327 
development of social production intelligible, it was necessary to 
break abruptly with the ideological economics of which Proudhon 
was unwittingly the last incarnation. 
Besides, in an article published in the Berlin Social-Demokrata on 
the death of Proudhon, Marx did justice to this fighter's great 
qualities, to his manly attitude after the days of June 1848,37 and 
to his talent as a political writer. 
Written in late March or early April 1880 Printed according to the manu­
script, checked with the newspaper First published in L'Egalité, No. 12, April 
7, 1880 Translated from the French 
a K. Marx, "On Proudhon", Der Social-Demokrat, Nos. 16-18, February 1, 3 and 
5, 1865 (see present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 26-33).— Ed. 

=====第358页=====
328 
Karl Marx 
WORKERS' QUESTIONNAIRE 
I 
1) Which is your branch of industry? 
2) Is the concern in which you work carried on by private 
capitalists or by a joint-stock company? Give the names of the 
private employer or the manager of the company. 
3) State the number of persons employed. 
4) State their sex and age. 
5) Which is the lowest age at which children—male or 
female—are admitted? 
6) State the number of overlookers and other employés who are 
no common wage-labourers. 
7) Are apprentices employed and how many? 
8) Are there besides the usual and regularly employed workmen 
others called in from abroad at certain seasons? 
9) Is your master's business exclusively or mainly carried on for 
local customers, for the general home-market, or for export to 
Foreign countries? 
10) Is the place of work rural or townish? 
11) If your industry is carried on in a country-place, does it 
form your main subsistence or is it accessory to, or combined with, 
agriculture? 
12) Is the work entirely or mainly hand-work or machine work? 
13) State the division of labour in the business where you are 
employed. 
14) Is steam-power employed as the motive power? 
15) State the number of sets of working rooms in which the 
different parts of the business are carried on and describe that 
part of the industrial process in which you are employed, not only 

=====第359页=====
Workers' Questionnaire 329 
technically, but with respect to the muscular and nervous strain it 
imposes and its general effects upon the health of the operative. 
16) Describe the sanitary state of the place of work in regard to 
size (the space left for each operative), ventilation, temperature, 
whitewashing, lieux d'aisance, general cleanliness, noise of machin­
ery, dust, dampness etc. 
17) Is there any supervision, governmental or municipal, over 
the sanitary state of the working place? 
18) Are there any peculiar deleterious influences in your 
business which breed specific diseases amongst the workmen? 
19) Is the working place overcrowded with machinery? 
20) Are the motive power, the machinery of transmission and 
the working machinery so secured as to prevent bodily harm to 
the workmen? 
21) State the main accidents to limb and life of the operatives 
during your personal experience. 
22) If working in a mine, state the precautionary measures 
taken by your employer to secure ventilation and to prevent 
explosions and other dangerous accidents. 
23) If working in a metal manufacture, chemical manufacture, 
for railways or other specially perilous industry, state whether 
precautionary measures are taken by your employer. 
24) What means of illumination, gas-light, petroleum etc. are 
applied in your working place? 
25) Are there sufficient means of escape within and outside of 
the working buildings in case of fire? 
26) In case of an accident, is the employer legally bound to 
indemnify the sufferer or his family? 
27) If not, does he indemnify anyhow the parties that have 
come to grief in the work of enriching him? 
28) Does there exist any medical attendance at your working 
place? 
29) If you work at home, state the condition of your working 
room; whether you use any tools or also little machines; whether 
you employ your wife and children or other helpmates, adults or 
children, male or female; whether you work for private customers 
or for an "entrepreneur"; whether you engage directly with him 
or through middlemen. 
II 
1) State the usual daily hours of work and the usual number of 
working days in the week. 

=====第360页=====
330 Karl Marx 
2) State the number of holidays during the year. 
3) Which are the interruptions of the working day? 
4) Are meal-times fixed at certain regular intervals or are they 
irregularly taken?3 
5) Is work performed during meal-times? 
6) If steam-power is employed, state the actual time of starting 
and stopping it. 
7) Is there night-work? 
8) State the working time of children and young persons under 
16 years of age. 
9) Do different sets of children and young persons relieve each 
other during the working day? 
10) Are such legislative enactments as exist for children's labour 
enforced by the government and strictly carried out by the 
employers? 
11) Do there exist any schools for children and young persons 
engaged in your industry? If so, at what hours of the day are the 
children in school? What are they taught? 
12) Where the work is continued night and day, what shifting 
system—relays of one set of workmen by another—is employed? 
13) To what extent are the usual hours of work lengthened 
during times of business pressure? 
14) Is the cleansing of machinery performed by an extra 
number of workmen, hired to the purpose, or is it gratuitously 
done by the operatives employed at the machines, during their 
usual working day? 
15) Which are the regulations and penalties with regard to the 
exact attendance of workmen at the time when the day's work 
begins or when it recommences after meals? 
16) How much time is daily lost to you by going from home to 
the working place and by returning home from the working place? 
Ill 
1) Which is the mode of engagement with your master? Are you 
engaged daily, weekly, monthly etc.? 
2) Which is the term stipulated for your receiving or giving 
notice of leave? 
3) In case of breach of contract, if the master be the defaulter, 
which penalties does he incur? 
a Here the following question was added by Charles Longuet: "Are they taken 
in or outside of the building?"—Ed. 

=====第361页=====
Workers' Questionnaire 331 
4) If the workman be the defaulter, which penalties does he 
incur? 
5) If apprentices are employed, state the terms of their contract. 
6) Is your occupation regular or irregular? 
7) Is your branch of industry mainly carried on in certain 
seasons or is work, in ordinary times, more or less evenly 
distributed over the whole year? If your work is bound to certain 
seasons, how do you live in the interval? 
8) Are your wages calculated by time or by peace-work? 
9) If by time, are they reckoned by the single hour or by the 
whole working day? 
10) Are extra wages—and which—paid in case of overtime? 
11) If your wages are paid à la pièce, state the method of fixing 
them; if you be employed in industries where the mass of the 
work done is estimated by measurement or by weight (as f.i. in 
coal-mines), are there trickeries recurred to by your master and 
his underlings in order to defraud you of part of your earnings? 
12) If you are paid by piece-work, is the quality of the article 
made a pretext for fraudulent deduction from wages? 
13) Whether calculated by time or by piece-work, at what terms 
are your wages paid? In other words how long a credit must you 
give to your master before receiving pay for work done? Is it paid 
after the lapse of a week, a month etc.? 
14) Have you found that such delay in the payment of wages 
obliges you to frequently recur to the monts de piété* paying there 
high interest, and denuding you of things you ought to have at 
your command, or to take credit from shopkeepers, and, by 
becoming their debtors, to become their prey? 
15) Are the wages paid directly by the "patron" or through a 
middleman, " marchandeur" b etc.? 
16) If the wages are paid through "marchandeurs" or other 
middlemen, state the terms of your engagement. 
17) State the daily or weekly amount of your wages in money. 
18) State the wages for the same time of the women and 
children co-operating with you in the same workshop. 
19) State the highest and lowest day wages during last month. 
20) State the highest and lowest piece wages during last month. 
21) State your actual earnings during the same time, and if you 
have a family, also those of your wife and children. 
22) Are the wages paid in money or partly otherwise? 
a Pawnshops.— Ed. 
b Contractor.— Ed. 

=====第362页=====
332 Karl Marx 
23) If you  rent your house accommodation from your  em­
ployer, state  on what terms? Does  he deduct  the  house-rent from 
your wages? 
24) State  the price  of your  necessaries,  such  asa: 
a) the pay for  your dwelling  and the  terms  on  which  it is 
rented;  the  number  of rooms  of which  it consists;  how  many 
people live  in it;  repair  and  insurance; purchase  and  repair  of 
furniture; lodging; heating, lighting, water  etc.; 
b) nourishment: bread, meat, vegetables (potatoes etc.); milk 
products, eggs, fish; butter,  oil,  lard, sugar, salt, spice; coffee,  tea, 
chicory; beer, cider, wine  etc.;  tobacco; 
c) clothes  (for the  parents  and the  children); washing; articles  of 
hygiene, bath, soap  etc.; 
d) various expenses, such  as for  mail, loan  and  payment  for 
keeping things  in pawnshops; expenses  for  teaching children  in 
school, paying  for apprenticeship, purchase  of journals, books  etc. 
Contributions  to societies  for  mutual  relief,  to strike fund,  to 
associations,  TRADES-UNIONS  etc.; 
e) expenses,  if there  are any,  connected with  the  exercise  of 
your trade; 
f) taxes. 
25) Try to  arrange  in form  of a  budget your weekly  and  yearly 
income  (and  that  of your family,  if you  have  one) and  your weekly 
and yearly expense. 
26) Have  you  remarked during your personal experience  a 
greater rising  in the  necessaries  of life (such  as house-rent, price 
of food  etc.)  than  in that  of wages? 
27) State changes  in the  taux de salaires  for as  long  a time  as you 
can remember. 
28) State fall  of wages during  the  times  of stagnation  or crisis. 
29) State rise  of wages  in so-called times  of prosperity. 
30) State interruption  of work through change  of fashion,  and 
partial  or general crises. 
31) State  the  changes  in the  price  of the  articles  you  produce  or 
the services  you  render  as compared with  the  simultaneous changes 
or permanency  of your wages. 
32) Have  in the  time  of your experience workmen been 
displaced  by the  introduction  of machines  or other improvements? 
33) Has  with  the  development  of machinery  and the  productive 
power  of  labour  the  intensity  and the  duration  of  labour 
decreased  or increased? 
a Points  a-f were written  by Marx  in French.—  Ed. 

=====第363页=====
Workers' Questionnaire 333 
34) Are you aware öf any rise of wages in consequence of 
improved production? 
35) Have you ever known instances wherein an ordinary 
operative was enabled to retire, at 50 years of age, on money 
earned as a wages-labourer? 
36) What is the number of years for which, in your branch of 
industry, an operative of average health can continue his work? 
IV 
1) Do trades-unions exist in your trade, and how are they 
managed? 
2) How many strikes have occurred in your trade during your 
personal experience? 
3) How long did those strikes last? 
4) Were they partial or general? 
5) Was their purpose an increase of wages or resistance to the 
reduction of the same; or did they relate to the length of the 
working day; or did they arise from any other motive? 
6) What was their result? 
7) Does your trade support the strikes of workmen belonging to 
other trades? 
8) State the rules and the penalties for breach of them 
established by your master for the government of his wages-
labourers.3 
9) Do there exist combinations between the masters for impos­
ing upon the workmen reduction of wages, increase of working 
day, interference with strikes, and generally for enforcing their 
behests upon the working class? 
10) Has, in your experience, the government abused the public 
force in the service of the masters against their men? 
11) Has the same government, in your experience, ever 
interfered for the men against the encroachments and unlawful 
combinations of the masters? 
12) Does the same government enforce the factory laws, as far 
as they exist, against the masters? Do its inspectors—if there are 
any—strictly fulfil their duties? 
a The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "in his workshop, 
where he, of course, unites the supreme legislative, judiciary and executive powers 
in his hands".— Ed. 

=====第364页=====
334 Karl Marx 
13) Do there exist in your workshop or your trade, societies for 
mutual relief and assistance in cases of accidents, sickness, death, 
temporary incapacity for work, old age etc.? 
14) Is the membership in such societies voluntary or compul­
sory? Are their funds exclusively under the control of the 
workmen? 
15) If the contributions to such funds are compulsory and 
under the control of the master, does he deduct the contributions 
from the wages; does he pay interest for them? Have the 
working-men giving or receiving leave their instalments returned? 
16) Are there working-men's co-operative enterprises in your 
department of industry? How are they managed? Do they also 
employ extraneous operatives for wages in the same way as the 
capitalists do? 
17) Are there in your trade workshops where part of the 
retribution of the operative is paid under the name of wages and 
another part in so-called shares in the master's profit? Compare 
the entire income of those operatives with that of others where there 
does not exist this so-called partnership. State the engagements of 
workmen living under this regime. State whether they are allowed 
to participate in strikes etc. or whether they are only permitted to 
be the obedient "subjects" of their master. 
18) Which is the general physical, intellectual and moral 
condition of working-men and working-women in your branch of 
trade? 
Drawn up in the first half of April 1880 Reproduced from the manuscript 
First published in La Revue socialiste, 
No. 4, April 20, 1880 

=====第365页=====
335 
Karl Marx 
[INTRODUCTION TO THE FRENCH EDITION 
OF ENGELS'  SOCIALISM:  UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC] 
The pages which form the subject of the present pamphlet, first 
published as three articles in the Revue socialiste* have been 
translated from the latest book by Engels Revolution in Science^ 
Frederick Engels, one of the foremost representatives of 
contemporary socialism, distinguished himself in 1844 with his 
Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy, which first appeared in 
the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, published in Paris by Marx and 
Ruge. The Outlines already formulates certain general principles 
of scientific socialism. Engels was then living in Manchester, where 
he wrote (in German) The Condition of the Working-Class in 
England (1845), an important work to which Marx did full justice 
in Capital 0 During his first stay in England he also contributed— 
as he later did from Brussels—to The Northern Star, the official 
journal of the socialistd movement, and to the New Moral World of 
Robert Owen. 
During his stay in Brussels he and Marx founded the German 
workers' communist club,377 linked with Flemish and Walloon 
a F. Engels, "Le socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique, I-III", La 
Revue socialiste, Nos. 3-5, March 20, April 20 and May 5, 1880 (see this volume, 
pp. 281-325).— Ed. 
b F. Engels, Anti-Dühring. Herr Eugen Dilhring's Revolution in Science. In the 
Introduction to the French edition of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and Scientific the 
following sentence was added: "They were revised by the author who introduced 
diverse additions in the third chapter in order to make the dialectical movement of the 
economic forces of capitalist production more comprehensible to the French 
reader."— Ed. 
c K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part III, Chapter X; Part IV, Chapter XV; Part VII, 
Chapters XXIV, XXV (present edition, Vol. 35).—Ed. 
d The 1880 edition has "Chartist" instead of "socialist".— Ed 

=====第366页=====
336 Karl Marx 
working men's clubs, and, with Bornstedt, the Deutsche-Brüsseler 
Zeitung. At the invitation of the German committee (residing in 
London) of the League of the Just, 378 they joined this society, which 
had originally been set up by Karl Schapper after his flight from 
France, where he had taken part in the Blanqui conspiracy of 
1839. 379 From then on the League was transformed into an 
international League of Communists after the suppression of the 
usual formalism of secret societies. Nevertheless, in those cir­
cumstances the society had to remain a secret as far as 
governments were concerned. In 1847 at the International 
Congress held by the League in London, Marx and Engels were 
instructed to draft the Manifesto of the Communist Party, 580 
published immediately before the February Revolution and 
translated3 into almost all the European languages.b 
In the same year they were involved in founding the Democratic 
Association of Brussels,381 an international and public association, 
where the delegates of the radical bourgeois and those of the 
proletarian0 workers met. 
After the February Revolution, Engels became one of the 
editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung (Nouvelle Gazette Rhénane), 
founded in 1848 by Marx in Cologne and suppressed in June 
1849 d by a Prussian coup d'état. After taking part in the rising at 
Elberfeld Engels fought in the Baden campaign 6 against the 
Prussians (June and July 1849) as the aide-de-camp of Willich, 
who was then colonel of a battalion of francs-tireurs. 382 
In 1850, in London, he contributed to the Review of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung 1 edited by Marx and printed in Hamburg. 
There Engels for the first time published The Peasant War in 
Germany, which 19 years later appeared again in Leipzig as a 
pamphlet and ran into three editions. 
After the resumption of the socialist movement in Germany, 
Engels contributed to the Volksstaat and Vorwärts his most 
a The 1880 edition further has: "at once into almost".— Ed 
b The following passage was added in the French edition which appeared in 1880: 
"The Communist Manifesto is one of the most valuable documents of modern 
socialism; even today it remains one of the most vigorous and clearest expositions of 
the development of bourgeois society and the formation of the proletariat which must 
put an end to capitalist society; as in The  Poverty  of Philosophy by Marx, published a year 
earlier, here, for the first time, the theory of class struggle is clearly formulated."— 
Ed 
c The 1880 edition has here: "socialist".— Ed 
d The last issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung came out on May 19, 1849.— Ed 
e The 1880 edition has: "the Baden and Palatinate campaign".— Ed 
f Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue. —Ed 

=====第367页=====
'ï> 
v^^v,^sg53 Ali? 
- <** ^^4WJ  **^Ä cî^« -*> 
The first page of Marx's "Introduction to the French Edition of Engels' Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific 
24-1317 

=====第368页=====

=====第369页=====
Introduction to Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 339 
important articles, most of which were reprinted in the form of 
pamphlets such as On Social Relations in Russia, The Prussian 
Schnapps in the German Reichstag, The Housing Question, The 
Cantonalist Rising in Spain* etc. 
In 1870, after leaving Manchester for London, Engels joined 
the General Council of the International, where he was entrusted 
with the correspondence with Spain, Portugal and Italy. 
The series of final articles which he contributed to the Vorwärts 
under the ironic title of Herr Dühring's Revolution in Science h (in 
response to the allegedly new theories of Mr. E. Dühring on 
science in general and socialism in particular) were assembled in 
one volume and were a great success among German socialists. In 
the present pamphlet we reproduce the most topical excerpt from 
the theoretical section of the book, which constitutes what might 
be termed an introduction to scientific socialism. 
Written on about May 4-5, 1880 Printed according to the manu­
script, checked with the 1880 
First published in a pamphlet: F. Engels, edition 
Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique, 
Paris,  1880 Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a A reference to The Bakuninists at Work—Ed 
b In the 1880 edition the title is given in French and, in brackets, in 
German — Herrn Dühring's Umwälzung der Wissenschaft — Ed 
24* 

=====第370页=====
340 
Karl Marx 
[PREAMBLE TO THE PROGRAMME 
OF THE FRENCH WORKERS' PARTY] 383 
Considering 
That the emancipation of the producing class is that of all 
human beings without distinction of sex or race; 
That the producers cannot be free unless they are in possession 
of the means of production; 
That there are only two forms in which the means of 
production can belong to them: 
1) the individual form, which has never existed as a general 
state of affairs and which is increasingly eliminated by industrial 
progress; 
2) the collective form, whose material and intellectual elements 
are shaped by the very development of capitalist society; 
Considering 
That this collective appropriation can only spring from the 
revolutionary action of the producing class—or proletariat— 
organised into an independent political3 party; 
That such an organisation must be striven for, using all the 
means at the disposal of the proletariat, including0 universal 
suffrage, thus transformed from the instrument of deception 
which it has been hitherto into an instrument of emancipation; 
The French socialist workers, 
Adopting as the object of their efforts in the economic sphere 
the return of all the means of production to collective ownership, 
have decided, as a means of organisation and struggle, to take part in 
the elections with the following minimum programme.384 
Written on about May 10, 1880 Printed according to L'Égalité, 
IT- ....J- , -. XT  oc  No- 24>  J une 30, 1880, checked 
First published in Le Précurseur, No. 25, with  the  text  of  Lg pr écurseur 
June 19, 1880 
Translated from the French 
a In Le Précurseur the word is omitted.-— Ëd: 
b Le Précurseur has here: "äboVe all".— Ed ' •* : 

=====第371页=====
M. M. - * Sitte. UBMKt* - 80UPA1UT» - JPSTICa  30 Juin 1880 
L'ÉGALITÉ 
ORGANE  COLLECTIVISTE RÉVOLUTIONNAIRE 
PARAISSANT  LE MERCREDI 
ABOMrmœrrs: BUREAUX:  S8, RUE ROYALS PRIX DU NUMERO : 
IM,«». | • •*,*».  |SM,I».SO A SAINT-CLOUD 15 centime« 
!•*,««. Bureaux  de vent»; SI, ni* da Crojsunt r*u (Ht* u rruc» 
PROGRAMME ÉLECTORAL DES TRAVAILLEURS SOCIALISTES 
Considérant, 
Que l'émancipation de la classe productive estcellede tous les êtres lium&Uis sans distinction de sexe ni de race '. 
Que les producteurs ne «auraient être libres qu'autant qu'il» seront en possession des moyens 4e production ; 
Qu'il n'y a quo deux formes sous lesquelles les moyens de production peuvent leur appartenir : 
t* La forme individuelle (jui n'a jamais existé à l'état de fait généra) et qui est éliminée de plus en plus par le progrès industriel ; 
î* La forme collective dont  les cléments matériels et intellectuels sunt constitués par le développement même de la société capitalist«. 
Considérant, 
Que cette appropriation collective ne peut sortir que de l'action révolutionnaire de la classe productive —.ou prolétariat — organisée 
•A parti poliuqae aflmnct ; 
Qu'une pareille organisation doit être poursuivie par tous les moyens dont dispose le proletariat, y compris fe surnage universel 
transformé ainsi d'instrument de duperie qu'il a été jusqu'ici en instrument d'emancipati'in ; 
Les travailleurs socialistes français en donnant pour buta leurs efforts, dans l'ordre économique, le retour» la collectivité do tous les 
moyens de production, ont décidé comme moyeifd'organiaad'on et de  lutLe.  d'entrer dans les élections avec le programme minimum 
suivant : 
A. — Programme polifù/ue. 
\' Abolition de toutes les lois sur la presse, les réunions et les association-! et surtout de la loi contre l'Association Internationale des 
Travailleurs.  Suppression du livret, cette mise encarte de la classe ouvrière, et de tous les articles du Code établissant l'infériorité 
de l'ouvrier vis-à-vis du patron. 
2« Surpression du budget des cultes et retour à la nation,  «| des biens dits de main-morte, meubles et immeubles, appartenant aux cor­
poration« reli (rieuses » (Décret de la Commune du 2 avril 1871), y compris toutes les annexes industrielles et commerciales de ces corpo­
ration». 
3" Armement général du peuple. 
4* La Commune maîtresse de »on administration et do sa police. 
6. — Programme (ioonomique. 
1* Repos du lundi ou interdiction légale pour les employeurs de faire travailler le lundi. —Réduction légale de la journée de travail 
à 8 heures pour les adulte«.  Interdiction du travail des enfants dans les ateliers privés au-dessous de M ans; et, da 14 à 18 ans, réduc­
tion légale de la journée de travail à 6 heures. 
2* Minimum légal des salaires, déterminé, chaque année, d'après le prix local des denrées. 
5* Egalité de salaire pour les travailleurs des deux sexes. 
V Instruction scientifique et technologique de tous les enfants, mis pour leur entretien à la charge de la société représentée par l'Etat 
•t par les Communes. 
5* Suppression de toute immixtion des employeurs daaa l'administration des caisses ouvrières de secours mutuels, de prévoyance, 
etc., restituées à la gestion exclusive des ouvriers. 
6» Responsabilité des patrons en matière d'accidents, garantie par un cautionnement versé par l'employeur, et proportionné au nom­
bre des ouvriers employés et aux dangers que présente l'industrie. 
L'Égalité,  No. 24, June 30, 1880, containing Marx's "Preamble to the Programme 
of the French Workers' Party" 

=====第372页=====

=====第373页=====
343 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE MEETING IN GENEVA HELD 
TO COMMEMORATE THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE POLISH REVOLUTION OF 1830385 
Citizens! 
After the first partition of their country, Poles who had left 
their fatherland crossed the Atlantic in order to defend the great 
American republic, which had just come into being.386 Kosciuszko 
fought side by side with Washington. In 1794, when the French 
Revolution was resisting the coalition forces with difficulty, the 
glorious Polish revolt deflected danger away from it.387 Poland lost 
its independence, but the Revolution survived. The defeated Poles 
joined the army of the sans-culottes and helped to smash feudal 
Europe.388 Finally, in 1830, when Tsar Nicholas and the Prussian 
King3 sought to carry out their plans to restore the Legitimist 
monarchy with a new attack on France, the Polish Revolution,389 
whose memory you are celebrating today, blocked their path: 
"Order was restored in Warsaw." 
The cry "Long live Poland!" which then resounded throughout 
Western Europe was not merely an expression of sympathy and 
admiration for the patriotic fighters who were crushed with brutal 
force—with this cry men hailed the people whose revolts all ended 
so unhappily for itself but always halted the advance of the 
counter-revolution, the people whose best sons never ceased to 
fight the struggle of resistance by everywhere going into battle 
under the banner of the popular revolutions. On the other hand, 
the partition of Poland consolidated the Holy Alliance, which 
served as a disguise for the Tsar's hegemony over all the 
governments of Europe. Thus the cry "Long live Poland!" has 
a Frederick William III.— Ed. 

=====第374页=====
344 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
really meant: Death to the Holy Alliance, death to the military 
despotism of Russia, Prussia and Austria, death to Mongol rule 
over modern society. 
Since 1830, when the bourgeoisie in France and England more 
or less took power in their hands, the proletarian movement began 
to grow. Since 1840 the propertied classes of England were 
already obliged to resort to force of arms to resist the Chartist 
Party, this first militant organisation of the working class. Then in 
1846 in the last corner of independent Poland, Cracow, the first 
political revolution to proclaim socialist demands broke out.390 
From that time on, Poland forfeited all the ostensible sympathies 
of the whole of Europe.3 
In 1847 the first international congress of the proletariat391 met 
secretly in London. One outcome of this congress was the writing 
of the Communist Manifesto, which ended with the new revolution­
ary watchword: "Working Men of All Countries, Unite!" Poland 
had its representatives at this congress, and at a public meeting in 
Brussels3 the famous Lelewel and his supporters declared their 
adhesion to the resolutions of the congress.— In 1848 and 1849 
numerous Poles served in the revolutionary German, Italian, 
Hungarian and Romanian armies, distinguishing themselves as 
soldiers and commanders.393 Although the socialist aspirations of 
this age were drowned in the bloodbath of the June days,394 the 
revolution of 1848 nevertheless—and this should not be forgot­
ten— turned Europe for a moment into one community by seizing 
it almost entirely with its flame, and in this way prepared the 
ground for the International Working Men's Association. The 
Polish insurrection of  1863, 395 by giving rise to a joint protest of 
English and French workers at the international machinations of 
their governments, formed the starting point for the International, 
which was founded with the participation of Polish exiles. Finally, 
the Paris Commune396 found its true champions among the Polish 
refugees and after its fall, it was sufficient to be a Pole to be shot 
by the war tribunals in Versailles. 
Thus outside the borders of their country the Poles have played 
a major part in the struggle for the emancipation of the 
proletariat; in this struggle they were predominantly its interna­
tional combat force. 
May this struggle develop among the Polish people  itself,  may our 
propaganda and the refugee press support it, and may it unite with 
a The Polish pamphlet has here: "property-owning Europe".— Ed. 
h The Polish pamphlet has: "revolutionary press".— Ed 

=====第375页=====
To the Meeting in Geneva 345 
the unequalled3 endeavours of our Russian brothers; this will be yet 
another reason to echo the cry of old: "Long live Poland!" Fraternal 
Greetings! 
London, November 27, 1880 
(Signed) Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, 
Paul Lafargue, F. Lessner h 
First published in Le Précurseur, No. 49, Printed according to the news-
December 4, 1880 paper, checked with the text of 
the Polish pamphlet Sprawozdanie z 
miçdzynarodowego zebrania zwolanego 
w 50-letniç rocznicç listopadowego 
powstania, Geneva, 1881 
Translated from the French 
a This word is omitted in the Polish pamphlet.— Ed. 
b The Polish pamphlet further has: "Former members of the General Council 
of the International Working Men's Association".— Ed. 

=====第376页=====
346 
Karl Marx 
[DRAFTS OF THE LETTER TO VERA ZASULICH] 
[FIRST DRAFT] s9« 
1) In dealing with the genesis of capitalist production I stated 
that it is founded on "the complete separation of the producer 
from the means of production" (p. 315, column I, French edition 
of Capital) and that "the basis of this whole development is the 
expropriation of the agricultural producer. To date this has not been 
accomplished in a radical fashion anywhere except in England... 
But all the other countries of Western Europe are undergoing the same 
process" (I.e., column II).a 
I thus expressly limited the "historical inevitability" of this 
process399 to the countries of Western Europe. And why? Be so 
kind as to compare Chapter XXXII, where it says: 
The "process of elimination transforming individualised and 
scattered means of production into socially concentrated means of 
production, of the pigmy property of the many into the huge 
property of the few, this painful and fearful expropriation of the 
working people, forms the origin, the genesis of capital... Private 
property, based on personal labour ... will be supplanted by capitalist 
private  property,  based on the exploitation of the labour of others, on 
wage labour" (p. 341, column II).b 
Thus,  in the final analysis, it is a question of the transformation of 
one form of private property into another form of private  property.  Since 
the land in the hands of the Russian peasants has never been their 
private property, how could this development be applicable? 
* Karl Marx, Le Capital, Paris, [1872-1875,] p. 315 (see Capital, Vol. I, Part VIII, 
"The So-Called Primitive Accumulation", Chapter XXVI: "The Secret of Primitive 
Accumulation", present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed. 
b Ibid. 

=====第377页=====
v ^>>W^'*%'V»  ******««**  v^*^^*-  X*\5L* 
W** <â-L5*  «5^2 <*J***  *W -PV^V^Y  */\ 
<\ i%war ft fh«i\ wV^ »  M|i*^Uv^^*  fcÄ** ^TjfjV"* 
i»**»» 
1 -»gum»'  v"" ' ^^«iuppp^"" -"-»  w  "~ »• iV**k 
k^i 
tb» <*» *¥*"% JS0»«i$5%V* c*-* 
vrC» 
-CSA* 
A page of the first draft of Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich 

=====第378页=====

=====第379页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 349 
2) From the historical point of view the only serious argument 
put forward in favour of the fatal dissolution of the Russian 
peasants' commune is this: By going back a long way communal 
property of a more or less archaic type400 may be found 
throughout Western Europe; everywhere it has disappeared with 
increasing social progress. Why should it be able to escape the 
same fate in Russia alone? I reply: because in Russia, thanks to a 
unique combination of circumstances, the rural commune, still 
established on a nationwide scale, may gradually detach itself from 
its primitive features and develop directly as an element of 
collective production on a nationwide scale. It is precisely thanks 
to its contemporaneity with capitalist production that it may 
appropriate the latter's positive acquisitions without experiencing all 
its frightful misfortunes. Russia does not live in isolation from the 
modern world; neither is it the prey of a foreign invader like the 
East Indies. 
If the Russian admirers of the capitalist system denied the 
theoretical possibility of such a development, I would ask them this 
question: In order to utilise machines, steam engines, railways, 
etc., was Russia forced, like the West, to pass through a long 
incubation period in the engineering industry? Let them explain 
to me, too, how they managed to introduce in their own country, 
in the twinkling of an eye, the entire mechanism of exchange 
(banks, credit institutions, etc.), which it took the West centuries to 
devise? 
If at the time of emancipation the rural communes had first 
been placed in conditions of normal prosperity; if the immense 
public debt, mostly paid for at the expense of the peasants, with 
the other enormous sums provided through the agency of the 
State (and still at the expense of the peasants) to the "new pillars 
of society",401 transformed into capitalists,—if all this expenditure 
had been applied to further developing the rural commune, no 
one would today be envisaging the "historical inevitability" of the 
destruction of the commune: everyone would recognise in it the 
element of regeneration of Russian society and an element of 
superiority over the countries still enslaved by the capitalist 
regime. 
Another circumstance favouring the preservation of the Russian 
commune (by the path of development) is the fact that it is not 
only contemporaneous with capitalist production but has outlasted 
the era when this social system still appeared to be intact; that it 
now finds it, on the contrary, in Western Europe as well as in the 
United States, engaged in battle both with science, with the 

=====第380页=====
350 Karl Marx 
popular masses, and widi the very productive forces which it 
engenders.3 In a word, it finds it in a crisis which will only end in 
its elimination, in the return of modern societies to the "archaic" 
type of communal property, a form in which, in the words of an 
American writerb quite free from any suspicion of revolutionary 
tendencies and subsidised in his work by the Washington 
government, "the new system" towards which modern society 
tends "will be  A REVIVAL IN  A SUPERIOR  FORM  of an archaic social type". 
So we must not let ourselves to be alarmed at the word "archaic". 
But then we would at least have to be familiar with these 
vicissitudes. We know nothing about them. In one way or another 
this commune perished in the midst of incessant wars, foreign and 
internal; it probably died a violent death. When the Germanic 
tribes came to conquer Italy, Spain, Gaul, etc.,402 the commune of 
the archaic type no longer existed. Yet its natural viability is 
demonstrated by two facts. There are sporadic examples which 
survived all the vicissitudes of the Middle Ages and have been 
preserved into our own day, for instance the district of Trier, in my 
native country. But more importantly, it imprinted its own 
characteristics so effectively on the commune which replaced it—a 
commune in which the arable land has become private property, 
whereas forests, pastures, common lands, etc., still remain communal 
property—that Maurer,c when analysing this commune of secon­
dary formation, was able to reconstruct the archaic prototype. 
Thanks to the characteristic features borrowed from the latter, the 
new commune introduced by the Germanic peoples in all the 
countries they invaded was the sole centre of popular liberty and life 
throughout the Middle Ages. 
If we know nothing about the life of the commune or about the 
manner and time of its disappearance after the age of Tacitus, at 
least we know the starting point, thanks to Julius Caesar.d In his 
day the land was already shared out annually, but between the 
gentes and the tribes of the Germanic confederations, and not yet 
between the individual members of the commune. The rural 
commune in Germany is therefore descended from a more archaic 
a The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "In a word, that it has 
turned into an arena of blatant antagonisms, of periodic crises, conflicts, disasters; 
that, increasingly blind, it reveals its incompetence; that it is a transitory system of 
production destined to be eliminated by the return of society...".— Ed. 
b L. H. Morgan, Ancient Society or Researches in the Lines of Human  Progress  from 
Savagery, through Barbarism to Civilisation, London, 1877, p. 552.— Ed. 
c G. L. von Maurer, Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-,  Dorf-  und 
Stadt-Verfassung und der öffentlichen Gewalt, Munich, 1854.— Ed. 
d Gaius Julius Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico. —Ed 

=====第381页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 351 
type;  it was the product of a spontaneous development instead of 
being imported fully developed from Asia. There—in the East 
Indies—we also encounter it, and always as the final stage or final 
period of the archaic formation. 
To assess the possible outcomes from a purely theoretical point 
of view, that is to say, assuming normal conditions of life, I 
must now point out certain characteristic features which distin­
guish the "agricultural commune" from the more archaic types. 
Firstly, previous primitive communities are all based on the 
natural kinship of their members; by breaking this strong but tight 
bond, the agricultural commune is better able to spread and to 
withstand contact with strangers. 
Next, in this form the house and its complement, the courtyard, 
are already the private property of the cultivator, whereas long 
before the introduction of agriculture the communal house was one 
of the material bases of previous communities. 
Finally, although arable land remains communal property, it is 
divided periodically between the members of the agricultural 
commune, so that each cultivator tills the fields assigned to him on 
his own account and appropriates as an individual the fruits 
thereof,  whereas in more archaic communities production took 
place communally and only the yield was shared out. This 
primitive type of cooperative or collective production resulted, of 
course, from the weakness of the isolated individual, and not from 
the socialisation of the means of production. It is easy to see that 
the dualism inherent in the "agricultural commune" might endow 
it with a vigorous life, since on the one hand communal property 
and all the social relations springing from it make for its solid 
foundation, whereas the private house, the cultivation of arable 
land in parcels and the private appropriation of its fruits permit a 
development of individuality which is incompatible with conditions 
in more primitive communities. 
But it is no less evident that this very dualism might in time 
become a source of decay. Apart from all the influences of hostile 
surroundings, the mere gradual accumulation of chattels which 
begins with wealth in the form of cattle (even admitting wealth in 
the form of serfs), the increasingly pronounced role which the 
movable element plays in agriculture  itself,  and a host of other 
circumstances inseparable from this accumulation but which it 
would take me too long to go into here, will eat away at economic 
and social equality and give rise to a conflict of interests at the 
very heart of the commune, entailing first the conversion of arable 
land into private property and ending with the private appropria-

=====第382页=====
352 Karl Marx 
tion of the forests, pastures, common lands, etc., which have 
already become communal appendages of private property. 
This is why the "agricultural commune" occurs everywhere as 
the most recent type of the archaic form of societies, and why in the 
historical development of Western Europe, ancient and modern, 
the period of the agricultural commune appears as a period of 
transition from communal property to private property, as a 
period of transition from the primary form to the secondary one. 
But does this mean that in all circumstances the development of 
the "agricultural commune" must follow this path? Not at all. Its 
constitutive form allows this alternative: either the element of 
private property which it implies will gain the upper hand over 
the collective element, or the latter will gain the upper hand over 
the former. Both these solutions are a priori possible, but for 
either one to prevail over the other it is obvious that quite 
different historical surroundings are needed.3 All this depends 
on the historical surroundings in which it finds itself (see 
p. 10 V 
Russia is the sole European country where the "agricultural 
commune" has kept going on a nationwide scale up to the present 
day. It is not the prey of a foreign conqueror, as the East Indies, 
and neither does it lead a life cut off from the modern world. On 
the one hand, the common ownership of land allows it to 
transform individualist farming in parcels directly and gradually 
into collective farming, and the Russian peasants are already 
practising it in the undivided grasslands; the physical lie of the 
land invites mechanical cultivation on a large scale; the peasant's 
familiarity with the contract of artel403 facilitates the transition 
from parcel labour to cooperative labour; and, finally, Russian 
society, which has so long lived at his expense, owes him the 
necessary advances for such a transition.0 On the other hand, the 
a This sentence was written by Marx on p. 8 of his manuscript with the 
indication of the place it referred to ("ad 5  *****").  A version of this sentence is also 
on p. 9 where it was not, probably by mistake, crossed out.— Ed. 
b Marx is presumably referring to p. 10 of his manuscript, to the following 
passage: "The best proof that this development of the 'rural commune'... the most 
archaic type—collective production and appropriation" (see this volume, p. 357).— 
Ed 
c The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "Coming now 
to the agrarian commune in Russia, I discount for the time being all the miseries 
which overwhelm it. I consider only the capacity for further development which 
its constitutive form and its historical surroundings allow it."—Ed 
d The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "Certainly, it would be 
necessary to begin by placing the commune in a normal state on  its present  basis,  on the 

=====第383页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 353 
contemporaneity of western production, which dominates the world 
market, allows Russia to incorporate in the commune all the 
positive acquisitions devised by the capitalist system without 
passing through its Caudine Forks.404 
If the spokesmen of the "new pillars of society" were to deny 
the theoretical possibility of the suggested evolution of the modern 
rural commune, one might ask them: Was Russia forced to pass 
through a long incubation period in the engineering industry, as 
was the West, in order to arrive at the machines, the steam 
engines, the railways, etc.? One would also ask them how they 
managed to introduce in their own country in the twinkling of an 
eye the entire mechanism of exchange (banks, joint-stock com­
panies, etc.), which it took the West centuries to devise? 
There is one characteristic of the "agricultural commune" in 
Russia which afflicts it with weakness, hostile in every sense. That 
is its isolation, the lack of connexion between the life of one 
commune and that of the others, this localised microcosm which is 
not encountered everywhere as an immanent characteristic of this 
type but which, wherever it is found, has caused a more or less 
centralised despotism to arise on top of the communes. The 
federation of Russian republics of the North proves that this 
isolation, which seems to have been originally imposed by the vast 
expanse of the territory, was largely consolidated by the political 
destinies which Russia had to suffer after the Mongol invasion.405 
Today it is an obstacle which could easily be eliminated. It would 
simply be necessary to replace the volost,406 the government body, 
with an assembly of peasants elected by the communes themselves, 
serving as the economic and administrative organ for their 
interests. 
One circumstance very favourable, from the historical point of 
view, to the preservation of the "agricultural commune" by the 
path of its further development is the fact that it is not only the 
contemporary of Western capitalist production and is thus able to 
appropriate its fruits without subjecting itself to its modus operandi,' 
but has outlasted the era when the capitalist system still appeared 
to be intact; that it now finds it, on the contrary, in Western 
Europe as well as in the United States, engaged in battle both with 
the working-class masses, with science, and with the very 
productive forces which it engenders—in a word, in a crisis which 
will end in its elimination, in the return of modern societies to a 
other hand, since the peasant is everywhere the enemy of too many sudden 
changes."— Ed. 
25-1317 

=====第384页=====
354 Karl Marx 
superior form of an "archaic" type of collective property and 
production. 
It goes without saying that the evolution of the commune would 
be carried out gradually, and that the first step would be to place 
it in normal conditions on its present basis. 
Theoretically speaking, then, the Russian "rural commune" can 
preserve itself by developing its basis, the common ownership of 
land, and by eliminating the principle of private property which it 
also implies; it can become a direct point of departure for the 
economic system towards which modern society tends; it can turn 
over a new leaf without beginning by committing suicide; it can 
gain possession of the fruits with which capitalist production has 
enriched mankind, without passing through the capitalist regime, 
a regime which, considered solely from the point of view of its 
possible duration hardly counts in the life of society. But we must 
descend from pure theory to the Russian reality.3 
3) To expropriate the agricultural producers it is not necessary 
to chase them off their land, as was done in England and 
elsewhere; nor is it necessary to abolish communal property by 
means of an ukase. Go and seize from the peasants the product of 
their agricultural labour beyond a certain measure, and despite 
your gendarmerie and your army you will not succeed in chaining 
them to their fields! In the last years of the Roman Empire, the 
provincial decurions407—not peasants but landowners—fled from 
their houses, abandoning their lands, even selling themselves into 
slavery, all in order to get rid of a property which was no longer 
anything more than an official pretext for extorting money from 
them, mercilessly and pitilessly. 
From the time of the so-called emancipation of the peasants the 
Russian commune has been placed by the State in abnormal 
economic conditions and ever since then it has never ceased to 
overwhelm it with the social forces concentrated in its hands. 
Exhausted by its fiscal exactions, the commune became an inert 
thing, easily exploited by trade, landed property and usury. This 
oppression from without unleashed in the heart of the commune 
a This paragraph is to be found on p. 10 of Marx's manuscript with the exact 
indication to transfer it to p. 7 ("ad p. 7"). On p. 7 of the manuscript the following 
passage is crossed out: "If we descend from theory to reality no one can conceal the 
fact that the Russian commune is today faced with a conspiracy of interests and 
powerful forces. Apart from its incessant exploitation by the State, which exists at the 
expense of the peasants, the establishment of a certain part of the capitalist 
system—finance, stock exchange, bank, railway construction speculation, com­
merce".— Ed. 

=====第385页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 355 
itself the conflict of interests already present, and rapidly 
developed the seeds of decay. But that is not all. At the expense of 
the peasants the State has forced, as in a hothouse, some branches 
of the Western capitalist system which, without developing the 
productive forces of agriculture in any way, are most calculated to 
facilitate and precipitate the theft of its fruits by unproductive 
middlemen. It has thus cooperated in the enrichment of a new 
capitalist vermin, sucking the already impoverished blood of the 
"rural commune".3 
...In a word, the State has given its assistance to the precocious 
development of the technical and economic means most calculated 
to facilitate and precipitate the exploitation of the agricultural 
producer, that is to say, of the largest productive force in Russia, 
and to enrich the "new pillars of society". 
5) This combination of destructive influences, unless smashed 
by a powerful reaction, is bound to lead to the death of the rural 
commune. 
But one wonders why all these interests (including the large 
industries placed under government protection), seeing that they 
are doing so well out of the current state of the rural 
commune—why would they deliberately conspire to kill the goose 
that lays the golclen eggs? Precisely because they sense that this 
"current state" is no longer tenable, and that consequently the 
current method of exploiting it is now outdated. Already the 
poverty of the agricultural producer has affected the land, which 
is becoming barren. Good harvests succeed famines by turns. The 
average of the last ten years showed agricultural production not 
simply standing still but actually declining. Finally, for the first 
time Russia now has to import cereals instead of exporting them. 
So there is no time to lose. There must be an end to it. It is 
necessary to make an intermediate rural class of the more or less 
prosperous minority of the peasants, and turn the majority into 
proletarians, without mincing matters. To this end the spokesmen 
of the "new pillars of society" denounce the very wounds which 
they have inflicted on the commune as being as many natural 
symptoms of its decrepitude. 
Disregarding all the miseries which are at present overwhelming 
the Russian "rural commune", and considering only its constitu­
tive form and its historical surroundings, it is first of all evident 
a The passage from the words "At the expense of the peasants..." till the end of 
the paragraph was transferred by Marx to page 7 of the manuscript from page 10 
with a special mark ("ad p. 7").— Ed. 
25* 

=====第386页=====
356 Karl Marx 
that one of its fundamental characteristics, communal ownership 
of the land, forms the natural basis of collective production and 
appropriation. What is more, the Russian peasant's familiarity with 
the contract of artel would ease the transition from parcel labour 
to collective labour, which he already practises to a certain extent 
in the undivided grasslands, in land drainage and other undertak­
ings of general interest. But for collective labour to supplant 
parcel labour—the source of private appropriation—in agricul­
ture in the strict sense, two things are required: the economic 
need for such a change, and the material conditions to bring it 
about. 
As for the economic need, it will be felt by the "rural 
commune" itself from the moment it is placed in normal 
conditions, that is to say, as soon as the burdens weighing on it are 
removed and its cultivable land has assumed a normal extent. 
Gone are the days when Russian agriculture called for nothing but 
land and its parcel cultivator, armed with more or less primitive 
tools.  These days have passed all the more swiftly as the oppression 
of the agricultural producer infects and lays waste his fields. What he 
needs now is cooperative labour, organised on a large scale. 
Moreover, will the peasant who lacks3 the necessary things for 
cultivating two or three dessiatines b be better off with ten times the 
number of dessiatines? 
But where are the tools, the manure, the agronomic methods, 
etc., all the means that are indispensable to collective labour, to 
come from? It is precisely this point which demonstrates the great 
superiority of the Russian "rural commune" over archaic com­
munes of the same type. Alone in Europe it has kept going on a 
vast, nationwide scale. It thus finds itself in historical surroundings 
in which its contemporaneity with capitalist production endows it 
with all the conditions necessary for collective labour. It is in a 
position to incorporate all the positive acquisitions devised by the 
capitalist system without passing through its Caudine Forks. The 
physical lie of the land in Russia invites agricultural exploitation 
with the aid of machines, organised on a vast scale and managed 
by cooperative labour. As for the costs of establishment—the 
intellectual and material costs—Russian society owes this much to 
the "rural commune", at whose expense it has lived for so long 
and to which it must still look for its "element of regeneration". 
a Crossed out in the manuscript: "the necessary capital, tools, horses and other 
necessary technical means for cultivating two or three dessiatines".— Ed 
b Marx transliterated this Russian measure of land (=approximately 2.7 acres) in 
Latin characters.— Ed 

=====第387页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 357 
The best proof that this development of the "rural commune" is 
in keeping with the historical trend of our age is the fatal crisis 
which capitalist production has undergone in the European and 
American countries where it has reached its highest peak, a crisis 
that will end in its destruction, in the return of modern society to 
a higher form of the most archaic type—collective production and 
appropriation. 
Since so many different interests, and especially those of the 
"new pillars of society" erected under the benign rule of 
Alexander II, have gained a good deal from the present state of the 
"rural commune", why would they deliberately plot to bring about 
its death? Why do their spokesmen denounce the wounds inflicted 
on it as so much irrefutable proof of its natural decrepitude? Why 
do they wish to kill the goose that lays the golden eggs? 
Simply because the economic facts, which it would take me too 
long to analyse here, have revealed the mystery that the current 
state of the commune is no longer  tenable  and that soon, by sheer force 
of circumstances, the current method of exploiting the mass of the 
people will no longer be in fashion. So new measures are 
needed—and the innovation stealthily introduced in widely 
differing forms always comes down to this: abolish communal 
property, make an intermediate rural class of the more or less 
prosperous minority of the peasants, and turn the majority into 
proletarians, without mincing matters. 
On the one hand, the "rural commune" has nearly been 
brought to the point of extinction; on the other, a powerful con­
spiracy is keeping watch with a view to administering the final blow. 
To save the Russian commune, a Russian revolution is needed. 
For that matter, the holders of political and social power are do­
ing their very best to prepare the masses for just such a disaster. 
And the historical situation of the Russian "rural commune" is 
unparalleled! Alone in Europe, it has kept going not merely as 
scattered debris such as the rare and curious miniatures in a state 
of the archaic type which one could still come across until quite 
recently in the West, but as the virtually predominant form of 
popular life covering an immense empire. If it possesses in the 
communal ownership of the soil the basis of collective appropria­
tion, its historical surroundings, its contemporaneity with capitalist 
production, lend it all the material conditions of communal labour 
on a vast scale. It is thus in a position to incorporate all the 
positive acquisitions devised by the capitalist system without 
passing through its Caudine Forks. It can gradually replace parcel 
farming with large-scale agriculture assisted by machines, which 

=====第388页=====
358 Karl Marx 
the physical lie of the land in Russia invites. It can thus become the 
direct point of departure for the economic system towards which 
modern society tends, and turn over a new leaf without beginning 
by committing suicide. On the contrary, it would be necessary to 
begin by putting it on a normal footing. 
But opposing it is landed property controlling almost half the 
land—and the best land, at that—not to mention the domains of 
the State. That is where the preservation of the "rural commune" 
by way of its further development merges with the general trend 
of Russian society, of whose regeneration it is the price. 
Even from the economic point of view alone, Russia can emerge 
from its agrarian cul-de-sac by developing its rural commune; it 
would try in vain to get out of it by capitalised farming on the 
English model, to which all the social conditions of the country are 
inimical.3 
In order to be able to develop, it needs above all to live, and 
there is no escaping the fact that at the moment the life of the 
"rural commune" is in jeopardy. 
Apart from the reaction of any other destructive element from 
hostile surroundings, the gradual growth of chattels in the hands 
of private families, e.g. their wealth in the form of cattle, and 
sometimes even slaves or serfs—this sort of private accumulation 
is, in itself,  enough to eat away at primitive economic and social 
equality in the long run, and give rise in the very heart of the 
commune to a conflict of interests which first undermines the 
communal ownership of arable land and ends by removing that of 
the forests, pastures, common lands, etc., after first converting 
them into a communal appendage of private property. 
4) The history of the decline of primitive communities (it would 
be a mistake to place them all on the same level; as in geological 
formations, these historical forms contain a whole series of 
primary, secondary, tertiary types, etc.) has still to be written. All 
we have seen so far are some rather meagre outlines. But in any 
event the research has advanced far enough to establish that: (1) 
the vitality of primitive communities was incomparably greater 
a This paragraph is taken from the third draft of the letter to Vera Zasulich 
where Marx indicated with a mark "ad 12D" the necessity of transferring this 
paragraph to p. 12 of the first draft, while on p. 12 he marked with D the exact place 
of insertion. Then the following text is crossed out on p. 12 of the manuscript: 
"Therefore it is only in the midst of a general uprising that the isolation of the rural 
commune, the lack of connexion between the life of one commune and that of the 
others, in a word the  localised microcosm  which deprives it of historical initiative, can be 
broken..."—Ed 

=====第389页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 359 
than that of Semitic, Greek, Roman, etc. societies, and, a fortiori, 
that of modern capitalist societies; (2) the causes of their decline 
stem from economic facts which prevented them from passing a 
certain stage of development, from historical surroundings not at 
all analogous with the historical surroundings of the Russian 
commune of today. 
When reading the histories of primitive communities written by 
bourgeois writers it is necessary to be on one's guard. They do not 
even shrink from falsehoods. Sir Henry Maine, for example, who 
was a keen collaborator of the British Government in carrying out 
the violent destruction of the Indian communes, hypocritically 
assures us that all the government's noble efforts to support the 
communes were thwarted by the spontaneous forces of economic 
laws!a 
5) You know perfectly well that today the very existence of the 
Russian commune has been jeopardised by a conspiracy of 
powerful interests; crushed by the direct extortions of the State, 
fraudulently exploited by the "capitalist" intruders, merchants, 
etc., and the land "owners", it is undermined, into the bargain, by 
the village usurers, by conflicts of interests provoked in its very 
heart by the situation prepared for it. 
To expropriate the agricultural producers it is not necessary to 
chase them off their land, as was done in England and elsewhere; 
nor is it necessary to abolish communal property by an ukase. On 
the contrary: go and seize the product of their agricultural labour 
beyond a certain point and, despite all the gendarmes at your 
command, you will not succeed in keeping them on the land! In 
the last years of the Roman Empire the provincial decurions— 
large landowners—left their lands, becoming vagabonds, even 
selling themselves into slavery, simply in order to get rid of a 
"property" which was no more than an official pretext for 
extorting money from them. 
At the same time as the commune is bled dry and tortured, its 
land rendered barren and poor, the literary lackeys of the "new 
pillars of society" ironically depict the wounds inflicted on it as so 
many symptoms of its spontaneous decrepitude. They allege that it 
is dying a natural death and they would be doing a good job by 
shortening its agony. As far as this is concerned, it is no longer a 
matter of solving a problem; it is simply a matter of beating an 
enemy. To save the Russian commune, a Russian revolution is 
needed. For that matter, the government and the "new pillars of 
a H. S. Maine, Village-Communities in the East and West, London,  1871.—  Ed. 

=====第390页=====
360 Karl Marx 
society" are doing their best to prepare the masses for just such a 
disaster. If revolution comes at the opportune moment, if it 
concentrates all its forces so as to allow the rural commune full 
scope, the latter will soon develop as an element of regeneration in 
Russian society and an element of superiority over the countries 
enslaved by the capitalist system. 
[SECOND DRAFT]408 
1) I showed in Capital that the metamorphosis of feudal 
production into capitalist production had its starting point in the 
expropriation of the producer, and more particularly that "  the basis of 
this whole development is the expropriation of the agricultural producer" 
(p. 315 of the French ed.). I continue: "To date this (the 
expropriation of the agricultural producer) has not been accom­
plished in a radical fashion anywhere except in England ... all 
the other countries of Western Europe are undergoing the same 
process" (I.e.). 
So I expressly limited this "historical inevitability" to the 
"countries of Western Europe". In order to eliminate the slightest 
doubt about my thinking, I state on p. 341: 
"Private property, as the antithesis to social, collective property, 
exists only where ... the external conditions of labour belong to private 
individuals. But according as these private individuals are labour­
ers or not labourers, private property changes its form." 
Thus the process which I analysed has replaced one form of the 
private and parcelled property of the labourers with the capitalist 
property of a tiny minority (I.e., p. 342),a caused one kind of  property 
to be substituted for another. How could this be applicable to Russia, 
where land is not and never has been the "private property" of 
the agricultural producer? So the only conclusion which they would 
be justified in drawing from the progress of things in the West is 
this: to establish capitalist production in Russia it would be 
necessary to start by abolishing communal property and exprop­
riating the peasants, i.e. the great mass of the people. This, by the 
way, is the wish of the Russian liberals,b but does their wish prove 
a See this volume, p.  346.—  Ed. 
b Crossed out in the manuscript: "who wish to naturalise capitalist production 
in their country and, consistent with themselves, transform the great mass of 
peasants into simple wage-earners".— Ed. 

=====第391页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 361 
any more than the wish of Catherine II to transplant into Russian 
soil the Western guild system of the Middle Ages?409 
1) Thus the expropriation of the agricultural producers in the 
West served to "transform the private and parcelled property of 
the labourers" into the private and concentrated property of the 
capitalists.410 But none the less it is the substitution of one form of 
private property for another form of private property. In Russia, 
on the contrary, it would be a question of substituting capitalist 
property for communist property. 
2) From the historical point of view there is only one serious 
argument in favour of the fatal dissolution of Russian communist 
property. It is this: communist property existed everywhere 
throughout Western Europe; everywhere it has disappeared with 
social progress. Why would it escape the same fate in Russia 
alone? 
Certainly! If capitalist production is to establish its sway in 
Russia, the great majority of the peasants, i.e. of the Russian 
people, must be converted into wage-earners and consequently 
expropriated by the advance abolition of their communist proper­
ty. But in any event, the Western precedent would not prove 
anything at all!a 
2) The Russian "Marxists" of whom you speak are quite 
unknown to me.411 To the best of my knowledge, the Russians 
with whom I am in personal contact hold diametrically opposed 
views.412 
3) From the historical point of view the only serious argument 
in favour of the fatal dissolution of Russian communal property is 
this: communal property existed everywhere throughout Western 
Europe, yet everywhere it has disappeared with social progress; 
how would it be able to escape the same fate in Russia? 
In the first place, in Western Europe the death of communal 
property and the birth of capitalist production are separated from 
one another by an immense interval0 embracing a whole series of 
successive economic revolutions and evolutions, of which capitalist 
production is merely the most recent. On the one hand, it has 
resulted in a wondrous development of the social productive 
forces0; but on the other hand, it has revealed its own 
a The crossed-out version of this sentence reads: "...does not prove anything at 
all as regards 'the historical inevitability' of this process".— Ed. 
b Then there follows a sentence crossed out in the manuscript: "The death of 
communal property did not give birth to capitalist production".— Ed. 
c Crossed out in the manuscript: "On the other hand, although it only dates 
from yesterday, it has already revealed its purely transitory nature, and, even more, 
the incompatibility between itself and the life of society".— Ed. 

=====第392页=====
362 Karl Marx 
incompatibility with the very forces which it engenders. Its history 
is henceforth no more than a history of antagonisms, crises, 
conflicts and disasters. In the last place, it has revealed to the entire 
world, except those blinded by self-interest, its purely transitory 
nature. The nations in which it has attained its highest peak in 
Europe and America aspire only to break its chains3 by 
replacing capitalist production with cooperative production, and 
capitalist property with a higher form of the archaic type of 
property, i.e. communistb property. 
If Russia were isolated in the world, if it therefore had to work 
out for itself the economic conquests which Western Europe has 
only acquired by passing through a long series of evolutions, from 
the existence of its primitive communities to its present state, there 
would be no doubt, at least in my eyes, that its communities would 
be fatally condemned to perish with the progressive development 
of Russian society. But the situation of the Russian commune is 
absolutely different from that of the primitive communities of the 
West. Russia is the only country in Europe where communal 
property has kept going on a vast, nationwide scale, but at the 
same time Russia exists in modern historical surroundings, it is 
contemporary with a higher culture, it is linked to a world market 
dominated by capitalist production. By appropriating the positive 
results of this mode of production, it is thus in a position to 
develop and transform the still archaic form of its rural commune, 
instead of destroying it. (Let me note in passing that the form of 
communist property found in Russia is the most modern form of 
the archaic type, which has itself passed through a whole series of 
evolutions.) If the supporters of the capitalist system in Russia 
deny the feasibility of such a plan, let them prove that to exploit 
machines Russia was forced to pass through the incubation period 
of mechanical production! Let them explain to me how they 
succeeded in introducing in their own country in a few days, so to 
speak, the mechanism of exchange (banks, credit institutions, etc.), 
which it took the West centuries to devise.c 
4) What is threatening the life of the Russian commune is neither 
a Crossed out in the manuscript: "of capitalist production and capitalist 
property, which corresponds to it, and appropriate the positive results of capitalist 
production by returning to a higher form of an archaic type".— Ed. 
b Originally, for the word "communist" Marx had written "collective".— Ed. 
c Further, the following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "Although the 
capitalist system is on the decline in the West and is approaching the time when it will 
be no more than an 'archaic' formation, its Russian supporters are...".— Ed 

=====第393页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 363 
historical inevitability nor a theory; it is oppression by the State and 
exploitation by capitalist intruders, who have been made powerful at 
the expense of the peasants by the very same State. 
4) The archaic or primary formation of our globe itself contains 
a series of layers of differing ages, one superimposed on the 
other; in the same way, the archaic form of society reveals to us a 
series of different types, marking progressive epochs. The Russian 
rural commune belongs to the most recent type of this chain. 
Under it, the agricultural producer already has private ownership 
of the house in which he lives and the garden which forms the 
complement to it. This is the first element of decay in the archaic 
form, an element unknown in older forms. On the other hand, 
the latter are all based on the natural relations of kinship between 
the members of the commune, whereas the type to which the 
Russian commune belongs, released from this tight bond, is 
thereby capable of further development. The isolation of rural 
communes, the lack of connexion between the life of one and the 
life of another, this localised microcosm is not encountered 
everywhere as an immanent characteristic of the last of the 
primitive types; but everywhere it is found it always gives rise to a 
central despotism over and above the communes. In Russia it 
seems to me an easy matter to do away with this primitive 
isolation, imposed by the vast extent of the territory, as soon as the 
government shackles have been cast off. 
I am now coming to the heart of the matter. There is no 
denying that the archaic type, to which the Russian commune 
belongs, conceals an intimate dualism which, given certain 
historical conditions, might entail ruin. The ownership of the land 
is communal, but each peasant tills and uses his field on his own 
account, just like the small peasant in the West. Communal 
ownership, parcel farming of the land—this combination, useful 
in more distant times, becomes dangerous in our own age.a On the 
one hand, the possession of chattels, an element which is playing 
an increasingly important part in agriculture  itself,  progressively 
differentiates the fortune of the members of the commune and 
there gives rise to a conflict of interests, especially under fiscal 
pressure from the State; on the other hand, the economic 
superiority of communal property, as the basis of cooperative and 
combined labour, is lost. But it should not be forgotten that in 
a Crossed out in the manuscript: "especially under fiscal pressure from the 
State", "especially in a society in which exchange is already heavily commercial".— 
Ed. 

=====第394页=====
364 Karl Marx 
farming the undivided grasslands the Russian peasants already 
practise the collective method, that their familiarity with the 
contract of artel would greatly facilitate the transition from parcel 
farming to collective farming, that the physical lie of the land in 
Russia encourages combined mechanised farming on a large scale, 
and that finally Russian society, which has so long lived at the 
expense of the rural commune, owes it the first advances 
necessary for this change. Of course, it is only a question of a 
gradual change which would commence by placing the commune 
on a normal footing on its present basis. 
5) Leaving aside any more or less theoretical question, I need 
not tell you that today the very existence of the Russian commune 
is threatened by a conspiracy of powerful interests. A certain kind 
of capitalism, nourished at the expense of the peasants through 
the agency of the State, has risen up in opposition to the 
commune; it is in its interest to crush the commune. It is also in 
the interest of the landed proprietors to set up the more or less 
well-off peasants as an intermediate agrarian class, and to turn the 
poor peasants—that is to say the majority—into simple wage-
earners. This will mean cheap labour! And how would a commune 
be able to resist, crushed by the extortions of the State, robbed by 
business, exploited by the landowners, undermined from within by 
usury? 
[THIRD DRAFT] 413 
Dear Citizen, 
To deal thoroughly with the questions posed in your letter of 
February 16 I would have to go into matters in detail and break 
off urgent work, but the concise exposé which I have the honour 
of presenting to you will, I trust, suffice to dispel any misunder­
standings with regard to my so-called theory. 
I. In analysing the genesis of capitalist production I say: "At the 
core of the capitalist system, therefore, lies the complete separa­
tion of the producer from the means of production ... the basis of 
this whole development is the expropriation of  the agricultural producer. 
To date this has not been accomplished in a radical fashion anywhere 
except in England... But all the other countries of Western Europe are 
undergoing the same process" (Capital, French ed., p. 315). 
Hence the "historical inevitability" of this process is expressly li­
mited to the countries of Western  Europe.  The cause of that limitation is 
indicated in the following passage from Chapter XXXII: "Private 
property, based on personal labour ... will be supplanted by capitalist 

=====第395页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 365 
private  property,  based on the exploitation of the labour of others, on 
wage labour" (I.e., p. 341). 
In this Western movement, therefore, what is taking place is the 
transformation of one form of private property into another form of private 
property. In the case of the Russian peasants, their communal property 
would, on the contrary, have to be transformed into private property. 
Whether one asserts or denies the inevitability of that transforma­
tion, the reasons for and against have nothing to do with my analysis 
of the genesis of the capitalist system. At the very most one might 
infer from it that, given the present state of the great majority of 
Russian peasants, the act of converting them into small proprietors 
would merely be the prelude to their rapid expropriation. 
II. The most serious argument which has been put forward 
against the Russian commune amounts to this: 
Go back to the origins of Western societies and everywhere you 
will find communal ownership of the land; with social progress it 
has everywhere given way to private property; so it will not be able 
to escape the same fate in Russia alone. 
I will not take this argument into account except in so far as it is 
based on European experiences. As for the East Indies, for 
example, everyone except Sir Henry Maine and others of his ilk 
realises that the suppression of communal landownership out 
there was nothing but an act of English vandalism, pushing the 
native people not forwards but backwards. 
Primitive communities are not all cast from the same die. On the 
contrary, taken all together, they form a series of social groupings 
which differ in both type and age, marking successive stages of 
evolution. One of these types, which convention terms the 
agricultural commune, is also that of the Russian commune. Its 
counterpart in the West is the Germanic commune, which is of very 
recent date. It did not yet exist in the days of Julius Caesar, nor 
did it exist any longer when the Germanic tribes came to conquer 
Italy, Gaul, Spain, etc. In Julius Caesar's day there was already an 
annual share-out of the arable land between groups, the gentes 
and the tribes, but not yet between the individual families of a 
commune; farming was probably also carried out in groups, 
communally. On Germanic soil itself this community of the archaic 
type turned, by natural development, into the agricultural commune 
as described by Tacitus. From that time on we lose sight of it. It 
perished obscurely amidst incessant wars and migrations; perhaps 
it died a violent death. But its natural viability is proved by two 
incontestable facts. Some scattered examples of this model 
survived all the vicissitudes of the Middle Ages and have been 

=====第396页=====
366 Karl Marx 
preserved into our own day, for instance the district of Trier in 
my own country. But, more importantly, we find the imprint of 
this "agricultural commune" so clearly traced on the commune 
that succeeded it that Maurer, in analysing the latter, was able to 
reconstruct the former. The new commune, in which arable land 
belongs to its cultivators as private property, at the same time as 
forests, pastures, common lands, etc., remain communal property, 
was introduced by the Germanic peoples in all the countries which 
they conquered. Thanks to the characteristics borrowed from its 
prototype, it became the sole centre of popular liberty and life 
throughout the Middle Ages. 
The "rural commune" is also found in Asia, among the 
Afghans, etc., but everywhere it appears as the most recent type and, 
so to speak, as the last word in the archaic formation of societies. It 
is in order to emphasise this fact that I went into the Germanic 
commune in some detail. 
We must now consider the most characteristic features distin­
guishing the "agricultural commune" from more archaic com­
munities. 
1) All other communities are based on blood relations between 
their members. One cannot enter them unless one is a natural or 
adopted relative. Their structure is that of a family tree. The 
"agricultural commune" was the first social grouping of free men 
not held together by blood-ties. 
2) In the agricultural commune, the house and its complement, 
the courtyard, belonged to the agricultural producer as an 
individual. The communal house and collective dwelling, on the other 
hand, were the economic basis of more primitive communities, long 
before the introduction of the pastoral or agrarian way of life. True, 
one finds agricultural communes where the houses, despite having 
ceased to be collective dwelling places, periodically change owners. 
Individual usufruct is thus combined with communal property. But 
such communes still carry their birthmark: they are in a state of 
transition between a more archaic community and the agricultural 
commune proper. 
3) The arable land, inalienable and communal property, is 
periodically divided between members of the agricultural com­
mune in such a way that everyone tills the fields assigned to him 
on his own account and appropriates the fruits thereof as an 
individual. In more primitive communities the work is carried out 
communally and the communal product is shared out according as 
it is required for consumption, excepting the portion reserved for 
reproduction. 

=====第397页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 367 
One can understand that the dualism inherent in the constitu­
tion of the agricultural commune is able to endow it with a 
vigorous life. Freed from the strong but tight bonds of natural 
kinship, communal ownership of the land and the social relations 
stemming from it guarantee it a solid foundation, at the same time 
as the house and the courtyard, the exclusive domain of the 
individual family, parcel farming and the private appropriation of 
its fruits give a scope to individuality incompatible with the 
organism of more primitive communities. 
But it is no less evident that in time this very dualism might turn 
into the germ of decomposition. Apart from all the malign 
influences from without, the commune carries the elements of 
corruption in its own bosom. Private landed property has already 
slipped into it in the guise of a house with its rural courtyard, 
which can be turned into a stronghold from which to launch the 
assault on the communal land. That is nothing new. But the vital 
thing is parcel labour as a source of private appropriation. It gives 
way to the accumulation of personal chattels, for example cattle, 
money and sometimes even slaves or serfs. This movable property, 
beyond the control of the commune, subject to individual 
exchanges in which guile and accident have their chance, will 
weigh more and more heavily on the entire rural economy. There 
we have the destroyer of primitive economic and social equality. It 
introduces heterogeneous elements, provoking in the bosom of the 
commune conflicts of interests and passions designed first to 
encroach on the communal ownership of arable lands, and then 
that of the forests, pastures, common lands, etc., which once 
converted into communal appendages of private property will fall to 
it in the long run. 
As the last phase of the primitive formation of society, the 
agricultural commune is, at the same time, a transitional stage 
leading to the secondary formation, and hence marks the 
transition from a society founded on communal property to a 
society founded on private property. The secondary formation, of 
course, includes the series of societies resting on slavery and 
serfdom. 
But does this mean to say that the historical career of the 
agricultural commune must inevitably come to such an end? Not 
at all. Its innate dualism admits of an alternative: either the 
property element will gain the upper hand over the collective 
element, or vice versa. It all depends on the historical environment 
in which the commune is placed. 
Let us discount for the time being all the miseries besetting the 

=====第398页=====
368 Karl Marx 
agricultural commune in Russia and consider only its capacity for 
further development. It occupies a unique position, without 
precedent in history. Alone in Europe, it is still the predominant 
organic form of rural life throughout an immense empire. The 
common ownership of land provides it with the natural basis for 
collective appropriation, and its historical setting, its contem­
poraneity with capitalist production, lends it—fully developed— 
the material conditions for cooperative labour organised on a vast 
scale. It can thus incorporate the positive acquisitions devised by 
the capitalist system without passing through its Caudine Forks. It 
can gradually replace parcel farming with combined agriculture 
assisted by machines, which the physical lie of the land in Russia 
invites. Having been first restored to a normal footing in its 
present form, it may become the direct starting point for the 
economic system towards which modern society tends and turn 
over a new leaf without beginning by committing suicide. 3 
The English themselves attempted some such thing in the East 
Indies; all they managed to do was to ruin native agriculture and 
double the number and severity of the famines. 
But what about the anathema which affects the commune—its 
isolation, the lack of connexion between the life of one commune 
and that of the others, this localised microcosm which has hitherto 
prevented it from taking any historical initiative? It would vanish 
amidst a general turmoil in Russian society. 
The familiarity of the Russian peasant with the artel would 
especially facilitate the transition from parcel labour to cooperative 
labour, which he already applies anyway, to a certain extent, in the 
tedding of the meadows and such communal undertakings as the 
land drainage, etc. A quite archaic peculiarity, the pet aversion of 
modern agronomists, still tends in this direction. If on arriving in 
any country you find that the arable land shows traces of a strange 
dismemberment, lending it the appearance of a chessboard 
composed of small fields, you need be in no doubt that it is the 
domain of an extinct agricultural commune! Its members, without 
having studied the theory of ground rent, perceived that the same 
a The following passage is crossed out in the manuscript: "But opposing it is 
landed property, holding in its clutches almost half the land—and the best land, at 
that—not to mention the domains of the State. That is where the preservation of the 
agricultural commune by way of its further development merges with 
the general trend of Russian society, whose regeneration can only be achieved 
at this price. Even from the economic point of view alone, Russia would 
try in vain to escape from the impasse by turning to capitalist farming on the 
English model, to which all the social conditions of the country are inimical."— 
Ed. 

=====第399页=====
Drafts of the Letter to Vera Zasulich 369 
amount of labour, expended on fields differing in natural fertility 
and location, will give differing yields. To spread the fortunes of 
labour more evenly, they therefore divided the land first into a 
certain number of areas, determined by the natural and economic 
divergences of the soil, and then broke up all these larger areas 
into as many parcels as there were labourers. Then each man was 
given a plot of land in each area. It goes without saying that this 
arrangement, perpetuated by the Russian commune into our own 
day, is at odds with the requirements of agronomy. Apart from 
other disadvantages, it entails a waste of energy and time. 
Nevertheless, it favours the transition to collective farming, with 
which it seems to be so much at odds at first glance. The parcel...3 
Written in late February and early March Printed according to Marx-Engels 
1881 Gesamtausgabe (MEGA), Erste Ab­
teilung, Band 25, Berlin, 1985, 
First published in Marx-Engels Archives, co\\ated with the manuscript 
Book I, Moscow, 1924 K 
Translated from the French 
The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 
26-1317 

=====第400页=====
370 
Karl Marx 
[LETTER TO VERA ZASULICH] 
London, March 8, 1881 
41 Maitland Park Road, N.W. 
Dear Citizen, 
A nervous complaint which has assailed me periodically over the 
last ten years has prevented me from replying any sooner to your 
letter of February 16. I am sorry that I cannot provide you with a 
concise exposé, intended for publication, of the question you have 
done me the honour of putting to me. Months ago I promised the St. 
Petersburg Committee to let them have a piece on the same 
subject. I hope, however, that a few lines will suffice to dispel any 
doubts you may harbour as to the misunderstanding in regard to 
my so-called theory. 
In analysing the genesis of capitalist production I say: 
"At the core of the capitalist system, therefore, lies the complete 
separation of the producer from the means of production ... the 
basis of this whole development is the expropriation of the 
agricultural producer. To date this has not been accomplished in a 
radical fashion anywhere except in England... But all the other 
countries of Western Europe are undergoing the same process" 
(Capital, French ed., p. 315). 
Hence the "historical inevitability" of this process is expressly 
limited to the countries of Western Europe. The cause of that 
limitation is indicated in the following passage from Chapter 
XXXII: 
"Private property, based on personal labour ... will be supplanted by 
capitalist private  property,  based on the exploitation of the labour of 
others, on wage labour" (I.e., p. 341). 
In this Western movement, therefore, what is taking place is the 
transformation of one form of private property into another form of 

=====第401页=====
Letter to Vera Zasulich 371 
private  property.  In the case of the Russian peasants, their communal 
property would, on the contrary, have to be transformed into private 
property. 
Hence the analysis provided in Capital does not adduce reasons 
either for or against the viability of the rural commune, but the 
special study I have made of it, and the material for which I drew 
from original sources, has convinced me that this commune is the 
fulcrum of social regeneration in Russia, but in order that it may 
function as such, it would first be necessary to eliminate the 
deleterious influences which are assailing it from all sides, and 
then ensure for it the normal conditions of spontaneous develop­
ment. 
I have the honour to be, dear Citizen, 
Yours very faithfully, 
Karl Marx 
Written on March 8, 1881 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in Marx-Engels Archives, 
Book I, Moscow, 1924 Translated from the French 

=====第402页=====
372 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE CHAIRMAN 
OF THE SLAVONIC MEETING, 
MARCH 21st 1881, 
IN CELEBRATION OF THE ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE PARIS COMMUNE416 
Citizen, 
With great regret we have to inform you that we are not able to 
attend your meeting. 
When the Commune of Paris succumbed to the atrocious 
massacre organised by the defenders of "Order", the victors little 
thought that ten years would not elapse before an event would 
happen in distant Petersburg417 which, maybe after long and 
violent struggle, must ultimately and certainly lead to the 
establishment of a Russian Commune; 
that the King of Prussia3 who had prepared the Commune by 
besieging Paris and thus compelling the ruling bourgeoisie to arm 
the people—that that same King of Prussia, ten years after, 
besieged in his own capital by Socialists, would only be able to 
maintain his throne, by declaring the state of siege in his capital 
Berlin.418 
On the other hand, the Continental governments who after the 
fall of the Commune by their persecutions compelled the 
International Working Men's Association to give up its formal, 
external organisation—these governments who believed they 
could crush the great International Labour Movement by decrees 
and special laws—little did they think that ten years later that 
same International Labour Movement, more powerful than ever, 
would embrace the working classes not only of Europe but of 
America also; that the common struggle for common interests 
against a common enemy would bind them together into a new 
a William I.— Ed. 

=====第403页=====
To the Chairman of the Slavonic Meeting 373 
and greater spontaneous International, outgrowing more and 
more all external forms of association. 
Thus the Commune which the powers of the old world believed 
to be exterminated lives stronger than ever, and thus we may join 
you in the cry: Vive la Commune! 
Written on March 21, 1881 Reproduced from the manuscript 
First published, in Russian, in Pravda, 
No. 308, November 7, 1933 

=====第404页=====
374 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE DAILY NEWS' 
Sir,a 
The Daily News of to-day, in an article entitled: "Prosecution of 
the Freiheit Journal", 13 states that the number of that paper, 
containing an article on the death of the Emperor of Russia,0  "also 
contained some allusion to the perpetrator of the Mansion House 
mystery". As this statement is open to an interpretation altogether 
at variance with the contents of the article in question; as that 
article is entirely unconnected with the one on the St. Petersburg 
affair and as Mr. Most the editor is at present not in a position to 
defend himself in the press, we beg to ask you to insert the 
following literal translation of all that is said, in the number of the 
Freiheit alluded to, with regard to the "Mansion House mystery". 
Freiheit, 19th March, 1881: 
"On Wednesday evening a parcel full of gunpowder, about 15 lb., was placed 
by an 'unknown' hand before the Mansion House in the City. It was burning at one 
end, but 'accidentally' a policeman at once observed this and was plucky enough to 
put it out. Now we do not see what purpose might possibly have been served by 
this powder explosion. Anyhow, the international police appear to have known how 
to make capital out of it. For on the following evening Government was to be asked 
in Parliament what measures they intended to take against the Socialist bands 
a W. K. Hales.— Ed. 
b The Daily News, No. 10906, March 31,  1881.—  Ed. 
c Alexander II. See Most's article "Endlich!" in the Freiheit, No. 12, March 19, 
1881.—  Ed. 

=====第405页=====
To the Editor of The Daily News 375 
which had established themselves in London.3 However, the Home Secretaryb did 
not think proper to do anything besides shrugging his shoulders, and that was all 
the international police got for their pains."0 
We are, Sir, your obedient servants, 
Karl Marx 
Frederick Engels 
London, March 31 d 
Written on March 31, 1881 Reproduced from the manuscript, 
collated with the newspaper First published in The Daily News, 
No. 10907, April 1, 1881 
a See "Nihilists in London", The Times, No. 30145, March 18,  1881.—  Ed. 
b Sir William Harcourt.— Ed. 
c [J. Most,] "England", Freiheit, No. 12, March 19,  1881.—  Ed. 
d Engels' manuscript has no date or signatures.— Ed. 

=====第406页=====
Frederick Engels 
A FAIR DAY'S WAGES FOR A FAIR DAY'S WORK 
This has now been the motto of the English working-class 
movement for the last fifty years. It did good service in the time 
of the rising Trades Unions after the repeal of the infamous 
Combination Laws in 1824421; it did still better service in the time 
of the glorious Chartist movement, when the English workmen 
marched at the head of the European working class. But times are 
moving on, and a good many things which were desirable and 
necessary fifty, and even thirty years ago, are now antiquated and 
would be completely out of place. Does the old, time-honoured 
watchword too belong to them? 
A fair day's wages for a fair day's work? But what is a fair day's 
wages, and what is a fair day's work? How are they determined by 
the laws under which modern society exists and develops itself? 
For an answer to this we must not apply to the science of morals 
or of law and equity, nor to any sentimental feeling of humanity, 
justice, or even charity. What is morally fair, what is even fair in 
law, may be far from being socially fair. Social fairness or 
unfairness is decided by one science alone—the science which 
deals with the material facts of production and exchange, the 
science of political economy. 
Now what does political economy call a fair day's wages and a 
fair day's work? Simply the rate of wages and the length and 
intensity of a day's work which are determined by competition of 
employer and employed in the open market. And what are they, 
when thus determined? 
A fair day's wages, under normal conditions, is the sum 
required to procure to the labourer the means of existence 

=====第407页=====
A Fair Day's Wages for a Fair Day's Work 377 
necessary, according to the standard of life of his station and 
country, to keep himself in working order and to propagate his 
race.  The actual rate of wages, with the fluctuations of trade, may 
be sometimes above, sometimes below this rate; but, under fair 
conditions, that rate ought to be the average of all oscillations. 
A fair day's work is that length of working day and that 
intensity of actual work which expends one day's full working 
power of the workman without encroaching upon his capacity for 
the same amount of work for the next and following days. 
The transaction, then, may be thus described—the workman 
gives to the Capitalist his full day's working power; that is, so 
much of it as he can give without rendering impossible the 
continuous repetition of the transaction. In exchange he receives 
just as much, and no more, of the necessaries of life as is required 
to keep up the repetition of the same bargain every day. The 
workman gives as much, the Capitalist gives as little, as the nature 
of the bargain will admit. This is a very peculiar sort of fairness. 
But let us look a little deeper into the matter. As, according to 
political economists, wages and working days are fixed by 
competition, fairness seems to require that both sides should have 
the same fair start on equal terms. But that is not the case. The 
Capitalist, if he cannot agree with the Labourer, can afford to 
wait, and live upon his capital. The workman cannot. He has but 
wages to live upon, and must therefore take work when, where, 
and at what terms he can get it. The workman has no fair start. 
He is fearfully handicapped by hunger. Yet, according to the 
political economy of the Capitalist class, that is the very pink of 
fairness. 
But this is a mere trifle. The application of mechanical power 
and machinery to new trades, and the extension and improve­
ments of machinery in trades already subjected to it, keep turning 
out of work more and more "hands"; and they do so at a far 
quicker rate than that at which these superseded "hands" can be 
absorbed by, and find employment in, the manufactures of the 
country. These superseded "hands" form a real industrial army of 
reserve for the use of Capital. If trade is bad they may starve, beg, 
steal, or go to the workhouse422; if trade is good they are ready at 
hand to expand production; and until the very last man, woman, 
or child of this army of reserve shall have found work—which 
happens in times of frantic over-production alone—until then will 
its competition keep down wages, and by its existence alone 
strengthen the power of Capital in its struggle with Labour. In the 
race with Capital, Labour is not only handicapped, it has to drag a 

=====第408页=====
378 Frederick Engels 
cannon-ball riveted to its foot. Yet that is fair according to 
Capitalist political economy. 
But let us inquire out of what fund does Capital pay these very 
fair wages? Out of capital, of course. But capital produces no 
value. Labour is, besides the earth, the only source of wealth; 
capital itself is nothing but the stored-up produce of labour. So 
that the wages of Labour are paid out of labour, and the working 
man is paid out of his own produce. According to what we may 
call common fairness, the wages of the labourer ought to consist in 
the produce of his labour. But that would not be fair according to 
political economy. On the contrary, the produce of the workman's 
labour goes to the Capitalist, and the workman gets out of it no 
more than the bare necessaries of life. And thus the end of this 
uncommonly "fair" race of competition is that the produce of the 
labour of those who do work, gets unavoidably accumulated in the 
hands of those that do not work, and becomes in their hands the 
most powerful means to enslave the very men who produced it. 
A fair day's wages for a fair day's work! A good deal might be 
said about the fair day's work too, the fairness of which is 
perfectly on a par with that of the wages. But that we must leave 
for another occasion. From what has been stated it is pretty clear 
that the old watchword has lived its day, and will hardly hold 
water nowadays. The fairness of political economy, such as it truly 
lays down the laws which rule actual society, that fairness is all on 
one side—on that of Capital. Let, then, the old motto be buried 
for ever and replaced by another: 
POSSESSION OF THE MEANS OF WORK-
RAW MATERIAL, FACTORIES, MACHINERY— 
BY THE WORKING PEOPLE THEMSELVES. 
Written on May 1-2, 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 1, May 7, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第409页=====
379 
Frederick Engels 
THE WAGES SYSTEM 
In a previous article a we examined the time-honoured motto, 
"A fair day's wages for a fair day's work", and came to the 
conclusion that the fairest day's wages under present social 
conditions is necessarily tantamount to the very unfairest division 
of the workman's produce, the greater portion of that produce 
going into the capitalist's pocket, and the workman having to put 
up with just as much as will enable him to keep himself in working 
order and to propagate his race. 
This is a law of political economy, or, in other words, a law of 
the present economical organisation of society, which is more 
powerful than all the Common and Statute Law of England put 
together, the Court of Chancery423 included. While society is 
divided into two opposing classes—on the one hand, the 
capitalists, monopolisers of the whole of the means of production, 
land, raw materials, machinery; on the other hand, labourers, 
working people deprived of all property in the means of 
production, owners of nothing but their own working power; 
while this social organisation exists the law of wages will remain 
all-powerful, and will every day afresh rivet the chains by which 
the working man is made the slave of his own produce— 
monopolised by the capitalist. 
The Trades Unions of this country have now for nearly sixty 
years fought against this law—with what result? Have they 
succeeded in freeing the working class from the bondage in which 
capital—the produce of its own hands—holds it? Have they 
enabled a single section of the working class to rise above the 
a See this volume, pp. 376-78.— Ed, 

=====第410页=====
380 Frederick Engels 
situation of wages-slaves, to become owners of their own means of 
production, of the raw materials, tools, machinery required in 
their trade, and thus to become the owners of the produce of their 
own labour? It is well known that not only they have not done so, 
but that they never tried. 
Far be it from us to say that Trades Unions are of no use 
because they have not done that. On the contrary, Trades Unions 
in England, as well as in every other manufacturing country, are a 
necessity for the working classes in their struggle against capital. 
The average rate of wages is equal to the sum of necessaries 
sufficient to keep up the race of workmen in a certain country 
according to the standard of life habitual in that country. That 
standard of life may be very different for different classes of 
workmen. The great merit of Trades Unions, in their struggle to 
keep up the rate of wages and to reduce working hours, is that 
they tend to keep up and to raise the standard of life. There are 
many trades in the East-end of London whose labour is not more 
skilled and quite as hard as that of bricklayers and bricklayers' 
labourers, yet they hardly earn half the wages of these. Why? 
Simply because a powerful organisation enables the one set to 
maintain a comparatively high standard of life as the rule by 
which their wages are measured; while the other set, disorganised 
and powerless, have to submit not only to unavoidable but also to 
arbitrary encroachments of their employers: their standard of 
life is gradually reduced, they learn how to live on less and less 
wages, and their wages naturally fall to that level which they 
themselves have learnt to accept as sufficient. 
The law of wages, then, is not one which draws a hard and fast 
line.  It is not inexorable with certain limits. There is at every time 
(great depression excepted) for every trade a certain latitude 
within which the rate of wages may be modified by the results of 
the struggle between the two contending parties. Wages in every 
case are fixed by a bargain, and in a bargain he who resists longest 
and best has the greatest chance of getting more than his due. If 
the isolated workman tries to drive his bargain with the capitalist 
he is easily beaten and has to surrender at discretion; but if a 
whole trade of workmen form a powerful organisation, collect 
among themselves a fund to enable them to defy their employers 
if need be, and thus become enabled to treat with these employers 
as a power, then, and then only, have they a chance to get even 
that pittance which, according to the economical constitution of 
present society, may be called a fair day's wages for a fair day's 
work. 

=====第411页=====
The Wages System 381 
The law of wages is not upset by the struggles of Trades 
Unions. On the contrary, it is enforced by them. Without the 
means of resistance of the Trades Unions the labourer does not 
receive even what is his due according to the rules of the wages 
system. It is only with the fear of the Trades Union before his 
eyes that the capitalist can be made to part with the full market 
value of his labourer's working power. Do you want a proof? Look 
at the wages paid to the members of the large Trades Unions, and 
at the wages paid to the numberless small trades in that pool of 
stagnant misery, the East-end of London. 
Thus the Trades Unions do not attack the wages system. But it 
is not the highness or lowness of wages which constitutes the 
economical degradation of the working class: this degradation is 
comprised in the fact that, instead of receiving for its labour the 
full produce of this labour, the working class has to be satisfied 
with a portion of its own produce called wages. The capitalist 
pockets the whole produce (paying the labourer out of it) because 
he is the owner of the means of labour. And, therefore, there is 
no real redemption for the working class until it becomes owner of 
all the means of work—land, raw material, machinery, etc.—and 
thereby also the owner of THE WHOLE OF THE PRODUCE OF 
ITS OWN LABOUR. 
Written on May 15-16, 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 3, May 21, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第412页=====
382 
Frederick Engels 
TRADES UNIONS 
i 
In our last issue we considered the action of Trades Unions as 
far as they enforce the economical law of wages against 
employers. 3 We return to this subject, as it is of the highest 
importance that the working classes generally should thoroughly 
understand it. 
We suppose no English working man of the present day needs 
to be taught that it is the interest of the individual capitalist, as 
well as of the capitalist class generally, to reduce wages as much as 
possible. The produce of labour, after deducting all expenses, is 
divided, as David Ricardo has irrefutably proved, into two shares: 
the one forms the labourer's wages, the other the capitalist's 
profits. 15 Now, this net produce of labour being, in every individual 
case,  a given quantity, it is clear that the share called profits 
cannot increase without the share called wages decreasing. To 
deny that it is the interest of the capitalist to reduce wages, would 
be tantamount to say that it is not his interest to increase his 
profits. 
We know very well that there are other means of temporarily 
increasing profits, but they do not alter the general law, and 
therefore need not trouble us here. 
Now, how can the capitalists reduce wages when the rate of 
wages is governed by a distinct and well-defined law of social 
economy? The economical law of wages is there, and is irrefutable. 
But, as we have seen, it is elastic, and it is so in two ways. The rate 
a See this volume, pp.  379-81.—  Ed 
b D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, London, 1817, 
pp. 90-145.—Ed. 

=====第413页=====
Trades Unions 383 
of wages can be lowered, in a particular trade, either directly, by 
gradually accustoming the workpeople of that trade to a lower 
standard of life, or, indirectly, by increasing the number of 
working hours per day (or the intensity of work during the same 
working hours) without increasing the pay. 
And the interest of every individual capitalist to increase his 
profits by reducing the wages of his workpeople receives a fresh 
stimulus from the competition of capitalists of the same trade 
amongst each other. Each one of them tries to undersell his 
competitors, and unless he is to sacrifice his profits he must try 
and reduce wages. Thus, the pressure upon the rate of wages 
brought about by the interest of every individual capitalist is 
increased tenfold by the competition amongst them. What was 
before a matter of more or less profit, now becomes a matter of 
necessity. 
Against this constant, unceasing pressure unorganised labour 
has no effective means of resistance. Therefore, in trades without 
organisation of the workpeople, wages tend constantly to fall and 
the working hours tend constantly to increase. Slowly, but surely, 
this process goes on. Times of prosperity may now and then 
interrupt it, but times of bad trade hasten it on all the more 
afterwards. The workpeople gradually get accustomed to a lower 
and lower standard of life. While the length of working day more 
and more approaches the possible maximum, the wages come 
nearer and nearer to their absolute minimum—the sum below 
which it becomes absolutely impossible for the workman to live 
and to reproduce his race. 
There was a temporary exception to this about the beginning of 
this century. The rapid extension of steam and machinery was not 
sufficient for the still faster increasing demand for their produce. 
Wages in these trades, except those of children sold from the 
workhouse424 to the manufacturer, were as a rule high; those of 
such skilled manual labour as could not be done without were very 
high; what a dyer, a mechanic, a velvet-cutter, a hand-mule 
spinner, used to receive now sounds fabulous. At the same time 
the trades superseded by machinery were slowly starved to death. 
But newly-invented machinery by-and-by superseded these well-
paid workmen; machinery was invented which made machinery, 
and that at such a rate that the supply of machine-made goods not 
only equalled, but exceeded, the demand. When the general 
peace, in 1815,425 re-established regularity of trade, the decennial 
fluctuations between prosperity, over-production, and commercial 
panic began. Whatever advantages the workpeople had preserved 

=====第414页=====
384 Frederick Engels 
from old prosperous times, and perhaps even increased during 
the period of frantic over-production, were now taken from them 
during the period of bad trade and panic; and soon the 
manufacturing population of England submitted to the general 
law that the wages of unorganised labour constantly tend towards 
the absolute minimum. 
But in the meantime the Trades Unions, legalised in 1824,a had 
also stepped in, and high time it was. Capitalists are always 
organised. They need in most cases no formal union, no rules, 
officers, etc. Their small number, as compared with that of the 
workmen, the fact of their forming a separate class, their constant 
social and commercial intercourse stand them in lieu of that; it is 
only later on, when a branch of manufactures has taken possession 
of a district, such as the cotton trade has of Lancashire, that a 
formal capitalists' Trades Union becomes necessary. On the other 
hand, the workpeople from the very beginning cannot do without 
a strong organisation, well-defined by rules and delegating its 
authority to officers and committees. The Act of 1824 rendered 
these organisations legal. From that day Labour became a power 
in England. The formerly helpless mass, divided against  itself,  was 
no longer so. To the strength given by union and common action 
soon was added the force of a well-filled exchequer—"resistance 
money", as our French brethren expressively call it. The entire 
position of things now changed. For the capitalist it became a risky 
thing to indulge in a reduction of wages or an increase of working 
hours. 
Hence the violent outbursts of the capitalist class of those times 
against Trades Unions. That class had always considered its 
long-established practice of grinding down the working class as a 
vested right and lawful privilege. That was now to be put a stop 
to. No wonder they cried out lustily and held themselves at least as 
much injured in their rights and property as Irish landlords do 
nowadays.426 
Sixty years' experience of struggle have brought them round to 
some extent. Trades Unions have now become acknowledged 
institutions, and their action as one of the regulators of wages is 
recognised quite as much as the action of the Factories and 
Workshops Acts as regulators of the hours of work. Nay, the 
cotton masters in Lancashire have lately even taken a leaf out of 
the workpeople's book, and now know how to organise a strike, 
when it suits them, as well or better than any Trades Union. 
a "An Act to repeal the Laws relative to the Combination of Workmen; and for 
other Purposes therein mentioned [21st June, 1824]".— Ed. 

=====第415页=====
Trades Unions 385 
Thus it is through the action of Trades Unions that the law of 
wages is enforced as against the employers, and that the 
workpeople of any well-organised trade are enabled to obtain, at 
least approximately, the full value of the working power which 
they hire to their employer; and that, with the help of State laws, 
the hours of labour are made at least not to exceed too much that 
maximum length beyond which the working power is prematurely 
exhausted. This, however, is the utmost Trades Unions, as at 
present organised, can hope to obtain, and that by constant 
struggle only, by an immense waste of strength and money; and 
then the fluctuations of trade, once every ten years at least, break 
down for the moment what has been conquered, and the fight has 
to be fought over again. It is a vicious circle from which there is 
no issue. The working class remains what it was, and what our 
Chartist forefathers were not afraid to call it, a class of wages 
slaves. Is this to be the final result of all this labour, self-sacrifice, 
and suffering? Is this to remain for ever the highest aim of British 
workmen? Or is the working class of this country at last to attempt 
breaking through this vicious circle, and to find an issue out of it 
in a movement for the ABOLITION OF THE WAGES SYSTEM 
ALTOGETHER? 
Next week we shall examine the part played by Trades Unions 
as organisers of the working class. 
II 
So far we have considered the functions of Trades Unions as far 
only as they contribute to the regulation of the rate of wages and 
ensure to the labourer, in his struggle against capital, at least some 
means of resistance. But that aspect does not exhaust our subject. 
The struggle of the labourer against capital, we said. That 
struggle does exist, whatever the apologists of capital may say to 
the contrary. It will exist so long as a reduction of wages remains 
the safest and readiest means of raising profits; nay, so long as the 
wages system itself shall exist. The very existence of Trades 
Unions is proof sufficient of the fact; if they are not made to fight 
against the encroachments of capital what are they made for? 
There is no use in mincing matters. No milksop words can hide 
the ugly fact that present society is mainly divided into two great 
antagonistic classes—into capitalists, the owners of all the means 
for the employment of labour, on one side; and working men, the 
owners of nothing but their own working power, on the other. 
27-1317 

=====第416页=====
386 Frederick Engels 
The produce of the labour of the latter class has to be divided 
between both classes, and it is this division about which the 
struggle is constantly going on. Each class tries to get as large a 
share as possible; and it is the most curious aspect of this struggle 
that the working class, while fighting to obtain a share only of its 
own produce, is often enough accused of actually robbing the 
capitalist! 
But a struggle between two great classes of society necessarily 
becomes a political struggle. So did the long battle between the 
middle or capitalist class and the landed aristocracy; so also does 
the fight between the working class and these same capitalists. In 
every struggle of class against class, the next end fought for is 
political power; the ruling class defends its political supremacy, 
that is to say its safe majority in the Legislature; the inferior class 
fights for, first a share, then the whole of that power, in order to 
become enabled to change existing laws in conformity with their 
own interests and requirements. Thus the working class of Great 
Britain for years fought ardently and even violently for the 
People's Charter,427 which was to give it that political power; it was 
defeated, but the struggle had made such an impression upon the 
victorious middle class that this class, since then, was only too glad 
to buy a prolonged armistice at the price of ever-repeated 
concessions to the working people. 
Now, in a political struggle of class against class, organisation is 
the most important weapon. And in the same measure as the 
merely political or Chartist Organisation fell to pieces, in the same 
measure the Trades Unions Organisation grew stronger and 
stronger, until at present it has reached a degree of strength 
unequalled by any working-class organisation abroad. A few large 
Trades Unions, comprising between one and two millions of 
working men, and backed by the smaller or local Unions, 
represent a power which has to be taken into account by any 
Government of the ruling class, be it Whig or Tory. 
According to the traditions of their origin and development in 
this country, these powerful organisations have hitherto limited 
themselves almost strictly to their function of sharing in the 
regulation of wages and working hours, and of enforcing the 
repeal of laws openly hostile to the workmen. As stated before, 
they have done so with quite as much effect as they had a right to 
expect. But they have attained more than that—the ruling class, 
which knows their strength better than they themselves do, has 
volunteered to them concessions beyond that. Disraeli's Household 
Suffrage428 gave the vote to at least the greater portion of the 

=====第417页=====
Trades Unions  387 
organised working class. Would  he have proposed  it unless  he 
supposed that these  new  voters would show  a will  of their 
own—would cease  to be led by  middle-class Liberal politicians? 
Would  he have been able  to carry  it if the  working people,  in the 
management  of their colossal Trade Societies,  had not  proved 
themselves  fit for  administrative  and  political work? 
That very measure opened  out a new  prospect  to the  working 
class.  It gave them  the  majority  in London  and in all  manufactur­
ing towns,  and  thus enabled them  to enter into  the  struggle 
against capital with  new  weapons,  by sending  men of  their  own 
class  to Parliament.  And  here,  we are  sorry  to say, the  Trades 
Unions forgot their duty  as the  advanced guard  of the  working 
class.  The new  weapon  has  been  in their hands  for more than  ten 
years,  but  they scarcely ever unsheathed  it. They ought  not to 
forget that they cannot continue  to hold  the  position they  now 
occupy unless they really march  in the van of the  working class.  It 
is not in the  nature  of things that  the  working class  of England 
should possess  the power  of sending forty  or fifty working  men to 
Parliament  and yet be  satisfied  for  ever  to be  represented  by 
capitalists  or their clerks, such  as lawyers, editors,  etc. 
More than this, there  are  plenty  of symptoms that  the  working 
class  of this country  is awakening  to the  consciousness that  it has 
for some time been moving  in the  wrong groove429; that  the 
present movements  for higher wages  and  shorter hours exclusive­
ly, keep  it in a  vicious circle  out of  which there  is no  issue; that  it 
is not the  lowness  of wages which forms  the  fundamental evil,  but 
the wages system  itself.  This knowledge once generally spread 
amongst  the  working class,  the  position  of Trades Unions must 
change considerably. They will  no longer enjoy  the  privilege  of 
being  the  only organisations  of the  working class.  At the  side  of, 
or above,  the  Unions  of special trades there must spring  up a 
general Union,  a political organisation  of the  working class  as a 
whole. 
Thus there  are two  points wrhich  the organised Trades would  do 
well to consider, firstly, that  the  time  is rapidly approaching when 
the working class  of this country will claim, with  a voice  not to be 
mistaken,  its full share  of representation  in Parliament. Secondly, 
that the  time also  is rapidly approaching when  the  working class 
will have understood that  the  struggle  for  high wages  and  short 
hours,  and the  whole action  of Trades Unions  as now  carried  on, 
is not an end in itself, but a  means,  a very necessary  and  effective 
means,  but  only  one of  several means towards  a higher  end: the 
abolition  of the  wages system altogether. 
27* 

=====第418页=====
388 Frederick Engels 
For the full representation of labour in Parliament, as well as 
for the preparation of the abolition of the wages system, 
organisations will become necessary, not of separate Trades, but of 
the working class as a body. And the sooner this is done the 
better. There is no power in the world which could for a day resist 
the British working class organised as a body. 
Written on about May 20, 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), Nos. 4 and 5, May 28 and 
June 4, 1881, as a leading article 

=====第419页=====
389 
Frederick Engels 
THE FRENCH COMMERCIAL TREATY 
On Thursday, June 9, in the House of Commons, Mr. Monk 
(Gloucester) proposed a resolution to the effect that 
"no commercial treaty with France will be satisfactory which does not tend to 
the development of the commercial relations of the two countries by a further 
reduction of duties".3 
A debate of some length ensued.430 Sir C. Dilke, on behalf of 
the Government, offered the mild resistance required by diplomatic 
etiquette. Mr. A. J. Balfour (Tamworth)431 would compel foreign 
nations, by retaliatory duties, to adopt lower tariffs. Mr. Slagg 
(Manchester) would leave the French to find out the value of our 
trade to them and of theirs to us, even without any treaty. 
Mr. Illingworth (Bradford) despaired of reaching free-trade 
through commercial treaties. Mr. Mac Iver (Birkenhead) declared 
the present system of free-trade to be only an imposture, 
inasmuch as it was made up of free imports and restricted exports. 
The resolution was carried by 77 to 49, a defeat which will hurt 
neither Mr. Gladstone's feelings nor his position. 
This debate is a fair specimen of a long series of ever-recurring 
complaints about the stubbornness with which the stupid 
foreigner, and even the quite as stupid colonial subject, refuse to 
recognise the universal blessings of free-trade and its capability of 
remedying all economic evils. Never has a prophecy broken down 
so completely as that of the Manchester School432—free-trade, 
once established in England, would shower such blessings over the 
country that all other nations must follow the example and throw 
a See "The French Commercial  Tariff",  The Times, No. 30217, June 10, 
1881.—  Ed. 

=====第420页=====
390 Frederick Engels 
their ports open  to English manufactures.  The  coaxing voice  of 
the free-trade apostles remained  the  voice  of one  crying  in the 
wilderness.  Not  only  did the  Continent  and  America,  on the 
whole, increase their protective duties433; even  the  British Col­
onies,  as  soon  as  they  had  become endowed with  self-
government,434 followed suit;  and no  sooner  had  India been 
placed under  the  Crown than  a 5 per  cent duty  on cotton goods 
was introduced even there,435 acting  as an  incentive  to native 
manufactures. 
Why this should  be so is an  utter mystery  to the  Manchester 
School.  Yet it is  plain enough. 
About  the  middle  of last century England  was the  principal seat 
of the  cotton manufacture,  and  therefore  the  natural place where, 
with a rapidly rising demand  for cotton goods,  the  machinery  was 
invented which, with  the  help  of the  steam engine, revolutionised 
first the  cotton trade,  and  successively  the  other textile manufac­
tures.  The  large  and  easily accessible coalfields  of Great Britain, 
thanks  to steam, became  now the  basis  of the  country's prosperity. 
The extensive deposits  of iron  ore in  close proximity  to the  coal 
facilitated  the  development  of the  iron trade, which  had  received  a 
new stimulus  by the  demand  for engines  and  machinery. Then,  in 
the midst  of this revolution  of the  whole manufacturing system, 
came  the  anti-Jacobin  and  Napoleonic wars,436 which  for  some 
twenty-five years drove  the  ships  of almost  all competing nations 
from  the sea, and  thus gave  to English manufactured goods  the 
practical monopoly  of all  Transatlantic  and  some European 
markets. When  in 1815  peace  was  restored, England stood there 
with her  steam manufactures ready  to supply  the  world, while 
steam engines were  as yet  scarcely known  in other countries.  In 
manufacturing industry, England  was an  immense distance  in 
advance  of them. 
But the  restoration  of peace soon induced other nations  to 
follow  in the  track  of England. Sheltered  by the  Chinese Wall  of 
her prohibitive  tariff,437  France introduced production  by steam. 
So also  did Germany, although  her  tariff  was at  that time  far more 
liberal438 than  any  other, that  of England  not  excepted.  So did 
other countries.  At the  same time  the British landed aristocracy,  to 
raise their rents, introduced  the  Corn Laws,439 thereby raising  the 
price  of bread  and  with  it the  money rate  of wages. Nevertheless 
the progress  of English manufactures went  on at a  stupendous 
rate.  By 1830 she had  laid herself  out to  become  "the  workshop  of 
the world".  To make  her the  workshop  of the  world  in reality  was 
the task undertaken  by the  Anti-Corn  Law  League.440 

=====第421页=====
The French Commercial Treaty 391 
There was no secret made, in those times, of what was aimed at 
by the repeal of the Corn Laws. To reduce the price of bread, and 
thereby the money rate of wages, would enable British manufac­
turers to defy all and every competition with which wicked or 
ignorant foreigners threatened them. What was more natural than 
that England, with her great advance in machinery, with her 
immense merchant navy, her coal and iron, should supply all the 
world with manufactured articles, and that in return the outer 
world should supply her with agricultural produce, corn, wine, 
flax, cotton, coffee, tea, etc.? It was a decree of Providence that it 
should be so, it was sheer rebellion against God's ordinance to set 
your face against it. At most France might be allowed to supply 
England and the rest of the world with such articles of taste and 
fashion as could not be made by machinery, and were altogether 
beneath the notice of an enlightened millowner. Then, and then 
alone, would there be peace on earth and goodwill towards men; 
then all nations would be bound together by the endearing ties of 
commerce and mutual profit; then the reign of peace and plenty 
would be for ever established, and to the working class, to their 
"hands",  they said: "There's a good time coming, boys—wait a 
little longer." Of course the "hands" are waiting still. 
But while the "hands" waited the wicked and ignorant 
foreigners did not. They did not see the beauty of a system by 
which the momentary industrial advantages possessed by England 
should be turned into means to secure to her the monopoly of 
manufactures all the world over and for ever, and to reduce all 
other nations to mere agricultural dependencies of England—in 
other words, to the very enviable condition of Ireland. They knew 
that no nation can keep up with others in civilisation if deprived 
of manufactures, and thereby brought down to be a mere 
agglomeration of clodhoppers. And therefore, subordinating 
private commercial profit to national exigency, they protected 
their nascent manufactures by high tariffs, which seemed to them 
the only means to protect themselves from being brought down to 
the economical condition enjoyed by Ireland. 
We do not mean to say that this was the right thing to do in 
every case. On the contrary, France would reap immense 
advantages from a considerable approach towards Free Trade. 
German manufactures, such as they are, have become what they 
are under Free Trade, and Bismarck's new Protection  tariff3441 
a Gesetz, betreffend den Zolltarif  des Deutschen Zollgebiets und den Ertrag der Zölle und 
der Tabacksteuer. Vom 15. Juli 1879. (Nr. 1320).— Ed. 

=====第422页=====
392 Frederick Engels 
will do harm to nobody but the German manufacturers them­
selves. But there is one country where a short period of Protection 
is not only justifiable but a matter of absolute necessity—America. 
America is at that point of her development where the 
introduction of manufactures has become a national necessity. 
This is best proved by the fact that in the invention of 
labour-saving machinery it is no longer England which leads, but 
America. American inventions every day supersede English 
patents and English machinery. American machines are brought 
over to England; and this in almost all branches of manufactures. 
Then America possesses a population the most energetic in the 
world, coalfields against which those of England appear almost as 
a vanishing quantity, iron and all other metals in plenty. And is it 
to be supposed that such a country will expose its young and 
rising manufactures to a long, protracted, competitive struggle 
with the old-established industry of England, when, by a short 
term of some twenty years of protection, she can place them at 
once on a level with any competitor? But, says the Manchester 
School, America is but robbing herself by her protective system. So 
is a man robbing himself who pays extra for the express train 
instead of taking the old Parliamentary train—fifty miles an hour 
instead of twelve. 
There is no mistake about it, the present generation will see 
American cotton goods compete with English ones in India and 
China, and gradually gain ground in those two leading markets; 
American machinery and hardware compete with the English 
makes in all parts of the world, England included; and the same 
implacable necessity which removed Flemish manufactures to 
Holland, Dutch ones to England, will ere long remove the centre 
of the world's industry from this country to the United States. 
And in the restricted field which will then remain to England she 
will find formidable competitors in several Continental nations. 
The fact cannot be longer shirked that England's industrial 
monopoly is fast on the wane. If the "enlightened" middle class 
think it their interest to hush it up, let the working class boldly 
look it in the face, for it interests them more than even their 
"betters". These may for a long time yet remain the bankers and 
money-lenders of the world, as the Venetians and the Dutch in 
their decay have done before them. But what is to become of the 
"hands"  when England's immense export trade begins to shrink 
down every year instead of expanding? If the removal of the iron 
shipbuilding trade from the Thames to the Clyde was sufficient to 
reduce the whole East-end of London to chronic pauperism, what 

=====第423页=====
The French Commercial Treaty 393 
will the virtual removal of all the staple trades of England across 
the Atlantic do for England? 
It will do one great thing: it will break the last link which still 
binds the English working class to the English middle class. This 
link was their common working of a national monopoly. That 
monopoly once destroyed, the British working class will be 
compelled to take in hand its own interests, its own salvation, and 
to make an end of the wages system. Let us hope it will not wait 
until then. 
Written in mid-June 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 7, June 18, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第424页=====
394 
Frederick Engels 
TWO MODEL TOWN COUNCILS 
We have promised our readers to keep them informed of the 
working men's movements abroad as well as at home. We have 
now and then been enabled to give some news from America, and 
today we are in a position to communicate some facts from 
France—facts of such importance that they well deserve being 
discussed in our leading columns. 
In France they do not know the numerous systems of public 
voting which are still in use in this country. Instead of having one 
kind of suffrage and mode of voting for Parliamentary elections, 
another for municipal, a third for vestry elections and so forth, 
plain Universal Suffrage and vote by ballot are the rule 
everywhere. When the Socialist Working Men's Party was formed 
in France,442 it was resolved to nominate working men's candidates 
not only for Parliament, but also for all municipal elections; and, 
indeed, at the last renewal of Town Councils for France, which 
took place on January 9 last, the young party was victorious in a 
great number of manufacturing towns and rural, especially 
mining, communes. They not only carried individual candidates, 
they managed in some places to obtain the majority in the councils, 
and one council, at least, as we shall see, was composed of none 
but working men.443 
Shortly before the establishment of the Labour Standard, there 
was a strike of factory operatives in the town of Roubaix, close on 
the Belgian frontier. The Government at once sent troops to 
occupy the town, and thereby, under the pretext of maintaining 
order (which was never menaced), tried to provoke the people on 
strike to such acts as might serve as a pretext for the interference 
of the troops. But the people remained quiet, and one of the 
principal causes which made them resist all provocations was the 
action of the Town Council. This was composed, in its majority, of 
working men. The subject of the strike was brought before it, and 

=====第425页=====
Two Model Town Councils 395 
amply discussed. The result was that the Council not only declared 
the men on strike to be in the right, but also actually voted the sum 
of 50,000 francs, or £2,000, in support of the strikers. That subsidy 
could not be paid, as according to French law the prefect of the 
department has the right to annul any resolutions of Town 
Councils which he may consider as exceeding their powers. But 
nevertheless the strong moral support thus given to the strike by 
the official representation of the township was of the greatest 
value to the workmen. 
On June 8 the Mining Company of Commentry, in the centre of 
France (Department Allier), discharged 152 men who refused to 
submit to new and more unfavourable terms. This being part of a 
system employed for some time for the gradual introduction of 
worse terms of work, the whole of the miners, about  1,600,  struck. 
The Government at once sent the usual troops to overawe or 
provoke the strikers. But the Town Council here, too, at once took 
up the cause of the men. In their meeting of June 12 (a Sunday to 
boot) they passed resolutions to the following effect: — 
1. Whereas it is the duty of society to ensure the existence of those who, by 
their work, permit the existence of all; and whereas if the State refuses to fulfil this 
duty the communes are bound to fulfil it, this Council resolves to take up a loan of 
25,000 francs (£1,000) with the consent of the highest rated inhabitants, which sum 
is to be devoted for the benefit of the miners whom the unjustifiable discharge of 
152 of their body has compelled to strike work. 
Carried unanimously, against the veto of the Mayor alone. 
2. Whereas the State, in selling the valuable national property of the mines of 
Commentry to a joint-stock company, has thereby handed over the workmen there 
employed to the tender mercies of the said company; and whereas, consequently, 
the State is bound to see that the oppression exercised by the company upon the 
miners is not carried to a degree threatening their very existence; whereas, 
however, the State, by placing troops at the disposal of the company during the 
present strike, has not even preserved its neutrality, but taken sides with the 
company, 
This Council, in the name of the working-class interests which it is its duty to 
protect, calls upon the sub-prefect of the district. 
1. To recall at once the troops whose presence, entirely uncalled for, is a mere 
provocation; and 
2. To intervene with the manager of the company and induce him to revoke 
the measure which has caused the strike. 
Carried unanimously. 
In a third resolution, also carried unanimously, the Council, 
fearing that the poverty of the commune will frustrate the loan 
voted above, opens a public subscription in aid of the strikers, and 
appeals to all the other municipal councils of France to send 
subsidies for the same object. 
Here, then, we have a striking proof of the presence of working 

=====第426页=====
396 Frederick Engels 
men, not only in Parliament, but also in municipal and all other 
local bodies. How differently would many a strike in England 
terminate if the men had the Town Council of the locality to back 
them! The English Town Councils and Local Boards, elected to a 
great extent by working men, consist at present almost exclusively 
of employers, their direct and indirect agents (lawyers, etc.), and at 
the best, of shopkeepers. No sooner does a strike or lock-out occur 
than all the moral and material power of the local authorities is 
employed in favour of the masters and against the men; even the 
police, paid out of the pockets of the men, are employed exactly as 
in France the troops are used, to provoke them into illegal acts 
and hunt them down. The Poor Law authorities in most cases 
refuse relief to men who, in their opinion, might work if they 
liked. And naturally so. In the eyes of this class of men, whom the 
working people suffer to form the local authorities, a strike is an 
open rebellion against social order, an outrage against the sacred 
rights of property. And therefore, in every strike or lock-out all 
the enormous moral and physical weight of the local authorities is 
placed in the masters' scale so long as the working class consent to 
elect masters and masters' representatives to local elective bodies. 
We hope that the action of the two French Town Councils will 
open the eyes of many. Shall it be for ever said, and of the English 
working men too, that "they manage these things better in 
France"? The English working class, with its old and powerful 
organisation, its immemorial political liberties, its long experience 
of political action, has immense advantages over those of any 
continental country. Yet the Germans could carry twelve working-
class representatives for Parliament,444 and they as well as the 
French have the majority in numerous Town Councils. True, the 
suffrage in England is restricted; but even now the working class 
has a majority in all large towns and manufacturing districts. They 
have only to will it, and that potential majority becomes at once an 
effective one, a power in the State, a power in all localities where 
working people are concentrated. And if you once have working 
men in Parliament, in the Town Councils and Local Boards of 
Guardians445 etc., how long will it be ere you will have also 
working men magistrates, capable of putting a spoke in the wheels 
of those Dogberries who now so often ride roughshod over the 
people? 
Written in the latter half of June 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 8, June 25, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第427页=====
397 
Frederick Engels 
AMERICAN FOOD AND THE LAND QUESTION 
Since autumn 1837 we have been quite accustomed to see 
money panics and commercial crises imported from New York 
into England. At least one out of every two of the decennial 
revulsions of industry broke out in America. But that America 
should also upset the time-honoured relations of British agricul­
ture,  revolutionise the immemorial feudal relations between 
landlord and tenant at will, smash up English rents, and lay waste 
English farms, was a sight reserved for the last quarter of the 
nineteenth century. 
And yet so it is. The virgin soil of the Western prairie—which is 
now coming into cultivation, not by piecemeal but in thousands of 
square miles—is now beginning to rule the price of wheat, and, 
consequently, the rent of wheat land. And no old soil can compete 
with it. It is a wonderful land, level, or slightly undulating, 
undisturbed by violent upheavals, in exactly the same condition in 
which it was slowly deposited at the bottom of a Tertiary ocean; 
free from stones, rocks, trees; fit for immediate cultivation without 
any preparatory labour. No clearing or draining is required; you 
pass the plough over it and it is fit to receive the seed, and will 
bear twenty to thirty crops of wheat in succession and without 
manuring. It is a soil fit for agriculture on the grandest scale, and 
on the grandest scale it is worked. The British agriculturist used to 
pride himself of his large farms as opposed to the small farms of 
Continental peasant proprietors; but what are the largest farms in 
the United Kingdom compared to the farms of the American 
prairie, farms of 40,000 acres and more, worked by regular armies 
of men, horses, and implements, drilled, commanded, and 
organised like soldiers? 

=====第428页=====
398 Frederick Engels 
This American revolution in farming, together with the 
revolutionised means of transport as invented by the Americans, 
sends over to Europe wheat at such low prices that no European 
farmer can compete with it—at least not while he is expected to 
pay rent. Look at the year 1879, when this was first felt. The crop 
was bad in all Western Europe; it was a failure in England. Yet, 
thanks to American corn, prices remained almost stationary. For 
the first time the British farmer had a bad crop and low prices of 
wheat at the same time. Then the farmers began to stir, the 
landlords felt alarmed. Next year, with a better crop, prices went 
lower still. The price of corn is now determined by the cost of 
production in America, plus the cost of transport. And this will be 
the case more and more every year, in proportion as new 
prairie-land is put under the plough. The agricultural armies 
required for that operation—we find them ourselves in Europe by 
sending over emigrants. 
Now, formerly there was this consolation for the farmer and the 
landlord, that if corn did not pay meat would. The plough-land 
was turned into grass-land, and everything was pleasant again. But 
now that resource is cut off too. American meat and American 
cattle are sent over in ever-increasing quantities. And not only 
that. There are at least two great cattle-producing countries which 
are on the alert for methods permitting them to send over to 
Europe, and especially to England, their immense excess of meat, 
now wasted. With the present state of science and the rapid 
progress made in its application, we may be sure that in a very few 
years—at the very latest—Australian and South American beef 
and mutton will be brought over in a perfect state of preservation 
and in enormous quantities. What is then to become of the 
prosperity of the British farmer, of the long rent-roll of the 
British landlord? It is all very well to grow gooseberries, 
strawberries, and so forth—that market is well enough supplied as 
it is. No doubt the British workman could consume a deal more of 
these delicacies—but then first raise his wages. 
It is scarcely needful to say that the effect of this new American 
agricultural competition is felt on the Continent too. The small 
peasant proprietor mostly mortgaged over head and ears and 
paying interest and law expenses where the English and Irish 
farmer pays rent, he feels it quite as much. It is a peculiar effect 
of this American competition that it renders not only large landed 
property, but also small landed property useless, by rendering 
both unprofitable. 
It may be said that this system of land exhaustion, as now 

=====第429页=====
American Food and the Land Question 399 
practised in the Far West, cannot go on for ever, and things must 
come right again. Of course, it cannot last for ever; but there is 
plenty of unexhausted land yet to carry on the process for another 
century. Moreover, there are other countries offering similar 
advantages. There is the whole South Russian steppe, where, 
indeed, commercial men have bought land and done the same 
thing. There are the vast pampas of the Argentine Republic, there 
are others still; all lands equally fit for this modern system of giant 
farming and cheap production. So that before this thing is 
exhausted it will have lived long enough to kill all the landlords of 
Europe, great and small, at least twice over. 
Well, and the upshot of all this? The upshot will and must be 
that it will force upon us the nationalisation of the land and its 
cultivation by co-operative societies under national control. Then, 
and then alone, it will again pay both the cultivators and the 
nation to work it, whatever the price of American or any other 
corn and meat may be. And if the landlords in the meantime, as 
they seem to be half inclined to do, actually do go to America, we 
wish them a pleasant journey. 
Written in late June 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 9, July 2, 1881, as a lead­
ing article 

=====第430页=====
400 
Frederick Engels 
THE WAGES THEORY 
OF THE ANTI-CORN LAW LEAGUE 
In another column we publish a letter from Mr. J. Noble3 
finding fault with some of our remarks in a leading article of the 
Labour Standard of June 18.b Although we cannot, of course, make 
our leading columns the vehicle of polemics on the subject of 
historical facts or economic theories, we will yet, for once, reply to 
a man who, though in an official party position, is evidently 
sincere. 
To our assertion that what was aimed at by the repeal of the 
Corn Laws was to "reduce the price of bread and thereby the 
money rate of wages", Mr. Noble replies that this was a 
"Protectionist fallacy" persistently combated by the League, and 
gives some quotations from Richard Cobden's speeches and an 
address of the Council of the League to prove it.446 
The writer of the article in question was living at the time in 
Manchester—a manufacturer amongst manufacturers.447 He is, of 
course, perfectly well aware of what the official doctrine of the 
League was. To reduce it to its shortest and most generally-
recognised expression (for there are many varieties) it ran 
thus:—The repeal of the duty on corn will increase our trade with 
foreign countries, will directly increase our imports, in exchange 
for which foreign customers will buy our manufactures, thus 
increasing the demand for our manufactured goods; thus the 
demand for the labour of our industrial working population will 
increase, and therefore wages must rise. And by dint of repeating 
a J. Noble, "The Anti-Corn Law League and Wages", The Labour Standard, 
No. 10, July 9,  1881.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 389-93.— Ed. 

=====第431页=====
The Wages Theory of the Anti-Corn Law League 401 
this theory day after day and year after year the official 
representatives of the League, shallow economists as they were, 
could at last come out with the astounding assertion that wages 
rose and fell in inverse ratio, not with profits, but with the price of 
food; that dear bread meant low wages and cheap bread high 
wages. Thus, the decennial revulsions of trade which have existed 
before and after the repeal of the Corn duties were, by the 
mouthpieces of the League, declared to be the simple effects of 
the Corn Laws, bound to disappear as soon as those hateful laws 
were removed; that the Corn Laws were the only great obstacle 
standing between the British manufacturer and the poor foreign­
ers longing for that manufacturer's produce, unclad and 
shivering for want of British cloth. And thus Cobden could 
actually advance, in the passage quoted by Mr. Noble, that the 
depression of trade and the fall in wages from 1839 to 1842 was 
the consequence of the very high price of corn during these years, 
when it was nothing else but one of the regular phases of 
depression of trade, recurring with the greatest regularity, up to 
now, every ten years; a phase certainly prolonged and aggravated 
by bad crops and the stupid interference of greedy landlord 
legislation. 
Well, this was the official theory of Cobden, who with all his 
cleverness as an agitator was a poor business man and a shallow 
economist; he no doubt believed it as faithfully as Mr. Noble 
believes it to this day. But the bulk of the League was formed of 
practical men of business, more attentive to business and generally 
more successful in it than Cobden. And with these matters were 
quite different. Of course, before strangers and in public 
meetings, especially before their "hands", the official theory was 
generally considered "the thing". But business men, when intent 
upon business, do not generally speak their mind to their 
customers, and if Mr. Noble should be of a different opinion, he 
had better keep off the Manchester Exchange. A very little 
pressing as to what was meant by the way in which wages must rise 
in consequence of free trade in corn, was sufficient to bring it out 
that this rise was supposed to affect wages as expressed in 
commodities, and that it might be quite possible that the money 
rate of wages would not rise—but was not that substantially a rise 
of wages? And when you pressed the subject further it usually 
came out that the money rate of wages might even fall while the 
comforts supplied for this reduced sum of money to the working 
man would still be superior to what he enjoyed at the time. And if 
you asked a few more close questions as to the way, how the 
28-1317 

=====第432页=====
402 Frederick Engels 
expected immense extension of trade was to be brought about, 
you would very soon hear that it was this last contingency upon 
which they mainly relied: a reduction in the money rate of wages 
combined with a fall in the price of bread, etc., more than 
compensating for this fall. Moreover, there were plenty to be met 
who did not even try to disguise their opinion that cheap bread 
was wanted simply to bring down the money rate of wages, and 
thus knock foreign competition on the head. And that this, in 
reality, was the end and aim of the bulk of the manufacturers and 
merchants forming the great body of the League, it was not so 
very difficult to make out for any one in the habit of dealing with 
commercial men, and therefore in the habit of not always taking 
their word for gospel. This is what we said and we repeat it. Of 
the official doctrine of the League we did not say a word. It was 
economically a "fallacy", and practically a mere cloak for 
interested purposes, though some of the leaders may have 
repeated it often enough to believe it finally themselves. 
Very amusing is Mr. Noble's quotation of Cobden's words about 
the working classes "rubbing their hands with satisfaction" at the 
prospect of corn at 25s. a quarter. The working classes at that time 
did not disdain cheap bread; but they were so full of "satisfaction" 
at the proceedings of Cobden and Co. that for several years past 
they had made it impossible for the League in the whole of the 
North to hold a single really public meeting. The writer had the 
"satisfaction" of being present, in 1843, at the last attempt of the 
League to hold such a meeting in Salford Town Hall, and of 
seeing it very nearly broken up by the mere putting of an 
amendment in favour of the People's Charter.448 Since then the 
rule at all League meetings was "admission by ticket", which was 
far from being accessible to everyone. From that moment 
"Chartist obstruction" ceased. The working masses had attained 
their end—to prove that the League did not, as it pretended, 
represent them. 
In conclusion, a few words about the wages theory of the 
League. The average price of a commodity is equal to its cost of 
production; the action of supply and demand consists in bringing 
it back to that standard around which it oscillates. If this be true 
of all commodities, it is true also of the commodity Labour (or 
more strictly speaking, Labour-force). Then the rate of wages is 
determined by the price of those commodities which enter into the 
habitual and necessary consumption of the labourer. In other 
words, all other things remaining unchanged, wages rise and fall 
with the price of the necessaries of life. This is a law of political 

=====第433页=====
The Wages Theory of the Anti-Corn Law League 403 
economy against which all the Perronet Thompsons, Cobdens, and 
Brights will ever be impotent. But all other things do not always 
remain unchanged, and therefore the action of this law in practice 
becomes modified by the concurrent action of other economical 
laws;  it appears darkened, and sometimes to such a degree that 
you must take some trouble to trace it. This served as a pretext to 
the vulgarising and vulgar economists dating from the Anti-Corn 
Law League to pretend, first, that Labour, and then all other 
commodities, had no real determinable value, but only a fluctuat­
ing price, regulated by supply and demand more or less without 
regard to cost of production, and that to raise prices, and 
therefore wages, you had nothing to do but increase the demand. 
And thus you got rid of the unpleasant connection of the rate of 
wages with the price of food, and could boldly proclaim that in 
this crude, ridiculous doctrine that dear bread meant low wages 
and cheap bread high wages. 
Perhaps Mr. Noble will ask whether wages are not generally as 
high, or even higher, with to-day's cheap bread than with the dear 
taxed bread before 1847? That would take a long inquiry to 
answer. But so much is certain: where a branch of industry has 
prospered and at the same time the workmen have been strongly 
organised for defence, their wages have generally not fallen, and 
sometimes perhaps risen. This merely proves that the people were 
underpaid before. Where a branch of industry has decayed, or 
where the workpeople have not been strongly organised in Trades 
Unions, these wages have invariably fallen, and often to starvation 
level. Go to the East-end of London and see for yourselves! 
Written at the beginning of July 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 10, July 9, 1881, as a 
leading article 
28* 

=====第434页=====
404 
Frederick Engels 
A WORKING MEN'S PARTY 
How often have we not been warned by friends and sympathis­
ers, "Keep aloof from party politics!" And they were perfectly 
right, as far as present English party politics are concerned. A 
labour organ must be neither Whig nor Tory, neither Conserva­
tive nor Liberal, or even Radical, in the actual party sense of that 
word. Conservatives, Liberals, Radicals, all of them represent but 
the interests of the ruling classes, and various shades of opinion 
predominating amongst landlords, capitalists, and retail trades­
men. If they do represent the working class, they most decidedly 
misrepresent it. The working class has interests of its own, political 
as well as social. How it has stood up for what it considers its social 
interests, the history of the Trades Unions and the Short Time 
movement shows. But its political interests it leaves almost entirely 
in the hands of Tories, Whigs, and Radicals, men of the upper 
class,  and for nearly a quarter of a century the working class of 
England has contented itself with forming, as it were, the tail of 
the "Great Liberal Party". 
This is a political position unworthy of the best organised 
working class of Europe. In other countries the working men have 
been far more active. Germany has had for more than ten years a 
Working Men's party (the Social-Democrats), which owns ten seats 
in Parliament, and whose growth has frightened Bismarck into 
those infamous measures of repression of which we give an 
account in another column.3 Yet in spite of Bismarck, the Working 
Men's party progresses steadily; only last week it carried sixteen 
elections for the Mannheim Town Council and one for the Saxon 
a See this volume, pp. 407-09.— Ed 

=====第435页=====
A Working Men's Party 405 
Parliament. In Belgium, Holland, and Italy the example of the 
Germans has been imitated; in every one of these countries a 
Working Men's party exists,449 though the voter's qualification 
there is too high to give them a chance of sending members to the 
Legislature at present. In France the Working Men's party is just 
now in full process of organisation; it has obtained the majority in 
several Municipal Councils at the last elections,3 and will undoubt­
edly carry several seats at the general election for the Chamber 
next October. Even in America where the passage of the working 
class to that of farmer, trader, or capitalist, is still comparatively 
easy, the working men find it necessary to organise themselves as 
an independent party.450 Everywhere the labourer struggles for 
political power, for direct representation of his class in the 
Legislature—everywhere but in Great Britain. 
And yet there never was a more widespread feeling in England 
than now, that the old parties are doomed, that the old shibboleths 
have become meaningless, that the old watchwords are exploded, 
that the old panaceas will not act any longer. Thinking men of all 
classes begin to see that a new line must be struck out, and that 
this line can only be in the direction of democracy. But in 
England, where the industrial and agricultural working class forms 
the immense majority of the people, democracy means the 
dominion of the working class, neither more nor less. Let, then, 
that working class prepare itself for the task in store for it,—the 
ruling of this great empire; let them understand the respon­
sibilities which inevitably will fall to their share. And the best way 
to do this is to use the power already in their hands, the actual 
majority they possess in every large town in the kingdom, to send 
to Parliament men of their own order. With the present household 
suffrage,451 forty or fifty working men might easily be sent to St. 
Stephen's,452 where such an infusion of entirely new blood is very 
much wanted indeed. With only that number of working men in 
Parliament, it would be impossible to let the Irish Land Bill453 
become, as is the case at present, more and more an Irish Land 
Bull, namely, an Irish Landlords' Compensation Act; it would be 
impossible to resist the demand for a redistribution of seats, for 
making bribery really punishable, for throwing election expenses, 
as is the case everywhere but in England, on the public purse, etc. 
Moreover, in England a real democratic party is impossible 
unless it be a working men's party. Enlightened men of other 
classes (where they are not so plentiful as people would make us 
a See this volume, pp. 394-96.— Ed. 

=====第436页=====
406 Frederick Engels 
believe) might join that party and even represent it in Parliament 
after having given pledges of their sincerity. Such is the case 
everywhere. In Germany, for instance, the working-men represen­
tatives are not in every case actual working men. But no 
democratic party in England, as well as elsewhere, will be 
effectively successful unless it has a distinct working-class charac­
ter. Abandon that, and you have nothing but sects and shams. 
And this is even truer in England than abroad. Of Radical 
shams there has been unfortunately enough since the break-up of 
the first working men's party which the world ever produced—the 
Chartist party. Yes, but the Chartists were broken up and attained 
nothing. Did they, indeed? Of the six points of the People's 
Charter,454 two, vote by ballot and no property qualification, are 
now the law of the land. A third, universal suffrage, is at least 
approximately carried in the shape of household suffrage; a 
fourth, equal electoral districts, is distinctly in sight, a promised 
reform of the. present Government. So that the break-down of the 
Chartist movement has resulted in the realisation of fully one-half 
of the Chartist programme. And if the mere recollection of a past 
political organisation of the working class could effect these 
political reforms, and a series of social reforms besides, what will 
the actual presence of a working men's political party do, backed 
by forty or fifty representatives in Parliament? We live in a world 
where everybody is bound to take care of  himself.  Yet the English 
working class allows the landlord, capitalist, and retail trading 
classes, with their tail of lawyers, newspaper writers, etc., to take 
care of its interests. No wonder reforms in the interest of the 
workman come so slow and in such miserable dribbles. The 
workpeople of England have but to will, and they are the masters 
to carry every reform, social and political, which their situation 
requires. Then why not make that effort? 
Written in mid-July 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 12, July 23, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第437页=====
407 
Frederick Engels 
BISMARCK AND 
THE GERMAN WORKING MEN'S PARTY 
The English middle-class Press has lately been very silent about 
the atrocities committed by Bismarck and his understrappers 
against the members of the Social-Democratic Working Men's 
Party in Germany. The only exception, to some extent, has been 
the Daily News.* Formerly, when despotic Governments abroad 
indulged in such vagaries at the expense of their subjects, the 
outcry was great indeed in the English dailies and weeklies. But 
here the oppressed parties are working men, and proud of the 
name, and the Press representatives of "Society", of the "Upper 
Ten", suppress the facts and almost seem, by the obstinacy of 
their silence, to approve of them. What business, indeed, have 
working men with politics? Leave that to their "betters"! And then 
there is this other reason for the silence of the English Press: It is 
very hard to attack Bismarck's Coercion Act455 and the way he 
carries it out, and in the same breath to defend Mr. Forster's 
coercion proceedings in Ireland.456 This is a very sore point, and 
must not be touched. The middle-class Press can scarcely be 
expected to point out itself how much the moral position of 
England in Europe and America has been lowered by the present 
Government's action in Ireland. 
At every general election the German Working Men's party 
turned up with rapidly-increasing numbers; at the last but one 
above 500,000; at the last one more than 600,000 votes fell to 
a See the following telegraphic reports: "News from Berlin", "Socialism in 
Saxony", "The Social Democrats in Germany", "News from Berlin", The Daily 
News, Nos.  10981,  10983, 10994, 10997, June 27 and 29, and July 12 and 15, 
1881.—  Ed. 

=====第438页=====
408 Frederick Engels 
their candidates.45  Berlin elected two, Elberfeld-Barmen, one; 
Breslau, Dresden, one each; ten seats were conquered in the face 
of the coalition of the Government with the whole of the Liberal, 
Conservative, and Catholic parties, in the face of the outcry 
created by the two attempts at shooting the Emperor, 458 which all 
other parties agreed to make the Working Men's party responsible 
for. Then Bismarck succeeded in passing an Act by which 
Social-Democracy was outlawed. The Working Men's newspapers, 
more than fifty, were suppressed, their societies and clubs broken 
up, their funds seized, their meetings dissolved by the police, and, 
to crown all, it was enacted that whole towns and districts might be 
"proclaimed", just as in Ireland. But what even English Coercion 
Bills 459 have never ventured upon in Ireland Bismarck did in 
Germany. In every "proclaimed" district the police received the 
right to expel any man whom it might "reasonably suspect" of 
Socialistic propaganda. Berlin was, of course, at once proclaimed, 
and hundreds (with their families, thousands) of people were 
expelled. For the Prussian police always expel men with families; 
the young unmarried men are generally let alone; to them 
expulsion would be no great punishment, but to the heads of 
families it means, in most cases, a long career of misery if not 
absolute ruin. Then Hamburg elected a working man member of 
Parliament,460 and was immediately proclaimed. The first batch of 
men expelled from Hamburg was about a hundred, with families 
amounting, besides, to more than three hundred. The Working 
Men's party, within two days, found the means to provide for their 
travelling expenses and other immediate wants. Now Leipzig has 
also been proclaimed,461 and without any other pretext but that 
otherwise the Government cannot break up the organisation of the 
party. The expulsions of the very first day number thirty-three, 
mostly married men with families. Three members of the German 
Parliament head the list3; perhaps Mr. Dillon will send them a 
letter of congratulation, considering that they are not yet quite so 
badly off as  himself.462 
But this is not all. The Working Men's party once being 
outlawed in due form, and deprived of all those political rights 
which other Germans are supposed to enjoy, the police can do 
with the individual members of that party just as they like. Under 
the pretext of searching for forbidden publications, their wives 
and daughters are subjected to the most indecent and brutal 
treatment. They themselves are arrested whenever it pleases the 
a Wilhelm Liebknecht, August Bebel and Wilhelm Hasenclever. — Ed. 

=====第439页=====
Bismarck and the German Working Men's Party 409 
police, are remanded from week to week, and discharged only 
after having passed some months in prison. New offences, 
unknown to the criminal code, are invented by the police, and that 
code stretched beyond all possibility. And often enough the police 
finds magistrates and judges corrupt or fanatical enough to aid 
and abet them; promotion is at this price! What this all comes to 
the following astounding figures will show. In the year from 
October, 1879, to October, 1880, there were in Prussia alone 
imprisoned for high treason, treason felony, insulting the Em­
peror, etc., not less than 1,108 persons; and for political libels, 
insulting Bismarck, or defiling the Government, etc., not less than 
10,094 persons. Eleven thousand two hundred and two political 
prisoners, that beats even Mr. Forster's Irish exploits! 
And what has Bismarck attained with all his coercion? Just as 
much as Mr. Forster in Ireland. The Social-Democratic party is in 
as blooming a condition, and possesses as firm an organisation, as 
the Irish Land League. 463 A few days ago there were elections for 
the Town Council of Mannheim. The working-class party nomi­
nated sixteen candidates, and carried them all by a majority of 
nearly three to one. Again, Bebel, member of the German 
Parliament for Dresden, stood for the representation of the 
Leipzig district in the Saxon Parliament. Bebel is himself a 
working man (a turner), and one of the best, if not the best 
speaker in Germany. To frustrate his being elected, the Govern­
ment expelled all his committee. What was the result? That even 
with a limited suffrage, Bebel was carried by a strong majority. 
Thus,  Bismarck's coercion avails him nothing; on the contrary, it 
exasperates the people. Those to whom all legal means of 
asserting themselves are cut off, will one fine morning take to 
illegal ones, and no one can blame them. How often have Mr. 
Gladstone and Mr. Forster proclaimed that doctrine? And how do 
they act now in Ireland? 
Written in mid-July 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 12, July 23, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第440页=====
410 
Frederick Engels 
[TO THE EDITOR OF THE FREIHEIT] 
[London,] July 22, 1881 
To the Editor of the "Freiheit" 
Mr. Norris A. Clowes, the New York Star's correspondent in 
Ireland, who has been recommended to me from America,465 has 
written as follows: 
* "If Herr Most would like to make any statement to the New York Star public, I 
should be glad to give him the opportunity."* 
To which I replied: 
* "If you wish to enter into communication with Mr. Most, you 
had better write to the Editor3  of the Freiheit, 252 Tottenham 
Court Road, W. London, who will be able to tell you whether such 
communication will be possible under present circumstances."* 466 
I hasten to bring this to your attention. 
Yours faithfully, 
F. E. 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, script 
1935 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 
a Karl Schneidt.— Ed. 

=====第441页=====
411 
Frederick Engels 
COTTON AND IRON 
Cotton and iron are the two most important raw materials of 
our time. Whichever nation is the leading one in the manufacture 
of cotton and iron articles, that nation heads the list of 
manufacturing nations generally. And because and as long as this 
is the case with England, therefore and so long will England be 
the first manufacturing nation of the world. 
It might, then, be expected that the workers in cotton and iron 
should be remarkably well off in England; that, as England 
commands in the market, trade in these articles should be always 
good, and that at least in these two branches of industry the 
millennium of plenty, promised at the time of the Free Trade 
agitation,467 should be realised. Alas! we all know that this is far 
from being the case, and that here, as in other trades, if the 
condition of the workpeople has not become worse, and in some 
instances even better, it is due exclusively to their own efforts—to 
strong organisation and hard-fought strikes. We know that after a 
few short years of prosperity about and after 1874 there was a 
complete collapse of the cotton and iron trades468; factories were 
closed, furnaces blown out, and where production was continued 
short time was the rule. Such periods of collapse had been known 
before; they recur, on an average, once in every ten years; they 
last their time, to be relieved by a new period of prosperity, and so 
on. 
But what distinguishes the present period of depression 
especially in cotton and iron is this, that it has now for some years 
outlasted its usual duration. There have been several attempts at a 
revival, several spurts; but in vain. If the epoch of actual collapse 

=====第442页=====
412 Frederick Engels 
has been overcome, trade remains in a languid state, and the 
markets continue incapable to absorb the whole production. 
The cause of this is that with our present system of using 
machinery to produce not only manufactured goods, but machines 
themselves, production can be increased with incredible rapidity. 
There would be no difficulty, if manufacturers were so minded, 
during the single period of prosperity to increase the plant for 
spinning and weaving, bleaching and printing cotton, so as to be 
able to produce fifty per cent more goods, and to double the 
whole production of pig-iron and iron articles of every descrip­
tion. The actual increase has not come up to that. But still it has 
been out of all proportion to what it was in former periods of 
expansion, and the consequence is—chronic over-production, 
chronic depression of trade. The masters can afford to look on, at 
least for a considerable time, but the workpeople have to suffer, 
for to them it means chronic misery and a constant prospect of the 
workhouse.469 
This,  then, is the outcome of the glorious system of unlimited 
competition, this the realisation of the millennium promised by the 
Cobdens, Brights, and Co.! This is what the workpeople have to 
go through if, as they have done for the last twenty-five years, 
they leave the management of the economical policy of the empire 
to their "natural leaders", to those "captains of industry" who, 
according to Thomas Carlyle, were called upon to command the 
industrial army of the country.3 Captains of industry indeed! Louis 
Napoleon's generals in 1870 were geniuses compared to them. 
Everyone of these pretended captains of industry fights against 
every other, acts entirely on his own account, increases his plant 
irrespective of what his neighbours do, and then at the end they 
all find, to their great surprise, that overtrading has been the 
result. They cannot unite to regulate production; they can unite 
for one purpose only: to keep down the wages of their  workpeople.  And 
thus,  by recklessly expanding the productive power of the country 
far beyond the power of absorption of the markets, they rob their 
workpeople of the comparative ease which a period of moderate 
prosperity would give them, and which they are entitled to after 
the long period of collapse, in order to bring up their incomes to 
the average standard. Will it not yet be understood that the 
manufacturers, as a class, have become incapable any longer to 
direct the great economical interests of the country, nay, even the 
a Th. Carlyle, Latter-Day Pamphlets, No. I: The Present Time, London, 1850, 
pp. 30-31,  42; Past and Present, London, 1843, pp. 361-69.— Ed. 

=====第443页=====
Cotton and Iron 413 
process of production itself? And is it not an absurdity—though a 
fact—that the greatest enemy to the working people of England is 
the ever-increasing productivity of their own hands? 
But there is another fact to be taken into consideration. It is not 
the English manufacturers alone who increase their productive 
powers. The same takes place in other countries. Statistics will not 
allow us to compare separately the cotton and iron industries of 
the various leading countries. But, taking the whole of the textile, 
mining, and metal-working industries, we can draw up a 
comparative table with the materials furnished by the chief of the 
Prussian Statistical Bureau, Dr. Engel, in his book, "Das Zeitalter 
des Dampfs" (The Age of Steam, Berlin, 1881). a According to his 
computation, there are employed in the above industries in the 
countries stated below steam-engines of the following total 
horse-power (one horse-power equal to a force lifting 75 
kilogrammes to the height of one metre in one second), viz: 
Textile Mining and 
Industries Metal Works 
England, 1871 515,800 1,077,000  h. p. 
Germany, 1875 128,125 456,436 " 
France about 100,000 185,000 " 
United States about 93,000 370,000 " 
Thus we see that the total steam power employed by the three 
nations who are England's chief competitors amounts to three-
fifths of the English steam power in the textile manufactures, and 
nearly equals it in mines and metal works. And as their 
manufactures progress at a far more rapid rate than those of this 
country, there can be scarcely a doubt that the combined produce 
of the former will soon surpass that of the latter. 
Look, again, at this table, giving the steam horse-power 
employed in production, exclusive of locomotives and ships' 
engines: — 
Horsepower 
Great Britain About 2,000,000 
United States "  1,987,000 
Germany "  1,321,000 
France " 492,000 
a The tables given below were compiled by Frederick Engels on the basis of the 
statistical data on pp. 178, 1-80 and 182-84 of Ernst Engel's book.— Ed. 

=====第444页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
This still more clearly shows how little there is left of the 
monopoly of England in steam manufactures, and how little Free 
Trade has succeeded in securing England's industrial superiority. 
And let it not be said that this progress of foreign industry is 
artificial, is due to protection. The whole of the immense 
expansion of the German manufactures has been accomplished 
under a most liberal Free Trade régime, and if America, owing to 
an absurd system of internal excise 470 more than anything else, is 
compelled to have recourse to a protection more apparent than 
real, the repeal of these excise laws would be sufficient to allow 
her to compete in the open market. 
This,  then, is the position in which twenty-five years of an 
almost absolute reign of Manchester School471 doctrines have left 
the country. We think these results are such as to call for a speedy 
abdication of the Manchester and Birmingham gentlemen, so as to 
give the working classes a turn for the next twenty-five years. 
Surely they could not manage worse. 
Written at the end of July 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 13, July 30, 1881, as a 
leading article 

=====第445页=====
415 
Frederick Engels 
SOCIAL CLASSES—NECESSARY AND SUPERFLUOUS 
The question has often been asked, in what degree are the 
different classes of society useful or even necessary? And the 
answer was naturally a different one for every different epoch of 
history considered. There was undoubtedly a time when a 
territorial aristocracy was an unavoidable and necessary element of 
society. That, however, is very, very long ago. Then there was a 
time when a capitalist middle class, a bourgeoisie as the French call 
it, arose with equally unavoidable necessity, struggled against the 
territorial aristocracy, broke its political power, and in its turn 
became economically and politically predominant. But, since 
classes arose, there never was a time when society could do 
without a working class. The name, the social status of that class 
has changed; the serf took the place of the slave, to be in his turn 
relieved by the free working man—free from servitude but also 
free from any earthly possessions save his own labour force. But it 
is plain: whatever changes took place in the upper, non-producing 
ranks of society, society could not live without a class of producers. 
This class, then, is necessary under all circumstances—though the 
time must come, when it will no longer be a class, when it will 
comprise all society. 
Now, what necessity is there at present for the existence of each 
of these three classes? 
The landed aristocracy is, to say the least, economically useless 
in England, while in Ireland and Scotland it has become a positive 
nuisance by its depopulating tendencies. To send the people across 
the ocean or into starvation, and to replace them by sheep or 
deer—that is all the merit that the Irish and Scotch landlords can 
lay claim to. Let the competition of American vegetable and 

=====第446页=====
416 Frederick Engels 
animal food develop a little further, and the English landed 
aristocracy will do the same, at least those that can afford it, 
having large town estates to fall back upon. Of the rest, American 
food competition will soon free us. And good riddance—for their 
political action, both in the Lords and Commons, is a perfect 
national nuisance. 
But how about the capitalist middle class, that enlightened and 
liberal class which founded the British colonial empire and which 
established British liberty? The class that reformed Parliament in 
1831,472  repealed the Corn Laws,473 and reduced tax after tax? 
The class that created and still directs the giant manufactures, and 
the immense merchant navy, the ever spreading railway system of 
England? Surely that class must be at least as necessary as the 
working class which it directs and leads on from progress to 
progress. 
Now the economical function of the capitalist middle class has 
been, indeed, to create the modern system of steam manufactures 
and steam communications, and to crush every economical and 
political obstacle which delayed or hindered the development of 
that system. No doubt, as long as the capitalist middle class 
performed this function it was, under the circumstances, a 
necessary class. But is it still so? Does it continue to fulfil its 
essential function as the manager and expander of social 
production for the benefit of society at large? Let us see. 
To begin with the means of communication, we find the 
telegraphs in the hands of the Government. The railways and a 
large part of the sea-going steamships are owned, not by 
individual capitalists who manage their own business, but by 
joint-stock companies whose business is managed for them by paid 
employees, by servants whose position is to all intents and purposes 
that of superior, better paid workpeople. As to the directors and 
shareholders, they both know that the less the former interfere 
with the management, and the latter with the supervision, the 
better for the concern. A lax and mostly perfunctory supervision 
is, indeed, the only function left to the owners of the business. 
Thus we see that in reality the capitalist owners of these immense 
establishments have no other action left with regard to them, but 
to cash the half-yearly dividend warrants. The social function of 
the capitalist here has been transferred to servants paid by wages; 
but he continues to pocket, in his dividends, the pay for those 
functions though he has ceased to perform them. 
But another function is still left to the capitalist, whom the 
extent of the large undertakings in question has compelled to 

=====第447页=====
Social Classes —Necessary and Superfluous 417 
"retire" from their management. And this function is to speculate 
with his shares on the Stock Exchange. For want of something 
better to do, our "retired" or in reality superseded capitalists, 
gamble to their hearts' content in this temple of mammon. They 
go there with the deliberate intention to pocket money which they 
were pretending to earn; though they say, the origin of all 
property is labour and saving—the origin perhaps, but certainly 
not the end. What hypocrisy to forcibly close petty gambling 
houses, when our capitalist society cannot do without an immense 
gambling house, where millions after millions are lost and won, 
for its very centre! Here, indeed, the existence of the "retired" 
shareholding capitalist becomes not only superfluous, but a perfect 
nuisance. 
What is true for railways and steam shipping is becoming more 
and more true every day for all large manufacturing and trading 
establishments. "Floating"—transforming large private concerns 
into limited companies—has been the order of the day for the last 
ten years and more. From the large Manchester warehouses of the 
City to the ironworks and coalpits of Wales and the North and the 
factories of Lancashire, everything has been, or is being, floated. 
In all Oldham there is scarcely a cotton mill left in private hands; 
nay, even the retail tradesman is more and more superseded by 
"co-operative stores", the great majority of which are co-operative 
in name only—but of that another time. Thus we see that by the 
very development of the system of capitalists' production the 
capitalist is superseded quite as much as the handloom-weaver. 
With this difference, though, that the handloom-weaver is doomed 
to slow starvation, and the superseded capitalist to slow death 
from overfeeding. In this they generally are both alike, that 
neither knows what to do with  himself. 
This,  then, is the result: the economical development of our 
actual society tends more and more to concentrate, to socialise 
production into immense establishments which cannot any longer 
be managed by single capitalists. All the trash of "the eye of the 
master", and the wonders it does, turns into sheer nonsense as 
soon as an undertaking reaches a certain size. Imagine "the eye of 
the master" of the London and North Western Railway! But what 
the master cannot do the workman, the wages-paid servants of the 
Company, can do, and do it successfully. 
Thus the capitalist can no longer lay claim to his profits as 
"wages of supervision", as he supervises nothing. Let us re­
member that when the defenders of capital drum that hollow 
phrase into our ears. 
29-1317 

=====第448页=====
418 Frederick Engels 
But we have attempted to show, in our last week's issue,3 that 
the capitalist class had also become unable to manage the immense 
productive system of this country; that they on the one hand 
expanded production so as to periodically flood all the markets 
with produce, and on the other became more and more incapable 
of holding their own against foreign competition. Thus we find 
that, not only can we manage very well without the interference of 
the capitalist class in the great industries of the country, but that 
their interference is becoming more and more a nuisance. 
Again we say to them, "Stand back! Give the working class the 
chance of a turn." 
Written in early August 1881 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in The Labour Standard 
(London), No. 14, August 6, 1881, as a 
leading article 
a See this volume, pp.  411-14.—  Ed 

=====第449页=====
419 
Frederick Engels 
DRAFT FOR THE SPEECH OVER THE GRAVE 
OF JENNY MARX474 
The noble-hearted woman at whose grave we stand was born in 
Salzwedel in 1814. Her father, Baron W[estphalen], was soon 
afterwards appointed Regierungsrat in Trier where he became 
intimately acquainted with the Marx family. The children of both 
families grew up together. By the time M[arx] went to the 
university, he and his future wife knew that their fates would 
henceforth be inseparable. 
In 1843, after Marx had first publicly distinguished himself as 
editor of the first Rheinische Zeitung, and after the suppression of 
that Paper by the Prussian government, 475 the marriage took 
place.3 From that day she not only followed the fortunes, the 
labours, the struggles of her husband; she took an active part in 
them with the highest intelligence and the deepest passion. 
The young couple went to Paris, into an exile, first voluntary, 
soon compulsory. Even in Paris the Prussian government perse­
cuted him. With regret I have to state, that a man like 
A. v. Humboldt so far demeaned himself as to cooperate in 
inducing the Government of Louis Philippe to expel M[arx] from 
France. The family moved to Brussels. The revolution of February 
ensued. During the troubles caused by this event in Brussels, the 
Belgian police not only arrested Marx, they must needs throw into 
prison his wife too, and that without the pretence of a pretext. 
The revolutionary effort of 1848 collapsed in the following year. 
New exile followed, first again in Paris, then, owing to fresh 
government interference, in London. And this time it was real 
exile with all its bitterness. The ordinary sufferings of exiles she 
* On June 19, 1843.—Ed. 
70* 

=====第450页=====
420 Frederick Engels 
might have overcome—though in consequence of them she had to 
lose three children,3 amongst them both her boys. But that all 
parties—governmental as well as oppositional, feudalist, liberal 
and so-called democratic, combined into one vast conspiracy 
against her husband, heaped upon him the vilest and most 
baseless calumnies; that the whole press without exception shut 
him out, that he stood helpless and defenceless before antagonists 
whom he and she must utterly despise—that hurt her to the life. 
And that lasted for years. 
But not for ever. By and bye the working class of Europe found 
itself placed in political conditions which gave it at least some 
elbow-room. The International Working Men's Association was 
formed; it drew into the struggle one civilized country after the 
other, and in that struggle, foremost amongst the foremost, fought 
her husband. Then a time began for her which made up for many 
past sufferings. She lived to see the base slanders, heaped up 
around her husband, fly away as chaff before the wind; she lived 
to hear the doctrines of her husband, to stifle which the 
reactionists of all countries, feudalists as well as so-called demo­
crats, 13 had spent all their efforts—to hear them proclaimed openly 
and victoriously in all civilized countries and in all civilized 
languages. She lived to see the revolutionary movement of the 
Proletariat seize one country after another, and raise its head, 
conscious of victory, from Russia to America. And one of her last 
joys,  on her deathbed, was the splendid proof of irrepressible life, 
in spite of all repressive laws, which the German working class 
gave at the late elections.476 
What such a woman, with such clear and critical intellect, with 
such political tact, with such passionate energy of character, with 
such capacity for self-sacrifice, has done in the revolutionary 
movement, that has not been pushed forward into publicity, that is 
not registered in the columns of the periodical press. That is only 
known to those who lived near her. But that I know, we shall 
often miss her bold and prudent counsels, bold without brag, 
prudent without sacrifice of honor. 
Of her personal qualities I need not speak. Her friends know 
them and will never forget them. If ever woman found her 
highest happiness in rendering others happy, that woman was she. 
The place where we stand is the best proof that she lived and 
died in the full conviction of atheist Materialism. Death had no 
a Edgar, Guido and Franziska. — Ed. 
b The words "feudalists as well as so-called democrats" are omitted in 
L'Égalité. —Ed. 

=====第451页=====
Draft Speech over the Grave of Jenny Marx 421 
terrors for her. She knew that one day she would have to return, 
body and mind, to the bosom of that nature from which she had 
sprung. And we, who now have laid her in her last resting-place, 
let us cherish her memory and try to be like her.3 
Written on December 2 or 3, 1881 Reproduced from the manuscript, 
verified with the newspaper 
First published in L'Egalité, No. 1, 
December 11, 1881 
a The last paragraph is omitted in L'Égalité. —Ed. 

=====第452页=====
422 
Frederick Engels 
JENNY MARX, NÉE VON WESTPHALEN 
Once again death has claimed a victim from among the ranks of 
the old guard of proletarian, revolutionary socialism. 
On December 2 this year, the wife of Karl Marx died in London 
after a long, painful illness. 
She was born in Salzwedel. Her father, 3 a state counsellor, was 
soon afterwards posted to Trier, where he became a close friend 
of the Marx family. The children grew up together. These two 
highly talented natures found each other. When Marx entered 
university, it was already decided that their future destinies were 
to be inseparable. 
The wedding took place in  1843, b after the suppression of the 
first Rheinische Zeitung, 478 which had, for a while, been edited by 
Marx. From then on, Jenny not only shared her husband's destiny, 
work, and struggles; she took part in them with the deepest 
understanding, with the most fervent passion. 
The young couple moved to Paris, into a voluntary exile that all 
too soon became an actual one. The Prussian government 
persecuted Marx there, too. Alexander von Humboldt allowed 
himself to become a party to procuring a deportation order 
against Marx. The family was forced to leave for Brussels. 
Then came the February Revolution. During the disturbances it 
engendered in Brussels, too, not only Marx was arrested. The 
Belgian police insisted on throwing his wife into prison as well, 
without any reason. 
a Ludwig von Westphalen.— Ed. 
b On June 19.— Ed. 

=====第453页=====
Jenny Marx, née von Westphalen 423 
The revolutionary upsurge of 1848 collapsed as early as the 
following year. Renewed exile, first in Paris, then, as a result of 
further intervention by the French government, in London. And 
this time it was indeed, for Jenny Marx, exile with all its terrors. 
She would, nevertheless, have got over the material pressures 
beneath which she saw her two boys and a little daughter* sink 
into the grave. But the fact that government and bourgeois 
opposition, from the vulgar-liberal to the democratic, combined in 
a great conspiracy against her husband; that they heaped the 
vilest, most despicable slanders on him; that the entire press closed 
its columns to him, depriving him of any means of defence, so 
that he was left momentarily helpless against opponents whom he 
and she must despise—this hurt her to the life. And so it remained 
for a very long time. 
But not forever. The European proletariat regained such 
conditions of existence as allowed it, to a certain extent, to move 
independently. The International was founded. The class struggle 
of the proletariat pressed on from one country to another, and 
Jenny's husband was among the foremost, in fact he was the 
foremost. Then there began for her a period that made up for 
many harsh sufferings. She lived to see the slanders that had rain­
ed down in torrents on Marx dispersed like chaff in the wind; 
she lived to hear his doctrines, which all reactionary parties, both 
feudal and democratic, had taken such tremendous pains to 
suppress, now preached from the rooftops in all civilised 
countries and in all cultured tongues. She lived to see the pro­
letarian movement, to which her entire being was wedded, shake 
the foundations of the old world from Russia to America and 
press onwards, increasingly certain of victory and defying all resis­
tance. And one of her last joys was the striking evidence of indestructible 
vitality that our German workers provided in the last elections to the 
Reichstag. 
The contribution made by this woman, with such a sharp 
critical intelligence, with such political tact, a character of such 
energy and passion, with such dedication to her comrades-in-
struggle—her contribution to the movement over almost forty 
years has not become public knowledge; it is not inscribed in the 
annals of the contemporary press. It is something one must have 
experienced at first hand. But of one thing I am sure: just as the 
wives of the Commune refugees will often remember her—so, 
too, will the rest of us have occasion enough to miss her bold and 
a Edgar, Guido and Franziska. — Ed. 

=====第454页=====
424 Frederick Engels 
wise advice, bold without ostentation, wise without ever com­
promising her honour to even the smallest degree.3 
Written on December 4, 1881 Printed according to the manu­
script, checked with the newspaper First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, 
No. 50, December 8, 1881 Published in English for the first 
time Signed: Frederick Engels 
a The Sozialdemokrat further has: London, December 4,  1881.—  Ed. 

=====第455页=====
425 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND RUSSIAN EDITION 
OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST  PARTY 4' 
The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party, 
translated by Bakunin, was published early in the sixties by the 
printing office of the KolokoL 81 At that time the West could see in 
it (the Russian edition of the Manifesto) only a literary curiosity. 
Such a view would be impossible today. 
What a limited field the proletarian movement still occupied at 
that time (December 1847) is most clearly shown by the last section 
of the Manifesto: the position of the Communists in relation to the 
different opposition parties in the various countries.3 Russia and 
the United States of all places are missing here. It was the time 
when Russia constituted the last great reserve of all European 
reaction, when the United States absorbed the surplus proletarian 
forces of Europe through emigration. Both countries supplied 
Europe with raw materials and were at the same time markets for 
its industrial products. At that time both were, therefore, in one 
way or another, pillars of the existing European order. 
How very different today! It was precisely European immigra­
tion that enabled North America to attain gigantic agricultural 
production, competition from which is shaking the very founda­
tions of European landed property—large and small. Moreover, it 
enabled the United States to exploit its tremendous industrial 
resources with an energy and on a scale that must shortly break 
the prevailing industrial monopoly of Western Europe, and 
especially of England. Both circumstances react in revolutionary 
manner upon America  itself.  Step by step the smaller and middle 
landownership of the farmers, the basis of the whole political 
a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 518-19.— Ed. 

=====第456页=====
426 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
constitution, is succumbing to the competition of giant farms; 
simultaneously, a numerous proletariat and a fabulous concentration 
of capital are developing for the first time in the industrial regions. 
And now Russia! During the Revolution of 1848-49, not only 
the European princes, but the European bourgeois as well, found 
their only salvation from the proletariat, which was just beginning 
to awaken, in Russian intervention. The Tsara was proclaimed the 
chief of European reaction. Today heb is a prisoner of war of the 
revolution, in Gatchina,482 and Russia forms the vanguard of 
revolutionary action in Europe. 
The Communist Manifesto had as its object the proclamation of 
the inevitably impending dissolution of modern bourgeois proper­
ty. But in Russia we find, face to face with the rapidly developing 
capitalist swindle and bourgeois landed property, which is just 
beginning to develop, more than half the land owned in common by 
the peasants. Now the question is: can the Russian obshchinaf a 
form of primeval common ownership of land, even if greatly 
undermined, pass directly to the higher form of communist common 
ownership? Or must it, conversely, first pass through the same 
process of dissolution as constitutes the historical development of the 
West? 
The only answer possible today is this: If the Russian Revolution 
becomes the signal for a proletarian revolution in the West, so that 
the two complement each other, the present Russian common 
ownership of land may serve as the starting point for communist 
development. 
Karl Marx, Frederick Engels 
London, January 21, 1882 
Published, in Russian, in: K. Marx and Printed according to the manu-
F. Engels, Manifesto of  the Communist  Party,  script 
Geneva, 1882 
a Nicholas I.— Ed. 
b Alexander III.— Ed. 
c Obshchina: village community.— Ed. 

=====第457页=====
427 
Frederick Engels 
BRUNO BAUER AND EARLY CHRISTIANITY 
On April 13 in Berlin a man died who once played a role as a 
philosopher and a theologian but was hardly heard of for years, 
only attracting the attention of the public from time to time as a 
"literary eccentric". Official theologians, including Renan, plagia­
rised him and therefore maintained a silence of death about him. 
And yet he was worth more than them all and achieved more than 
any of them on an issue which interests us socialists too: on the 
issue of the historical origin of Christianity. 
Let us take his death as an occasion to give a brief account of 
the present position on this question and Bauer's contribution to 
its solution. 
The view that dominated from the free-thinkers of the Middle 
Ages to the Enlighteners of the eighteenth century, the latter 
included, that all religions, and therefore Christianity too, were 
the work of deceivers, was no longer sufficient once Hegel had set 
philosophy the task of showing a rational development in world 
history.3 
It is obvious that if naturally arising religions, like the fetish 
worship of the Negroes or the common primitive religion of the 
Aryans,484 come into being without deception playing any part, 
deceit by the priests very soon becomes inevitable in their further 
development. But in spite of all the sincere fanaticism, artificial 
religions cannot even at their foundation do without deception 
and the falsification of history. Christianity, too, has pretty 
achievements to boast of in this respect from the very beginning, 
a G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte. See G. W. F. 
Hegel, Werke, Bd. IX, 2. Aufl., Berlin, 1840, S. 11-15.— Ed. 

=====第458页=====
428 Frederick Engels 
as Bauer showed in his criticism of the New Testament.3 But that 
only affirms a general phenomenon and does not explain the 
particular case in question. 
A religion that brought the Roman world empire into subjection 
and dominated by far the larger part of civilised humanity for 
1,800 years cannot be disposed of merely by declaring it to be 
nonsense gleaned together by deceivers. One cannot dispose of it 
before one succeeds in explaining its origin and its development 
from the historical conditions under which it arose and reached its 
dominating position. This applies especially to Christianity. The 
question to be solved, then, is how it came about that the masses in 
the Roman Empire preferred this nonsense—which was preached, 
into the bargain, by slaves and oppressed—to all other religions so 
that the ambitious Constantine finally saw in the adoption of this 
religion of nonsense the best means of exalting himself to the 
position of autocrat of the Roman world.485 
Bruno Bauer contributed far more to answering this question 
than anybody else. No matter how much even the half-believing 
theologians of the period of reaction may have resisted it since 
1849,  he irrefutably proved the chronological order of the Gospels 
and their mutual interdependence, shown by Wilke from the 
purely linguistic standpoint,0 by the very contents of the Gospels 
themselves. He exposed the utter lack of scientific spirit of Strauss' 
vague myth theory0 according to which anybody can consider 
historical as much as he likes in the Gospel narrations. And if 
almost nothing from the whole content of the Gospels turns out to 
be historically provable—so that even the historical existence of a 
Jesus Christ can be questioned—Bauer has thereby only cleared 
the ground for the solution of the question: what is the origin of 
the ideas and thoughts that have been woven together into a sort 
a See the following books by Bruno Bauer: Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte des 
Johannes (Bremen, 1840); Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker (Vols. 1 
and 2, Leipzig, 1841) and the third volume of this book entitled Kritik der 
evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker und des Johannes (Brunswick, 1842); Kritik 
der Evangelien und Geschichte ihres Ursprungs (Vols. 1-4, Berlin, 1850-52); Die 
Apostelgeschichte. Eine Ausgleichung des Paulinismus und des Judenthums innerhalb der 
christlichen Kirche (Berlin, 1850); Kritik der paulinischen Briefe (Abt. 1-3, Berlin, 
1850-52).— Ed. 
b Ch. G. Wilke, Der Urevangelist oder exegetisch kritische Untersuchung über 
das Verwandtschaftsverhältniß der drei ersten Evangelien (Dresden and Leipzig, 
1838).—  Ed 
c D. Fr. Strauß, Das Leben Jesu, kritisch bearbeitet (Vols. 1-2, Tübingen, 
1835-36); B. Bauer, Philo, Strauß und Renan und das Urchristenthum (Berlin, 
1874).—  Ed. 

=====第459页=====
Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity 429 
of system in Christianity, and how did they come to dominate the 
world? 
Bauer studied this question until his death. His research reached 
its culminating point in the conclusion that the Alexandrian Jew 
Philo,  who was still living about A.D. 40 but was already very old, 
was the real father of Christianity, and that the Roman stoic 
Seneca was, so to speak, its uncle. 3 The numerous writings 
attributed to Philo b which have been passed down to us do indeed 
originate in a fusion of allegorically and rationalistically conceived 
Jewish traditions with Greek, particularly stoic, philosophy. 486 This 
conciliation of Occidental and Oriental outlooks already contains 
all the essentially Christian ideas: the innate sinfulness of man, the 
Logos, the Word, which is with God and is God and which becomes 
the mediator between God and Man; atonement, not by sacrifices 
of animals, but by bringing one's own heart to God, and finally the 
essential feature that the new religious philosophy reverses the 
previous world order, seeks its disciples among the poor, the 
miserable, the slaves and the rejected and despises the rich, the 
powerful and the privileged, whence the precept to despise all 
worldly pleasures and to mortify the flesh. 
On the other hand, Augustus saw to it in his time that not only 
the God-man, but also the so-called immaculate conception became 
formulas imposed by the empire. He not only had Caesar and 
himself worshipped as gods, he also had it spread that he, 
Augustus Caesar Divus, the Divine, was not the son of a human 
father but that his mother had conceived him of the god Apollo. 
But was not that god Apollo perhaps a relation of the one sung 
by Heinrich Heine? 487 
As we see, we need only the keystone and we have the whole of 
Christianity in its basic features: the incarnation of the Logos 
become man in a definite person and his sacrifice on the cross for 
the redemption of sinful mankind. 
Truly reliable sources leave us uncertain as to how this keystone 
was historically introduced into the Stoic-Philonic doctrines. But 
this much is certain: it was not introduced by philosophers, either 
Philo's disciples or stoics. Religions are founded by people who 
feel a need for religion themselves and have a feeling for the 
religious needs of the masses, and as a rule this is not the case 
with philosophical schools. On the contrary we find that in times 
of general decay—now, for instance—philosophy and religious 
a B. Bauer, Christus und die Caesar  en. Der Ursprung des Christentums aus dem 
römischen Griechenthum, Berlin, 1877.— Ed. 
b Philo, Legum allegoriae; Quaestiones in Exodum; Quaestiones in Genesin. — Ed. 

=====第460页=====
430 Frederick Engels 
dogmatism are shallowly and universally spread in a vulgarised 
form. While classical Greek philosophy in its last forms— 
particularly in the Epicurean school488—led to atheistic material­
ism, Greek vulgar philosophy led to the doctrine of a one and only 
God and of the immortality of the human soul. Likewise Judaism, 
rationally vulgarised in mixture and intercourse with aliens and 
half-Jews, came to neglect the ritual and transform the formerly 
exclusively Jewish national god, Jahveh,* into the one true God, 
the creator of heaven and earth, and adopt the idea of the 
immortality of the soul which was alien to early Judaism. Thus 
monotheistic vulgar philosophy came into contact with vulgar 
religion, which presented it with the ready-made one and only 
God. And so the ground was prepared on which the elaboration 
among the Jews of the likewise vulgarised Philonic notions could 
produce Christianity which, once produced, could find acceptance 
among the Greeks and Romans. The fact that it was popularised 
Philonic notions and not Philo's own works that gave birth to 
Christianity is proved by the New Testament's almost complete 
disregard of most of these works, particularly the allegorical and 
philosophical interpretation of the narrations of the Old Testa­
ment. This is an aspect to which Bauer did not devote enough 
attention. 
One can get an idea of what Christianity looked like in its early 
form by reading the so-called Revelation of John. Wild, confused 
fanaticism, only the beginnings of dogmas, of the so-called Christian 
morals, only the mortification of the flesh, but on the other hand a 
multitude of visions and prophecies. The emergence of the dogmas 
and moral doctrine belongs to a later period in which the Gospels 
and the so-called Epistles of the Apostles were written. In this—at 
least as regards morality—unceremonious use was made of the 
philosophy of the stoics, of Seneca in particular. Bauer proved that 
the Epistles often copy the latter word: for word b, in fact, even the 
faithful noticed this, but they maintained that Seneca had copied 
from the New Testament, though it had not yet been written in his 
* As Ewald has already proved, 3 the Jews used dotted script (containing vowels 
and reading signs) to write under the consonants in the name of Jahveh, which it 
was forbidden to pronounce, the vowels of the word Adonai, which they read in its 
place. This was subsequendy read as Jehovah. This word is therefore not the name 
of a god but only a vulgar mistake in grammar: in Hebrew it is simply impossible. 
3 H. Ewald, Geschichte des Volkes Israel bis Christus, Second ed., Vol. 4, Göttingen, 
1852,  pp. 222-24.— Ed. 
b B. Bauer, Christus und die Caesarea..., pp. 47-61 ("Seneca im Neuen 
Testament"). — Ed. 

=====第461页=====
Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity 431 
time.  Dogma developed, on the one hand, in connection with the 
evangelical legend of Jesus which was then taking shape and, on the 
other hand, in the struggle between Jewish Christians and those of 
pagan origin. 
Bauer also gives very valuable data on the causes which helped 
Christianity to triumph and attain world domination.3 But here 
the German philosopher is prevented by his idealism from seeing 
clearly and formulating precisely. Phrases often replace substance 
at decisive points. Instead, therefore, of going into details on 
Bauer's views, we shall better give our own conception of this point, 
based on Bauer's works and also on our personal study. 
The Roman conquest first directly dissolved in all subjugated 
countries the previous political systems and then indirectly also the 
old social conditions of life. Firstly, by substituting the simple 
distinction between Roman citizens and non-citizens or subjects of 
the state for the former organisation according to social estates 
(slavery apart). Secondly, and mainly, by exacting tribute in the name 
of the Roman state. If under the empire a limit was set as far as 
possible in the interest of the State to the governors' thirst for wealth, 
that thirst was replaced by ever more effective and oppressive 
taxation for the benefit of the state treasury, an exaction which was 
terribly destructive. Thirdly, and finally, Roman law was adminis­
tered everywhere by Roman judges while the native social systems 
were declared invalid insofar as they did not tally with the provisions 
of Roman law. These three levers were bound to develop a 
tremendous levelling power, particularly when they were applied for 
a century or two to populations the most vigorous part of which had 
been either suppressed or taken away into slavery in the battles 
preceding, accompanying and often even following the conquest. 
Social relations in the provinces came nearer and nearer to those 
obtaining in the capital and in Italy. The population became more 
and more sharply divided into three classes thrown together out of 
the most varied elements and nationalities: rich people, including 
not a few emancipated slaves (cf. Petronius b), big landowners or 
usurers or both at once, like Seneca, the uncle of Christianity; 
propertyless free people, who in Rome were fed and amused by the 
state—in the provinces they got on as they could by themselves— 
and finally the great mass, the slaves. In relation to the state, i.e., the 
emperor, the first two classes had almost as few rights as the slaves in 
a B. Bauer, Christus und die Caesarea.. .; Philo, Strauß und Renan... — Ed. 
b Engels is referring to Petronius' Satyricon where he describes a feast in the 
house of an emancipated slave, Trimalchionis, who became rich.— Ed. 

=====第462页=====
432 Frederick Engels 
relation to their masters. From the time of Tiberius to that of Nero in 
particular, it was a practice to sentence rich Romans to death in order 
to confiscate their property. The support of the government was, 
materially, the army, which was more like an army of hired 
mercenaries than the old Roman peasant army, and morally, 
the general view that there was no way out of this situation; 
that not, indeed, this or that emperor, but an empire based 
on military domination was an inevitable necessity. Here is not the 
place to examine what eminently material facts this view was based 
on. 
General slackening and demoralisation were consonant with the 
general lawlessness and despair as to the possibility of better 
conditions. The few surviving old Romans of the patrician type 
and views were either removed or died out; Tacitus was the last of 
them. The others were glad if they were able to keep away from 
public life; all they existed for was to collect and enjoy riches, and 
to indulge in private gossip and private intrigue. The propertyless 
free citizens were state pensioners in Rome, but in the provinces 
their condition was an unhappy one. They had to work, and to 
compete with slave labour into the bargain. But they were 
confined to the towns. Besides them, there were in the provinces 
peasants, free landowners (here and there probably still in 
communal ownership) and, as in Gaul, bondsmen for debts to big 
landowners. This class was the least affected by the social 
upheaval; it was also the one to resist the religious upheaval 
longest.* Finally, there were the slaves, deprived of rights and of 
their own will and the possibility to free themselves, as the defeat 
of Spartacus had already proved489; most of them, however, were 
former free citizens or sons of freed citizens. It must therefore 
have been among them that hatred of their condition of life was 
still generally vigorous, though externally powerless. 
We shall find that the type of ideologists at the time 
corresponded to this state of affairs. The philosophers were either 
mere money-earning schoolmasters or buffoons in the pay of 
wealthy revellers. Some were even slaves. What became of them if 
they were fortunate is shown by Mr. Seneca. This stoic and 
preacher of virtue and abstinence was Nero's first court intriguer, 
which would not have been possible without servility; he secured 
•According to Fallmerayer3 the peasants in Maina, Peloponnesus, still offered 
sacrifices to Zeus in the ninth century. 
a J. Ph. Fallmerayer, Geschichte der Halbinsel Morea während des Mittelalters. Ein 
historischer Versuch, Part 1, Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1830, p. 227.— Ed. 

=====第463页=====
Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity 433 
from Nero presents in money, estates, gardens and palaces, and, 
while he preached the poor man Lazarus of the Gospel, he was in 
reality the rich man in the same parable. Not until Nero wanted to 
get at him did he request the Emperor to take back all his 
presents, his philosophy being enough for him. Only a very few 
isolated philosophers like Persius had the courage to brandish the 
lash of satire over their degenerated contemporaries. But as for 
the second type of ideologists, the jurists, they enthused at the 
new system because the abolition of all differences between social 
estates allowed them broad scope in elaborating their favourite 
private law, in return for which they prepared for the emperors 
the vilest system of state law that ever existed. 
With the political and social peculiarities of the peoples, the 
Roman Empire also doomed to ruin their particular religions. All 
religions of antiquity were naturally arising tribal and later national 
religions which sprang from and grew together with the social and 
political conditions of the respective peoples. Once these, their 
foundations, were destroyed and their traditional forms of society, 
their inherited political institutions and their national indepen­
dence shattered, the religion corresponding to these naturally also 
collapsed. The national gods could suffer other national gods, in 
other nations beside them, as was the general rule in antiquity, but 
not above them. The transplantation of Oriental divinities to 
Rome was harmful only to the Roman religion, but could not 
check the decay of the Oriental religions. As soon as the national 
gods are unable to protect the independence and sovereignty of 
their nation, they engineer their own destruction. This was the 
case everywhere (except with peasants, especially in the moun­
tains).  What vulgar philosophical enlightenment—I almost said 
Voltairianism—did in Rome and Greece, was done in the 
provinces by Roman subjugation and the replacement of men 
proud of their freedom by desperate subjects and self-seeking 
ragamuffins. 
Such was the material and moral situation. The present was 
unbearable, the future perhaps still more menacing. There was no 
way out. Only despair or refuge in the commonest sensuous 
pleasure, for those at least who could afford it, and they were a 
tiny minority. Otherwise, nothing but languid surrender to the 
inevitable. 
But in all classes there were necessarily a number of people 
who,  despairing of material salvation, sought in its stead a spiritual 
salvation, a consolation in their consciousness to save them from 
utter despair. This consolation could not be provided by the stoics, 
30-1317 

=====第464页=====
434 Frederick Engels 
any more than by the Epicurean school, for the very reason that 
they are philosophies and therefore not intended for the common 
consciousness and, secondly, because the conduct of their disciples 
brought the doctrines of the schools into disrepute. The consola­
tion was to be a substitute not for the lost philosophy, but for the 
lost religion; it had to take on a religious form, just as anything 
which was to grip the masses then and even as late as the 
seventeenth century. 
We hardly need to note that of those who were pining for such 
consolation of their consciousness, for this flight from the external 
world into the internal, the majority were among the slaves. 
It was in the midst of this general economic, political, 
intellectual and moral decay that Christianity appeared. It was 
decisively at odds with all previous religions. 
In all previous religions ritual had been the main thing. Only by 
taking part in the sacrifices and processions, and in the Orient by 
observing the most cumbersome diet and cleanliness regulations, 
could one show to what religion one belonged. While Rome and 
Greece were tolerant in the latter respect, there was in the Orient 
an obsession with religious prohibitions that contributed no little 
to the final collapse. People of two different religions (Egyptians, 
Persians, Jews, Chaldeans) could not eat or drink together, 
perform any everyday act together, or hardly speak to each other. 
It was largely due to this segregation of man from man that the 
Orient met its demise. Christianity knows no distinctive rituals, not 
even the sacrifices and processions of the classical world. By thus 
rejecting all national religions and their common ritual and 
addressing itself to all peoples without distinction, it becomes the 
first potential world religion. Judaism,  too, with its new universal god, 
had made a start towards becoming a world religion; but the 
children of Israel always remained an aristocracy among the 
believers and the circumcised, and Christianity itself had to get rid 
of the notion of the superiority of the Jewish Christians (still 
dominant in the so-called Revelation of John) before it could really 
become a world religion. Islam  itself,  on the other hand, by 
preserving its specifically Oriental ritual, limited the area of its 
propagation to the Orient and the North Africa conquered and 
populated anew by Arab Bedouins; here it could become the 
dominant religion, but not in the West. 
Secondly, Christianity struck a chord that was bound to echo in 
countless hearts. To all complaints about the wickedness of the 
times and the general material and moral misery, Christian 
consciousness of sin answered: It is so and it cannot be otherwise; 

=====第465页=====
Bruno Bauer and Early Christianity 435 
thou art to blame, ye are all to blame for the corruption of the 
world, thine and your own internal corruption! And where was 
the man who could deny it? Mea culpa!* The admission of each 
one's share in the responsibility for the general misfortune was 
irrefutable and was made now the precondition for the spiritual 
salvation which Christianity at the same time announced. And this 
spiritual salvation was so instituted that it could be easily 
understood by members of every old religious community. The idea 
of atonement to placate the offended deity was current in all the old 
religions; how could the idea of the self-sacrifice of the mediator 
atoning once and for all for the sins of humanity not easily find 
ground there? Christianity, therefore, clearly expressed the 
universal feeling that men themselves are guilty of the general 
decay as the consciousness of sin of each one; at the same time it 
provided, in the sacrificial death of its founder, a form easily 
understood everywhere of the universally longed-for internal 
salvation from the decadent world, the consolation of conscious­
ness;  it thus again proved its capacity to become a world religion 
and, indeed, a religion which suited the world as it then was. 
So it happened that among the thousands of prophets and 
preachers in the desert that filled that period with their countless 
religious renovations the founders of Christianity alone met with 
success. Not only Palestine, but the entire Orient, swarmed with such 
founders of religions, and between them there raged what can be 
called a Darwinist struggle for ideological existence.490 Thanks 
mainly to the elements mentioned above, Christianity won the day. 
How it gradually developed its character of a world religion by 
natural selection in the struggle of sects amongst themselves and 
against the pagan world is taught in detail by the history of the 
Church in the first three centuries. 
Written in the latter half of April 1882 Printed according to the manu­
script, checked with the text of the First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, newspaper 
Nos.  19 and 20, May 4 and 11, 1882 H F 
Signed: F. Engels 
a My fault.— Ed. 
30* 

=====第466页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE VICAR OF BRAY 
In good King Charles's golden days 
When loyalty no harm meant, 
A zealous high-church man I was, 
And so I got preferment: 
To teach my flock I never miss'd, 
Kings are by God appointed, 
And damn'd are those that do resist. 
Or touch The Lord's Anointed, 
And this is law I will maintain, 
Until my dying day, Sir, 
That whatsoever king shall reign, 
I'll be the vicar of Bray, Sir. 
When royal James obtain'd the crown, 
And popery came in fashion, 
The penal laws I hooted down, 
And read the Declaration: 
The church of Rome I found would fit 
Full well my constitution; 
And had become a Jesuit, 
But for the Revolution. 
And this is law, &c. 
When William was our King declar'd, 
To ease the nation's grievance; 
With this new wind about I steer'd, 
And swore to him allegiance: 
Old principles I did revoke, 
Set conscience at a distance; 
Passive obedience was a joke, 
A jest was non-resistance. 
And this is law, &c. 

=====第467页=====
The Vicar of Bray 437 
When gracious Ann became our queen, 
The Church of England's glory, 
Another face of things was seen, 
And I became a Tory: 
Occasional conformists base, 
I damn'd their moderation; 
And thought the church in danger was, 
By such prevarication. 
And this is law, &c. 
When George in pudding-time came o'er, 
And moderate men look'd big, Sir, 
I turn'd a cat-in-pan once more, 
And so became a Whig, Sir; 
And thus preferment I procur'd 
From our new faith's-defender; 
And almost ev'ry day abjur'd 
The Pope and the Pretender. 
And this is law, &c. 
Th'illustrious house of Hanover, 
And Protestant succession; 
To these I do allegiance swear— 
While they can keep possession: 
For in my faith and loyalty, 
I never more will falter, 
And George my lawful king shall be— 
Until the times do alter. 
And this is law I will maintain, 
Until my dying day, Sir, 
That whatsoever king shall reign, 
I'll be the vicar of Bray, Sir!3 
The above song is probably the only political folk song to 
have remained in favour in England for more than 160 years. 
This is largely attributable to its fine tune, which is still sung 
everywhere today. Moreover, the song is far from outdated, even 
with regard to present-day conditions in Germany. Though, in the 
meantime, as is only fit and proper, we have made some progress. 
The good vicar of the original had only to turn his coat at every 
a The English poem is cited from Joseph Ritson, A Select Collection of English 
Songs, in three volumes, 2nd ed., Vol. II, London, 1813, pp. 141-43. For Engels' 
German translation of this poem see Note  491.—  Ed. 

=====第468页=====
438 Frederick Engels 
change of monarch. But we Germans have, above our many 
political vicars of Bray, a true Pope of Bray,a who demonstrates his 
infallibility by himself radically overturning the entire political 
doctrine at ever decreasing intervals. Yesterday free trade, today 
protective tariffs492 ; yesterday freedom of craft, today compulsory 
guilds; yesterday  Kulturkampf, 493 today off to Canossa ^ with flying 
colours—and why not? Omnia in majorem Dei gloriam (All for the 
greater glory of God), which in German means: everything 
in order to extract more taxes and more soldiers. And the poor 
little vicars have to go along with it; they have to "jump through 
the hoops", as they themselves put it again and again, and often, 
at that, without compensation. With what scorn our stern old vicar 
would look down on these puny successors of his—he, who was 
genuinely proud of the courage with which he maintained his 
position through every storm! 
Fr. Engelsb 
Written at the end of August and the 
beginning of September 1882 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, 
No. 37, September 7, 1882 Printed according to the manu­
script of the second rough outline, 
checked with the newspaper 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 
a A reference to Bismarck.— Ed. 
b There is no signature in the manuscript.— Ed 

=====第469页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE MARK 

=====第470页=====
Written in the middle of September-the 
first half of December 1882 
First published as an appendix to F. En-
gels'  book Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus 
von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft, Hottingen-
Zurich, 1882 Printed according to the author­
ised English edition of Engels' 
pamphlet, Socialism: Utopian and 
Scientific, 1892, checked with the 
fourth German edition (1891) of 
the book 

=====第471页=====
441 
In a country like Germany, in which quite half the population 
live by agriculture, it is necessary that the socialist working-men, 
and through them the peasants, should learn how the present 
system of landed property, large as well as small, has arisen. It is 
necessary to contrast the misery of the agricultural labourers of 
the present time and the mortgage-servitude of the small peasants, 
with the old common property of all free men in what was then in 
truth their "fatherland", the free common possession of all by 
inheritance. 
I shall give, therefore, a short historical sketch of the primitive 
agrarian conditions of the German tribes. A few traces of these 
have survived until our own time, but all through the Middle Ages 
they served as the basis and as the type of all public institutions, 
and permeated the whole of public life, not only in Germany, but 
also in the north of France, England, and Scandinavia. And yet 
they have been so completely forgotten, that recently 
G. L. Maurer has had to re-discover their real significance. 496 
Two fundamental facts, that arose spontaneously, govern the 
primitive history of all, or of almost all, nations; the grouping of 
the people according to kindred, and common property in the 
soil. And this was the case with the Germans. As they had brought 
with them from Asia the method of grouping by tribes and gentes, 
as they even in the time of the Romans so drew up their battle 
array, that those related to each other always stood shoulder to 
shoulder, this grouping also governed the partitioning of their 
new territory east of the Rhine and north of the Danube. Each 
tribe settled down upon the new possession, not according to 

=====第472页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
whim or accident, but, as Caesar expressly states,2 according to the 
gens-relationship between the members of the tribe. A particular 
area was apportioned to each of the nearly related larger groups, 
and on this again the individual gentes, each including a certain 
number of families, settled down by villages. A number of allied 
villages formed a hundred (old high German, huntari; old Norse, 
heradh).  A number of hundreds formed a gau or shire. The sum 
total of the shires was the people  itself. 
The land which was not taken possession of by the village 
remained at the disposal of the hundred. What was not assigned 
to the latter remained for the shire. Whatever after that was still to 
be disposed of—generally a very large tract of land—was the 
immediate possession of the whole people. Thus in Sweden we 
find all these different stages of common holding side by side. 
Each village had its village common land (bys almänningar), and 
beyond this was the hundred common land (härads), the shire 
common land (lands), and finally the people's common land. This 
last, claimed by the king as representative of the whole nation, was 
known therefore as Konungs almänningar. But all of these, even 
the royal lands, were named, without distinction, almänningar, 
common land. 
This old Swedish arrangement of the common land, in its 
minute subdivision, evidently belongs to a later stage of develop­
ment. If it ever did exist in Germany, it soon vanished. The rapid 
increase in the population led to the establishment of a number of 
daughter-villages on the Mark, i.e., on the large tract of land 
attributed to each individual mother village. These daughter-
villages formed a single mark-association with the mother village, 
on the basis of equal or of restricted rights. Thus we find 
everywhere in Germany, so far as research goes back, a larger or 
smaller number of villages united in one mark-association. But 
these associations were, at least, at first, still subject to the great 
federations of the marks of the hundred, or of the shire. And, 
finally, the people, as a whole, originally formed one single great 
mark-association, not only for the administration of the land that 
remained the immediate possession of the people, but also as a 
supreme court over the subordinate local marks. 
Until the time when the Frankish kingdom subdued Germany 
east of the Rhine, the centre of gravity of the mark-association 
seems to have been in the gau or shire—the shire seems to have 
formed the unit mark-association. For, upon this assumption alone 
a Gaius Julius Caesar, Commentarii de hello Gallico, Book VI, Chapter 22.— Ed. 

=====第473页=====
The Mark 443 
is it explicable that, upon the official division of the kingdom, so 
many old and large marks reappear as shires.3  Soon after this time 
began the decay of the old large marks. Yet even in the code known 
as the Kaiserrecht, the "Emperor's Law" of the thirteenth or 
fourteenth century, it is a general rule that a mark includes from six 
to twelve villages. 497 
In Caesar's time a great part at least of the Germans, the Suevi, 
to wit, who had not yet got any fixed settlement, cultivated their 
fields in common. From analogy with other peoples we may take it 
that this was carried on in such a way that the individual gentes, 
each including a number of nearly related families, cultivated in 
common the land apportioned to them, which was changed from 
year to year, and divided the products among the families. But 
after the Suevi, about the beginning of our era, had settled down 
in their new domains, this soon ceased. At all events, Tacitus 
(150 years after Caesar) only mentions the tilling of the soil by 
individual families.0 But the land to be tilled only belonged to 
these for a year. Every year it was divided up anew and 
redistributed. 
How this was done, is still to be seen at the present time on the 
Moselle and in the Hochwald, on the so-called "Gehöferschaf­
fen ".c There the whole of the land under cultivation, arable and 
meadows, not annually it is true, but every three, six, nine, or 
twelve years, is thrown together and parcelled out into a number 
of "Gewanne", or areas, according to situation and the quality of 
the soil. Each Gewann is again divided into as many equal parts, 
long, narrow strips, as there are claimants in the association. These 
are shared by lot among the members, so that every member 
receives an equal portion in each Gewann. d At the present time the 
shares have become unequal by divisions among heirs, sales, etc.; 
but the old full share still furnishes the unit that determines the 
half,  or quarter, or one-eighth shares. The uncultivated land, 
forest and pasture land, is still a common possession for common 
use. 
The same primitive arrangement obtained until the beginning 
of this century in the so-called assignments by lot (Loosgüter) of 
the Rhein Palatinate in Bavaria, whose arable land has since been 
a The German edition of 1891 has here: "als Gerichtsgaue" ("as court-
shires").—  Ed. 
b Publius Cornelius Tacitus, Germania. — Ed. 
c Farmstead communities.— Ed. 
d The 1891 German edition further has: "i.e. a plot of every stretch of land, of soil 
of every quality".— Ed. 

=====第474页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
turned into the private property of individuals. The Gehöferschaf-
ten also find it more and more to their interest to let the 
periodical re-division become obsolete and to turn the changing 
ownership into settled private property. Thus most of them, if not 
all, have died out in the last forty years and given place to villages 
with peasant proprietors 3 using the forests and pasture land in 
498 
common. 
The first piece of ground that passed into the private property 
of individuals was that on which the house stood. The inviolability 
of the dwelling, that basis of all personal freedom, was transferred 
from the caravan of the nomadic train to the log house of the 
stationary peasant, and gradually was transformed into a complete 
right of property in the homestead. This had already come about 
in the time of Tacitus. The free German's homestead must, even 
in that time, have been excluded from the mark, and thereby 
inaccessible to its officials, a safe place of refuge for fugitives, as 
we find it described in the regulations of the marks of later times, 
and to some extent, even in the "leges Barbarorum", the 
codifications of German tribal customary law, written down from 
the fifth to the eighth century. 499 For the sacredness of the 
dwelling was not the effect but the cause of its transformation into 
private property. 
Four or five hundred years after Tacitus, according to the same 
law-books, the cultivated land also was the hereditary, although 
not the absolute freehold property of individual peasants, who had 
the right to dispose of it by sale or any other means of transfer. 
The causes of this transformation, as far as we can trace them, are 
twofold. 
First, from the beginning there were in Germany  itself,  besides 
the close villages already described, with their complete ownership 
in common of the land, other villages where, besides homesteads, 
the fields also were excluded from the mark, the property of the 
community, and were parcelled out among the individual peasants 
as their hereditary property. But this was only the case where the 
nature of the place, so to say, compelled it: in narrow valleys,b  and 
on narrow, flat ridges between marshes, as in Westphalia; later on, 
in the Odenwald, and in almost all the Alpine valleys. In these 
places the village consisted, as it does now, of scattered individual 
dwellings, each surrounded by the fields belonging to it. A 
periodical re-division of the arable land was in these cases hardly 
a The 1891 German edition has: "with allotment peasants".— Ed. 
b The 1891 German edition has here: "as in the Berg country".— Ed. 

=====第475页=====
The Mark 445 
possible, and so what remained within the mark was only the 
circumjacent untitled land. When, later, the right to dispose of the 
homestead by transfer to a third person became an important 
consideration, those who were free owners of their fields found 
themselves in an advantageous position. The wish to attain these 
advantages may have led in many of the villages with common 
ownership of the land to the letting the customary method of 
partition die out and to the transformation of the individual 
shares of the members into hereditary and transferable freehold 
property. 
But, second, conquest led the Germans on to Roman territory, 
where, for centuries, the soil had been private property (the 
unlimited property of Roman law), and where the small number 
of conquerors could not possibly altogether do away with a form 
of holding so deeply rooted. The connexion of hereditary private 
property in fields and meadows with Roman law, at all events on 
territory that had been Roman, is supported by the fact that such 
remains ,of common property in arable land as have come down to 
our time are found on the left bank of the Rhine—i.e., on 
conquered territory, but territory thoroughly Germanised. When the 
Franks settled here in the fifth century, common ownership in the 
fields must still have existed among them, otherwise we should not 
find there Gehöferschaften and Loosgüter. 3 But here also private 
ownership soon got the mastery, for this form of holding only do 
we find mentioned, in so far as arable land is concerned, in the 
Ripuarian law of the sixth century. 500 And in the interior of 
Germany, as I have said, the cultivated land also soon became 
private property. 
But if the German conquerors adopted private ownership in 
fields and meadows—i.e., gave up at the first division of the land, 
or soon after, any re-partition (for it was nothing more than this), 
they introduced, on the other hand, everywhere their German 
mark system, with common holding of woods and pastures, 
together with the over-lordship of the mark in respect to the 
partitioned land. This happened not only with the Franks in the 
north of France and the Anglo-Saxons in England, but also with 
the Burgundians in Eastern France, the Visigoths in the south of 
France and Spain, and the Ostrogoths and Langobardians in Italy. 
In these last-named countries, however, as far as is known, traces 
of the mark government have lasted until the present time almost 
exclusively in the higher mountain regions. 
a land distributed by drawing lots.— Ed. 

=====第476页=====
446 Frederick Engels 
The form that the mark government has assumed after the 
periodical partition of the cultivated land had fallen into disuse, is 
that which now meets us, not only in the old popular laws of the 
fifth, sixth, seventh, and eighth centuries, but also in the English 
and Scandinavian law-books of the Middle Ages, in the many 
German mark regulations (the so-called Weisthiimer501 ) from the 
thirteenth to the seventeenth century, and in the customary laws 
(coutumes) of Northern France. 
Whilst the association of the mark gave up the right of, from 
time to time, partitioning fields and meadows anew among its 
individual members, it did not give up a single one of its other 
rights over these lands. And these rights were very important. The 
association had only transferred their fields to individuals with a 
view to their being used as arable and meadow land, and with that 
view alone. Beyond that the individual owner had no right. 
Treasures found in the earth, if they lay deeper than the 
ploughshare goes, did not, therefore, originally belong to him, but 
to the community. It was the same thing with digging for ores, 
and the like. All these rights were, later on, stolen by the princes 
and landlords for their own use. 
But, further, the use of arable and meadow lands was under the 
supervision and direction of the community and that in the 
following form. Wherever three-field farming obtained—and that 
was almost everywhere—the whole cultivated area of the village 
was divided into three equal parts, each of which was alternately 
sown one year with winter seed, the second with summer seed, 
and the third lay fallow. Thus the village had each year its winter 
field, its summer field., its fallow field. In the partition of the land 
care was taken that each member's share was made up of equal 
portions from each of the three fields, so that everyone could, 
without difficulty, accommodate himself to the regulations of the 
community, in accordance with which he would have to sow 
autumn seed only in his winter field, and so on. 
The field whose turn it was to lie fallow returned, for the time 
being, into the common possession, and served the community in 
general for pasture. And as soon as the two other fields were 
reaped, they likewise became again common property until 
seed-time, and were used as common pasturage. The same thing 
occurred with the meadows after the aftermath. The owners had 
to remove the fences upon all fields given over to pasturage. This 
compulsory pasturage, of course, made it necessary that the time 
of sowing and of reaping should not be left to the individual, but 
be fixed for all by the community or by custom. 

=====第477页=====
The Mark 447 
All other land, i.e., all that was not house and farmyard, or so 
much of the mark as had been distributed among individuals, 
remained, as in early times, common property for common use; 
forests, pasture lands, heaths, moors, rivers, ponds, lakes, roads 
and bridges, hunting and fishing grounds. Just as the share of 
each member in so much of the mark as was distributed was of 
equal size, so was his share also in the use of the "common mark". 
The nature of this use was determined by the members of the 
community as a whole. So, too, was the mode of partition, if the 
soil that had been cultivated no longer sufficed, and a portion of 
the common mark was taken under cultivation. The chief use of 
the common mark was in pasturage for the cattle and feeding of 
pigs on acorns. Besides that, the forest yielded timber and 
firewood, litter for the animals, berries and mushrooms, whilst the 
moor, where it existed, yielded  turf.  The regulations as to pasture, 
the use of wood, etc., make up the most part of the many mark 
records written down at various epochs between the thirteenth and 
the eighteenth centuries, at the time when the old unwritten law 
of custom began to be contested. The common woodlands that are 
still met with here and there, are the remnants of these ancient 
unpartitioned marks. Another relic, at all events in West and 
South Germany, is the idea, deeply rooted in the popular 
consciousness, that the forest should be common property, 
wherein every one may gather flowers, berries, mushrooms, 
beechnuts and the like, and generally so long as he does no 
mischief,  act and do as he will. But this also Bismarck remedies, 
and with his famous berry-legislation502 brings down the Western 
Provinces to the level of the old Prussian squirearchy. 
Just as the members of the community originally had equal 
shares in the soil and equal rights of usage, so they had also an 
equal share in the legislation, administration, and jurisdiction 
within the mark. At fixed times and, if necessary, more frequently, 
they met in the open air to discuss the affairs of the mark and to 
sit in judgment upon breaches of regulations and disputes 
concerning the mark. It was, only in miniature, the primitive 
assembly of the German people, which was, originally, nothing 
other than a great assembly of the mark. Laws were made, but 
only in rare cases of necessity. Officials were chosen, their conduct 
in office examined, but chiefly judicial functions were exercised. 
The president had only to formulate the questions. The judgment 
was given by the aggregate of the members present. 
The unwritten law of the mark was, in primitive times, pretty 
much the only public law of those German tribes, which had no 

=====第478页=====
448 Frederick Engels 
kings;  the old tribal nobility, which disappeared during the 
conquest of the Roman empire,3 or soon after, easily fitted itself 
into this primitive constitution, as easily as all other spontaneous 
growths of the time, just as the Celtic clan-nobility, even as late as 
the seventeenth century, found its place in the Irish holding of the 
soil in common. And this unwritten law has struck such deep roots 
into the whole life of the Germans, that we find traces of it at 
every step and turn in the historical development of our people. 
In primitive times, the whole public authority in time of peace was 
exclusively judicial, and rested in the popular assembly of the 
hundred, the shire, or of the whole tribe. But this popular 
tribunal was only the popular tribunal of the mark adapted to 
cases that did not purely concern the mark, but came within the 
scope of the public authority. Even when the Frankish kings began 
to transform the self-governing shires into provinces governed by 
royal delegates, and thus separated the royal shire-courts from the 
common mark tribunals, in both the judicial function remained 
vested in the people. It was only when the old democratic freedom 
had been long undermined, when attendance at the public 
assemblies and tribunals had become a severe burden upon the 
impoverished freemen, that Charlemagne, in his shire-courts,b 
could introduce judgment by Schöffen, lay assessors, appointed 
by the king's judge, in the place of judgment by the whole 
popular assembly.* But this did not seriously touch the tribunals 
of the mark. These, on the contrary, still remained the model even 
for the feudal tribunals in the Middle Ages. In these, too, the 
feudal lord only formulated the issues, whilst the vassals them­
selves found the verdict. The institutions governing a village 
during the Middle Ages are but those of an independent village 
mark, and passed into those of a town as soon as the village was 
transformed into a town, i.e., was fortified with walls and trenches. 
All later constitutions of cities have grown out of these original 
town mark regulations. And finally, from the assembly of the 
mark were copied the arrangements of the numberless free 
associations of mediaeval times not based upon common holding 
* Not to be confused with the Schöffen courts after the manner of Bismarck 
and Leonhardt, 503 in which lawyers and lay assessors combined find verdict 
and judgment. In the old judicial courts there were no lawyers at all, the presiding 
judge had no vote at all, and the Schöffen or lay assessors gave the verdict 
independently. 
a The 1891 German edition has: "which disappeared during the Völkerwan­
derung or soon after it".— Ed. 
b The 1891 German edition has: "in most shire-courts".— Ed. 

=====第479页=====
The Mark 449 
of the land, and especially those of the free guilds. The rights 
conferred upon the guild for the exclusive carrying on of a 
particular trade were dealt with just as if they were rights in a 
common mark. With the same jealousy, often with precisely the 
same means in the guilds as in the mark, care was taken that the 
share of each member in the common benefits and advantages 
should be equal, or as nearly equal as possible. 
All this shows the mark organisation to have possessed an almost 
wonderful capacity for adaptation to the most different depart­
ments of public life and to the most various ends. The same 
qualities it manifested during the progressive development of 
agriculture and in the struggle of the peasants with the advance of 
large landed property. It had arisen with the settlement of the 
Germans in Germania Magna, that is, at a time when the breeding 
of cattle was the chief means of livelihood, and when the 
rudimentary, half-forgotten agriculture which they had brought 
with them from Asia was only just put into practice again. It held 
its own all through the Middle Ages in fierce, incessant conflicts 
with the land-holding nobility. But it was still such a necessity that 
wherever the nobles had appropriated the peasants' land, the 
villages inhabited by these peasants, now turned into serfs, or at 
best into coloni or dependent tenants, were still organised on the 
lines of the old mark, in spite of the constantly increasing 
encroachments of the lords of the manor. Farther on we will give 
an example of this. It adapted itself to the most different forms of 
holding the cultivated land, so long as only an uncultivated 
common was still left, and in like manner to the most different 
rights of property in the common mark, as soon as this ceased to 
be the free property of the community. 3 It died out when almost 
the whole of the peasants' lands, both private and common,b were 
stolen by the nobles and the clergy, with the willing help of the 
princes. But economically obsolete and incapable of continuing as 
the prevalent social organisation of agriculture it became only 
when the great advances in farming of the last hundred years 
made agriculture a science and led to altogether new systems of 
carrying it on. 
The undermining of the mark organisation began soon after the 
conquest of the Roman empire.0 As representatives of the nation, 
a In the German edition of 1891 this sentence ends as follows: "as soon as this 
[the Mark] ceased to be free".— Ed. 
b The 1891 German edition reads here: "both divided and undivided".— Ed. 
c The German edition of 1891 has here: "after the Völkerwanderung". — Ed. 
31-1317 

=====第480页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
the Frankish kings took possession of the immense territories 
belonging to the people as a whole, especially the forests, in order 
to squander them away as presents to their courtiers, to their 
generals, to bishops and abbots. Thus they laid the foundation of 
the great-randed estates, later on, of the nobles and the Church. 
Long before the time of Charlemagne, the Church had a full third 
of all the land in France, and it is certain that, during the Middle 
Ages,  this proportion held generally for the whole of Catholic 
Western Europe. 
The constant wars, internal and external, whose regular 
consequences were confiscations of land, ruined a great number of 
peasants, so that even during the Merovingian dynasty,504 there 
were very many free men owning no land. The incessant wars of 
Charlemagne broke down the mainstay of the free peasantry. 
Originally every freeholder owed service, and not only had to 
equip  himself,  but also to maintain himself under arms for six 
months. No wonder that even in Charlemagne's time scarcely one 
man in five could be actually got to serve. Under the chaotic rule 
of his successors, the freedom of the peasants went still more 
rapidly to the dogs. On the one hand, the ravages of the 
Northmen's invasions, the eternal wars between kings, and feuds 
between nobles, compelled one free peasant after another to seek 
the protection of some lord. Upon the other hand, the covetous-
ness of these same lords and of the Church hastened this process; 
by fraud, by promises, threats, violence, they forced more and 
more peasants and peasants' land under their yoke. In both cases, 
the peasants' land was added to the lord's manor, and was, at best, 
only given back for the use of the peasant in return for tribute 
and service. Thus the peasant, from a free owner of the land, was 
turned into a tribute-paying, service-rendering appanage of it, into 
a serf.  This was the case in the western Frankish kingdom,505 
especially west of the Rhine, East of the Rhine, on the other hand, 
a large number of free peasants still held their own, for the most 
part scattered, occasionally united in villages entirely composed of 
freemen. Even here, however, in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth 
centuries, the overwhelming power of the nobles and the Church 
was constantly forcing more and more peasants into serfdom. 
When a large landowner—clerical or lay—got hold of a 
peasant's holding, he acquired with it, at the same time, the rights 
in the mark that appertained to the holding. The new landlords 
were thus members of the mark and, within the mark, they were, 
originally, only regarded as on an equality with the other members 
of it, whether free or serfs, even if these happened to be their own 

=====第481页=====
The Mark 451 
bondsmen. But soon, in spite of the dogged resistance of the 
peasants, the lords acquired in" many places special privileges in 
the mark, and were often able to make the whole of it subject to 
their own rule as lords of the manor. Nevertheless the old 
organisation of the mark continued, though now it was presided 
over and encroached upon by the lord of the manor. 
How absolutely necessary at that time the constitution of the 
mark was for agriculture, even on large estates, is shown in the 
most striking way by the colonisation of Brandenburg and Silesia 
by Frisian and Saxon settlers, and by settlers from the Netherlands 
and the Frankish banks of the Rhine. From the twelfth century, 
the people were settled in villages on the lands of the lords 
according to German law, i.e., according to the old mark law, so 
far as it still held on the manors owned by lords. Every man had 
house and homestead; a share in the village fields, determined 
after the old method by lot, and of the same size for all; and the 
right of using the woods and pastures, generally in the woods of 
the lord of the manor, less frequently in a special mark. These 
rights were hereditary. The fee simple of the land continued in 
the lord, to whom the colonists owed certain hereditary tributes 
and services. But these dues were so moderate, that the condition 
of the peasants was better here than anywhere else in Germany. 
Hence, they kept quiet when the peasants' war broke out. For this 
apostasy from their own cause they were sorely chastised. 
About the middle of the thirteenth century there was 
everywhere a decisive change in favour of the peasants. The 
crusades506 had prepared the way for it. Many of the lords, when 
they set out to the East, explicitly set their peasant serfs free. 
Others were killed or never returned. Hundreds of noble families 
vanished, whose peasant serfs frequently gained their freedom. 
Moreover, as the needs of the landlords increased, the command 
over the payments in kind and services of the peasants became 
much more important than that over their persons. The serfdom 
of the earlier Middle Ages, which still had in it much of ancient 
slavery, gave to the lords rights which lost more and more their 
value; it gradually vanished, the position of the serfs narrowed 
itself down to that of simple hereditary tenants. As the method of 
cultivating the land remained exactly as of old, an increase in the 
revenues of the lord of the manor was only to be obtained by the 
breaking up of new ground, the establishing of new villages. But 
this was only possible by a friendly agreement with the colonists, 
whether they belonged to the estate or were strangers. Hence, in 
the documents of this time, we meet with a clear determination 
31* 

=====第482页=====
452 Frederick Engels 
and a moderate scale of the peasants' dues, and good treatment of 
the peasants, especially by the spiritual landlords. And, lastly, the 
favourable position of the new colonists reacted again on the 
condition of their neighbours, the bondmen, so that in all the 
North of Germany these also, whilst they continued their services 
to the lords of the manor, received their personal freedom. The 
Slav and Lithuanian peasants alone were not freed. But this was 
not to last. 
In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries the towns rose rapidly, 
and became rapidly rich. Their artistic handicraft, their luxurious 
life, throve and flourished, especially in South Germany and on 
the Rhine. The profusion of the town patricians aroused the envy 
of the coarsely-fed, coarsely-clothed, roughly-furnished, country 
lords.  But whence to obtain all these fine things? Lying in wait for 
travelling merchants became more and more dangerous and 
unprofitable. But to buy them, money was requisite. And that the 
peasants alone could furnish. Hence, renewed oppression of the 
peasants, higher tributes, and more corvée; hence renewed and 
always increasing eagerness to force the free peasants to become 
bondmen, the bondmen to become serfs, and to turn the common 
mark-land into land belonging to the lord. In this the princes and 
nobles were helped by the Roman jurists, who, with their 
application of Roman jurisprudence to German conditions, for the 
most part not understood by them, knew how to produce endless 
confusion, but yet that sort of confusion by which the lord always 
won and the peasant always lost. The spiritual lords helped 
themselves in a more simple way. They forged documents, by 
which the rights of the peasants were curtailed and their duties 
increased. Against these robberies by the landlords, 3 the peasants, 
from the end of the fifteenth century, frequently rose in isolated 
insurrections, until, in 1525, the great Peasants' War overflowed 
Suabia, Bavaria, Franconia, extending into Alsace, the Palatinate, 
the Rheingau, and Thüringen. The peasants succumbed after 
hard fighting. From that time dates the renewed predominance of 
serfdom amongst the German peasants generally. In those places 
where the fight had raged, all remaining rights of the peasants 
were now shamelessly trodden under foot, their common land 
turned into the property of the lord, they themselves into serfs. 
The North German peasants, being placed in more favourable 
conditions, had remained quiet; their only reward was that they 
a The German edition of 1891 has here: "by the princes, nobles and 
priests".— Ed. 

=====第483页=====
The Mark 453 
fell under the same subjection, only more slowly. Serfdom is 
introduced among the German peasantry from the middle of the 
sixteenth century in Eastern Prussia, Pomerania, Brandenburg, 
Silesia, and from the end of that century in Schleswig-Holstein, 
and henceforth becomes more and more their general condition. 
This new act of violence had, however, an economic cause. 
From the wars consequent upon the Protestant Reformation, only 
the German princes had gained greater power. It was now all up 
with the nobles' favourite trade of highway robbery. If the nobles 
were not to go to ruin, greater revenues had to be got out of their 
landed property. But the only way to effect this was to work at 
least a part of their own estates on their own account, upon the 
model of the large estates of the princes, and especially of the 
monasteries. That which had hitherto been the exception now 
became a necessity. But this new agricultural plan was stopped by 
the fact that almost everywhere the soil had been given to 
tribute-paying peasants. As soon as the tributary peasants, whether 
free men or coloni, had been turned into serfs, the noble lords had 
a free hand. Part of the peasants were, as it is now called in 
Ireland,3  evicted, i.e., either hunted away or degraded to the level 
of cottars, with mere huts and a bit of garden land, whilst the 
ground belonging to their homestead was made part and parcel of 
the demesne of the lord, and was cultivated by the new cottars and 
such peasants as were still left, in corvée labour. Not only were 
many peasants thus actually driven away, but the corvée service of 
those still left was enhanced considerably, and at an ever 
increasing rate. The capitalistic period announced itself in the 
country districts as the period of agricultural industry on a large 
scale, based upon the corvée labour of serfs. 
This transformation took place at first rather slowly. But then 
came the Thirty Years' War.507 For a whole generation Germany 
was overrun in all directions by the most licentious soldiery known 
to history. Everywhere was burning, plundering, rape, and 
murder. The peasant suffered most where, apart from the great 
armies, the smaller independent bands, or rather the freebooters, 
operated uncontrolled, and upon their own account. The devasta­
tion and depopulation were beyond all bounds. When peace came, 
Germany lay on the ground helpless, down-trodden, cut to pieces, 
bleeding; but, once again, the most pitiable, miserable of all was 
the peasant. 
The land-owning noble was now the only lord in the country 
a The German edition of 1891 has here: "to use the technical term".— Ed. 

=====第484页=====
454 Frederick Engels 
districts. The princes, who just at that time were reducing to 
nothing his political rights in the assemblies of Estates by way of 
compensation, left him a free hand against the peasants. The last 
power of resistance on the part of the peasants had been broken 
by the war. Thus the noble was able to arrange all agrarian 
conditions in the manner most conducive to the restoration of his 
ruined finances. Not only were the deserted homesteads of the 
peasants, without further ado, united with the lord's demesne; the 
eviction of the peasants was carried on wholesale and systematical­
ly. The greater the lord of the manor's demesne, the greater, of 
course, the corvée required from the peasants. The system of 
"unlimited corvée" was introduced anew; the noble lord was able 
to command the peasant, his family, his cattle, to labour for him, 
as often and as long as he pleased. Serfdom was now general; a 
free peasant was now as rare as a white crow. And in order that 
the noble lord might be in a position to nip in the bud the very 
smallest resistance on the part of the peasants, he received from 
the princes of the land the right of patrimonial jurisdiction, i.e., he 
was nominated sole judge in all cases of offence and dispute 
among the peasants, even if the peasant's dispute was with him, 
the lord  himself,  so that the lord was judge in his own case! From 
that time, the stick and the whip ruled the agricultural districts. 
The German peasant, like the whole of Germany, had reached his 
lowest point of degradation. The peasant, like the whole of 
Germany, had become so powerless that all self-help failed him, 
and deliverance could only come from without. 
And it came. With the French Revolution came for Germany 
also and for the German peasant the dawn of a better day. No 
sooner had the armies of the Revolution conquered the left bank 
of the Rhine, than all the old rubbish vanished, as at the stroke of 
an enchanter's wand— corvée service, rent dues of every kind to 
the lord, together with the noble lord  himself.  The peasant of the 
left bank of the Rhine was now lord of his own holding; 
moreover, in the Code Civil, 508 drawn up at the time of the 
Revolution and only baffled and botched by Napoleon, he 
received a code of laws adapted to his new conditions, that he 
could not only understand, but also carry comfortably in his 
pocket. 
But the peasant on the right bank of the Rhine had still to wait 
a long time. It is true that in Prussia, after the well-deserved 
defeat at Jena,509 some of the most shameful privileges of the 
nobles were abolished, and the so-called redemption of such 
peasants' burdens as were still left was made legally possible. But 

=====第485页=====
The Mark 455 
to a great extent and for a long time this was only on paper. In 
the other German States, still less was done. A second French 
Revolution, that of 1830, was needed to bring about the 
"redemption" in Baden and certain other small States bordering 
upon France. And at the moment when the third French 
Revolution, in 1848, at last carried Germany along with it, the 
redemption was far from being completed in Prussia, and in 
Bavaria had not even begun. After that, it went along more 
rapidly and unimpeded; the corvée labour of the peasants, who 
had this time become rebellious on their own account, had lost all 
value. 
And in what did this redemption consist? In this, that the noble 
lord, on receipt of a certain sum of money or of a piece of land 
from the peasant, should henceforth recognise the peasant's land, 
as much or as little as was left to him, as the peasant's property, 
free of all burdens; though all the land that had at any time 
belonged to the noble lord was nothing but land stolen from the 
peasants. Nor was this all. In these arrangements, the Government 
officials charged with carrying them out almost always took the 
side,  naturally, of the lords, with whom they lived and caroused, 
so that the peasants, even against the letter of the law, were again 
defrauded right and left. 
And thus, thanks to three French revolutions, and to the 
German one, that has grown out of them, we have once again a 
free peasantry. But how very inferior is the position of our free 
peasant of to-day compared with the free member of the mark of 
the olden time! His homestead is generally much smaller, and the 
unpartitioned mark is reduced to a few very small and poor bits of 
communal forest. But, without the use of the mark, there can be 
no cattle for the small peasant; without cattle, no manure; without 
manure, no agriculture. The tax-collector and the officer of the 
law threatening in the rear of him, whom the peasant of to-day 
knows only too well, were people unknown to the old members of 
the mark. And so was the mortgagee, into whose clutches 
nowadays one peasant's holding after another falls. And the best 
of it is that these modern free peasants, whose property is so 
restricted, and whose wings are so clipped, were created in 
Germany, where everything happens too late, at a time when 
scientific agriculture and the newly-invented agricultural machin­
ery make cultivation on a small scale a method of production more 
and more antiquated, less and less capable of yielding a livelihood. 
As spinning and weaving by machinery replaced the spinning-
wheel and the hand-loom, so these new methods of agricultural 

=====第486页=====
456 Frederick Engels 
production must inevitably replace the cultivation of land in small 
plots by landed property on a large scale, provided that the time 
necessary for this be granted. 
For already the whole of European agriculture, as carried on at 
the present time, is threatened by an overpowering rival, viz., the 
production of corn on a gigantic scale by America. Against this 
soil, fertile, manured by nature for a long range of years, and to 
be had for a bagatelle, neither our small peasants, up to their eyes 
in debt, nor our large landowners, equally deep in debt, can fight. 
The whole of the European agricultural system is being beaten by 
American competition. Agriculture, as far as Europe is concerned, 
will only be possible if carried on upon socialised lines, and for the 
advantage of society as a whole. 
This is the outlook for our peasants. And the restoration of a 
free peasant class, starved and stunted as it is, has this value,—that 
it has put the peasant in a position, with the aid of his natural 
comrade, the worker, to help  himself,  as soon as he once 
understands how.510 
But how?—By means of reviving the mark, not in its old, 
outdated form, but in a rejuvenated form: by rejuvenating 
common landownership under which the latter would not only 
provide the small-peasant community with all the prerogatives of 
big farming and the use of agricultural machinery, but will also 
give them means to organise, along with agriculture, major 
industries utilising steam and water power, and to organise them 
without capitalists by the community  itself. 
To organise big farming and utilise agricultural machines 
means, in other words, to make superfluous the agricultural 
labour of most small peasants who today work their land 
themselves. And so that these people, made superfluous in 
agriculture, would not be left unemployed and would not have to 
go to towns and cities, it would be necessary to employ them in 
industry in the village  itself,  and that can only be profitably 
organised on a large scale with the aid of steam and water power. 
How to arrange this? Think well on it, German peasants. Only 
the Social-Democrats can help you. 

=====第487页=====
457 
Frederick Engels 
PREFACE TO THE FIRST GERMAN EDITION 
OF SOCIALISM:  UTOPIAN AND SCIENTIFIC511 
The following work is derived from three chapters of my book: 
Herrn E. Dührings Umwälzung der Wissenschaft, Leipzig, 1878. I put 
them together for my friend Paul Lafargue for translation into 
French and added a few extra remarks. The French translation 
revised by me appeared first in the Revue socialiste* and then 
independently under the title: Socialisme utopique et socialisme 
scientifique, Paris, 1880. A rendering into Polish made from the 
French translation has just appeared in Geneva and bears the title: 
Socyjalizm utopijny a naukowy, Imprimerie de l'Aurore, Genève, 
1882. 
The surprising success of the Lafargue translation in the 
French-speaking countries and especially in France itself forced 
me to consider the question whether a separate German edition of 
these three chapters would not likewise be of value. Then the 
editors of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat informed me that a demand 
was generally being raised within the German Social-Democratic 
Party for the publication of new propaganda pamphlets, and they 
asked me whether I would not apply those three chapters to this 
purpose. 512 I was naturally in agreement with that and put my 
work at their disposal. 
It was, however, not originally written for immediate popular 
propaganda. How could what was in the first place a purely 
scientific work be suitable for that? What changes in form and 
content were required? 
So far as form is concerned, only the numerous foreign words 
could arouse doubts. But even Lassalle in his speeches and 
a F. Engels, "Le socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique", I-III, La 
Revue socialiste, Nos. 3, 4 and 5, March 20, April 20 and May 5, 1880.— Ed. 

=====第488页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
propaganda writings was not at all sparing with foreign words, 
and to my knowledge there has been no complaint about it. Since 
that time our workers have read newspapers to a far greater 
extent and far more regularly and to the same extent they have 
become thereby more familiar with foreign words. I have 
restricted myself to removing all unnecessary foreign words. 
Where they were unavoidable, I have refrained from adding 
so-called explanatory translations. The unavoidable foreign words, 
usually generally accepted scientific-technical expressions, would 
not have been unavoidable if they had been translatable. 
Translation, therefore, distorts the sense; it confuses instead of 
explaining. Oral information is of much greater assistance. 
The content on the other hand, I think I can assert, will cause 
German workers few difficulties. In general, only the third section 
is difficult, but far less so for workers, whose general conditions of 
life it concerns, than for the "educated" bourgeois. In the many 
explanatory additions that I have made here, I have had in mind 
not so much the workers as "educated" readers; persons of the 
type of the Deputy von Eynern, the Privy Councillor Heinrich von 
Sybel and other Treitschkes, who are governed by the irresistible 
impulse to demonstrate again and again in black and white their 
frightful ignorance and, following from this, their colossal 
misconception of socialism. If Don Quixote tilts his lance at 
windmills, that is in accordance with his office and his role; but it 
would be impossible for us to permit Sancho Panza anything of 
the sort. 
Such readers will also be surprised that in a sketch of the history 
of the development of socialism they should encounter the 
Kant-Laplace cosmogony, modern natural science and Darwin, 
classical German philosophy and Hegel. But scientific socialism is 
after all an essentially German product and could arise only in 
that nation whose classical philosophy had kept alive the tradition 
of conscious dialectics: in Germany.* The materialist conception of 
history and its specific application to the modern class struggle 
* "In Germany" is a slip of the pen. It should read "among Germans". For as 
indispensable, on the one hand, as German dialectics were for the genesis of 
scientific socialism, as equally indispensable for it were the developed economic and 
political conditions of England and France. The economic and political stage 
of development of Germany, which at the beginning of the forties was still more 
backward than today, could produce at the most caricatures of socialism (cf. 
Communist Manifesto, III, 1. c, "German, or 'True', Socialism" 3). Only by the 
subjection of the economic and political conditions produced in England and France 
a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp.  510-13.—  Ed. 

=====第489页=====
Preface to Socialism: Utopian and Scientific 459 
between proletariat and bourgeoisie was only possible by means of 
dialectics. And if the schoolmasters of the German bourgeoisie 
have drowned the memory of the great German philosophers and 
of the dialectics produced by them in a swamp of empty 
eclecticism—so much so that we are compelled to appeal to modern 
natural science as a witness to the preservation of dialectics in 
reality—we German Socialists are proud of the fact that we are 
descended not only from Saint-Simon, Fourier and Owen, but also 
from Kant, Fichte and Hegel. 
Frederick Engels 
London, September 21, 1882 
First published in the book: F. Engels, Printed according to the book 
Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der 
Utopie zur Wissenschaft, Hottingen-Zurich, 
1882 
to German dialectical criticism could a real result be achieved. From this angle, 
therefore, scientific socialism is not an exclusively German, but just as> much as 
international product. [This footnote was added by Engels to the third German 
edition of 1883.] 

=====第490页=====
460 
Frederick Engels 
JENNY LONGUET, NÉE MARX 513 
Jenny, the eldest daughter of Karl Marx, died at Argenteuil 
near Paris on January 11. About eight years ago she married 
Charles Longuet, a former member of the Paris Commune and at 
present co-editor of the Justice. 514 
Jenny Marx was born on May 1, 1844, grew up in the midst of 
the international proletarian movement and most closely together 
with it. Despite a reticence that could almost be taken for shyness, 
she displayed when necessary a presence of mind and energy 
which could be envied by many a man. 
When the Irish press disclosed the infamous treatment that the 
Fenians sentenced in 1866 and later had to suffer in jail,515 and 
the English papers stubbornly ignored the atrocities; and when the 
Gladstone Government, despite the promises it made during the 
election campaign, refused to amnesty them516 or even to 
ameliorate their conditions, Jenny Marx found a means to make 
the pious Mr. Gladstone take immediate steps. She wrote two 
articles for Rochefort's Marseillaise* vividly describing how political 
prisoners are treated in free England. This had an effect. The 
disclosures in a big Paris newspaper could not be endured. A few 
weeks later O'Donovan Rosa and most of the others were free 
and on their way to America. 
In the summer of 1871 Jenny, together with her youngest 
sister,b visited their brother-in-law Lafargue at Bordeaux. Lafargue, 
his wife, their sick childc and the two girls went from there to 
a Jenny Marx wrote eight articles on the Irish question for this newspaper (see 
present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 414-41).— Ed 
b Eleanor Marx.— Ed. 
c Charles Etienne Lafargue.— Ed 

=====第491页=====
Jenny Longuet, née Marx 461 
Bagnères-de-Luchon, a spa in the Pyrenees. Early one morning a 
gentleman came to Lafargue and said: "I am a police officer, but 
a Republican; an order for your arrest has been received; it is 
known that you were in charge of communications between 
Bordeaux and the Paris Commune. You have one hour to cross 
the border." 
Lafargue with his wife and child succeeded in getting over the 
pass into Spain, for which the police took revenge by arresting the 
two girls. Jenny had a letter in her pocket from Gustave Flourens, 
the leader of the Commune who was killed near Paris; had the 
letter been discovered, a journey to New Caledonia 517 was sure to 
follow for the two sisters. When she was left alone in the office for 
a moment, Jenny opened a dusty old account book, put the letter 
inside and closed the book again. Perhaps the letter is still there. 
When the two girls were brought to his office, the prefect, the 
noble Count of Kératry, well remembered as a Bonapartist, closely 
questioned them. But the cunning of the former diplomat and the 
brutality of the former cavalry officer were of no avail when faced 
with Jenny's calm circumspection. He left the room in a fit of rage 
about "the energy that seems peculiar to the women of this 
family". After the dispatch of numerous cables to and from Paris, 
he finally had to release the two girls, who had been treated in a 
truly Prussian way during their detention. 
These two incidents are characteristic of Jenny. The proletariat 
has lost a valiant fighter in her. But her mourning father has at 
least the consolation that hundreds of thousands of workers in 
Europe and America share his sorrow. 
London, January 13, 1883 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the news-
No. 4, January 18, 1883 paper 
Signed: Fr. Engels 

=====第492页=====
462 
Frederick Engels 
TO THE NEW YORKER VOLKSZEITUNG 
London, March 16, 1883 
Karl Marx's death occurred at 3 o'clock in the afternoon of 
Wednesday, the 14th inst, at Argen teuil, France. 518 For several 
weeks Marx had been suffering from bronchitis, this being further 
complicated by an abscess of the lung, and ultimately an internal 
haemorrhage put an end to his life. His death was an easy and 
painless one. 
Frederick Engels 
First published in the New Yorker Printed according to the news-
Volkszeitung, No. 66, March 17, 1883 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第493页=====
463 
Frederick Engels 
DRAFT  OF A  SPEECH  AT THE  GRAVESIDE 
OF KARL MARX519 
Scarcely  15 months  ago  most  of us  assembled round this grave, 
then about  to become  the  last resting place  of a  grand  and 
noble-hearted woman.3 Today  we  have  it reopened,  to receive 
what remains  of her  husband. 
Karl Marx  was one of  those pre-eminent  men of  whom  a 
century produces  not  many. Charles Darwin discovered  the law of 
development  of organic nature upon  our  planet. Marx  is the 
discoverer  of the  fundamental  law  according  to which human 
history moves  and  develops  itself, a law so  simple  and  self-evident 
that its simple enunciation  is almost sufficient  to secure assent.  Not 
enough with that, Marx  had  also discovered  the law  [which]  has 
created  our  actual state  of society with  its great class-division  of 
capitalists  and  wages-labourers;  the law  according  to which that 
society  has  become organised,  has  grown until  it [has]  almost 
outgrown  itself, and  according  to which  it must ultimately perish 
like all previous historical phases  of society. Such results render  it 
all the  more painful that  he should have been taken from  us in 
the midst  of his  work,  and  that, much  as he did,  still more  he left 
uncompleted. 
But science, though dear  to him, was far  from absorbing  him 
entirely.  No man  could feel  a purer  joy  than  he when  a new 
scientific progress  was  secured anywhere,  no  matter whether 
practically applicable  or not. But he  looked upon science above  all 
things  as a  grand historical lever,  as a  revolutionary power  in the 
most eminent sense  of the  word.  And as  such  he used,  to such 
a Jenny Marx,  neé von Westphalen.—  Ed. 

=====第494页=====
464 Frederick Engels 
purpose he wielded that immense knowledge, especially of history 
in all its branches of which he disposed. 
For he was indeed, what he called  himself,  a Revolutionist. The 
struggle for the emancipation of the class of wages-labourers from 
the fetters of the present capitalistic system of economic produc­
tion, was his real element. And no more active combatant than he 
ever existed. The crowning effort of this part of his work was the 
creation of the International Working Men's Association of which 
he was the acknowledged leader from 1864-72. The Association 
has disappeared, as far as outward show goes; but the fraternal 
bond of union of the working men of all civilised countries of 
Europe and America is established once for ever, and continues to 
live even without any outward, formal bond of union. 
No man can fight for any cause without creating enemies. And 
he has had plenty of them. For the greater part of his political life 
he was the best hated and best slandered man in Europe. But he 
scarcely ever noticed calumny. If ever man lived calumny down, 
he did, and at the time of his death he could look with pride upon 
the millions of his followers, in the mines of Siberia as well as in 
the workshops of Europe and America; he saw his economical 
theories adopted as the undisputed creed of universal socialism, 
and if he still had many opponents, there was scarcely one 
personal enemy left.3 
Written between March 14 and 17, 1883 Reproduced from the manuscript, 
„. ,,-,,., , verified with the newspaper 
tirst published in the newspaper La 
Justice, No. 27, March 20, 1883 
a La Justice has two more paragraphs: "What Marx was in his private life, for 
his family and his friends—I have no force to express it at the moment. And there 
is no need to do so, because all of you who have come here to tell him your last 
farewell know this. 
"Farewell, Marx! Your work and your name will endure through the 
ages."—Ed. 

=====第495页=====
5EÏ)er Molkmokroti 
- -Ä - genftaf-§)r$ati  bcx beut fdjett ^ojtaCbemoRxatie. 
SR: 1H. ~ ~" ~  $wwi4^»71mb^ " 1883. 
asa.rjT'^SLï  "?*Ä 
»epntlw*  of tu fri%Mn KteMwlMiM.  M> 
Atgrattiat pnttiterti««.; 
MnSnriflTJTty "*rt*-  * "•""^ »"-**••" 
Marin lirtnmliiu r«Kiii«l  m of hi (B 
)« «m (Nil« ptaw  Mn Mm. •-"— 
._£?  *«W  tefaWet««  Mew  *»*#«.  M •« M» 
MnfnM IMTut ebae.«  M, il  aetiafitem. 
}W4. 1. Jttq 1*81 
K> M*a»«  a* «larkrtiai  In ,ti»ltiMtnt". 
Her • ttrtt«. 
«MeM kk «Mat a »élira a»h «M«, 
*kM kk CNfcfcÇ etMJte» M» r«4ttt, 
ettW kk mtfcrk «eMaat n* ettatâttt, 
«* Ht «trite« m ak^iMiMKit, 
t„ Mi t.c««.i. • law', w ü 3>kl 
tlak «*He4 lab |k tarn M tatfeiHl, 
tin w. «Mae«  j*miw«, 
u*k «4* kk *»«*t tel «Jaattt k»t4llil 
«*t ut mil «trat «t««*» «m *t4t. 
. . . t.teekrtrit a«fl «tat krareMi 
*k warft »M »M  mfc'r»  erettißt.  » 
tertre»««!  «ak rakmk tat Unkt trMee)t. 
«Kr ««V« «a ««At attka»trt* «M, «tin «eert  MUM  fw te» «fc«»»tt» fffitt. «ter »mal krt eetfcr »antatet** «»«te «ttttlt  a«« kt«  «tut« eef'l «teat ta'» «été«, »Jam a» ak trkttt »twetafaa wir etk'a. 
Sraa.  fratearkr, auajt ta«) ketta, 
3w lafttMKHM ai rakthk »k &«. 
S. «Mit  taIle»»* k»  fcrtrr  14» Mat 
S feaat  «*t» aaaMdl  ea» »«M 14e«  «ea»)»». 
«ttktt  eeleawr«,  tri Starr ta «tern. 
tmtt eektt kat Darr» »rr SJrtikea »tree. 
$«• $c«t*fettt  »m JUot Pttnc. 
Corfu« IT. «t«, »erM «»r ««.Ma  l**t  »» t**»* 
tat était «rlefl, i» WMla «r«M, « bra, (mit gréa •»> (•»!-
irt« SUtaMa kerrMfl aeiM«. 
«••rati  Ittu «t. ïtmtt ,««l«r«»4t ak i«H«.e*lr»«t 
ut Ma «Sat«, rat etaan Mr Marnet '«•• *r»*i*>ti W> 
,»»|tetktaett«l- tat i« Ma M» £aaktattr ><««». 
• if,.!*,» «r»«itt.»ll»««««»er(l»«. 
«am «ara« «.«««tl« «>set«»t Wfoktt M tiiMf««t 
.«•. 14. CUn. «aa)wlta(I ri« «tat« »at art., iat krr 
«H« latantt ï»ttt ~ltt»Jrt. j. acatn. »«a. )M Ban 
ail» Jëadt«, lartr. la» i*. »rial «rttrtM fa («««• ««»* 
taiia «trWaaaatBt — ahr Kt attattr. 
.».» M btiitart tmtAtay «• «wttfa.ii«V »Jrairjami. 
•M Mt »iHatitay BSI|h.l»«ti u Mrrt» Stam Milar» »•»«". 
ka« «I I»« ai*l l> «n»i»»ea. »W» ««»» •**»»>«»«< 
ftKter  -a*r».  «tel«.»«*« «»«»Ititr. «trait« tat. 
.SMt t«»<« art »*» »<r *tl»i*«n9 W »rj««((«a» 
Rattirt, (• oriarft» »«T art «Itt»t«»a8»«fi*| »rr aw>r«)lt«)tK 
etfa)Utr^ Ut trl>> aMR ik»uai|*r« U.irt.»*<i»««t« Hr. 
Mk t»fa* ïlaliaaV, V«, W» Wt«(«o. ... «tir. «haaa 
,«nii  rjt«,  Ittm«. ut«t» w» M "riktn ««*», jtjk 
iMMr. Bt»t«l**,  «ui*  Stl%i<« ». f. ». trr»«» g"»»; 
kai aifa ait *jra»«fti«« art «aarutdfattt« «aaianEBi« ïtMal-
•irtrl.  m* »a«ll Ma l*«*au««< «ai«».if*t «iraaMtaaijNtlah 
ri.r> «alM a»tt run« g*«««»*«« *< «"•»»J' »** •»• 
brt (4 »it »î««»»i«i*tl«»Jt«, kit »a»»»»»«!«»«««»»«;. »« 
•h»«/.«« WW Wt »H»«« ««*»ll"«9<» •»» hmfWkot 
SttaM« «IttMdatt  ».»t..  a»> M* ttt fàl •«»'«») «•«•• 
amïtr, mURm - ««H »* ««•». ,tt**«.^^ •»?•*<• 
.Ham« ««*« fBBif, *<tt  «*•*»  ««* •»• »** »*** 
lOTBtadrt k« tt.lip« «.»»»lim»» »ahÄ»W»»* «* >rt 
îimi!< tilt««*. »ar»trH*t« «MAKOt. »> •«  «•»*«« 
Mt •lt|o»«W •» liât t»»«4 »•• «<(*»«•». »»*««• «»« 
Irälltt» n.«rl««ir««t» r«M|I Mt >»r«tTfii»« OUtBMa« «t 
ktr i»|i«li(ti»»V« «t«»B, « »»«M C* '<•*" **""• .gawi hUVt »»ikrfaaat« talk» Ht ri» Cran 
OUitki Ma« art. Mat t« Mrataat tft, •«> liât I»!* 
•nay«.  Wart auf ftktai ttaatïBta «tkift, »fit narr Mr B«trr> 
4aa)«a| KmtraMtî. mk  fcitftr  «Wttttt «Mtrra ft^t aielt  an» Ttiirtl 
»ai « IW M4Ü, MriVl - aaf ItM». ittk» «I Ma ktr 
ttarMauaif. |at rr ftf»fantkà«r V«iM««i«|m t^n««)t. 
.taMHi lUaa Mr SHMaWk. t»tr »al atar «a* 
la«|t »• Mr (aOt »a», «it «r<«la>Mi »ar («< »art 
Itat «d«>4tli4 MataicaM, nwt matait»««» Sraft. »S» rchK 
' " ' * * «HiiM«««« «t trftt* 
catHaak tt, «Ma« t« flaj «at tint «tniMiritii« |a«ktltt, ki« M»n 
taMIaaaatt ri^ti« i« Ut >»»»ri., la kir «t!«i.»iii«)t «at. 
atftaai kkttlaakt. «a |at tr kit tatwi«««« Mr IKrsikfoVratni 
aai Mai «tMH Mr «eM»jtit ink jaltki aäa) kit M« SUR 
Xnitri,  |t«a« Mrfal«i. 
.Xlcaa 3K«r »Mr «M Sffttat ItYMratunfair. MM«««^»». «* 
Wain »Mr |t«R B«., aatCUt) Mr ra^lat«ma» tMltl*»« 
I«k Mt karà) Ht «tf«)«"»«»« «^ÀaxhNaaRHtolMalta, aatraMNrtc» 
«a MT Bthtfaaf M« »»»tr««» t^nttkfrtat«. ktw rr »ttnfr MA 
StaMftrM*  tetatar <t«tat« e«|t «Bk ftiatr Brkarfmit, MA Ba> 
antlrEri« Mr »3tktag««|t« ftrMr Cat«a|iaali«R a«|t»t« tattr ~-
Mat aw fti« »Nrltt4tt SeWalMtKl. Tm Xuitf »m tritt 
»t«t«i.  U«» tt kat at«««*! au ««tt »tikoiiajatl ttaar 
âHifM,  liant «Mal» «it «*«t«t. «r»t .kr».la>« ârta«, 
»842.  »attirr «araàhl» iHt, <3rtHiltr krutia« Jtii«a| 184.T, 
Ktar rMii«M)t âttOn« 1148—49, »»-Bart lit»«« 1812 Mt 
taet — kaj« C«aîf»r«t4&i« kit StrHgt, firktit i« tBtrtiat« 
r> «art«. BrltW ««» ftaâan,  til r»kt«» Ht |t«it >irt««n»««<i 
«rk»tttr«1f»l«»«w ait Jhftau»« Mt »«««itn «trftaak awtrlak. 
Mal »MK  »tlMr  Cm SMwitat, »*<««l ftt« UrMMv ftotl fit« 
Ct««tl,  kattt rr t««9 aaa) ««tri «Itliitrt. 
,tl«k kt«»««|t« «ar  affÜKi  Mr t«|«]a>a|tl aak kcftMrtatnaMli 
fia«» triatr &L 9t««itr«a|t«, «»an«« va rt»««itl««ifa)a. 
«Htfr» i|« «trft, Wtnnftart, faut««««»! «Ht t|trra«MaH)lrat«*a>t. 
Ia«ta ik» um oit »tilt Bartifltrwan «aa). 0r la)»» kat 
«ttrl Wi &titr, atlt «Ski«««!*», «oklrtt Mfftn «iajt, aatawrtrtt 
•ar, an«« iakrtfte gra«, il ». ttak <t iD «ttlaaMa, 
Mrtktt, «ttirtt, ktnoMlt »a« fàrufeWKt» rt»«t«a»»«rfr aait. 
«rMittr, kit »M kra a*irifa)t* »««awrtt« «« tilt «a»i fera»« 
aak «atrtila tu  MStariram  k» »rt«t«, ink i* tant M <«|a 
f««t«:  tr «taa)rt «aak ataaakst «tffltt ^akt«, aktr taaai «a«) 
ûra »«taatitjt» Jn»k. 
.Cria (tain kitk kara> Ml 3«ktt«.»trK lartltkt« >«k I» 
a«a> Ma aStttl-
CTan' «aWmtat». tain»«. »rt1al»«»n i««t»»t, afri«. 
lllilitt «»«»«it ti.M«a«t«r *»tt«t«: 
I. .««4 M «rat »a« «art »air «tttat M« M» raffln)« 
»ajwiülra: 
.3» »««t. allir rat«fa>ia ®«ii«ii»r. tt«M la) «im Irk«. 
Sàtir Mi et»»»« Maft r» railajlrft«, ttatr Mt 
txrtüarfir. ttartrr arr« kat UMattt kat «raiataria« I* 
•tftarfc«. 
.CM r.l»(4t.  »J«ali»t« «i»t« M Ht k» ttnaVl Ml 
Ruart, »tr «nt IM<» 6r|tn*««»rii i»»»«lti«Tl |M iat 9m 
«ni atkr Baaklinji« ä)t« l«)tt«Ua)t«  »««Wf«;  «M« taxaft, 
M» (Il t»tt(»ttt« »»M«, Mt Mr «™*|t»t Mr  t«<ia»t«  tttaa-
!««»•  nk|«U| laatkn MaaafkM take«. C« mtW+t «Sar«a)t 
•a* fcii «tr. k« r»t OaVrrtrk-k Mt .JtQitttl' ttfaf. Mata» 
tftata>>M>l M« »mat.««!«)!« «5«*^».«». «tt 6l«ktM<« 
Mt raidi««« tt«r»rr«*t« Mira kat tr><«, karca « ta »Mil 
KnM,  ri« faaaMtMtay «artiaaat «|«k«tt« Ml tktrtit« M» 
•tantu«.« «taUtt, M« •* r* «rtt»«« faiaak aStaf M«, 
tatao, M M ml kn« «riant Mr .3»Kt«.l«r»«to. lrkrarr-
««„•ar«»- m »H-b» MhaMa ta Ben«, «rl ».«WaV Ckaa. 
«•Mantfraiia. anMn M kaa)  tait twan m Mt ««tt.lr.kt«  
»»«i.m.11 ink Mr t«»« ÏMJfc.t«. Mt ka» neu» m »atitiii« 
•ekitatt, Mi »tat»««a«| ko Uaaaainiia »»rlrltaJalttW««», 
«ak Me «k»l«|>i(t« Mr «tt««-«. «]lt«|»kiHH'"l'*" "" 
»itlt« e«l«««l»«»»t»<>»m i« rttranM« Mtfaaki«. «a» MMt 
Mt Irjktaaaafrlia^« «taarr. Ml tr mtw M« »tikta Mr «ae. 
tatlMir« «SajeiitarMti «aak, «a»«« »i*t «i*tt« «H M«t »wl 
aakarakat, M« tt ter 95 JhMni. wtatm««« «K Mn JHMIM 
litnrl ïtktnl, ta kir Kilt |iamitrriitt« kam: 
.Çrairlari« aiïlt Étakrr, atttrat«!  *««)!" 
,*et t« «a *•<! «art «Jtrk kttrainrl »a««»!», Mt («i«t« 
»tkaart« i« trtatlw «ak ttllir« Si«»«» «4 »»te d* »« 
taXtta Mrjtimktn. 
.ttak ia) trl»»M «.r »»(«(«iatr«, kat tt «aa) l«)»»«t,U«jtt 
km««« Bit» »»« kra«, kü Karr tat Matra »3tr<*i« «tteael. 
MlaaMtl M« "«>", Mt >|» «U ft'«"k «"«»' »«»<» 
.««tit. 15. 3»8«| t883. ». î««>t»H." 
ti. Xeftarailiat. 
,*»r *»rift« 8r»»Sr«l«)«tt Mr tr«it(îll(«l» WWtlr»«ttri 
krstfi iMt« §d>meri »«t Mtat tjrrlttfi kt* «Vatrr». ktfit« «altrialHlil«t «Ma)ia>Ha«ttalla«i «•» krtlm ««a»it ktr t4i.it« . 
ItfttHV« $rek«fti«n kt« «üat«Hi«fitie>t« Saiiolitmut un» Mt 
««llRailriia« tt»«t«1i«a«tt r«taai««ittife)r  ftrmtgt'-fia.  arltkatttn 
laala.  «Sit kr«« frnirr ««« ikrr tttttM««« fat Ma «ttt«ia)r« 
Vint «ak »Vt »»Sflattkiitt tîttiiti«««»«« «lit ttint« «rktt«. 
.Satt«,  1S. tRiti trt83. Ttt «rrtrtar «.ki«t.' 
tu. t>tc«r«M«i. 
.3« atratrt» tiaata »««K« a«k «H Xtttatttn krt ikaMriMa 
«rkaeraami (t^e««m«ta)«ti «a« Sftakti») Mtkriltat tàj «ttél 
«a km «itjtaeatt« «5«Wtt| Mr gtr««M »ak t»*irt »»« 
Vl«rr tei ktat f» «T«i(aaK« Cttfttft krt «rafcr« ^»«atiat». kit 
«atlt Kstt Vttiftn aaar. 
Itari«,  t«. »Sr» ms. 3.1* î«ti« » *f«»»«ti.-
S«t««i Im«* S!itkt«ia)i. aat Mai. i» kt«tla)tr 
•>-¥•• 
.3«) M« «at Mt fAtut «rMtattaak« «rtairtiiim. «t« km un* 
»tr«t|lta)rff ütMw «ak irlttr«  fftvàtA  »it'ttt titkt «ak lauf. 
aerttrt «nt|»krftât«. ïkw rmult rtrrunk' £tin «ttrtirr ittt«»« 
»ak fatrlrrtb» |«1 Jtari «Satr farkm km kt^tkdMtn ^a«a 
kirin 3«kiMuMri< ara«««. «»M tTt i»et Mt MftarM«, 
rr f(t »Mt «ml, Mt MaV'teMt «twrita tptnattatt «a« M» 
UatttMiaV» .»» «atkrmrr« M» Sdtt, >t(l|iii<H »a km 
ttattrkriulu« ««k «»t«rM«ittn , iaaitii Ar «4 ikrrr y««! M. 
amlt Sak «>t IBatl kn uattttoarftffi »n» «t«i«tMttitu« tttkt 
flte, ler« rr ri «rttrM tat. Ktm ktttaktt, Mflt« %tti«S km 
»tfi««tn,  «m |t»| m trittrr  ftrM,  wit ia {titan« 4>| >$ttn 
(Ml «Mt Mt siM ntiaraaftrR. $t «nr tm era«t«  a>< ri, «ar 
«r tta «rater &rt»; war Xi* a»|ft« Kt!t, kit tt« («antr«. 
,T«k ia) »Ht kt« aattatt» «4>l« «ak  ,itru* . 14 
«e>r Mer ««4 «t« fMttekr krt ktatta)t» £aiiaffttt«a> 
tta Ht, kit »ut kraaltratt »«t, M«  «M«M>II  »uik.aj i« 
«etea. wrta)t fat tir a>na Sttttt «a»tl«kti. |är kt« «tan«, 
Mt aftfrtt tpartrt «t{4«tfra kat, fataeti ma« t« Mir O», 
v«4««« ea« «S4alrta nke» («a«, 
.(H antrM H "i41 ratuA». »»ttu t« k«. »i4 .« 84»«. 
ttki» fttek». tEBar k*4kamt«8k et« ttikt«f4aftii4etrt Stt«k 
kit Vitatt «it (artWaa;. Ce« attaM lit In« »«flrtHt4rl 
e^ektlaft. Ma) tr kat VreUtertat , ktr Vertn kr« «tMttr«M» 
Mt ni kir »Jkr.it  kttritt »rt itt m lr»t, kat« 
a«*» j« tt(4«Hrt«K «aW Mt Btllt.i4.l1  «MtM« |el. 
«tentaltantt ktr SBrlnntMtt, llnMatiaiiet »ut» w Witt«. 
k*att,  tat et M» |»a#n «tkht Mr ffl.lr.i4.l1  frtleawm. 
»ai Irrettaleteni tam ttaïc ««k kit ftat(Ma)e!i >«i» katiaei«. 
.C<| «Si«t«i4a(l lit kit etttttrrta ktr 3»r^4ltti. 
.ïit Sat.tmltr.i4.lt  hfutt «»« •»« tS.tt «a4 Mt 
«tett lai tiauait litt tatt, eu») tem« ktr IBt)fr«|a)ett «)« ft' 
.t* i»«it!M4«!lk»iitti.t4«tt. taeteVOtatr Ma «Ml. 
ttr4t»f|ea |et, ttktet Ma  ftiwttau««!««,  «ak wtt 4« Mi 4»»Mn 
aak (terre« Mr Crkt, wda)t te teaat tkt teM», ke. ®ett ma)! 
.lit «Bi«r.l4att itt «ia)t kl»tl4. Sit team teat •54t«»teit 
»ar «fiew «atjt M« »54taasm Mt «tattanattiei a«k fa 
.«aattal"  «et«r«t«»t| a«4 
.3« «tt« .«([«tie 
.Dit »eltt Mr J5tut.i4.ft , aektjt m «art »rt«.t.(t». itkt 
«at i» M» »tktak, «Se« «nattffia ktt r)n«M |a trekt«. «Kk 
Ma *«atM. »"14" aar »auraeaaMa M™, an ttrt »«4tt««,« 
trttir« Hetrafeke«. 
.Rari k« kit «nt«»r«M»i.tit la« ri«tr «t!l«, a«« «air 
«S4»lt j» eatr partit «e«i«a)t, pt Mr ».«»i, »eta)t |ea>k 
fa)aa ««Mttjl (Ureti, aak M» «Met >nt«an aatt 
.tl«k M IA «tey kt.» «a. itltittlti,. Siatr |0)»il 
Ma t)r»lit«rttt. *e« «rMeierkira eOcr tfaakrr ka» fei« 
faakt« cite» eekkanaei. fwt M«Pjatt|ia, Matmbn tataittartir 
«fier Staket «ak e)a la kaeirtatet «kerekrttae ktMJpxtea. 
.M * eut taVaatri «4U«, Mr aal «mette« tel tae) »tr 
ttearr» ««tt. «et tatet Ht ue)l leM. (t nk la ka 
4}ttti«.  it 1* ta Ma Ce»! M «talatatia«. «et, «a-
ttatM aatt «M)t »n»ta«t», fesrtr iaMt wrirb ia atari wrüernt 
Xnitra ktrlna feta. 
.«Stat I« ««an». kMSea ail la »„«t an |re|r* Zeklta 
katiktl.,  ait .Set IMt IreVra, ke| >»«ti4lt tan »tt. 
»irlti4t »MtM. wet «r |na)tt aat rrtrrkt tat. «5a (linn 
ait ea »rill« In« ejekaftait. 
.ê^ttr, IrtraMr gerankt «Bir »tiki« kl« 9Bt«, kr« 
k» «a» «ijrijt »a», waakli« ktl |«a giet. »al 
«tl.tta an ea Xitaia «tektl-
Va flkrcM weit« aatet Ma fa)ea taeaaaatca «ea) %tit** 
«art*, a. ». in aatetl «e)aitea*ta «ee «Ut(,  «.ill 
«at.t,«t, Jtitkti* ftl.tt. 1952 •• «aaar taata» 
«rftajiiReect 1« tftitf jeVra geaaaf aeraaaranV •• C»e)«tt, 
etiata9t «Mr« tBtit«tiek kit tBaaMI Mr «aaejatitlia. «5te 
9UtatwitTt«t4att a« kertrtti« kar4 j«« aMeirileM« trftt« 
A page  of Der Sozialdemokrat,  No. 13,  March  22, 18 
"Karl Marx's Funeral" containing Engels' article 
32-1317 

=====第496页=====

=====第497页=====
467 
Frederick Engels 
KARL MARX'S FUNERAL 
On Saturday, March 17, Marx was laid to rest in Highgate 
Cemetery, in the same grave in which his wife had been buried 
fifteen months earlier. 
At the graveside Gottlieb Lemke laid two wreaths with red 
ribbons on the coffin in the name of the editorial board and 
dispatching service of the Sozialdemokrat and in the name of the 
London Communist Workers' Educational Society. 521 
Frederick Engels then made the following speech in English: 
"On the 14th of March, at a quarter to three in the afternoon, 
the greatest living thinker ceased to think. He had been left alone 
for scarcely two minutes, and when we came back we found him 
in his armchair, peacefully gone to sleep—but forever. 
"An immeasurable loss has been sustained both by the militant 
proletariat of Europe and America, and by historical science, in 
the death of this man. The gap that has been left by the departure 
of this mighty spirit will soon enough make itself felt. 
"Just as Darwin discovered the law of development of organic 
nature, so Marx discovered the law of development of human 
history: the simple fact, hitherto concealed by an overgrowth of 
ideology, that mankind must first of all eat, drink, have shelter 
and clothing, before it can pursue politics, science, art, religion, 
etc.; that therefore the production of the immediate material 
means of subsistence and consequently the degree of economic 
development attained by a given people or during a given epoch 
form the foundation upon which the state institutions, the legal 
conceptions, art, and even the ideas on religion, of the people 
concerned have been evolved, and in the light of which they must, 
32* 

=====第498页=====
468 Frederick Engels 
therefore, be explained, instead of vice versa, as had hitherto been 
the case. 
"But that is not all. Marx also discovered the special law of 
motion governing the present-day capitalist mode of production 
and the bourgeois society that this mode of production has 
created. The discovery of surplus value suddenly threw light on 
the problem, in trying to solve which all previous investigations, of 
both bourgeois economists and socialist critics, had been groping 
in the dark. 
"Two such discoveries would be enough for one lifetime. Happy 
the man to whom it is granted to make even one such discovery. 
But in every single field which Marx investigated—and he 
investigated very many fields, none of them superficially—in 
every field, even in that of mathematics, he made independent 
discoveries. 
"Such was the man of science. But this was not even half the 
man. Science was for Marx a historically dynamic, revolutionary 
force. However great the joy with which he welcomed a new 
discovery in some theoretical science whose practical application 
perhaps it was as yet quite impossible to envisage, he experienced 
quite another kind of joy when the discovery involved immediate 
revolutionary changes in industry and in historical development in 
general. For example, he followed closely the development of the 
discoveries made in the field of electricity and recently those of 
Marcel Deprez. 
"For Marx was before all else a revolutionist. His real mission in 
life was to contribute, in one way or another, to the overthrow of 
capitalist society and of the state institutions which it had brought 
into being, to contribute to the liberation of the modern 
proletariat, which he was the first to make conscious of its own 
position and its needs, conscious of the conditions of its 
emancipation. Fighting was his element. And he fought with a 
passion, a tenacity and a success such as few could rival. His work 
on the first Rheinische Zeitung (1842), the Paris Vorwärts! (1844), 
Brüsseler Deutsche Zeitung* (1847), the Neue Rheinische Zeitung 
(1848-49), the New-York Tribune (1852-61), and in addition to 
these a host of militant pamphlets, work in organisations in Paris, 
Brussels and London, and finally, crowning all, the formation of 
the great International Working Men's Association—this was 
indeed an achievement of which its founder might well have been 
proud even if he had done nothing else. 
a Deutsche-Brüsseler Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第499页=====
Karl Marx's Funeral 469 
"And, consequently, Marx was the best-hated and most calum­
niated man of his time. Governments, both absolutist and 
republican, deported him from their territories. Bourgeois, 
whether conservative or ultra-democratic, vied with one another in 
heaping slanders upon him. All this he brushed aside as though it 
were cobweb, ignoring it, answering only when extreme necessity 
compelled him. And he died beloved, revered and mourned by 
millions of revolutionary fellow-workers—from the mines of Siberia 
to California, in all parts of Europe and America—and I make bold 
to say that though he may have had many opponents he had 
hardly one personal enemy. 
"His name will endure through the ages, and so also will his 
work!" 
Then Marx's son-in-law Longuet read the following addresses 
which had been received in French. 
I. ON THE GRAVE OF KARL MARX 
FROM THE RUSSIAN SOCIALISTS 
"In the name of all Russian socialists I send a last farewell greeting to the 
outstanding Master among all the socialists of our times. One of the greatest minds 
has passed away, one of the most energetic fighters against the exploiters of the 
proletariat has died. 
"The Russian socialists bow before the grave of the man who sympathised with 
their strivings in all the fluctuations of their terrible struggle, a struggle which they 
shall continue until the final victory of the principles of the social revolution. The 
Russian language was the first to have a translation of Capital? that gospel of 
contemporary socialism. The students of the Russian universities were the first to 
whose lot it fell to hear a sympathetic exposition of the theories of the mighty 
thinker whom we have now lost. Even those who were opposed to the founder of 
the International Working Men's Association in respect of practical questions of 
organisation were obliged always to bow before his comprehensive knowledge and 
lofty power of thought which penetrated the substance of modern capital, the 
development of the economic forms of society and the dependence of the whole 
history of mankind on those forms of development. Even the most vehement 
opponents that he found in the ranks of the revolutionary socialists could not but 
obey the call that he and his lifelong friend sent into the world 35 years ago: 
'"Proletarians of All Countries, UniteV 
"The death of Karl Marx is mourned by all who have been able to grasp his 
thought and appreciate his influence upon our time. 
"I allow myself to add that it will be still more deeply mourned by those who 
associated closely with Marx, especially by those who loved him as a friend. 
Paris,  March 15, 1883 "p Lavrov." 
a KapA MapKcb, KanumaJi*. Kpumuxa nojiumuuecKou auonoMiu. nepeB04T> 
CT> HtMeuKaro.  TOM-B  nepBwft. KHHra I. «npoiiecct npoH3B04CTBa KanHTaAa». 
C.-neTep6ypn>, 1872.—Ed. 

=====第500页=====
470 Frederick Engels 
II. TELEGRAM 
"The Paris branch of the French Workers' Party expresses its grief at the loss of 
the thinker whose materialist conception of history and analysis of capitalist 
production founded scientific socialism and the present revolutionary communist 
movement. It also expresses its respect for Marx as a man and its complete 
agreement with his doctrines. 
Paris,  March 16, 1883 «The Secretary, Upine." 
III. TELEGRAM 
"In my own name and as a delegate of the Spanish Workers' Party522 (Madrid 
Branch), I share the immense grief of the friends and daughters of Marx at the 
cruel loss of the great Socialist who was the master of us all. 
Paris,  March 16, 1883 "jos ^ Mesa y Leompart" 
Then Liebknecht made the following speech in German: 
"I have come from the heart of Germany to express my love and gratitude to 
my unforgettable teacher and faithful friend. To my faithful friend! Karl Marx's 
greatest friend and colleague has just called him the best-hated man of this 
century. That is true. He was the best-hated but he was also the best-loved. The 
best-hated by the oppressors and exploiters of the people, the best-loved by the 
oppressed and exploited, as far as they are conscious of their position. The 
oppressed and exploited people love him because he loved them. For the deceased 
whose loss we are mourning was great in his love as in his hatred. His hatred had 
love as its source. He was a great heart as he was a great  mind.  All who knew him 
know that. 
"But I am here not only as a pupil and a friend, I am here as the representative 
of the German Social-Democrats, who have charged me with expressing their feelings 
for their teacher, for the man who created our party, as much as one can speak of 
creating in this connection. 
"It would be out of place here to indulge in fine speeches. For nobody was a 
more vehement enemy of phrasemongering than Karl Marx. It is precisely his 
immortal merit that he freed the proletariat, the working people's party, from 
phrases and gave it the solid foundation of science that nothing can shake. A 
revolutionary in science and a revolutionary through science, he scaled the highest 
peak of science in order to come down to the people and to make science the 
common good of the people. 
"Science is the liberator of humanity. 
"The natural sciences free us from God. But God in heaven still lives on 
although science has killed him. 
"The science of society that Marx revealed to the people kills capitalism, and 
with it the idols and masters of the earth who will not let God die as long as they 
live. 
"Science is not German. It knows no barriers, and least of all the barriers of 
nationality. It was therefore natural that the creator of Capital should also become 
the creator of the International Working Men's Association. 

=====第501页=====
Karl Marx's Funeral 471 
"The basis of science, which we owe to Marx, puts us in a position to resist all 
attacks of the enemy and to continue with ever-increasing strength the fight which 
we have undertaken. 
"Marx changed the Social-Democracy from a  sect,  a school,  into a party, the party 
which is now fighting undaunted and which will be victorious. 
"And that is true not only of us Germans. Marx belongs to the proletariat. It was 
to the proletariat of all countries that his life was dedicated. Proletarians who can 
think and do think in all countries have grateful reverence for him. 
"It is a heavy blow that has fallen on us. But we do not mourn. The deceased is 
not dead. He lives in the heart, he lives in the head of the proletariat. His memory 
will not perish, his doctrine will be effective in ever broader circles. 
"Instead of mourning, let us act in the spirit of the great man who has died and 
strive with all our strength so that the doctrine which he taught and for 
which he fought will be put into practice as soon as possible. That is the best way to 
honour his memory! 
"Deceased, living friend, we shall follow to the final aim the way you showed us. We 
swear it on your grave!" 
Besides those mentioned there were also present at the grave, 
among others, Karl Marx's other son-in-law, Paul Lafargue, 
Friedrich Lessner, who was sentenced at the Cologne Communist 
Trial in 1852 523 to five years' imprisonment in a fortress, and 
G. Lochner, also an old member of the Communist League.524 The 
natural sciences were represented by two celebrities of the first 
magnitude, the zoologist Professor Ray Lankester and the chemist 
Professor Schorlemmer, both members of the London Academy of 
Sciences  (ROYAL SOCIETY). 525 
Written on about March 18, 1883 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, 
No. 13, March 22, 1883 
Signed: Fr. Engels 

=====第502页=====
472 
Frederick Engels 
[TO THE EDITORS OF THE NEW YORKER 
VOLKSZEITUNG] 
[London,] April 18, [18]83 
122 Regent's Park Road 
TO THE EDITORS OF THE N. Y. VOLKSZEITUNG 
In your issue of the 15th you print my telegram to Sorge 3 as 
though it were addressed to you! 3 
In the issue of the 17th you make me say in my telegram to you 
that Marx died in Argenteuil.c 
It is not our custom over here to take liberties of this kind with 
the names of other persons or to countenance such things if they 
are done to ourselves. 
You have thus made it impossible for me to send you any 
further reports. 
If you ever make similar misuse of my name in your paper 
again, I shall be compelled to request my old friend Sorge to 
announce that this was an outright falsification on your part. 
Yours very truly, 
F. E. 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, script 
Moscow, 1935 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Engels is referring to his telegram to Friedrich Adolf Sorge of March 14, 
1883 (see present edition, Vol. 46).— Ed 
b See an item, "London, 14. März, 1883" in the New Yorker Volkszeitung, 
No. 64, March 15,  1883.—  Ed 
c See this volume, p. 462.— Ed. 

=====第503页=====
473 
Frederick Engels 
ON THE DEATH OF KARL MARX 
I 
I have subsequently received several further announcements on 
the occasion of this bereavement which demonstrate how wide­
spread people's sympathy has been, and of which I have to render 
an account. 
On 20th March Miss Eleanor Marx received the following 
telegram, written in French, from the Editorial Office of The Daily 
News: 
"Moscow, 18th March. Editorial Office Daily News, London. Please be so kind as 
to convey to Mr. Engels, author of The Working Classes in England 3 and intimate 
friend of the late Karl Marx, our request that he lay a wreath on the coffin of the 
unforgettable author of Capital, bearing the following inscription: 
"'In memory of the defender of workers' rights in theory and their 
implementation in practice—the students of the Petrovsky Agricultural Academy in 
Moscow.'527 
"Mr. Engels is requested to tell us his address and the cost of the wreath. The 
amount due will be forwarded to him without delay. 
"Students of the Petrovsky Academy in Moscow." 
The dispatch was at any event too late for the funeral, which 
took place on 17th March. 
In addition to that, our friend P. Lavrov in Paris remitted me 
an order on 31st March for 124.50 frs (£4.18s.9d.), sent in by 
students of the Technological Institute in Petersburg528 and by 
Russian student women, also for a wreath to go on the grave 
of Karl Marx. 
Thirdly, last week the Sozialdemokrat announced that Odessa 
students also wished for a wreath in their name to be placed on 
Marx's grave. 529 
a F. Engels, The Condition of the Working-Class in England.— Ed. 

=====第504页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
As the money received from Petersburg is easily enough for all 
three wreaths, I have taken the liberty of paying for the Moscow 
and Odessa wreaths from that as well. The preparation of the 
inscriptions, a somewhat unfamiliar practice here, has caused some 
delay, but the wreaths will be placed on the grave at the beginning 
of next week, and I shall then be able to render an account, in the 
Sozialdemokrat, of the money received. 3 
A beautiful, large wreath has reached us from Solingen, via the 
Communist Workers' Educational Society 530 here, "for the grave 
of Karl Marx from the workers of the scissors, knife and sword 
industry at Solingen". When we placed it on the grave on 24th 
March, we found that the long ends of the red silk bows on the 
wreaths from the Sozialdemokrat and the Communist Workers' 
Educational Society had been cut off and stolen by people 
desecrating the grave. Complaining to the trustees was to no avail, 
but will no doubt mean that the grave will be protected in future. 
A Slavonic association in Switzerland531 expresses the hope 
"that a special memorial will be established to Karl Marx through the setting-up 
of an international fund bearing his name in support of the victims of the great 
emancipation struggle and for the furtherance of that struggle  itself", 
and has sent an initial contribution which I have retained for 
the time being. Of course, the fate of this suggestion depends 
primarily on whether there is a response to it, and that is why I 
am publishing it here. 
In order to counter the false rumours which are being 
circulated in the press with some actual facts, I am passing on the 
following brief details concerning the illness and death of our 
great theoretical leader. 
Having been almost totally cured of an old liver complaint by 
three periods of treatment at Karlsbad,532 Marx was left suffering 
only from a chronic stomach complaint and nervous exhaustion, 
which took the form of headaches and, mainly, persistent 
insomnia. Both complaints disappeared more or less after a visit to 
a seaside or health resort in the summer, and did not return, with 
more troublesome effects, until after the New Year. Chronic 
throat complaints and coughing, which also contributed to the 
insomnia, and chronic bronchitis were, on the whole, less 
troublesome. But it was to those very complaints that he was to 
succumb. Four or five weeks before the death of his wifeb he was 
suddenly seized by a severe bout of pleurisy, complicated by 
a See this volume, pp. 476-77.— Ed. 
b Jenny Marx died on December 2,  1881.—  Ed. 

=====第505页=====
On the Death of Karl Marx 475 
bronchitis and incipient pneumonia. The affair was very danger­
ous, but it turned out well. He was then sent first of all to the Isle 
of Wight (early in 1882), and following that to Algiers. The 
journey was a cold one and he arrived in Algiers suffering from a 
renewed attack of pleurisy. In normal circumstances that would 
not have made so much difference. But in Algiers the winter and 
the spring were colder and rainier than ever. In April vain 
attempts were made to heat the dining room! The final result was 
that his overall condition became worse instead of better. 
Having been sent from Algiers to Monte Carlo (Monaco), Marx 
arrived there, after a cold and damp voyage, suffering from a 
third but milder attack of pleurisy. On top of that constant bad 
weather, which he seemed to have brought with him specially 
from Africa. So here too he had to fight against a fresh bout of 
illness rather than have the opportunity to restore  himself.  Towards 
the beginning of summer he went to visit his daughter Madame 
Longuet at Argenteuil, and used his stay there to go to the 
sulphurous springs in the neighbouring town of Enghien to treat 
his chronic bronchitis. Despite the continued wet summer the treat­
ment was a success, slow but to the satisfaction of the doctors. 3 
They now sent him to Vevey on Lake Geneva, and there he 
recovered most, so that he was allowed to spend the winter, not in 
London, it is true, but on the south coast of England. Here he 
wanted at last to take up his work again. When he came to 
London in September, he looked well and often climbed 
Hampstead Hill (about 300 feet above his lodging) with me, 
without complaint. When the November fogs threatened to 
descend he was sent to Ventnor, the southern tip of the Isle of 
Wight. Immediately he was subjected again to wet weather and 
fog. The inevitable consequence was a fresh cold, coughing and so 
on; in short, weakening through confinement to his room when he 
should have been restoring himself by moving about in the fresh 
air. Then Madame Longuet died. The next day (12th January) 
Marx came to London, clearly suffering from bronchitis. This was 
soon complicated by laryngitis, which made it almost impossible 
for him to swallow. Able to bear the greatest of pain with the most 
stoic equanimity, he preferred to drink a litre of milk (which he 
had loathed his whole life long) rather than eat the appropriate 
solids. In February an ulcer developed in his lung. The 
medicaments had no effect on his body, surfeited as it was with 
medicines administered over the previous fifteen months; at most 
a Gustave Dourien and Feugier.— Ed. 

=====第506页=====
476 Frederick Engels 
they weakened his appetite and inhibited his digestion. He became 
visibly thinner, almost by the day. All the same, the illness was 
taking a relatively favourable course overall. His bronchitis was 
almost cured and it became easier for him to swallow. The 
doctors3 were full of hope. Then, visiting him between two and 
three o'clock—the best time to see him—I suddenly found the 
whole house in tears: he was so ill that they thought it was 
probably the end. And yet that very morning he had taken wine, 
milk and soup with relish. Faithful old Lenchen Demuth, who had 
raised all his children from the cradle and has been with the 
household for forty years, went up to him and came straight back 
down: "Come with me, he's half asleep." When we went in, he was 
completely asleep, but forever. One cannot wish to die an easier 
death than Karl Marx did in his armchair. 
And now, to close with, a piece of good news: 
The manuscript of the second volume of Capital has been 
preserved completely intact. Whether it can be printed in its present 
form I am not yet in a position to say. There are more than 
1,000 pages of folio. But "the process of circulation of capital" 
and "the forms of the process as a whole" are complete in a 
version dating from the years 1867-1870. There is the beginning 
of a later version and copious material in the form of critical 
extracts, particularly on Russian landownership, a good deal of 
which may yet be put to use. 
His oral instruction was that his youngest daughter Eleanor and 
I should be his literary executors. 
London, 28th April 1883 
Frederick Engels 
II 
A beautiful wreath bearing an inscription on red ribbons was 
sent to Argenteuil by the Social-Democrats of Erfurt; fortunately 
someone happened to be available to bring it across; when it was 
laid on the grave, it was noticed that the red silk ribbons of the 
Solingen wreath had again been stolen. 
Meanwhile the three wreaths for Moscow, Petersburg and Odessa 
were completed. To prevent the ribbons from being stolen, we 
were obliged to make it impossible for them to be used again by 
a Horatio Bryan Donkin.— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
On the Death of Karl Marx 477 
making little incisions on the edges. They were laid on the grave 
yesterday. A shower of rain had so affected the ribbon on the 
Erfurt wreath that it could not be used for anything else, and thus 
escaped being stolen. 
These three wreaths cost £l.ls.8d. each, a total of £3.5s.0d. I 
therefore have £1.13s.9d. left from the £4.18s.9d. that was sent to 
me, and I shall send that back to P. Lavrov in order to comply 
with the wishes of the donors.— 
The death of a great man provides a first-rate opportunity for 
small people to make political, literary and actual capital out of it. 
Here just a few examples which should be made public, not to 
speak of the many which have occurred in private correspon­
dence. 
In a letter dated 2nd April Philipp van Patten, Secretary of the 
CENTRAL LABOR UNION in New York, 533 wrote to me as follows: 
"In connection with the recent demonstration in honour of the memory of Karl 
Marx, when ... all factions united in testifying their regard for the deceased 
philosopher, there were very loud statements made by John Most and his friends to 
the effect that he, Most, was upon intimate terms with Karl Marx, that he had made his 
work Das Kapital popular in Germany and that Marx was in accord with the 
propaganda conducted by him. 
"We have a high appreciation of the talents and the achievements of Marx but 
cannot believe that he was in sympathy with the anarchistic, disorganising methods 
of Most and I would like to obtain from you an expression of opinion as to Karl 
Marx's position upon the question of Anarchy versus Social-Democracy. Too much 
mischief has already been done here by the untimely and imprudent talk of Most 
and it is rather disagreeable for us to learn that so high an authority as Marx 
endorsed such tactics." 
I replied to him in a letter on 18th April3534 : 
"My statement in reply to your inquiry of the 2nd April as to 
Karl Marx's position with regard to the Anarchists in general and 
Johann Most in particular shall be short and clear. 
"Marx and I, ever since 1845,535 have held the view that one of 
the final results of the future proletarian revolution will be the 
gradual dissolution and ultimate disappearance of that political 
organisation called the State; an organisation the main object of 
which has ever been to secure, by armed force, the economical 
subjection of the working majority to the wealthy minority. With 
the disappearance of a wealthy minority the necessity for an 
armed repressive State-force disappears also. At the same time we 
have always held, that in order to arrive at this and the other, far 
more important ends of the social revolution of the future, the 
a The Sozialdemokrat further has: "which is given here in the German 
translation".— Ed. 

=====第508页=====
478 Frederick Engels 
proletarian class will first have to possess itself of the organised 
political force of the State and with its aid stamp out the resistance 
of the Capitalist class and re-organise society. This is stated already 
in the Communist Manifesto of 1847, end of Chapter II.a 
"The Anarchists reverse the matter. They say, that the 
Proletarian revolution has to begin by abolishing the political 
organisation of the State. But after the victory of the Proletariat, 
the only organisation the victorious working class finds ready-
made for use, is that of the State. It may require adaptation to the 
new functions.15 But to destroy that at such a moment, would be to 
destroy the only organism by means of which the victorious 
working class can exert its newly conquered power, keep down its 
capitalist enemies and carry out that economical revolution of 
society, without which the whole victory must end in a defeat and 
in a massacre of the working class like that after the Paris 
Commune.536 
"Does it require my express assertion, that Marx opposed these 
anarchist absurdities from the very first day that they were started 
in their present form by Bakunin? The whole internal history of 
the International Working Men's Association is there to prove it. 
The Anarchists tried to obtain the lead of the International by the 
foulest means, ever since 1867 and the chief obstacle in their way 
was Marx. The result of the five years' struggle was the expulsion, 
at the Hague Congress, September 1872, of the Anarchists from 
the International, and the man who did most to procure that 
expulsion, was Marx. Our old friend F. A. Sorge of Hoboken, who 
was present as a delegate, can give you further particulars if you 
desire. 
"Now as to Johann Most. If any man asserts that Most, since he 
turned anarchist, has had any relations with, or support from 
Marx, he is either a dupe or a deliberate liar. After the first No. of 
the London Freiheit had been published, 0 Most did not call upon 
Marx and myself more than once, at most twice. Nor did we call 
on him or even meet him accidentally anywhere or at any time 
since his new-fangled anarchism had burst forth in that paper.d 
Indeed, we at last ceased to take it in as there was absolutely 
'nothing in it'. We had for his anarchism and anarchist tactics the 
a See present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 505-06.— Ed. 
b In the Sozialdemokrat this sentence reads: "This state may require very important 
changes before it can fulfil its new functions".— Ed. 
c On January 4, 1879.— Ed. 
d The words "since his new-fangled anarchism had burst forth in that paper" 
are omitted in the Sozialdemokrat. —Ed. 

=====第509页=====
On the Death of Karl Marx 479 
same contempt as for that of the people3 from whom he had 
learnt it. 
"While still in Germany, Most published a 'popular' extract of 
Das Kapital? Marx was requested to revise it for a second edition. 
I assisted Marx in that work. We found it impossible to eradicate 
more than the very worst mistakes, unless we re-wrote the whole 
thing from beginning to end, and Marx consented his corrections 
being inserted on the express condition only that his name was 
never in any way connected with even this revised form of Johann 
Most's production. 0 
"You are perfectly at liberty to publish this letter in the Voice of 
the People,6 if you like to do so." 
From America to Italy. 
About two years ago a young Italian, one Signor Achille Loria 
from Mantua, sent Marx a copy of a book he had written on 
ground-rent 537 together with a letter written in German in which 
he proclaimed himself to be a disciple and admirer of Marx. He 
also corresponded with him for some time after that. In the 
summer of 1882 he came to London and visited me twice. The 
second time I had occasion seriously to tell him my opinion about 
the fact that, in a pamphlet6 which had appeared in the meantime, 
he had accused Marx of having deliberately misquoted. 
Now this puny fellow, who got his wisdom from the German 
academic socialists,538 has written an article on Marx in Nuova 
Antologia1 and has the effrontery to send me, "his most worthy 
friend" (!!), a separate offprint. What constituted this effrontery 
will be clear from the following translation of my reply (I wrote to 
him in his language, for his German is even shakier than my 
Italian): 
"I received your piece on Karl Marx. You are at liberty to 
subject his teachings to your most searching criticism and even to 
misunderstand them if you wish; you are at liberty to draft a 
biography of Marx which is a work of pure fantasy. However, 
what you are not at liberty to do, and it is a privilege I shall never 
a Engels is referring to Proudhon and Bakunin.— Ed. 
b J. Most, Kapital und Arbeit. Ein populärer Auszug aus "Das Kapital" von Karl 
Marx, Chemnitz [1873].— Ed. 
c It appeared in Chemnitz in 1876.— Ed. 
d In the Sozialdemokrat the words "in the Voice of the People" are omitted.— Ed. 
e A. Loria, La teoria del valore negli economisti italiani, Bologna, 1882, 
pp. 38-39.— Ed. 
{ A. Loria, "Karl Marx", Nuova Antologia di scienze, lettere ed arti, Vol. 38, 
Rome, 1883, pp. 509-42.— Ed. 

=====第510页=====
480 Frederick Engels 
grant to anybody, is to slander the character of my late friend. 
"Already, in an earlier work, you have presumed to accuse 
Marx of having deliberately misquoted. When Marx read that, he 
compared his quotations and yours with the original texts and told 
me that his quotations were correct, and if anyone was deliberately 
misquoting, then it was you. And when I see how you now quote 
Marx, how you shamelessly have him speak of 'profit' where he 
speaks of 'surplus value'a—especially in view of the fact that he was 
constantly at pains to avoid the error of assuming that the two 
things were the same (which incidentally Mr. Moore and I 
explained to you orally when you were in London)—then I know 
whom to believe and who is deliberately misquoting. 
"But that is a mere trifle by comparison with your 'firm and 
deeply held conviction ... that they' (the teachings of Marx) 'are all 
dominated by a  conscious  sophism'; that Marx 'did not allow himself to 
be held up by incorrect conclusions, knowing full well that they were 
incorrect'; that 'he was often a sophist who, at the cost of the truth, 
wished to arrive at the negation of the existing society', and that, as 
Lamartine says, 'he played with lies and truth as children play with 
knucklebones'. 0 
"In Italy, a land of ancient civilisation, that may be regarded as 
a compliment. Among the academic socialists too such a thing may 
be regarded as great praise, since, of course, those fine professors 
would never have been able to accomplish their numerous systems 
except 'at the cost of the truth'. We revolutionary communists 
regard the matter differently. We consider such assertions to be 
defamatory accusations, and since we know them to be fabrica­
tions,  we hurl them back at their author who has defamed no one 
but himself with such inventions. 
"It seems to me that you had a duty to inform the public as to 
the nature of that famous 'conscious sophism', which you say 
dominates all the teachings of Marx. But I have looked for it in vain. 
Nagott!" (Lombardic swearword for: nothing at all.) 
"It takes a puny soul to imagine that a man like Marx 'always 
threatened his opponents with a second volume' which 'he never 
for one moment thought of writing'; that that second volume was 
nothing more than 'a crafty expedient of Marx's to avoid scientific 
arguments.'0 That second volume is on hand and will shortly be 
published. Then at last you may perhaps learn to grasp the 
distinction between surplus value and profit. 
a Ibid., pp. 531-32.—  Ed 
b Ibid, pp. 510, 538-39.— Ed. 
c Ibid., p. 532.— Ed. 

=====第511页=====
On the Death of Karl Marx 481 
"A German translation of this letter will appear in the next 
edition of the Zurich Sozialdemokrat. 
"In closing, the sentiments I am gratified to express are no 
more than those you deserve." 
That should suffice for today. 
London, 12th May 1883 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Printed according to the news-
Nos.  19 and 21, May 3 and 17, 1883 paper 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第512页=====

=====第513页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第514页=====

=====第515页=====
Karl Marx 
NOTES ON BAKUNIN'S BOOK STATEHOOD AND 
ANARCHY 5™ 

=====第516页=====
Written in April 1874-January 1875 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in the magazine Letopisi Published in English in full for the 
marksizma, No. 11, 1926 first time 

=====第517页=====
487 
BAKUNIN: STATEHOOD AND ANARCHY 
INTRODUCTION. PART I. 1873 • 
(Following this title on p. 1: Conflict («Bopb6a») in the 
International Working Men's Association.) 
«FOREWORD» 
«In Italy as in Russia there was quite a significant number of such young 
people, incomparably more than in any other country»540 (p. 7).b 
«Indeed, perhaps nowhere is the social revolution as close as in Italy» (p. 8). 
«In Italy there predominates that destitute proletariat who are spoken of with 
such profound contempt by Messrs. Marx and Engels, and in their wake the whole 
school of German Social-Democrats, and quite mistakenly, since it is in this class 
and this class alone and by no means in the bourgeois stratum of the working masses 
referred to above that the entire intelligence and the entire strength of the coming social 
revolution is to be found» (p. 8). 
Contrast the German situation: here the government can rely, 
on the one hand, on its excellent etc., army, and, on the other 
hand, 
«on the patriotism of its loyal  subjects,  on boundless national ambition and on that 
ancient, historical and no less boundless servility and worship of power which to 
this day characterise the German nobility, the German burghers» (bourgeoisie), 
«the German bureaucracy, the German church, the entire guild of German scholars 
and, under their combined influence, frequently enough, alas, the German nation 
itself» (p. 11). 
«As can be seen, Prussia has swallowed up Germany. This means that as long as 
Germany remains a state, it will  necessarily  remain the prime and chief representative and a 
constant source of all possible despotisms in Europe», despite any pseudo-liberal, 
constitutional, democratic «and even Social-Democratic forms» (p. 11). 
a [M. A. Bakunin,] rocydapcmeeunocmb u anapxin. BBe^eme. Hacrt I. [Geneva,] 
1873.—  Ed. 
b Here and below Marx indicates in brackets pages in Bakunin's book.— Ed. 

=====第518页=====
488 Karl Marx 
Ever since the middle of the [16th] century and up to 1815 the chief source of 
all reactionary movements was Austria (i.e. as the representative of Germany); from 
1815 to 1848 divided between Austria and Prussia, with the former predominating 
(Metternich) (p. 12); «from 1815 this Holy Alliance of pure German reaction was  joined, 
much more for sport than for profit, by our Tartar-German, all-Russian, imperial knout» 
(p. 13). 
To shift the responsibility from themselves the Germans try to persuade 
themselves and others that Russia was the chief instigator of the Holy Alliance. "In 
contrast to the German Social-Democrats, whose programme has as its first goal the 
establishment of a Pan-Germanic Empire, the Russian social revolutionaries are 
striving primarily to bring about the utter dissolution of our" (the Russian) 
"Empire", etc. (p. 13). 
In the interest of the truth, «not from any wish to defend the policy 
of the Petersburg cabinet» (p. 13), Bakunin replies to the Germans as 
follows. (So as not to have to mention the creation of Prussia with 
Russian help, which had been forthcoming ever since Peter I, the 
great man overlooks the alliance under Catherine, as well as 
Russian influence over France since the Revolution and up to and 
including Louis Philippe.) (He likewise ignores the fact that from 
the beginning of the 18th century Russia had intrigued with 
England with the aim of subjugating Europe.) He starts with 
Alexander I and Nicholas and depicts their activities as follows: 
«Alexander rushed hither and thither, bustled about and made a great fuss; 
Nicholas gave black looks and uttered threats. But that was the end of it. They did 
nothing ... because they could not, since their friends, the Austrian and Prussian Germans, 
prevented them from acting; they had only been assigned an honorary role of playing the 
bogeyman» (intimidation); «the only countries to move were Austria, Prussia and» 
"finally [under the leadership and with the consent of both] — the French 
Bourbons who moved against Spain"541 (pp. 13, 14). 
Russia only once crossed her frontiers and that was in 1849, to rescue Austria 
from the Hungarian revolution.542 Apart from that she also suppressed the Polish 
revolution twice in this century with the aid of Prussia,543 which had as great an 
interest in this as  herself.  Of course, «a Russia of the people is unthinkable without 
Polish independence and freedom» (p. 14). 
Neither intelligence, power or  wealth  can give Russia  such  predominance  as to  entitle her  to 
a «decisive say» in Europe (p. 14). 
Russia can only take action at the behest of a Western power. (Thus 
Frederick II called on Catherine to partition Poland 544 and almost Sweden as well.) 
As for the revolutionary movement in Europe, Russia, finding herself in the 
hands of Prussian politicians, played the role of bogeyman and not infrequently 
that of the screen behind which they were adept at concealing their own aggressive 
and reactionary manoeuvres. After their recent victories,545 they no longer need 
this and don't do it any more (p. 15). 
Now with Bismarck, Berlin is the visible chief and capital of reaction in Europe 
(p. 16). Reaction (Roman Catholic) in Rome, Versailles, and to some extent in 
Vienna and Brussels; knout-reaction in Russia; but the living, «intelligent», really 
«powerful» reaction is concentrated in Berlin and is spreading from the new German 
Empire to all parts of Europe, etc. (p. 16). 
«The federal organisation of the workers' associations, groups, communities, volosts and 
ultimately of regions and peoples, from below—this sole precondition of true, non-fictitious 

=====第519页=====
\ vv,w^g MM6 »*** »tft^V^ gwj^siaaa» H ^Tï^iH^^"*1^ 
A »-*VUL^^ U«JCH  VUH^ ^^|^^5^^*M*  ?&***  VtWi^ O^^VU *^^g£ 
^VW^  ^^^ 44,<o*H ^HOW  \**V**~HU  V^§.W^^y^^W^(^v^^lH|^ 
w^«***  *******  -^ .*•** *-* w***~ V^M** ^xL^iu^ 
, t ..  •"*  * 
Part of a page from Marx's "Notes on Bakunin's Book Statehood and Anarchy" 

=====第520页=====

=====第521页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 491 
freedom—is as opposed to their nature3 as any economic autonomy is incompatible 
with them» (p. 17). 
Representative democracy (npeAcraBHTeAbHafl /teMOKparifl) on the other hand has 
two requirements for its success: «state centralisation and the actual subjugation of 
the sovereign people by an intellectual minority which governs and unfailingly 
exploits it, while ostensibly representing it» (p. 17). 
«The essence of our Tartar-German Empire» (p. 14). 
The new German Empire is warlike; it must conquer or be conquered (pp. 17, 
18): it has a «compelling aspiration to become a world state» (p. 18). Hegemony is 
merely the modest expression of this aspiration; its precondition is the weakness 
and subjugation of as many of the surrounding empires as possible.b The last 
French Empire had this role, at present the German has it, and «In our view the 
German state is the only true state in Europe» (p. 19). 
«State» (empire, royaumec ); «ruler» (souverain, monarque, empereur, 
roid); rule (régner, dominer^). (In German, on the other hand, Reich 
originally referred only to a piece of territory (large  OR small) with 
definite boundaries, named after the tribe, etc., the people it 
belonged to. For example, the region of the Upper Palatinate on 
the Regen up to Viechtach was called the Viechtreich; Aachner-
reich; Vrankryk (in the Netherlands); the Reich of Nimwegen; 
Reich of Megen; the district of Trarbuch on the Moselle is still 
called Cröverreich to this day; Westrich is another region on the 
Moselle.) 
France's «career as a state» is at an end; anyone who knows anything of the 
character of the French knows like us (Bakunin) that as France was able to be the 
«predominant power» for so long, she will find it impossible to accept a secondary 
position or even one of equality with others. She will prepare for a new war, for 
revenge, for the re-establishment of her lost nepBeHCTBa (primacy) (p. 19). But will 
she achieve it? Surely not. The latest events have shown that patriotism, the highest 
civic virtue (sma evtcuian zocydapcmeenuoR  do6podemeAt>)  no longer exists in France 
(p. 19). The patriotism of the upper classes f is nothing more than vanity which, 
however, they will abandon in favour of their real interests, as the last war 
demonstrated. The French rural population displayed just as little patriotism. 
Peasants ceased to be patriots once they became property owners. Only in Alsace and 
Lorraine, as if in mockery of the Germans, did French patriotism make its 
appearance. Patriotism survives now only in the urban proletariat. This is the main 
reason why the hatred of the propertied classes turned against them. But they are not 
patriotic in the true sense, because they are socialist (fraternal towards the workers of 
all other countries). They took up arms not against the German people, but against 
Germanic military despotism (pp. 20-22). The war began only four years after the 
First Geneva Congress546 and the propaganda of the International created 
«especially» among the workers «of Latin origin» a new antipatriotic outlook (p. 22). 
a I.e. the nature of modern capitalist production and bank speculation.— Ed 
b Bakunin has "at least all the surrounding states".— Ed. 
c Kingdom.— Ed. 
d Sovereign, monarch, emperor, king.— Ed. 
e Govern, dominate.— Ed 
f Bakunin has: "social-estates".— Ed 

=====第522页=====
492 Karl Marx 
This also became apparent at a MEETING in Vienna in 1868 "in response to a whole 
series of political and patriotic «proposals»" made by the young Germanic3 bourgeois 
democrats.547 The workers replied by saying that they were being exploited by them, 
had always been deceived and oppressed by them, and that all workers of all countries 
were their brothers... The international camp of working men was their only 
fatherland, the international world of exploiters their only enemy (pp. 22, 23). As 
proof they sent a telegram "to their Paris brethren, the pioneers of «workers' 
liberation throughout the world»" (p. 23).b  This reply raised quite a furore in 
Germany; it sent waves of panic through all bourgeois democrats, including even 
Johann Jacoby, and "not only wounded their patriotic feelings but also offended 
against the official faith (rocy4apcTBeHHyio Bipy) of the school of Lassalle and Marx. 
Probably on the advice of the latter, Mr. Liebknecht, who is now one of the leaders of 
the German Social-Democrats, but who was at the time still a member of the 
bourgeois-democratic party (the defunct People's Party  548), immediately left Leipzig 
for Vienna to have negotiations (neperoBopw) with the Viennese workers about the 
"political tactlessness" that had given rise to the scandal. In justice to him it must be 
said he acted so successfully that only a few months later, namely in August 1868, 
at the Nuremberg Congress of German workers, all the leaders of the Austrian 
proletariat subscribed without protest to the narrowly patriotic programme of the 
Social-Democratic Party"549 (pp. 23, 24). This revealed "the profound gulf 
between the political leanings of the leaders of the Party, all of whom were more or 
less learned and bourgeois, and the revolutionary instincts of the Germanic or at 
least the Austrian proletariat  itself".  However, such instincts have barely developed in 
Germany and Austria since 1868, but have come on famously in Belgium, Italy, 
Spain and above all in France (p. 24). The French workers are fully conscious that, 
as social revolutionaries, they are working for the whole world (p. 25), "and more 
for the world than for themselves" (p. 25). "This dream" (sTa MeMTa) "has become se­
cond nature to the French proletariat and has expelled the last vestiges of imperial 
patriotism from their minds and their hearts" (p. 26). When the French proletariat 
issued its call to arms, it was in the conviction that it was fighting as much for the 
freedom and rights of the German proletariat as for its own (p. 26). "They were 
not fighting for greatness and honour, but for victory over the hated «military 
power» which in the hands of the bourgeoisie had been the means of their 
oppression. They detested the German army, not because it was German, but 
because it was an army" (p. 26). The uprising of the Paris Commune against the 
Versailles National Assembly 550  and against the saviour of the fatherland— Thiers— 
makes crystal-clear the nature of the passion which alone motivates the French 
proletariat today for whom only a social-revolutionary war continues, etc., to exist 
(p. 27). In their passion for social revolution "they proclaimed the ultimate dissolution 
of the French Empire, the shattering of the imperial unity of  France,  which is incompatible 
with the autonomy of the French Communes (communities). The Germans only reduced 
the frontiers and the power (cnwy) of their political fatherland; they however aimed 
to «y6HTb» (kill, destroy) it entirely, and as if to symbolise their treasonable intent, 
they toppled into the dust the Vendôme Column, the revered memorial of French 
glory"  551 (p- 27). 
«Hence the state on the one hand, the social revolution on the other» (p. 29). 
This struggle at its sharpest in France; even among the peasants, at least in 
Southern France (p. 30). "And this hostile antagonism between two now 
a Bakunin has: "South German and Austrian".— Ed. 
b "Die Arbeiter Wien's an die französischen und englischen Arbeiter. Wien, 
den 10. Juli 1868", Der Vorbote, No. 8, August, 1868, pp. 120-22.— Ed 

=====第523页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 493 
irreconcilable worlds constitutes the second reason why it is impossible for France to 
become once again a state of the first rank, the predominant «state»" (p. 30). The 
men of Versailles, the stock exchange, the bourgeoisie, etc., lost their heads when 
Thiers announced the withdrawal of the Prussian troops552 (p. 31). «That is to say, 
the curious patriotism of the French bourgeoisie looks to the ignominious 
capitulation of the fatherland for its salvation» (p. 31). 
"The sympathies for the Spanish revolution, evinced so clearly nowadays by 
French workers, particularly in Southern France,553 where the proletariat evidently 
longs for fraternal alliance with the Spanish proletariat and would even like to form 
a «people's» federation with them, based on free labour and collective ownership" 
[p. 32],-
Hapcwb, people, nation (natio, nasci—something born, birth)— 
"despite all national differences and state frontiers—these sympathies and 
aspirations, I say, prove that for the French proletariat above all, as well as for the 
privileged classes, the age of imperial patriotism is over" (p. 32). 
«How then can such an ancient, incurably sick state» (like France) «take on the 
youthful and hitherto still healthy German state» (p. 33)? No form of state, no 
republic however democratic, can give the people what it needs, "i.e. the free 
(BOAbHMH—free, but also unbridled) organisation of its own interests from below 
(cHH3y B"b BepxT>), without any interference, tutelage, compulsion from above, 
because every such statehood (rocy4apcTBo), even the most republican and most 
democratic, even the so-called people's state" (MHHMO-Hapo/iHoe rocy^apcTBo) «which 
has been thought up by Mr. Marx, is in essence» nothing but the government of the 
masses from above by an intelligent and hence privileged minority, which rules as 
if it comprehended the real interests of the people better than the people  itself" 
(pp. 34, 35). 
Since therefore the propertied classes cannot satisfy the passion and the 
aspirations of the people, "only one means is left them—state force (rocy^apcTBeH-
Hoe HacHAne), in a word, the «state», because the actual meaning of «state» is 
«force» (violence, vehemence, force), «government by force, concealed if possible, but if 
the worst comes to the worst, ruthless force», etc." (p. 35). Gambetta cannot mend 
matters here; the desperate struggle between bourgeoisie and proletariat (in 
France) "calls for the deployment of all means and forces at the disposal of the 
government (the state), thus leaving no means and forces to spare to enable the 
French Empire to maintain its external supremacy over the European powers". 
«How could it compete with Bismarck's empire!» (p. 37). France must submit to the 
superior leadership, the friendly tutelage of the German Empire, just as the Italian 
state had to bow to the policies of the French (pp. 37, 38). 
England: Influence greatly reduced. Following sentence charac­
teristic: 
«Even as recently as thirty years ago she would not have acquiesced so calmly in 
either the German conquest of the Rhine provinces, the re-establishment of Russian 
predominance on the Black Sea, or the Russian campaign in Khiva»554 (p. 39). 
The reason for this complaisance, etc.—the struggle of the workers' world with the 
exploitative and politically dominant bourgeois world (p. 39). The social revolution 
is not far off there, etc. (I.e.). 
Spain and Italy, not worth mentioning: they will never become dangerous and 
powerful states, not from the absence of material means but because the «spirit of 
the people» is directed towards quite different objectives (p. 39). 

=====第524页=====
494 Karl Marx 
On this point: Spain roused herself again in the people's war against 
Napoleon555 which was initiated by the untutored masses themselves. Nothing of 
the kind in Germany in 1812 and 1813. Remained unmoved until Napoleon's 
defeat in Russia. The Tirol the only exception556 (pp. 40, 41). 
Meanwhile: 
«We have seen that the ownership of property sufficed to corrupt the French 
peasantry and to extinguish its last remaining sparks of patriotism» (p. 42). In 
Germany (1812-13) the young citizens or rather the loyal subjects (BÏ>pHonx>4-
4aHHbie), stirred up by philosophers and poets, took up arms to protect and restore 
the German Empire, for it was just at this time that the idea of the Pan-Germanic 
Empire was born in Germany. In the meantime, the Spanish people rose up as one 
man (noroAOBHo) to defend  (OTCTOHTI>)  the freedom of their «homeland» and the 
independence of their «national life» against the ferocious and powerful oppressor 
(p. 43). Every form of government was then tried out in Spain, but to no purpose: 
despotism, constitutionalism, conservative republicanism, etc.; even the petty-
bourgeois federal republic along Swiss lines (p. 43). 
"Spain was seized (possessed) in real earnest by the demon of revolutionary 
socialism.557  Andalusian and Estremaduran peasants, without asking anyone's 
permission or waiting for anyone's orders, made themselves masters of the estates 
of the erstwhile landowners. Catalonia, and particularly Barcelona, loudly assert 
their independence and autonomy. The people of Madrid proclaim a federal 
republic and refuse to subject the revolution to the future commands of a 
constituent assembly. Even in the North, in territory under Carlist control, 558 the 
social revolution is proceeding openly: the fueros (^yapocw)559 are proclaimed, as 
is the independence of the districts and communities; all legal and civil records are 
burnt; throughout the whole of Spain the army fraternises with the people and 
drives away its officers. General bankruptcy has set in, public and private—the first 
prerequisite for social and economic revolution" (p. 44). "An end to finance, to the 
army, the courts, the police; away with government forces and with the «state»; 
what remains is the vigorous and fresh  (CBOKHH)  people, sustained now only by the 
passion of the social revolution. Under the collective leadership of the International 
and the Alliance of Social Revolutionaries560  it rallies and organises its forces, etc." 
(p. 44). The only living tradition still surviving in the Italian people is that of 
absolute autonomy, not only of the «o6AacTeö» (province, region, district), but of 
the communities (o6mHHw). a To this, the «only political concept» which really is 
peculiar to the «people», we must add the historical and ethnographic «variety» of 
the «regions» where so many dialects are spoken that people in one «o6AacTb» 
(which en passant also means "power, force") only understand the inhabitants of 
other «regions» with difficulty and sometimes not at all. But «socially», Italy is not 
disunited. On the contrary, there is a «common Italian character and type», by 
which Italians are distinguished from all other peoples, even southern ones (p. 45). 
The break-up of the latest Italian «state» will unfailingly have «free, social 
unification» as its consequence (p. 46). All this refers only to the «mass of the 
people». 
In the «upper strata» of the Italian bourgeoisie, on the other hand, as in other 
countries, we find that «state unity has given rise to the social unity of the class of the 
privileged exploiters of the labour of the people, a unity which is now being 
steadily developed. This class is now known in Italy under the collective term 
a In Bakunin this reads "not even at the level of the province, but [only] in the 
communities".— Ed. 

=====第525页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 495 
Consorteria ... the whole» official world, bureaucratic and military, police and 
judicial; big landowners, industrialists, merchants and bankers; the entire official 
and semi-official host of lawyers and writers, the whole parliament (p. 46). 
But even the most terrible destitution (poverty), even when it afflicts «the many 
millions» of proletarians, is not a sufficient guarantee (3aAon>) of revolution. When 
man (the destitute) is driven to despair, his rebellion becomes that much more 
possible... In desperation even the German ceases to reason; but an enormous 
amount is needed to drive him to despair... However, «destitution» and «despair» 
can do no more than provoke personal or at best local «revolts»; they are 
insufficient to grip «whole masses of the people». For that a «universal popular 
ideal» is needed which historically «always» evolves from the «depths of popular 
instinct», in addition a belief (BÏ>pa) in one's right, «it could be said, a religious 
belief in this right». 
This together with poverty and despair provides the right recipe 
for social revolution (pp. 47, 48). 
"This is the situation in which the Italian people finds itself today" (p. 48). 
In particular, it was the International—i.e. the Alliance, which has 
been especially effective in Italy in the last two years (1872 and 
1873) — that acted as midwife to this ideal. 
«Ita pointed out to it [the proletariat] the objective to be achieved and at the same 
time provided it with the ways and means to organise the energies of the people» 
(p. 48). 
"It is worthy of note that in Italy as in Spain it was not «Marx's state-communist 
programme» which carried the day (triumphed), but that in both countries there 
was a widespread and passionate endorsement of the programme of the world-famous 
(npecAOByToro) Alliance or «League of Social Revolutionaries» with its implacable 
declaration of war on «domination, governmental tutelage, prerogative and 
authority» of every kind"561 (p. 49). 
"Under these conditions the people can emancipate itself and establish its own 
particular mode of life «on the basis of the most extensive freedom» of each and 
everyone, but without constituting a threat at all to the liberty of other peoples" 
(p. 49). 
Therefore, since Italy and Spain adhere to the programme of 
the Alliance, the social revolution in those countries is at hand, but 
no policy of conquest is to be feared from them (p. 49). 
The small states—Switzerland, Belgium, Holland, Denmark, Sweden, 
«for the very same reasons» (i.e. because they have embraced the 
programme of the Alliance!), 
"but chiefly" because of "their political insignificance" (p. 49) present no threat 
but, on the contrary, have many reasons to "fear annexation by the new German 
Empire" (p. 50). 
Austria sick unto death. Divided into two states, Magyar-Slav 
and German-Slav562 (p. 50). The Germans wish for hegemony in 
the latter. 
a The propaganda of the International.— Ed. 

=====第526页=====
496 Karl Marx 
"The Germans, «state-worshippers» and bureaucrats by nature, it can be said, 
base their pretentions on their historic right, i.e. on the right of conquest and 
«tradition», on the one hand, and on the alleged superiority of their culture, on the 
other" (p. 52). In recent years the Germans have been compelled to concede an 
independent «existence» to the Magyars. «Of all the tribes» that inhabit the 
Austrian Empire, the Magyars have the «most developed state-consciousness» after 
the Germans (p. 52). They assert their historic right to lord it over all the other 
tribes who live with them in the Kingdom of Hungary, even though they do not 
amount to much more than V3 (I.e.) (viz. 5,500,000 Magyars, 5,000,000 Slavs, 
2,700,000 Romanians,  1,800,000  Jews and Germans, around 500,000 other 
«tribes», making 15,500,000 all told) (I.e.). So the Austro-Hungarian Empire 
[divides] into 2: the Cisleithan state, Slav-German with 20,500,000 (7,200,000 
Germans and Jews, 11,500,000 Slavs, about  1,800,000  Italians and other «tribes»); 
and the Magyar-Slav-Romanian-German state (p. 53). 
In Hungary 
the "majority of the population is subject to the Magyars, does not like them, 
bears their yoke grudgingly, hence perpetual struggle" (p. 53). The Magyars fear 
revolt from the Romanians and Slavs: hence in secret league with Bismarck who, 
"foreseeing the inevitable war with the Austrian Empire, which is destined to 
disappear, «makes advances» to the Magyars" (p. 54). 
In the Cisleithan state the situation is no better; there the Germans want to rule 
over the Slav majority: "The Germans hate the Slavs as the master is wont to hate 
his slaves" (p. 54), fear their emancipation, etc. "Like all conquerors of foreign 
land and subjugators of foreign peoples, the Germans simultaneously and highly 
«unjustly» both hate and despise the Slavs" (I.e.). The Prussian Germans' main 
criticism of the Austrian government is that it is incapable of Germanicising the 
Slavs.  "This, in their view and also in fact, constitutes the greatest crime against 
German patriotic interests in general and against Pan-Germanism" (p. 55) (his3 
emphasis). With the exception of the Poles, the Austrian Slavs have countered this 
Pan-Germanism with Pan-Slavism, which likewise is a piece of "nauseating folly", 
"an ideal incompatible with freedom and fatal to the people" (p. 55). 
Hereto a footnote in which Mr. Bakunin threatens to treat this 
question at greater length; here he just calls on Russian 
revolutionary youth to resist this trend; he admits that Russian 
agents are busy propagating Pan-Slavism among the Austrian Slavs 
and trying to persuade them that the Tsar is eager to free their land 
from the German yoke, and "this at a time when the Petersburg 
Cabinet is «openly» betraying the whole of Bohemia and Moravia, 
selling them to Bismarck as a reward for the promised assistance 
in the East". 
How does it come about, then, that in the Austro-Slav territories there is a 
whole class of educated, etc., people who either expect to be liberated by the 
Russians or even hope for "the establishment of a Slav great power under the supremacy 
of the Russian Tsar"? (p. 57). 
This only goes to show "the degree to which this accursed German civilisation 
which is «bourgeois» in essence and hence «statist», has succeeded in entering the 
soul of the Slav patriots themselves ... they would remain completely German even 
a Bakunin's.— Ed 

=====第527页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 497 
though the goal they are seeking to achieve is anti-German; using ways and means 
borrowed from the Germans they want, they think to free the Slavs from the 
German yoke. Because of their German education they cannot conceive of any way 
of obtaining their freedom but through the formation of Slav states or a single 
great Slav empire. They therefore set themselves a purely German objective 
because the «modern state»—centralist, bureaucratic, a police and military state 
after the fashion, for example, of the new German or «All-Russian» Empire—is a 
purely German «creation». In Russia it formerly contained a certain Tartar 
element, «but even in Germany there is certainly no lack of Tartar civility 
nowadays»" (p. 57). 
"The entire nature, the entire character of the Slav tribe is definitely 
unpolitical, i.e. non-«statist». In vain do the Czechs hark back to (noMHHaioTb) their 
Great Moravian Empire563 and the Serbs their Empire of Dusan. All such things 
are either ephemeral phenomena or old fairy-tales. The truth is that no single Slav 
tribe has ever of itself created a «state»" (p. 57). 
Polish Monarchy-Republic  : 
founded under the dual influence of Germanism and Latinism, after the Slav 
people (xoAom. — bondsman, serf) had been suppressed by the Szlachta who are 
not of Slav origin in the opinion of many Polish historians (such as «Mickiewicz») 
(p. 58). 
Bohemian state (Czech): 
patched together on the German model and openly influenced by the Germans; 
hence soon formed an organic part of the German Empire. 
Russian Empire: 
Tartar knout, Byzantine blessing (6AarocAOBeme) and German bureaucratic, 
military and police Enlightenment (p. 58). 
"Hence it is indubitable that the Slavs have never established a «state» on their 
own initiative. Because they have never been a tribe bent on conquest. Only warlike 
people found «states» and they invariably found them for their own benefit and to 
the detriment of subjugated nations." The Slavs were predominantly peaceful, 
agrarian tribes; they lived cut off and independently in their communities, 
administered (ynpaBAHTb—also govern) in patriarchal fashion by their «elders» on 
the basis of the «electoral principle», collective ownership of land, no nobility, no 
special priest-caste, all equal, "implementing in a patriarchal and hence imperfect 
manner the idea of human fraternity". No political bonds between communities; 
only a defensive alliance in case of attacks from outside; no Slav «state»; but social, 
fraternal bonds between all Slav tribes, hospitable in the highest degree (pp. 58, 
59). "Such an organisation rendered them defenceless against the incursions and 
attacks of warlike tribes, especially the Germans who sought to extend their rule 
everywhere" (p. 59). "The Slavs were exterminated in part, the majority subjugated 
by Turks, Tartars, Magyars and above all Germans" (p. 59). "The second half of 
the 10th century witnesses the beginning of the tormented, but also heroic history 
of their slavery" (p. 59). 
" Unfortunately for Poland her leading parties (pyKOBOAnmi« naprin) which to 
this day have belonged for the most part to the Szlachta, have not yet renounced 
their «statist» programme and, instead of striving for the liberation and «rebirth» 
of their «homeland» through social revolution, they remain the prisoners of ancient 
prejudices and seak either the protection of a Napoleon or else an alliance with the 
Jesuits and the Austrian feudal nobility" (p. 61). 
34-1317 

=====第528页=====
498 Karl Marx 
In our century  the  Western  and  Southern Slavs have also awakened; Bohemia 
the centre  for the one,  Serbia  for the  other  (pp. 61, 62). 
The latest expression  of the  «state»:  the  Pan-Germanic Empire:  "its  days  are 
numbered  and all  nations expect that  its collapse will bring about their ultimate 
emancipation...  Are the  Slavs envious  of the  Germans  for  having earned  the  hatred 
of all the  other peoples  of Europe?"  (p. 63) 
England does not exist for this  COFFEE-HOUSE  politician; it is the 
true apex  of bourgeois society  in Europe. 
Either there will  be no  Slav «state»  at all, or  else there will  be a  vast, 
all-devouring Pan-Slav,  «St.  Petersburg knout State»  (pp. 64, 65). 
Nor is it  possible  to oppose Pan-Germanic centralisation  by forming  a Pan-Slav 
Federation after  the  manner  of the  United States  (p. 66).  Federation  in North 
America  is possible only because there  is no  powerful «state» like Russia, Germany 
or France  on the  American continent adjacent  to the  great republic. Hence,  in 
order  to counter  a victorious Pan-Germanism  on the level  of the «state» or politics, only 
one way  remains:  to establish  a Pan-Slav «state». 
Universal Slav servitude beneath  the  «All-Russian knout»  (p. 67). But  even this 
would  be impossible. Numerically, there  are  almost three times  as many Slavs  in 
Europe  as Germans. Despite this,  a Pan-Slav Empire would never  be able  to match 
the Pan-Germanic Empire  in terms  of power  and  actual «political  and  military 
strength».  Why  not? "Because German blood, German instinct  and the  German 
tradition  are all  imbued with  a passion  for  «state» order  and  «state» discipline"; 
with the  Slavs  the  position  is the  reverse; "this  is why  they  can  only  be disciplined 
by having  the  threat  of a big  stick hanging over them, while  any  German will 
swallow  the  stick with  the  conviction  (CT>  y6fe?K4eHieMT,)  of his own  free will.  To him 
freedom consists  in «being drilled»  and he  «willingly bows down»  to every 
authority. Furthermore,  the  Germans  are  earnest, diligent people, learned, thrifty, 
«orderly, careful  and  calculating», which does  not  prevent them from fighting 
splendidly  if need  be,  namely when  the  authorities desire  it. They proved this  in 
the recent wars. Moreover, their military  and  administrative organisation  has  been 
perfected  to the  highest possible degree, beyond  the  reach  of any  other nation.  So 
is it thinkable that  the  Slavs could ever match them  on the  plane  of «statehood»? 
(pp. 68, 69). "The  Germans look  to the  «state»  for their life  and  their freedom;  for 
the Slavs  the  «state»  is a  tomb. They seek their liberation outside  the  «state»,  not 
just in the  struggle against  the  German «state»,  but in the  «universal revolt» against 
«states»  of every kind,  in social revolution"  (p. 69). "But  «states» will  not  fall of 
their  own  accord: they  can  only  be overthrown  by an  international social revolution 
which encompasses  all nations  and  peoples"  (p. 69).  The  Slavs' hostility  to the  state, 
which hitherto  has  been their weakness, becomes their strength  for the  present 
popular movement  (p. 69).  The  moment  is drawing near  for the  total emancipation 
of «the mass  of unskilled workers»  and for  «their free social organisation «from 
below», without  any  «npaBHTeAbCTBeHHoro» (directing, governmental) interference, 
by means  of free economic, «Hapo4Hwx» (popular, public) «coio30B-b» (union, 
alliance, coalition, federation), «disregarding»  all old  state frontiers  and all  national 
differences,  on the  sole basis  of productive labour, humanised through  and 
through  and  with total solidarity amidst  all its  diversity"  (p. 70). 
"Nationality  is no  universal human principle,  but an  historical, local fact having, 
like all «genuine»  and  harmless facts,  an undoubted right  to universal «recogni­
tion».  Every people  and  even every «little people»  has its own  character,  its manner 
and these  in fact  (HMCHHO)  are  what form  the  essence  of nationality,  the  product  of 
the whole  of history  and the  totality  of the  conditions  of life of the  nationality. 

=====第529页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 499 
Every people, like every individual, is «inevitably» what it is and has the undoubted 
right to be  itself.  This is what the entire so-called «national right» amounts to" 
(P- 70). 
But it does not follow from this that one should lay down his nationality and 
the other his individuality as a «special principle», etc.: "The less they think about 
themselves, and the more they «are imbued» with a common humanity, then the 
more the nationality of the one and the individuality of the other gain in vitality 
and ideas" (p. 71). The Slavs too will only be able to assume «their rightful place» 
in history and in the free brotherhood of peoples if, jointly with others, they 
embrace universal interests (p. 71). 
"In Germany the Reformation very quickly abandoned its «insurrectionary» 
character, which is anyway incompatible with the German temperament, and 
assumed the shape of a «peaceful state» reform which soon came to form the basis for 
the «most methodical», systematic, learned «state» despotism. In France, after a long 
and bloody struggle which made no small contribution to the growth of free thought 
in that country, they (desires for reform) were crushed by the victorious Catholic 
Church. In Holland, England and later in the United States of America they created a 
new civilisation which was in  essence  anti-«statist», but «bourgeois-economic» and liberal" 
(p. 72). 
This passage is very typical for Bakunin; the genuine capitalist 
state for him anti-governmental; secondly, the different develop­
ments in Germany, on the one hand, and Holland and England, 
on the other, are not the result of changes in world trade, but etc. 
"The religious reform" 
(also very brilliant that the Renaissance is only thought of in the 
context of religion) 
"produced two main trends in civilised mankind: an economic and liberal-
« bourgeois»  trend, particularly in England and then in America, and the despotic, 
«statist», essentially also «bourgeois»"— 
he uses this word bourgeois both for capitalism and for the 
medieval philistines [Spießbürger] in Germany— 
"and the Protestant trend, even though the latter is mixed with aristocratic Catholic 
elements which, incidentally, became completely subordinate to the «state». The chief 
representatives of this trend were France and Germany, the Austrian part to begin with 
and then the Prussian" (p. 73). 
"The French Revolution founded a new universal human interest, the ideal of 
unlimited human liberty, but exclusively in the political realm; contradiction, political 
freedom [on its own] cannot be put into practice; freedom within a «state» is a lie. 
Resulted in two main tendencies. Systematic exploitation of the proletariat and the 
enrichment of a minority. On this exploitation of the people one party desires to 
set up a democratic republic, the other, more consistent, strives for the monarchic, 
i.e. an openly «state» despotism" (p. 73). 
Against all these aspirations, there is a new trend "leading 
directly" to Bakunin (p. 74).564 
"Therefore the Slav proletariat must join the International Working Men's 
Association en masse" (p. 75). "We have already had occasion to refer to the 
magnificent demonstration of international solidarity by the Viennese workers in 
34* 

=====第530页=====
500 Karl Marx 
1868"  (p. 75) against the Pan-Germanic programme. But the Austrian workers 
failed to follow this up with the necessary measures, "because they were stopped 
short (prevented) at the very first step by the patriotic-Germanic propaganda of 
Mr. Liebknecht and the other Social-Democrats who came with him to Vienna, it 
would seem, in July 1868 expressly for the purpose of throwing off course (leading 
astray) the true social instinct of the Austrian workers from the path of 
international revolution and diverting it towards political agitation in favour of 
establishing a «state», what they call «Hapo4HWM» (people's state), Pan-Germanic, of 
course—in short, for implementing the patriotic ideal of Count Bismarck,only on a 
Social-Democratic basis and by means of so-called legal «popular agitation» " 
(p. 76). 
"For the Slavs this would mean voluntarily submitting to the German yoke and 
this [is] «repugnant» to every Slav heart (p. 77). Hence we shall not only not 
persuade our Slav brothers to enter the ranks of the Social-Democratic Party of the 
German workers which is presided over with dictatorial powers by Messrs. Marx 
and Engels and after them Messrs. Bebel, Liebknecht and some literary Jews; on 
the contrary, we must strive with all our might to prevent the Slav proletariat from 
«forming» a suicidal «alliance» with this party which is in no sense a «people's» 
party but in its tendency, its aims and its methods is purely «bourgeois» and 
moreover exclusively German, i.e. «fatal to Slavs» " (p. 77). 
The Slav proletariat must not only not join this party, it must avoid all contact 
with it, and instead must strengthen its bonds with the International Working 
Men's Association. "The German Social-Democratic Party should on no account be 
confused with the International (p. 77). The political and patriotic programme of 
the former has almost nothing in common with the programme of the latter and is 
indeed diametrically opposed to it. At the Hague Congress the Marxists tried to 
impose it on the entire International.565 But this attempt provoked a general loud 
protest from Italy, Spain, part of Switzerland, France, Belgium, Holland, England 
and even to some extent of the United States of America, so that it became apparent to 
the whole world that no one wants the German programme except for the Germans 
themselves" (p. 78). 
The Slav proletariat must join the International en masse, form sections and, if 
it appears necessary, a «Pan-Slav federation» (p. 78). 
Serbia, «Serbian principality»: The Serbs founded a «state» after emancipation 
from the Turks; its yoke heavier than that of the Turks (p. 79). At the mercy of 
bureaucratic «robbery» and despotism (I.e.). In Turkish Serbia there is neither a 
nobility nor very big landowners, nor industrialists, nor even particularly rich 
merchants; a new bureaucratic aristocracy has grown up, educated for the most 
part at government expense in Odessa, Moscow, Petersburg, Vienna, Germany, 
Switzerland and Paris (p. 79). 
The Bulgarians want nothing to do with the Serbian «Dusan Kingdom»; nor do 
the «Croats», the «Montenegrins» and the Bosnian Serbs. For all these lands there 
is only one possible means of escape, and of unification—social revolution; 
«certainly not a war between states» which could lead only to their subjugation by 
Russia or Austria or both (p. 86). 
In Czech Bohemia Wenceslas's kingdom and crown 566 have fortunately not yet 
been restored; the Viennese authorities treat it simply as a province, without even 
the privileges of Galicia; and yet there are as many political parties in Bohemia as 
in the dear3 Slav «state». "Indeed, this damned German spirit of politicking and 
«statehood» has made such inroads into the education of Czech youth that there is 
a Bakunin has: "any" (p. 86).— Ed. 

=====第531页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 501 
a serious risk of the latter ending up by «losing» the capacity «to understand their 
own people» " (p. 86). "In all Austrian towns where the Slav population has 
intermingled with the German, the Slav workers play the most active part in all the 
general rallies of the proletariat. But there are almost no workers' associations in 
these towns apart from those which have recognised the programme of German 
Social-Democracy, so that in effect the Slav workers, carried away by their social-
revolutionary instincts, have been recruited into a party whose direct and loudly 
proclaimed goal is the foundation of a pan-Germanic «state», i.e. a vast German 
«prison» " (p. 88). 
They must accept the programme of the International under 
the leadership of Bakunin (p. 89) (the Slav section in Zurich, a 
member of the Jura Federation,567 is specially recommended as a 
recruiting office in the Note to p. 89). 
Austria (Conclusion). 
The Empire continues to exist only through the calculated tolerance of Prussia 
and Russia who do not yet wish to proceed with dismembering it because each is 
waiting for a favourable opportunity to seize the lion's share [p. 93]. 
Russia  : 
"There is but one constitution of benefit to the people—the destruction of the 
(Russian) Empire" (p. 96). 
Does it have the military power to take on the new German Empire? At present 
this the only political issue in Russia (I.e.). "This question ... inexorably posed by 
Germany's new situation, i.e. by the fact that it «has grown» overnight (3a o£Hy  HOHI>) 
«into a gigantic and omnipotent state». But all history shows, and rational logic 
confirms, that two states of equal strength cannot subsist side by side. One must 
conquer the other" (p. 97). This is essential for Germany. "After long, long 
political humiliation it has suddenly become the most powerful empire on the 
European continent. Can it endure beside  itself,  under its very nose as it were, a 
power entirely independent of it, one it has not yet subdued and which dares to 
claim equal status; and the power of Russia at that, «the most hated of all»!" 
(p. 97). 
"There can be few Russians, we believe, who are unaware of the degree to 
which the Germans, all Germans, but chiefly the German bourgeois, and under 
their influence, alas!, the German people too, hate Russia" (p. 97). This hatred [is] 
one of Germany's most powerful national passions, (p. 98). 
Initially, a genuine hatred by German civilisation for Tartar barbarism (p. 98). 
In the twenties the protest of political liberalism against political despotism (I.e.). 
They put the entire blame for the Holy Alliance onto Russia (I.e.). In the early 
thirties sympathy with the Poles, hatred of the Russians for suppressing the Polish 
uprising (I.e.). They forgot again that Prussia had helped to put down the Poles; 
Prussia gave her assistance because a Polish victory would have meant rebellion 
throughout the whole of Prussian Poland, which would have "nipped the «rising 
power» of the Prussian monarchy in the bud" (I.e.). 
In the second half of the thirties the emerging Slav question provided a new 
reason to hate the Russians, one which gave that hate a political and national 
direction: the formation in Austria and Turkey of a Slav Party which hoped for 
and expected help from Russia. The idea of a Pan-Slav republican federation to 
which the Decembrists (Pestel, Muravyov-Apostol, etc.) aspired. Nicholas took it up, 
but in the form of a unified, Pan-Slav and autocratic «state» under his sceptre of 

=====第532页=====
502 Karl Marx 
iron. In the early thirties and forties Russian agents travelled to the Slav territories 
from Petersburg and Moscow, some officially, others as unpaid volunteers; the 
latter belonged to the Moscow Slavophile Society.568 Pan-Slav propaganda spread 
among the Southern and Western Slavs. Many pamphlets, some written in German, 
others translated into it. Fear among the Pan-Germanic public. Bohemia—Russianl 
Spoilt their appetite and ruined their sleep (p. 99). The greatest hatred of Russia 
from this time; for their part the Russians have no love for the Germans. Under 
these circumstances what possibility is there for the All-Russian a and Pan-Germanic 
Empires to live as neighbours? (p. 100). But there were and still are grounds for 
them both to keep the peace. First: Poland (I.e.). Austria opposed to partition, etc. 
For Austria, Poland a bulwark against Russia and Prussia.  Second:  Austria, which 
they wish to dismember. The partition of Austria will divide them, but until then 
nothing can separate them (pp. 100-102).  Third:  the new German Empire, hated by 
all and with no ally apart from Russia, and perhaps the United States.  Still has much 
to do before it can achieve the idea of Pan-Germanic Empire; would have to take 
the whole of Lorraine away from France; to devour Belgium, Holland, Switzerland, 
Denmark and the Scandinavian peninsula; the Russian Baltic provinces, so as to 
achieve sole control of the Baltic. It would leave Hungary to the Magyars, Galicia 
with the Austrian Bukovina to the Russians; it would reserve its rights to the whole 
of Austria up to and including Trieste and also Bohemia, which the Russian 
Cabinet would not even dream of contesting... "We" (Bakunin) "have certain 
knowledge that secret negotiations about the partition of the Austrian Empire in the shorter 
or longer term have long since been in train between the Petersburg and the German 
courts", in the course of which each side naturally tries to dupe the other. On its 
own, the Prussian-German Empire [is] not capable of carrying out these great 
plans;  "hence an alliance with Russia is and will for a long time remain an «urgent 
necessity»  "... The same true of Russia "Conquest in every direction and at any price is 
the normal condition of life for the Russian Empire." In which direction then? To west 
or east? The western route is that of Pan-Slavism and an alliance with France against 
the united military might of Prussia and Austria and with the probable neutrality of 
England and the United States. The other, eastern, route leads to India, Persia, 
Constantinople. The enemies there [are] Austria and England, probably joined by 
France; allies—Germany and the United States (pp. 102-104). 
The first route (Pan-Slavism, against the German Empire). The assistance of 
France worthless, her unity shattered forever, etc.; this route is revolutionary; it 
leads to an uprising of the peoples, the Slavs especially, against their legitimate 
«rulers», both Austrian and Prussian-German. Nicholas rejected this course of 
action from instinct, principle, etc. (!) But over and above that «it must not be 
forgotten that the liberation of Poland is absolutely impossible to All-Russian 
statehood». Centuries of struggle between two opposing forms of the «state»: the 
«will of the Sczlachta» and the Tsarist knout. The Poles often seemed on the verge 
of victory. But as soon as the people rose up—in Moscow in 1612,569  and then the 
insurrection of the Ukrainians and the Lithuanian «serfs» under Bogdan 
Khmelnitsky 570—it was at an end. "The Russian knout triumphed thanks to the people." 
This admission on p. 110. 
The All-Russian knout-Empire built on the ruins of the Sczlachta Polish 
«state». "Take these supports away from it, i.e. the provinces which «formed part» of 
the Polish «state» up to 1772, and the All-Russian Empire will vanish" (p. 110). 
a Here Marx has: "Bcerussische", a word coined from Russian and German.— 
Ed 

=====第533页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 503 
These are the wealthiest, most fertile and best populated provinces; if they were 
lost the wealth and might of the Russian Empire would be halved. This loss would 
be followed by that of the «Baltic provinces» and, on the assumption that the Polish 
state were really invested with new life, it would wrest from Russia control of the 
whole of the Ukraine, which would become either a Polish province or an 
«independent state». Russia would thereby forfeit her frontier on the Black Sea; 
she would be cut off from Europe on every side and be forced into Asia. Some 
imagine that the Russian Empire could at least cede Lithuania to Poland. «No». 
The proximity of «Moscow» and Poland necessarily leads Polish patriotism to the 
conquest of the Baltic provinces and the Ukraine. Were the present Kingdom of 
Poland once freed, Warsaw would immediately unite with Vilna, Grodno, «Minsk» 
and Kiev, to say nothing of Podolia and Volhyniya. The Poles such a restless people 
that it cannot be given an inch of free space; it instantly becomes the focal point of 
general revolutionary resistances In 1841 there remained only one free city, 
Cracow, and Cracow became the focal point of general revolutionary resistance. 
The Russian Empire can only prolong its existence by using the Muravyovian system 
«to keep» the Poles «doum»571... The Russian people has nothing in common with 
the Russian Empire; [their] interests are opposed. 
At this point Bakunin puts forward the following proposition, a 
nonsensical one from the standpoint of his own system: 
"As soon as the Russian Empire collapses and the Great Russians, Ukrainians and 
other peoples have established their freedom, the ambitious intentions of the Polish 
«state»-patriots will cease to hold any «terrors» for them" (comment done!b). "They can 
be fatal only to the Empire" (p. 111). This is why the Tsar will not voluntarily give up 
the least patch of Polish territory. "And without liberating the Poles, can he call on the 
Slavs «to rebel»?" (pp. 104-111). 
And in Nicholas' day the Pan-Slav way was more promising than today. At that 
time an uprising of the Magyars and the Italians against Austria was still to be 
counted on. At present Italy probablyc neutral, since (in such an event) Austria 
would just hand over the few remaining Italian enclaves in her possession 
voluntarily. As for the Magyars, in view of their own «state» d  position vis-à-vis the 
Slavs,  they would vigorously support the Germans against Russia. The Russian 
Emperor could only rely on limited support from among the Austrian Slavs; if he 
tried to induce the Turkish Slavs to rise up too, then [he would face a] new enemy: 
England. But in the Austrian Empire there are no more than 17 million Slavs; of 
these 5 million are in Galicia, where the Poles would paralyse the Ruthenians; this 
leaves 12 million, minus those serving in the Austrian army, who would fight against 
anyone their superiors commanded them to, as is the fashion in any army. These 
12 million 
(who,  according to Bakunin, are exclusively male and adult) 
are not concentrated in one or a few places; scattered over the whole expanse 
of the Austrian Empire, speaking very different dialects, mixed with Germans, 
Magyars, Italians and Romanians. 
a In Bakunin this part of the sentence reads: "people in it will instantly conspire 
and establish secret contacts with all the conquered regions so as to restore the Polish 
state".—  Ed. 
b To be sure! — Ed. 
c Bakunin has: "undoubtedly".— Ed. 
d Bakunin has: "dominating".— Ed. 

=====第534页=====
504 Karl Marx 
"This is a huge number with which to keep the Austrian authorities and the 
Germans in general in a state of constant uneasiness, but it is very little to give the 
Russian armies serious support against the combined forces of Prussian Germany 
and Austria." The Russian government knows this and so does not even 
contemplate a Pan-Slav war against Austria, which would inevitably turn into war 
against the whole of Germany. Nevertheless, it does employ agents to disseminate 
actual Pan-Slav propaganda in the Austrian territories. It is very useful for it to 
have such blind, etc., supporters in all the Austrian provinces. " This paralyses, 
impedes and alarms the Austrian government and strengthens the influence of Russia not 
just on Austria, but on the whole of Germany. Imperial Russia incites the Austrian Slavs 
against Magyars and Germans, knowing full well that in the last analysis it would 
abandon them to the mercies of those Germans and Magyars" (pp. 112, 113). 
By taking the western, Pan-Slav course of action Russia has to fight against all 
the Germans, both Prussian and Austrian, against the Magyars and against the 
Poles.  Could Russia defeat even Prussian Germany alone in an offensive war (which she 
would have to conduct under the pretext of liberating the Slavs)? The Russian 
nation would have no interest in a war; for peoples in general have no interest in 
purely political wars conducted by governments; the only instance [of a popular 
war] in recent history [was] Napoleon I, but he was regarded rather as continuing 
the Revolution; the only genuine example [was] the last Prussian war against the 
Second Empire. At that time Pan-Germanic interest outweighed all others in the 
hearts and minds of all Germans without distinction, and at the present moment 
this is what constitutes the special strength of Germany... Russians displayed no 
interest in their government even in the Crimean War, "which was a defensive war, 
not a war of conquest". 
This on p. 117; by contrast the war against Napoleon III was 
evidently a mere offensive war?572 
The Russian peasant is not even aware that he is a Slav ... for the Slav peoples 
there must be war against all «states», to begin with in alliance with the Latin 
nations, who like the Slavs are threatened by the German policy of conquest... And 
then with the Germans, but only when they too have become opposed to the 
«state»... But until then an alliance of the Slavs and the Latin nations against the 
German politicians bent on conquest remains a necessity... "Étrange 3 vocation for 
the German tribe! By stirring up (arousing) universal alarm and universal hate 
against themselves, they unite the nations"... "In this sense the Russian people too 
[is] completely Slav." But its hostility does not extend to the point of declaring 
war against them on their own initiative; it will only reveal itself if the Germans 
invade Russia and try to set up their own rule there,—but it would take no part 
in an offensive war against the Germans... But do the government resources, both 
financial and military, suffice [for a war] against Germany?... In the situation 
postulated here (a Russian offensive) the Germans would be righting on their own 
soil and «this time» there would be a truly «universal» uprising of all classes and of 
the entire population of Germany (pp. 114-120). 
The Russian officer a better human being than the German... the latter a 
civilised wild animal... Germans, especially officers and officials, combine education 
with barbarism, erudition with servility... But for a regular army there is nothing 
more perfect than the German officer—his entire life: receiving and giving 
orders... Ditto the German soldier—ideal for the regular army both by nature and 
Strange.— Ed 

=====第535页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 505 
training... First break the soldier's body in and thereby the spirit... Discipline, etc.... 
The superiority of the German officers over those of other nations lies in their 
knowledge, their theoretical and practical grasp of military affairs, their ardent and 
completely pedantic devotion to soldiering, their precision, their methodicalness, 
«self-control», inexhaustible stamina (Tepntmie) and, on top of it all, a relative 
probity (necTHOCTb). The organisation and equipment of the German army are 
genuine and not merely something that exists on paper, as with Napoleon III and 
as it will be with us. And then [there is] the administrative, civil and above all 
military control, so that widespread deception is impossible. "With us by contrast 
there is nothing but back-scratching from bottom to top and from top to  bottom,  so that 
it is almost impossible to discover the truth" (pp. 121-128). 
(Last sentence p. 128.) 
Even if Russia maintains a million troops, half of them are needed domestically 
to keep an eye on the beloved people. How many needed then for the Ukraine, 
Lithuania and Poland (p. 128). 
Germany will have a real «million»-strong army, which in organisation, 
«drilling», morale, knowledge and equipment will be the best in the world. 
And behind it the entire people in arms "which in all probability would not have 
risen up against the French if Napoleon III rather than the Prussian Fritz3 had 
been the victor in the last war, but which would rise up as one man against a 
Russian «invasion» "... But where will the Russian million be? On paper... Where 
the officers and the equipment?... No money... The Germans received 5 thousand 
million from the French.573 At least 2 went on armaments... "Indeed at the 
moment the whole of Germany is transformed into a menacing arsenal, bristling on 
every side." At your very first step on German soil you will be utterly defeated 
and your offensive war will be turned into a defensive war at a stroke; the 
German army will cross the frontiers of the All-Russian Empire. Then a general 
uprising of the Russian people? "  Yes,  if the Germans occupy Russian «regions» and 
march e.g. directly to Moscow; but if they do not commit this act of folly, but march 
northwards towards Petersburg, through the Baltic provinces, there they will find 
many friends, not just among the bourgeois, the Protestant parsons and Jews, 
disaffected barons and their children, and students, but also among our countless 
Baltic generals, officers, officials both high and low who congregate in Petersburg 
but are also scattered throughout the whole of Russia; even more, they will lead 
Poland and the Ukraine to rise up against the Russian Empire" (pp. 128-131). 
The Poles have no more dangerous or insidious enemy than Bismarck. "It 
appears as if he has made it his life's task to wipe (cTepeTb) them from the face of the 
earth. And this does not prevent him from exhorting the Poles to rise up 
against Russia when German interests require it. And despite the fact that the Poles 
loathe him and Prussia, not to say Germany as a  whole,  which the Poles «will not admit 
even to  themselves,  although in the depths of their souls there burns the same historical hatred 
of the Germans that is to be found among all the other Slav peoples» ... the Poles will 
doubtless rise up at Bismarck's summons" (p. 133). 
"In Germany and in Prussia herself a numerous and serious political party has 
existed for a very long time; even three parties: a liberal-progressive party, a purely 
democratic one and a Social-Democratic party,574 which taken together have an 
undoubted majority in the German and Prussian parliaments, and an even more 
decisive one in society  itself;  these parties, which have foreseen and in part desire 
and, as it were, call forth a German war with Russia, have realised that the uprising 
a William I.— Ed. 

=====第536页=====
506 Karl Marx 
and the restoration of Poland «within certain limits»2  will be the necessary 
precondition of that war" (p. 133). Neither Bismarck nor any of these parties has 
any wish to restore to Poland all the territories taken from her by Prussia: neither 
Königsberg nor Danzig, nor even the smallest portion of West Prussia; and only a 
very little of the Duchy of Posen. But they will give the Poles the whole of Galicia 
together with «Lvov» and Cracow since all this is Austrian at present, and as much 
of the Russian territory as they can seize. In addition, money, weapons and military 
aid, in the form of a Polish loan on German security of course... The Poles will 
jump at it... With a few exceptions the Poles do not concern themselves with the 
«Slav question»; they «find the Magyars much closer and more comprehensible»... 
Numerous parties among the Poles; in the background always the restoration of 
the Polish «state» within the frontiers of 1772. The only difference between the 
parties is that some favour one means and others another to achieve this end... 
Bismarck will demand that they formally renounce their claims to the greater part 
of the old Polish territories which are now Prussian... It is true, it will be a strange 
Poland that will have been restored under the aegis of Count Bismarck. But better 
a «strange» Poland than none at all; besides the Poles envisage the possibility of 
freeing themselves from Bismarck's protection at a later date... Poland will rise; 
Lithuania ditto, and, given a little bit of a squall, the Ukraine as well... The Polish 
patriots are poor socialists and at home they would not concern themselves with 
socialist revolutionary propaganda; even if they wished to do so, Bismarck would 
not permit it—«too close to Germany»... but it could be done in Russia and against 
Russia. A peasant «revolt» in Russia useful for the Germans and the Poles and not 
difficult to them; so many Poles and Germans scattered through Russia; all allies of 
Bismarck and the Poles: "Just picture our situation: our armies utterly defeated 
and in headlong flight; at their heels the Germans are marching on Petersburg, 
and in the south and west, the Poles are marching towards «Smolensk» and the 
Ukraine,—and at the same time, fired by foreign and home propaganda, a general, 
victorious peasants' revolt in Russia and the Ukraine." 
(This sentence on p. 138.) 
...In this way the German «state» would cut the Russian state off from Europe. 
"We are speaking, of course, of the Empire" (Russian) "and not of  the Russian people, 
which, when it needs to, will find or «make a path for itself» (npoÔHTboi, clear, force 
its way, percer, se faire jour) eaody dopozy (everywhere, on all sides)." 
(This sentence pp. 138-139.) 
So, while the Russian people is acting as a whole and forcing its 
way through so as to prevent itself from being cut off from Europe, 
these anarchists conduct a political war. And what does Bakunin 
want? The Germans and Poles lay the Russian Empire in ruins but, 
at the same time, they trigger off a general, victorious peasants' 
revolt in Russia. Bismarck and the Poles will do nothing to pre­
vent these peasants from asserting themselves as "anarchists". On 
the contrary, they make more effective propaganda among them 
than the "world-famous" Alliance; and once this anarchistic state 
of affairs has been established on such a giant scale, their Latin 
and Slav brethren will also catch fire. And it can change nothing 
a Emphasis in Bakunin.— Ed 

=====第537页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 507 
about the matter whether this takes place as the result of a war 
started by Russia against Germany, or vice versa. Incidentally, 
since according to Bakunin there is nothing but a "class of 
officials" in Serbia, apart from the people, what shall the Serbian 
social revolution consist in, if not in the elimination of the class of 
officials, since it is this class which alone constitutes the «state» 
there? (pp. 138, 139) 
Hence for the All-Russian Empire the road to Europe is now blocked; Count 
Bismarck holds the keys to its gates and nothing in the whole wide world could 
induce him to hand them over to Prince Gorchakov. But if the north-western route 
is blocked, then there remain the southern and the south-eastern routes—Bokhara, 
Persia, Afghanistan, East India and finally Constantinople. Russian politicians have 
long raised the question as to whether the capital and the centre of gravity of the 
Empire should not be transferred from Petersburg to Constantinople. It is true that 
these insatiable patriots wanted both, the Baltic and Constantinople. But they are 
getting used to the idea of giving that up; their eyes were opened above all by events 
of recent years, in particular the "union of Schleswig-Holstein and Hanover with 
the Prussian Kingdom, 575 which was thereby transformed into a North Sea power" 
(p. 139). 
"All are familiar with the axiom that no «state» can lay claim to a place in the 
first rank without extensive frontiers to the sea which ensure it direct 
communication with the whole world and allow it direct participation in world 
communication, material and social, political and moral (noAHTHnecKH-
HpaBCTBeHHOM)" ... without that soon stagnation... China ... A host of conditions must 
be fulfilled for a people consolidated (3aMKHyTWH) into a «state» to participate in 
world communication; nowadays they include (npHHa4Ae>KHTb) «natural common 
sense and innate energy», education, the capacity for productive labour «and the 
most extensive inner freedom, impossible as this may be for the masses within a state». 
"But these conditions necessarily include also navigation, sea trade, because the sea 
as a form of transport surpasses all others—the railways included—in relative 
cheapness, speed and also freedom in the sense that the sea belongs to nobody. It 
may be that air travel will prove to be even more serviceable in every respect and 
will be particularly important because it will finally level out (ypaBroieTh) the 
conditions of development and life of all countries." 
This is the central issue for Bakunin—levelling out, e.g. the 
whole of Europe to the level of Slovak mouse-trap sellers. ... "For 
the present, navigation remains the chief instrument for bringing 
about the well-being (the great progress, «the prosperity») of the 
peoples." This [is] the only point at which Mr. Bakunin speaks of 
economic conditions and understands that they create conditions 
and differences among peoples independent of the «state»... 
Once states (rocyAapcTBa) cease to exist and "a free, fraternal union of free 
productive associations, communities and «regional» federations" arises from the 
ruins of all states "in complete freedom and organising themselves from below, 
embracing, without distinctions of any kind, because free, peoples of all languages 
and nationalities,—once this is done, the way to the sea will be open to all in equal 
measure: directly for coastal dwellers and, for those living further from the sea, 
with the aid of the railways, which will be completely liberated from all  «T-HMX 

=====第538页=====
508 Karl Marx 
noneHeHifi» ([state] concern, welfare, care), «B3HMaHift» (levies), taxes, restrictions, 
harassment, prohibitions, authorisations and interference. But even then the coastal 
dwellers will enjoy a number of natural advantages, of an intellectual and ethical as well as 
a material  kind.  Direct contact with the world market and world communication in 
general is extraordinarily conducive to development, including that of relations not 
thus levelled out, those living in the interior, denied these advantages, will live and 
develop at a slower and more indolent pace than the coastal inhabitants. This is why air 
travel will be of such immense significance ... but until then ... the coastal inhabitants will 
form the vanguard in all respects and will constitute a sort of aristocracy of mankind" 
As in Britanny, for examplel 
And the distinction between plains and highlands, river valleys, 
climate, soil, coal, iron, acquired productive forces, material and 
intellectual, language, literature, technical skills, etc. etc. Fourier 
tackles the problem of levelling out in a much more heroic 
manner (pp. 139-142). 
In this connection Bakunin makes the discovery that Germany 
(as a non-maritime nation) is inferior to Holland in trade and to 
Belgium in industry (p. 143). 
Prussia is now the embodiment, the head and hands of Germany, she has 
established (based) herself firmly on the Baltic and the North Sea (p. 145). 
Hamburg, Bremen, Lübeck, Mecklenburg, Oldenburg, Schleswig-Holstein —all 
Prussian; Prussia is building two large fleets with French money, one in the Baltic, 
the other in the North Sea, and with the aid of the ship-canal 576 now being dug to 
join the two seas, the two fleets will soon become one. Will soon be much stronger 
than the Russian Baltic fleet. Then to the devil with Riga, Reval, Finland, 
Petersburg, Kronstadt. To the devil with the significance of Petersburg. Gorchakov 
had to admit this to himself on the day when his ally Prussia plundered our 
confederate Denmark with impunity and as if with our consent. 
The Polish insurrection, «Mr.» Bakunin!577 
"He should have grasped the fact that from the day on which Prussia, basing 
herself now on the whole of Germany and constituting in indissoluble unity with the 
latter the strongest continental power; since the time, in a word, when under the 
Prussian sceptre the new German Empire took up its present position on the Baltic 
and became such a threat to all neighbouring powers, the supremacy of Petersburgian 
Russia over that sea was at an end, Peter's great political creation lay in ruins, and 
with it the power of the All-Russian «state» was destroyed, if it is not compensated for  the 
loss of the open sea route in the north by the opening up of a new route in the south" 
(pp. 145-147). 
But how far open, s'il vous plait? As far as the English are 
concerned, [it was] "open" to the ramparts of Kronstadt. 
"The approaches still in the hands of Denmark; but, after first federating with 
Germany of her own free will, Denmark will then find herself swallowed up by the 
Pan-Germanic Empire. Hence the entire Baltic soon an exclusively German sea and 
hence Petersburg's loss of political significance. Gorchakov must have realised this 
when he agreed to the dismemberment of Denmark and the union of 
Schleswig-Holstein with Prussia. Either he betrayed Russia or he received a formal 
guarantee from Bismarck to help Russia establish a new power in the south-east. 

=====第539页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 509 
For Bakunin it is an established fact that an offensive and 
defensive alliance between Prussia and Russia was concluded after the 
Paris Treaty578 or at least at the period of the Polish insurrection of 
1863. 
Hence Bismarck's nonchalance in launching the war with Austria and the 
greater part of Germany in the face of the threat of French intervention, and 
hence the even more decisive war with France. The slightest show of force by 
Russia on the frontier in either war, especially in the last one, would have put a 
stop to the victorious advance of the Prussian army. The whole of Germany, 
particularly the north of Germany, was completely denuded of troops in the last 
war; Austria only remained inactive because of Russian threats; Italy and England 
only refrained from intervening because Russia did not want them to. If she had 
not shown herself to be such a determined ally of Prussia, the Germans would 
never have taken Paris. But Bismarck was obviously convinced that Russia would 
not let him down. On what did this conviction rest? Bismarck knows that Russian 
and Prussian interests are entirely antagonistic, apart from on the Polish question. 
War between them inevitable. But there may be grounds for delaying it since each 
hopes to derive greater benefit from their enforced alliance until the day of crisis 
arrives. The German Empire far from secure either internally or externally. 
Internally, still a host of petty princes. Externally, Austria and France. Obeying an 
inner necessity, it contemplates new adventures,579 new wars. Restoration of the 
mediaeval Empire with its original frontiers, based on the patriotic Pan-Germanic 
feeling that fills the whole of German society; [dreams of] annexing the whole of 
Austria with the exception of Hungary, but including Trieste as well as Bohemia, 
the whole of German-speaking Switzerland, a part of Belgium, the whole of 
Holland and Denmark, essential for the establishment of its naval power: plans 
stirring up a considerable section of western and southern Europe against it and 
their implementation not feasible without Russian agreement. Hence the Russian 
alliance still necessary for the new German Empire (pp. 148-151). 
The All-Russian Empire, for its part, cannot dispense with the Prusso-
Germanic alliance. It must advance towards the south-east—the Black Sea instead 
of the Baltic; otherwise [it will be] cut off from Europe; and for that Constantinople 
essential; otherwise can always be denied access to the Mediterranean, as was the 
case during the Crimean War. Hence Constantinople the great goal. This in 
conflict with the interests of the whole of southern Europe, France included; in 
conflict with English interests and even those of Germany, since if Russia had 
absolute control over the Black Sea, the entire Danube «basin» would be made 
directly dependent upon Russia. Despite this Prussia has formally promised Russia 
to assist her in her south-eastern policy; it is no less certain that she will break her 
promise at the first opportunity. But such a breach of the agreement not to be 
expected now, at the very beginning of its fulfilment. Prussia helped Russia to 
nullify the clauses of the Paris Peace Treaty; will support her just 
as strongly on the issue of Khiva. It is of benefit to the Germans that Russia should 
be engaged as far to the east as possible. What is the purpose of the Russian war 
against Khiva?... India? Not at all. China would be much simpler; and the Russian 
government is indeed planning something of the sort. "It is striving quite openly to 
detach Mongolia and Manchuria from China"; "one fine day we shall hear of a 
victory of Russian forces on the western frontier (!) of China... The Chinese feel 
themselves constricted within their own territory, too numerous; hence emigration 
to Australia, California; other masses may move to the north and north-west. And 
then in a trice Siberia, the whole area stretching from the Gulf of Tartary to the 

=====第540页=====
510 Karl Marx 
Urals and the Caspian Sea, will cease to be Russian. In this giant territory, 
12,200,000 square kilometres, more than 20 times as large as France 
(528,600 square kilometres), there are at present only 6 million inhabitants, of 
whom only about 2,600,000 are Russian, all others are natives of Tartar or Finnish 
origin, and the number of troops there is quite negligible... The Chinese will be 
able to cross the Urals and penetrate as far as the Volga... The increase in 
population makes it almost impossible for the Chinese to maintain an existence 
within the frontiers of China. In the Chinese interior there are vigorous, warlike 
people, reared amidst constant civil wars in which tens and hundreds of thousands 
have been annihilated at a stroke... In recent times they have become acquainted 
with European weapons and discipline, in short, with the «state» civilisation of 
Europe. At the same time, great barbarity; no instinct for freedom or humanity. At 
present they band together under the leadership of a crowd of military 
adventurers, American and European, who have made their way to China since the 
last Anglo-French expedition (I860), 580 this is the great threat from the East... And 
our Russian authorities are playing with this threat with all the naivety of a child... 
They want to extend their frontiers; and yet Russia neither has been to this day, 
nor will she ever be able, to populate the newly acquired Amur region where in a 
territory of 2,100,000 square kilometres, almost four times the size of France, there 
are a mere 65,000 inhabitants including the army and navy; and with all this there 
is the wretched condition of the Russian people driving it to a general «revolt»; and 
despite this the Russian government hopes to extend its sway over the whole of the 
Asiatic East. It would have to turn its back on Europe, as Bismarck wishes, and hurl 
its whole army into Siberia and Central Asia, and conquer the East like Tamerlane. 
But Tamerlane, unlike the Russian government, was followed by his own people"... 
As far as India is concerned, the Russians cannot help themselves to her in the face 
of English opposition... "But if we cannot conquer India, we can destroy or at least 
weaken the hold of the English there, provoke native «rebellions» against England, 
assist them, maintain them, if need be even with the aid of military intervention." 
"It will cost us very dear in terms of both money and men... What for?... To alarm 
the English to no purpose? «No», but because the English are in our way. Where 
are they in our way? In Constantinople.3 As long as the English retain their power 
they will never and at no price in the world agree to Constantinople falling into 
our hands, becoming the new capital not just of the All-Russian Empire, but of a 
Slav and Eastern Empire too." This is why the Russian government is waging war 
in Khiva; this is the reason for its long-standing wish to move closer to India. "It is 
on the lookout for the spot where England is vulnerable, and, not finding one 
anywhere else, threatens her in India. In this way it attempts to reconcile England 
to the idea that Constantinople must become a Russian city"... Its supremacy in the 
Baltic irretrievably lost... The Russian Empire, built on the bayonet and the knout, 
hated by the mass of all the peoples, including the Slavs and starting with the Great 
Russians themselves, demoralised, disorganised, etc. ... is incapable of waging a war 
against the newly risen German Empire. Hence, "it is necessary to renounce the 
Baltic and to await the moment when the entire Baltic «region» will become a 
German province. This can be prevented only by a «popular revolution». But such a 
revolution would be death to the «state», and our government will not look to it for 
its salvation". 
(This last sentence p. 160.) 
For our government the only solution lies in an alliance with Germany. 
Sacrificing the Baltic, it must look to the Black Sea for compensation and even for 
a Italicised in Bakunin too.— Ed 

=====第541页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 511 
its political survival; and this can only be achieved with German aid. "The Germans 
have committed themselves to assist us. We have no doubt that a formal treaty has 
been agreed between Bismarck and Gorchakov." Naturally, the Germans have no 
intention of implementing it. They cannot abandon the mouth of the Danube and 
their Danube trade to the arbitrary will of the Russians; to set up a great Pan-Slav 
Empire in southern Europe would be suicidal for the Pan-Germanic Empire. But 
"to guide and push the Russian armies towards Central Asia, towards Khiva, on the 
pretext that this is the most direct way to Constantinople, that is quite another 
matter.".Gorchakov and Alexander II tricked by Bismarck, as Napoleon III had 
been before them.581 But this is what has happened, and there is no use crying 
over spilt milk. It is impossible for the feeble Russian forces  (APH6AMMT>  ca\aM) to 
overturn the new Germanic Empire; only the revolution could do that, and as long 
as it is not victorious in Russia or Europe the victor will be «statist» Germany which 
will carry all before her, and the Russian government, like all continental govern­
ments in Europe, will survive only with her permission and by her «favour»... 
"More than ever before the Germans have become our masters, and it is not for 
nothing that all the Germans in Russia celebrated the victory of the German armies 
over France with such noise and enthusiasm; it is not for nothing that all the 
Petersburg Germans gave such a triumphant welcome to the new Pan-Germanic 
Emperor." "At the present time, on the whole continent of Europe, only one truly 
independent «state» survives: Germany... The chief reason for this the «community 
instinct» which is the characteristic feature of the German people. The instinct on 
the one hand, for blind obedience towards the more powerful, [on the other,] for 
ruthless suppression of the weaker" (pp. 151-163). 
There now follows a survey of the recent history of Germany 
(especially since 1815) as proof of her instinct for servility and 
suppression... 
The Slavs in particular have had to suffer from the latter. The "historic mission" 
of the Germans at least in the north and east consisted, in their own view, in the 
extermination, enslavement and "forcible Germanisation" of the Slav tribes. "This 
long and «melancholy» history the memory of which is deeply rooted in every Slav 
heart will doubtless resound in the last inevitable struggle [of the Slavs] against the 
Germans unless the social revolution pacifies them first" (p. 164). 
This is followed by a history of German patriotism since 1815. 
(His material from Professor Miiller's History from 1816 to 1866.)* 
"The political existence of the Prussian monarchy (in 1807) was only preserved 
thanks to the intercession of Alexander I" (pp. 168-169).582 
Fichte's Speeches to the German Nation583: «But contemporary Germans, while 
retaining all the outsized pretentions of their patriotic philosopher, have renounced 
his humanism... The patriotism of Prince Bismarck or Mr. Marx is more accessible 
to them» (p. 171). 
After Napoleon's flight from Russia, Bakunin maintains, "Frederick William III 
embraced his saviour, the Emperor of all the Russias, in Berlin with tears of 
«emotion and gratitude»" (I.e.). 
"Only one course remained open to Austria: to avoid stifling Germany" by 
entering the German Confederation with all her possessions as she originally 
wanted, "while at the same time preventing Prussia from seizing the leadership of 
a W. Müller, Geschichte der Neuesten Zeit 1816-1866 mit besonderer  Berücksichtigung 
Deutschlands, Stuttgart, 1867.— Ed. 

=====第542页=====
512 Karl Marx 
the German Confederation. Following this policy, she could reckon on the active 
help of France and Russia. Russian policy until recent times, i.e. up to the Crimean 
War, consisted above all in systematically encouraging the mutual rivalry between 
Austria and Prussia so that neither might gain the upper hand over the other, and 
at the same time, in sowing the seeds of mistrust and fear in the smaller and 
medium principalities of Germany, whilst protecting them from both Austria and 
Prussia" (p. 183). Prussia's influence chiefly moral; much expected of her (after 
1815).  Hence it was vital for Metternich to ensure that the (promised) constitution 
should not be granted and that Prussia should join Austria at the head of the 
reaction. "In his pursuit of this plan he discovered the most enthusiastic «support» 
in France which was ruled by the Bourbons and in Tsar Alexander who was 
manipulated by «Arakcheyev»" (p. 184). 
"The Germans have no need of freedom. Life for them is simply unthinkable 
without authority, i.e. without a supreme will, a supreme idea and an iron hand «to 
drive them on». The stronger this hand, the prouder they are and life is more 
congenial to them" (p. 192). 
1830-1840. Blind imitation of the French. "The Germans stopped devouring 
the Gauls and instead turned all their hatred towards the Russians" (p. 196). 
"Everything hinged on the outcome of the Polish revolution. If it had been 
victorious, the Prussian monarchy, cut off (separated) from its north-east rampart 
and compelled" to surrender if not all then at least a considerable part of its Polish 
possessions, "would have been forced to seek new bases in Germany  herself,  and 
since at the time it could not achieve this by conquest... it would have had to do so 
by means of liberal reforms" (p. 199). Following the defeat of the Poles, Frederick 
William III, who had performed such important services for his son-in-law Tsar 
Nicholas,584 "cast off his mask and pursued the Pan-Germanic patriots even more 
vehemently than before" (p. 200). 
"In the conviction that the mass of the people harbour all the elements of their 
future normal organisation in their instincts, as these have been developed to a 
greater or lesser extent by history, in their daily needs and their conscious or 
unconscious aspirations, we seek that ideal" (the ideal of social organisation) "in the 
people  itself;  and since every «state» power, every authority is by its very nature 
and its position placed outside the people and above it, and since it must 
necessarily strive to force the people to submit to rules and objectives alien to it, 
this is why we declare ourselves the enemies of all power vested in authority, the 
«state», the enemies of all «state» organisation in general and believe that the 
people can only be happy and free when «it creates its own life» by organising itself 
«from below», by means of autonomous and completely free associations 
(coe4HHeHifi) and «without» any official tutelage «but not independently of various 
and equally free influences, both of people and parties»" (p. 213). These are "the 
convictions of the social revolutionaries, and this is why we are called anarchists" 
(p. 213). "Idealists of every kind, metaphysicians, positivists, advocates of the 
primacy of science over life, doctrinaire revolutionaries, all together, with the same 
zeal (>KapoM-B), although with differing arguments, defend (oTcraHBaioTB) the idea 
of the «state» and of «state» power, seeing in it, and very logically* in their way, the 
only salvation for society. Very logically* because, starting from the «assumption» 
that the idea precedes life, that abstract theory takes precedence over social practice and 
that therefore the science of  sociology  must form the starting-point for social revolutions 
and transformations, they necessarily arrive at the conclusion that since the idea, 
theory, science, at the present time at least, is everywhere the province of a very 
a Italicised in Bakunin too.— Ed. 

=====第543页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 513 
few people, this small number of people must therefore be entrusted with the 
management of society, and that they should provide not merely the inspiration, 
but also the leadership of every popular movement and that on the day after the 
revolution a new social organisation should be established not by the free 
association of popular organisations, communities, «districts, regions from below» 
in accordance with the people's requirements and instincts, but solely through the 
dictatorial authority of that learned minority, albeit a minority elected by the «will 
of the whole people»" (p. 214). 
Hence the "doctrinaire revolutionaries" are never enemies of the «state», but 
only of existing governments whose place they wish to occupy as dictators (p. 215). 
"And this is so true that at the present time when reaction is triumphant 
throughout Europe, when all the governments, etc., are making preparations 
under the leadership of Count Bismarck for a desperate struggle against the social 
revolution; at a time when it would seem that all sincere revolutionaries should join 
forces to resist the desperate onslaught of international reaction, we see the 
opposite, namely that under the leadership of Mr. Marx the doctrinaire 
revolutionaries everywhere take up the cudgels on behalf of «statehood» and the 
«worshippers of the state» and against the «popular revolution» (p. 216). In France 
they stood on the side of the «state» republican-reactionary Gambetta against the 
revolutionary Ligue du Midi 585 which alone could have saved France both from the 
German yoke and from the much more dangerous and now victorious coalition of 
clerics, Legitimists, Bonapartists and Orleanists; in Spain they openly sided with 
Castelar, Pi y Margall and the Madrid Constituent Assembly; lastly, in Germany and 
around her, in Austria, Switzerland, Holland and Denmark, they serve Count 
Bismarck whom on their own admission they regard as an extremely useful revolutionary 
«statesman» and assist him in the Pan-Germanisation 586 of all these countries" 
(pp. 216, 217). 
(Feuerbach was still a metaphysician: "he had to make way for his «legitimate» 
successors, the leaders of the school of materialists or realists, most of whom, such 
as, for instance, Messrs. Büchner, Marx and others" have not yet succeeded in 
liberating themselves "from the dominance of metaphysical abstract thought") 
(p. 207). 
"But the principal propagandist of socialism in Germany, at first in secret and 
not long afterwards in public, was Karl Marx. Mr. Marx played and still plays too 
important a role in the socialist movement of the German proletariat for it to be 
possible to overlook this remarkable personality without having made the attempt 
to describe some of his true characteristics. By origin Mr. Marx is a Jew. It may be 
said that he combines in himself all the virtues and defects of this gifted race. 
Nervous (HepBHbift), as some say, to the point of cowardice, he is extraordinarily 
ambitious and vain, quarrelsome, intolerant and absolute like Jehovah, the God of 
his forefathers, and like Him, vindictive to the point of insanity. There is no lie, 
slander, which he would be incapable of inventing against anyone who had the 
misfortune to arouse his jealousy, or, what amounts to the same thing, his hatred. 
And he stops short at no intrigue, however «infamous», if only in his opinion 
(which incidentally is mostly mistaken) this intrigue can serve to strengthen his 
position, his influence or his power. In this respect he is a political «man» through 
and through. These are his negative characteristics. But he has also a great many 
positive qualities. He is very «clever» and extraordinarily versatile and «learned». A 
doctor of philosophy, it can be said that, as early as 1840 in Cologne he was the 
heart and soul of a very important circle of leading Hegelians587 with whom he 
began to publish an oppositional journal3 which was soon suppressed on 
a Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und  Gewerbe. — Ed. 
35-1317 

=====第544页=====
514 Karl Marx 
ministerial orders. To this circle belonged the brothers Edgar and Bruno Bauer, 
Marx, Stirner and later in Berlin the first circle of German nihilists588  whose 
cynical logic far surpassed that of the most ferocious Russian nihilists. In 1843 or 
1844 Marx moved to Paris. There for the first time he made contact with the society 
of French and German communists and with his compatriot, Moritz Hess, 3 
another German Jew, who had been a learned economist and socialist even before 
him and who at this period exerted an important influence on the intellectual 
development of Mr. Marx. It is rare that one comes across a man who «knows» as 
much and has read «as intelligently» as Mr. Marx. Even at this early date the economy 
was the sole object of his concern. He studied the English economists with 
particular zeal since they excel all others in the positive character of their 
«knowledge» and in their practical sense, nourished by the facts of the English 
economy, their vigorous criticism and the scrupulous boldness of their conclusions. 
But to all this Mr. Marx added two new features of his own: the most abstract, 
«most ingenious» dialectics which he had acquired in the Hegelian school and 
which he frequently «pushed to mischievous, not to say perverted lengths», and 
the communist point of view. Mr. Marx read, it goes without saying, all the French 
socialists from St. Simon to Proudhon inclusively, the last named being someone he 
hated, as is well known, and there is no doubt that the merciless criticism that he 
directed against Proudhon contains more than a grain of truth b ; Proudhon, despite 
all his efforts to stand on the firm ground of reality, remained an idealist and a 
metaphysician. His point of departure was the abstract idea of law; he proceeds 
from law to the economic fact, while Mr. Marx, on the other hand, has stated and 
proved the indubitable truth, which is confirmed by the entire history of human 
society, of peoples and of states, both past and present, that the economic fact 
everywhere took and takes precedence over juridical and political law. The 
«exposition» and proof of this truth is one of the principal scientific achievements 
of Mr. Marx. But the most remarkable fact, and one which Mr. Marx has never 
acknowledged, is that in the political sphere Mr. Marx is a direct disciple of 
M. Louis Blanc. Mr. Marx is incomparably «more intelligent» and incomparably 
more erudite than that «little unsuccessful» revolutionary and statesman; but as a 
German and despite «his respectable height», he served his apprenticeship with the 
diminutive Frenchman. And there is a simple explanation for this singular fact: the 
rhetorical Frenchman, as a bourgeois politician and a self-confessed follower of 
Robespierre, and the learned German in his threefold character as Hegelian, Jew 
and German, are both ferocious «worshippers of the state» and preachers of 
«state» communism, only with the difference that the one rests content with 
rhetorical declamations instead of arguments, and the other, as befits a learned and 
PAINSTAKING  German, supported the principle which was equally dear to him with 
every subtlety of Hegelian dialectics and the whole wealth of his vast erudition. In 
around 1845 Mr. Marx became the leader of the German communists and 
subsequently, together with Mr. Engels, his devoted (HeH3MÏ>HHbiM-b) friend, who 
was just as «intelligent», though less learned, albeit much more practical and no 
less capable of political slander, lies and intrigue, he founded a secret society of 
German communists or «state» socialists. 590 Their central committee,which was—of 
course—led by himself and Mr. Engels, was transferred to Brussels when both 
were expelled from Paris in 1846, 591 and it remained there until 1848. Incidentally, 
until that year their propaganda, although it had made some headway in Germany, 
a Moses Hess.— Ed 
b K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon.— Ed. 

=====第545页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 515 
remained secret and «therefore did not penetrate to the outside world»" (pp. 
221-225). 
At the time (of the revolution of 1848) the urban proletariat in Germany, at 
least in its vast majority, was still beyond the reach of Marx's propaganda and 
beyond the organisation of his communist party. The latter was concentrated 
chiefly in the industrial towns of Rhenish Prussia, especially in Cologne; branches 
in Berlin, Breslau and, «finally», in Vienna, but very weak. Instinctively the 
German proletariat was naturally in favour of socialist aspirations, but no conscious 
demands for social revolution in 1848-49 even though the Communist Manifesto had 
been published as early as March 1848. It made almost no impression at all on the 
German people. The urban revolutionary proletariat still under the direct influence 
of the political party of radicals or at best the democrats (p. 230). At that time 
there was one more element in Germany, which now does not exist there, the 
revolutionary peasantry, or a peasantry at least ready to become revolutionary ... at 
that time it was ready for anything, even for a «general revolt». "In 1848 as in 
1830 the German liberals and radicals feared nothing so much as such a «revolt»; 
nor do socialists of Marx's school like it any better. It is a well-known fact that 
Ferdinand Lassalle who confessed to being a direct disciple of the supreme leader 
of the communist party in Germany, which did not prevent his teacher from giving 
vent, after Lassalle's death, to his jealous and envious (malevolent—3aBHCTAHBoe) 
dissatisfaction with his brilliant pupil, who had left his teacher far behind him in 
terms of practical politics; it is a well-known fact ... that Lassalle more than once 
gave it as his opinion that the defeat of the peasants' uprising in the 16th century 
and the subsequent strengthening and blossoming of the bureaucratic «state» in 
Germany was a real victory for the revolution. For the communist or socialist 
democrats of Germany, the peasantry, any peasantry, is reactionary; and the 
«state», every «state», even the Bismarckian one, revolutionary. And let no one 
imagine that we are slandering them. As proof that they actually think in this way 
we shall point to their speeches, their pamphlets, journalistic  STATEMENTS  and lastly 
their letters—all these things will be made available (npe^cTaBAeHo) to the Russian 
public in due course. Moreover, the Marxists cannot in fact think in any other way; 
«state worshippers» at any price, they must inevitably abominate every popular 
revolution, especially peasant ones, peasant 3 by their very nature and directly 
aiming at the destruction of the «state». As all-devouring Pan-Germanisers they 
must repudiate peasant revolution if only because that is the specific form of the 
Slav revolution" (pp. 230-232). 
"Not only in 1848, but even now the German workers blindly submit to their 
leaders, while the leaders, the organisers of the German Social-Democratich Party, 
lead them neither to liberty nor to international fraternity, but beneath the yoke of 
the Pan-Germanic «state»" (p. 254). 
Bakunin recounts how Frederick William IV was afraid of 
Nicholas (reply to the Polish deputation in March 1848 and 
Olmütz, November 1850) 592 (pp. 254-257). 
1849-1858: The German Confederation counted for less than nothing among 
the other great powers. "Prussia was more than ever the slave of Russia... Her 
subservience to the interests of the Petersburg court went so far that the Prussian 
Minister of War and the Prussian ambassador to the English court, a friend of the 
a "Anarchic" in Bakunin's text.— Ed. 
b Italicised in Bakunin too.— Ed 

=====第546页=====
516 Karl Marx 
King's, were both dismissed because they had revealed their pro-western 
sympathies." Nicholas furious about Schwarzenberg's and Austria's ingratitude. 
"Austria, the natural enemy of Russia on account of her interests in the east, 
openly took sides with England and France against her. To the great indignation of 
the whole of Germany, Prussia remained «true to the last»" (p. 259). "Manteuffel 
became Prime Minister in November 1850 to put his signature to all the conditions 
of the Olmütz conference, which were humiliating in the extreme for Prussia, and 
to put the finishing touches to subjecting both Prussia and the whole of Germany 
to the hegemony of Austria. Such was the will of Nicholas ... such too were the 
aspirations of the major part of the Prussian Junkers or nobles who could not even 
bear to talk of merging Prussia into Germany and who were even more devoted to 
the Austrian" (?) "and All-Russian Emperors than to their own king" (p. 261). 
"At this time (1866 et seq.) the so-called People's Party came into existence. Its 
centre Stuttgart. A group wanting federation with republican Switzerland was the 
main impetus behind the founding of the Ligue de la Paix et de la Liberté 593 
(p. 271). 
"Lassalle founded a mainly political party of German workers, organised it 
hierarchically and subjected it to strict discipline and to his dictatorship; in a word 
he did what Mr. Marx intended to do in the International in the next three years. 
Marx's attempt failed, but Lassalle's was completely successful" (p. 275). 
"The first act of the people's «state»" (according to Lassalle) "will be the granting 
of unlimited credit to the workers' production and consumption associations, for 
only then will these be able to fight bourgeois capital and to defeat and absorb it in 
the not too distant future. When the process of absorbing it is completed, then the 
period of the radical transformation of society will commence. This is Lassalle's 
programme and this is the programme of the Social-Democratic Party. In actual 
fact it belongs not to Lassalle, but to Marx, who gave a complete «exposition» of it in 
the celebrated Manifesto of the Communist Party, published by him and Engels in 
1848.  And there is a «definite pointer to it» in the first Manifesto of the International 
Association* written by Marx in 1864, in the words: 'the great duty of the working 
classes', etc., or, as it is put in the Communist Manifesto, 'the first step in the revolution', 
etc., and ending with 'to concentrate all instruments of production in the hands of the 
«state»', i.e. of the proletariat «raised to the level of the ruling  estate  »" b (pp. 275, 276). 
"But is it not «clear» that Lassalle's programme is indistinguishable from that of Marx 
whom he ackhowledged as his teacher? In the pamphlet directed against 
Schulze-Delitzsch, Lassalle ... having explained his basic conception of the social and 
political development of modern society, says explicitly that the ideas themselves and 
even the terminology he uses belong not to him but to Mr. Marx c... All the «stranger» 
is it, therefore, to see the protest printed by Mr. Marx after the deathb  of Lassalle in the 
Preface to Capital. Marx complains bitterly that Lassalle has robbed him by 
appropriating his ideas. 594 This protest, a very «strange» one from a communist who 
preaches collective ownership but who does not comprehend the fact that an idea, 
once uttered, ceases to be the property of an individual. It would be another matter if 
Lassalle had «copied one or more pages»..." (p. 276). "In contrast to his teacher Marx, 
who is strong on theory and on intrigue behind the scenes or under cover, but 
loses all importance and force in the public arena, Lassalle was made by nature 
a K. Marx, "Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Associa­
tion".— Ed. 
b Italicised in Bakunin too.— Ed. 
c F. Lassalle, Herr Bastiat-Schulze von Delitzsch der ökonomische Julian, oder: 
Capital und Arbeit, Berlin, 1864.— Ed. 

=====第547页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 517 
for open struggle in practical politics" (p. 277). "The entire liberal and democratic 
bourgeoisie deeply detested him; «like-minded comrades», socialists, Marxists and 
Marx  himself,  concentrated on him all the force of their malevolent envy (3aBHCTH). 
Indeed, their loathing of him equalled that felt by the bourgeoisie; during his life 
they did not venture to express their hatred because he was too strong for them" 
(pp. 277, 278). 
"We have already expressed our deep aversion to the theory of Lassalle and 
Marx which recommends to the workers, if not as an ultimate ideal, at least as the 
principal immediate objective, the establishment of a people's state (Hapo4Haro 
rocyAapcTBa), which, as they put it, will be nothing other than 'the proletariat 
«raised to the level of the ruling estate»'. The question is, if the proletariat is to be the 
ruling class, over whom will it rule? This means (this implies—3HaHHTb) that 
another proletariat will remain which will be subject to this new domination, this 
new state (rocy^apcrBy)." 
It implies that as long as the other classes, above all the capitalist 
class,  still exist, and as long as the proletariat is still fighting 
against it (for when the proletariat obtains control of the 
government its enemies and the old organisation of society will not 
yet have disappeared), it must use forcible means, that is to say, 
governmental means; as long as it remains a class  itself,  and the 
economic conditions which give rise to the class struggle and the 
existence of classes have not vanished they must be removed or 
transformed by force, and the process of transforming them must 
be accelerated by force. 
"For example, the «KpecTbHHCKa« nepHb», the vulgar peasants, the peasant 
rabble, who, as is well known, do not enjoy the goodwill of the Marxists and who, 
standing on the lowest rung of civilisation, will probably be governed by the urban 
and factory proletariat" [p. 278]. 
That is to say, where peasants en masse exist as owners of 
private property, where they even form a more or less consider­
able majority, as in all the states of the West European continent, 
where they have not yet disappeared and have not been replaced 
by agricultural day labourers, as in England, there the following 
may happen: either the peasants prevent or bring about the 
downfall of every workers' revolution, as they have done hitherto 
in France; or else the proletariat (for the peasant proprietor does 
not belong to the proletariat, and even if he does belong to it in 
terms of his actual position, he does not think of himself as 
belonging to it) must, as the government, take the measures 
needed to enable the peasant to directly improve his condition, i.e. 
to win him over to the revolution; these measures, however, 
contain the seeds which will facilitate the transition from the 
private ownership of the land to collective ownership, so that the 
peasant arrives at this economically of his own accord; but it is 
important not to antagonise the peasant, e.g. by proclaiming the 

=====第548页=====
518 Karl Marx 
abolition of the right of inheritance or the abolition of his 
property; the latter is possible only where the capitalist tenant 
farmer has ousted the peasants, so that the actual farmer is as 
much a proletarian, a wage-labourer, as the urban worker, so that 
he has the same interests as the latter directly and not indirectly. 
Still less should smallholdings be strengthened by increasing the 
size of allotments simply by dividing up the large estates among 
the peasantry, as in Bakunin's revolutionary campaign. 
"Or, if this question is considered from the national point of view, then it must 
be assumed that for the Germans the Slavs will, for the same reason, be placed in 
the same relationship of slavish dependency on the victorious German proletariat 
as that in which the latter finds itself vis-à-vis its own bourgeoisie" (p. 278). 
Schoolboyish rot! A radical social revolution is bound up with 
definite historical conditions of economic development; these are 
its premisses. It is only possible, therefore, where alongside 
capitalist production the industrial proletariat accounts for at least 
a significant portion of the mass of the people. And for it to have 
any chance of victory, it must be able mutatis mutandis* at the very 
least to do as much directly for the peasants as the French 
bourgeoisie did in its revolution for the French peasantry at that 
time.  A fine idea to imagine that the rule of the workers implies 
the oppression of rural labour! But this is where we glimpse 
Mr. Bakunin's innermost thought. He understands absolutely 
nothing of social revolution, only its political rhetoric; its economic 
conditions simply do not exist for him. Now since all previous 
economic formations, whether developed or undeveloped, have 
entailed the enslavement of the worker (whether as wage labourer, 
peasant, etc.), he imagines that radical revolution is equally possible 
in all these formations. What is more, he wants the European 
social revolution, whose economic basis is capitalist production, to 
be carried out on the level of the Russian or Slav agricultural and 
pastoral peoples, and that it should not surpass this level, even 
though he can see that navigation creates distinctions among 
brethren; but of course he only thinks of navigation because this 
distinction is familiar to all politicians! Willpower, not economic 
conditions, is the basis of his social revolution. 
"Where there is a state (rocy4apcTBo), there is inevitably domination (rocno4-
CTBO)  and consequently there is also «slavery»; domination without slavery, hiddenb 
or masked, is unthinkable—that is why we are enemies of the «state»" (p. 278). 
"What does it mean to talk of the proletariat «raised to the level of the ruling 
estate»"? 
a With the necessary changes having been made.— Ed. 
b Bakunin has: "open".— Ed. 

=====第549页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 519 
It means that the proletariat, instead of fighting in individual 
instances against the economically privileged classes, has gained 
sufficient strength and organisation to use general means of 
coercion in its struggle against them; but it can only make use of 
such economic means as abolish its own character as wage labourer 
and hence as a class; when its victory is complete, its rule too is 
therefore at an end, since its class character will have disappeared. 
"Will perhaps the entire proletariat stand at the head of the government?" 
In a TRADES UNION, for example, does the entire union form its 
executive committee? Will all division of labour in the factory 
come to an end as well as the various functions arising from it? 
And with Bakunin's constitution «from below», will everyone be 
«at the top»? If so, there will be no one «at the bottom». Will all 
the members of the community at the same time administer the 
common interests of the «region»? If so, there will be no 
distinction between community and «region». 
"There are about 40 million Germans. Does this mean that all 40 million will be 
members of the government?" 
CERTAINLY! For the system starts with the self-government of the 
communities. 
"The entire people will rule, and no one will be ruled." 
When a person rules  himself,  he does not do so according to 
this principle; for he is only himself and not another. 
"Then there will be no government, no state, but if there is a state, there will be 
both rulers and slaves." 
That just means when class rule has disappeared there [will] be 
no state in the present political sense (p. 279). 
"The dilemma in the theory of the Marxists is easily resolved. By people's 
government they" (i.e. Bakunin) "understand the government of the people by 
means of a small number of representatives chosen (elected) by the people." 
Asine!a This is democratic twaddle, political claptrap! Elec­
tions—a political form found in the tiniest Russian commune and 
in the artel. The character of an election does not depend on this 
name but on the economic foundation, the economic interrelations 
of the voters, and as soon as the functions have ceased to be 
political, 1) government functions no longer exist; 2) the distribu­
tion of general functions has become a routine matter which 
entails no domination; 3) elections lose their present political 
character. 
"The universal suffrage of the whole people" — 
a Ass.— Ed. 

=====第550页=====
520 Karl Marx 
such a thing as the whole people, in the present meaning of the 
word, is an illusion— 
"to elect its representatives and «rulers of state»—that is the last word of the 
Marxists and also of the democratic school — is a lie which conceals the despotism 
of the ruling minority, a lie that is all the more dangerous as it appears as the 
expression of the so-called will of the people." 
With collective ownership the so-called will of the people 
disappears and makes way for the genuine will of the cooperative. 
"So the result is the control of the vast majority of the people by a privileged 
minority. But this minority, the Marxists say," 
Where? 
"will consist of workers. Yes, quite possibly of former workers, but, as soon as they 
have become the representatives or rulers of the people, they  cease  to be workers" — 
no more than a factory owner today ceases to be a capitalist when 
he becomes a municipal councillor— 
"and will gaze down upon the whole world of the common workers from the 
eminence of «statehood»; they will no longer represent the people, but only 
themselves and their «claims» to govern the people. Anyone who can doubt this 
knows nothing of human nature" (p. 279). 
If Mr. Bakunin were familiar even with the position of a 
manager in a workers' co-operative factory, all his fantasies about 
domination would go to the devil. He should have asked  himself: 
what forms could management functions assume within such a 
workers' state, if he wants to call it that? (p. 279). 
"But these chosen people will become passionately convinced as well as learned 
socialists. The words 'learned socialism'"— 
never used — 
" 'scientific  socialism'  "— 
u>ed only in contrast to Utopian socialism which wishes to foist new 
illusions onto the people instead of confining its scientific 
investigations to the social movement created by the people  itself;  see 
my book against Proudhon3— 
"which recur repeatedly in the writings and speeches of the Lassalleans and 
Marxists, prove themselves that the so-called people's state will be nothing more 
than the highly despotic direction of the masses of the people by a new and very 
small aristocracy of genuinely or supposedly learned men. The people is not 
scientific; that means it will be wholly liberated from the cares of government, it 
will be completely incorporated into the herd that is to be governed. A fine 
liberation!" (pp. 279, 280). 
a K. Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by 
M. Proudhon.— Ed. 

=====第551页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 521 
"The Marxists perceive this" (!) "contradiction and, recognising that a 
government of scholars" (quelle rêveriel) a "will be the most oppressive, most hated 
and most despicable in the world, and that for all its democratic forms it will 
actually be a dictatorship, they console themselves with the thought that this 
dictatorship will be provisional and  brief"  [p. 280]. 
Non,  mon cher] —The class rule of the workers over the strata of 
the old world who are struggling against them can only last as 
long as the economic basis of class society has not been destroyed. 
"They say that their sole concern and objective will be to educate and uplift the 
people" (ale-house politician!) "both economically and politically to such a level that 
all government will soon become unnecessary and the state will completely lose its 
political, i.e. its «dominating» character, and will change of its own accord into the 
free organisation of economic interests and communities. This is an evident 
contradiction. If their state is truly a people's state, why destroy it, and if its 
abolition is necessary for the real liberation of the people, then how dare they call 
it a people's state?" (p. 280). 
Apart from his harping on Liebknecht's people's state, which is 
nonsense directed against the Communist Manifesto, etc., it only 
means that, as the proletariat in the period of struggle leading to 
the overthrow of the old society still acts on the basis of the old 
society and hence still moves within political forms which more or 
less correspond to it, it has at that stage not yet arrived at its final 
organisation, and hence to achieve its liberation has recourse to 
methods which will be discarded once that liberation has been 
attained. Hence Mr. Bakunin deduces that the proletariat should 
rather do nothing at all... and just wait for the day of universal 
liquidation—the Last Judgement. 
"By our polemics against them" 
(which appeared, of course, before my book against Proudhon 
and the Communist Manifesto, and even before St. Simon) (a 
beautiful vorepov TrpoTepovb) 
"we have forced them to admit that freedom or anarchy" 
(Mr. Bakunin has only translated Proudhon's and Stirner's 
anarchy into the barbaric idiom of the Tartars), 
"i.e. the free organisation of the working masses from below" (nonsense!) "is the 
ultimate goal of social development and that every «state», the people's state 
included, is a yoke which engenders despotism, on the one hand, and slavery, on 
the other" (p. 280). 
"They assert that this authoritarian yoke, dictatorship, is a transitional phase 
essential to the attainment of the complete liberation of the people: anarchy or 
freedom—the end; domination or dictatorship—the means. Hence in order to 
a What a fantastic  idea!  — Ed. 
b Hysteron proteron: a figure of speech in which what should come last (hysteron) 
is put first (proteron); inversion of natural order.— Ed. 

=====第552页=====
522 Karl Marx 
liberate the mass of the people, it is first necessary to enslave them. It is on this 
contradiction that our polemics rest. They assure us that only a dictatorship, their 
own of course, can form the basis of the people's freedom; we reply that no 
dictatorship can ever have any goal but to «perpetuate itself» and that it is «capable 
only of breeding and nurturing slavery in the people that is forced to endure it»; 
freedom can only be created by freedom" ([the freedom] of the permanent citoyen 
Bakunin), "i.e. by the «rebellion of the whole people» and the free organisation of 
the masses from below" (p. 281). 
"Whereas the political and social theory of the anti-state socialists or anarchists 
leads «inexorably» and directly to a complete break with all governments, with all 
modes of bourgeois politics, leaving no alternative but social revolution," 
(leaving nothing of the social revolution but phrases), 
"the opposite theory, the theory of the state communists and of scientific autho­
rity, on the pretext of political tactics, lures its supporters no less «inexorably» 
and ensnares them in an incessant process of «horsetrading» with governments and 
the various bourgeois political parties; that is to say, it drives them directly into the 
arms of the reaction" (p. 281). "The best proof of this is Lassalle. Who is ignorant 
of his relations and his deals with Bismarck? The liberals and democrats [...] used 
this to accuse him of venality. The same, though not so openly, has been 
«whispered» among various 3 followers of Mr. Marx in Germany" (p. 282). 
Lassalle's attitude towards the mass of common workers was more like that of a 
doctor towards his patients than one brother to another. He would not have 
betrayed the people for anything in the world (I.e.). Lassalle had openly declared 
war on the liberals and democrats; he detested and despised them. Bismarck's 
attitude to them was the same. This was the first reason for their rapprochement. 
"The chief basis for this «rapprochement» was implicit in Lassalle's political 
and social programme, in the theory of communism founded by Mr. Marx" 
(p. 283). 
"The principal point of this programme: the (supposed) liberation of the 
proletariat by means of the «state alone»... Two means ... the proletariat must carry 
out revolution in order to subject the state to it—this the heroic method ... 
according to the theory of Mr. Marx" ... the people must then put all power into 
his own hands and the hands of his friends... "They will found a single state bank, 
concentrating in their hands all commercial, industrial, agricultural and even 
scientific production, and divide the population into two armies, industrial and 
agricultural, under the direct command of engineers of the state who will form a 
new privileged scientific and political estate" (pp. 283, 284). 
As for making a revolution, Germans themselves do not believe in it.— "It is 
necessary for another people to make a start or for some external «force» to drag 
them along or «give» them «a push»." Hence some other means required to obtain 
control of the state. Necessary to gain the sympathy of people who stand or can 
stand at the head of the state. In Lassalle's day, as today, Bismarck stood at the 
head of the state... Lassalle chiefly endowed with practical instinct and «intelli­
gence», which are missing in Mr. Marx and his followers. Like all theoreticians, 
Marx a lifelong and «incorrigible» dreamer in practice. He demonstrated this by his 
hapless campaign in the International Association, whose goal was to set up his 
dictatorship in the International and to extend it through the International to the 
entire revolutionary movement of the proletariat in Europe and America. To set 
yourself such a goal you must be either a madman or a completely abstract 
a Bakunin has: "personal".— Ed. 

=====第553页=====
Notes  on Bakunin's Statehood  and  Anarchy 523 
theoretician. This year  Mr.  Marx suffered  a complete  and  thoroughly merited 
defeat,  but it "is  unlikely  to rid  (H36aBHTb)  him of his  ambitious dreaming" 
(pp. 284, 285).  "Such dreams, together with  his  desire  to gain admirers  and 
adherents among  the  bourgeoisie,  led and  lead Marx again  and  again  to drive  the 
proletariat into negotiations with  the  bourgeois radicals. Gambetta  and  Castelar— 
those  are his  «true» ideals"  (pp. 284, 285).  "These attempts, which have intensified 
in Marx  in recent years,  to make deals (c^eAKavi) with  the  radical bourgeoisie, 
testify  to two  different dreams: first,  if the  radical bourgeoisie attains power,  it will 
perhaps  be in a  position  to «want»  to use  that power  to the  advantage  of the 
proletariat,  and  second,  it will  be able  to hold  out  against  the  reaction whose roots 
are hidden within  itself" (p. 285). 
As a practical  man  Lassalle realised this  (i.e.  that  the  radical bourgeoisie  is 
neither willing  nor  able  to liberate  the  people,  but  wishes only  to exploit  it); 
moreover  he  detested  the  German bourgeoisie; Lassalle also knew  his  fellow 
countrymen  too  well  to expect  any  revolutionary initiative from them. Only 
Bismarck remained  to him.  "What brought them together  was  provided  to him by 
Marxian theory  itself: a  unified, forcibly centralised state. Lassalle wanted this  and 
Bismarck created  it. How  could they  not  come together?" Bismarck  the  enemy  (!) 
of the  bourgeois.  His  present activities prove that  he is no  fanatic  and no  slave  of 
the aristocratic-feudal party...  "His  chief purpose, like that  of Lassalle  and 
Marx—the state.  And  therefore Lassalle proved himself  to be  incomparably more 
logical  and  practical than Marx,  who  ackhowledges Bismarck  as a  revolutionary, 
«albeit  in his own  way»,  and who  dreams  of his  overthrow, probably because  he 
occupies  the  first place  in the  state,  a position which  in Mr.  Marx's opinion ought 
to be his."  Lassalle lacked such vanity; therefore  he did not  recoil from  the  idea  of 
forming  an  alliance with Bismarck.  "In  complete conformity with  the  political 
programme propounded  by Messrs. Marx  and  Engels  in the Communist Manifesto, 
Lassalle  put only  one  demand  to Bismarck: that  he should make government credit 
available  to workers' production associations."  And at the  same time,  "in agreement 
with the  programme,  he began peaceful  and  legal agitation among  the  workers  to 
achieve  the  introduction  of the  franchise"  (pp.  288-289). 
After Lassalle's death, alongside  the  workers' educational societies  and  Lassalle's 
General Association  of German Workers,  "a third party—the Social-Democratic Party  of 
the German Workers—was formed under  the  direct influence  of the  friends  and 
followers  of Mr.  Marx.  At its  head were Bebel, noAypaöoTHHicb  (a semi-worker),  and 
Liebknecht,  a complete theorist 3 and  agent  of Mr.  Marx"  (p. 289). 
We have already referred  to Liebknecht's activities  in Vienna  in 1868.  These 
resulted  in the  Nuremberg Congress^ (August  1868) at  which  the  Social-Democratic 
Party  was  finally organised.  "The  desire (intention)  of its  founders, acting under  the 
direct leadership  of Marx,  was to  make  it the  Pan-Germanic section  of the 
International Working Men's Association."  But the  German  and,  above  all, the 
Prussian laws were opposed  to such  a union. Hence  it was  only touched  on 
indirectly:  "The  Social-Democratic Party  of the  German Workers enters into relations 
with the  International Working Men's Association within  the  limits permitted  by 
German laws."  " There  can be no doubt that this new party  was founded  in Germany with  the 
secret hope  and  intention  of making  use of it to  introduce into  the International  the 
entire programme  of Marx which  the  first Geneva Congress  (of 1866) had 
rejected."595 "Marx's programme became  the  programme  of the  Social-Democratic 
Party",  the  «conquest»  of "political power" became  the  "first  and  immediate 
a "Direct disciple"  in Bakunin.—  Ed. 
h Italicised  in Bakunin too.—  Ed. 

=====第554页=====
524 Karl Marx 
objective", a recommendation followed by this significant phrase: "The conquest of 
political power (universal suffrage, freedom of the press, freedom of association 
and meetings, etc.) as the indispensable preliminary (npe/raapHTeAbHoe) condition 
of the economic emancipation of the workers." "This phrase means: before 
advancing towards social revolution, the workers must carry out the political 
revolution, or, as better befits the German character, conquer, or, better still, 
acquire, political rights by means of peaceful agitation. But since every political 
movement preceding or, what amounts to the same thing, occurring outside the social 
one can be none other than a bourgeois movement, it follows that this programme 
recommends the German workers first and foremost to acquire bourgeois interests and 
objectives and to carry out the political movement for the benefit of the radical bourgeoisie 
which then in gratitude will not liberate the people, but will subject it to a new rule 
and new exploitation" (pp. 289-291). 
"On the basis of this programme a moving reconciliation took place between the 
German and Austrian workers and the bourgeois radicals of the People's Party." 
On the basis of "the Nuremberg Congress delegates nominated by the Congress 
for the purpose went to Stuttgart where a formal defensive and offensive alliance 
was concluded596  between the elders of the deceived workers and the ring-leaders 
of the bourgeois radical party. As a consequence of this alliance both groups 
appeared together at the second Congress of the Ligue de la Paix et de la Liberté, 
which opened in September in Berne. But a very remarkable fact. There was a split 
between the bourgeois socialists and the radicals on the one hand—and the social 
revolutionaries belonging to the party of the Alliance on the other" (pp. 291, 
292). 597 "Marx's school has provided us with many examples of this (ability to call one­
self a socialist and a friend of the people while remaining opposed to popular social­
ism); and the German dictator is very hospitable under the indispensable condition 
that people bow down to him, so that his banner covers a very large number of people 
who are bourgeois socialists and democrats from top to toe; even the Ligue de la Paix 
et de la Liberté could find refuge there if it were only prepared to acknowledge him as 
the top man  (HCAOBCICB).  If the bourgeois congress had proceeded in this fashion, the 
position of the Alliancists would have been incomparably more difficult; it would 
have led to the same struggle between the League and the Alliance that now rages 
between the Alliance and Marx. However, the League showed itself to be more 
stupid, but also more honest than the Marxists; it denied equality" (nonsense!) "in 
the economic sphere. It thereby cut itself off from the proletariat, died and left 
behind it only two shades who roam around uttering lamentations: Amand Goegg 
and the St. Simonist millionaire, Lemonier... Another  FACT  about this Congress: the 
delegates who came from Nuremberg and Stuttgart, i.e. the workers mandated by the 
Nuremberg Congress of the new Social-Democratic Party of the German Workers and the 
bourgeois Swabian 'People's Party', together with the majority of the League, voted 
unanimously against equality... And a further remarkable  FACT  is that the Brussels 
Congress of the International, which concluded its deliberations some days before the 
one in Berne, repudiated all solidarity with the latter, and all the Marxists who took 
part in the Brussels Congress spoke and voted along those lines. How could it 
come about then that other Marxists, acting like the first under the direct influence of 
Marx, should have gone along in such touching harmony with the majority at the 
Berne Congress? All that remained an enigma which has still not been resolved to 
the present day. The same contradiction became manifest throughout 1868 and 
even into 1869 in the Volksstaat... At times very powerful articles were printed 
in it against the bourgeois League; these were then followed by unmistakable 
«declarations» of affection, and at other times friendly remonstrances. The paper 
as it were implored the League to «moderate» its over-enthusiastic proclamations of 

=====第555页=====
Notes on Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy 525 
bourgeois instincts which compromised its defenders in the eyes of the workers. 
This indecision persisted in Mr. Marx's party up to September 1869, i.e. up to the 
Basle Congress. This Congress is epoch-making in the history of the International" 
(pp. 293-296). 
For the first time the Germans appeared at an international congress, and 
they came as a party organised around a bourgeois political programme rather 
than a national people's3  one. Under the leadership of Liebknecht they voted as 
one man. His first concern, understandably in view of his programme, was to put 
the political question before everything else. The Germans decisively defeated. The 
Basle Congress retained the programme of the International in all its purity; it 
refused to allow the Germans to mutilate it by introducing their bourgeois policies. 
It was in this way that the split in the International came about, and it was the 
Germans who were responsible for it. They wished to impose their narrowly 
bourgeois, national-political, exclusively German and Pan-Germanic programme on 
an association which was first and foremost international. "They were squarely 
defeated and the League of Social Revolutionaries, the Alliancists, were not slow to 
make use of this defeat. b Hence the bitter hatred of the Germans for the Alliance. 
The end of 1869 and first half of 1870 were filled with venomous attacks and even 
more insidious and not infrequently base intrigues by the Marxists against the 
Alliance people" (p. 296). 
A victory by Napoleon III would not have had such long-lasting adverse effects 
as the German one (p. 297). 
All Germans without exception rejoiced at the victory, even though they knew 
that it would set the seal on the predominance of the military; "not a single 
German, or scarcely one, was dismayed, all joined together in unanimous 
jubilation". Their passion: domination and slavery (p. 298). "And what about the 
German workers? Well, the German workers did nothing at all, not a single vigorous 
demonstration of sympathy, of compassion for the workers of France. A few  MEETINGS 
where a few phrases were mouthed in which victorious national pride fell silent, 
so to speak, before the demonstration of international solidarity. But no one 
went beyond phrases, even though in Germany cleaned of all troops at the time it 
would have been possible to start and do something. It is true that a majority of 
workers had been drafted into the army where they distinguished themselves in 
carrying out their duty as soldiers, killed everyone, etc., at the command of their 
superiors and even took part in plundering. Some of them, while carrying out their 
warlike duty in this way, at the same time wrote heart-rending letters to the 
Volksstaat with vivid accounts of the barbarous crimes committed by the German 
armies in France" (pp. 298, 299). Meanwhile there were a few instances of bolder 
opposition: the protests of Jacoby, Liebknecht and Bebel; these were isolated and 
also very rare cases. 
"We cannot forget the article published in the Volksstaat in September 1870 in 
which Pan-Germanic victory jubilation is openly expressed. It begins with the 
words: 'Thanks to the victories gained by the German armies, the historical 
initiative has finally passed from France to Germany: we Germans, etc.'" (p. 299). 
"In a word, we can say without any exception that the triumphant feeling of 
national military and political victory predominated and still predominates among 
all Germans. It is upon this that the power of the Pan-Germanic Empire and its 
great Chancellor, Count Bismarck, may be said chiefly to be founded" (p. 299). 
"And do you know what ambition now predominates in the mind or the 
a Bakunin has: "social people's".— Ed. 
b Bakunin has: "made no small contribution to this defeat".— Ed. 

=====第556页=====
526 Karl Marx 
instinct of every German? The desire to expand (pacnpocTpaHHTb) «far, wide» the 
German Empire" (p. 303). This passion is "now also the entire activity of the Social-
Democratic Party. And do not imagine that Bismarck is such an ardent enemy of 
that party as he pretends (npHKH^braaeTCfl). He is too «cunning» not to perceive 
that it serves him as an advance guard, spreading the idea of the Germanic state in 
Austria, Sweden, Denmark, Belgium, Holland and Switzerland. The dissemination of 
this Germanic idea is at present the principal aspiration of Mr. Marx who, as we have 
already remarked, has attempted to renew  (BO3O6HOBHTI))  to his own advantage within 
the International the exploits and the victories of Count Bismarck. Bismarck holds all 
parties in his hand and is hardly likely to hand them over to Mr. Marx" (p. 304). 
"Through the voice of its great Chancellor, this" (Pan-Germanic) "Empire has 
declared a war to the death on social revolution. Count Bismarck uttered this death 
sentence in the name of 40 million Germans who stand behind him and support 
him. Marx too, his envious rival, and behind him all the [ring-]leaders of the 
German Social-Democratic Party, for their part declared the same desperate war on 
social revolution. We shall discuss all this in depth in the next section" (pp. 307, 
308). "Hitherto, it" (the social revolution) "has concentrated its forces in Southern 
Europe: Italy, Spain, France; but soon, we hope, the peoples of the north-west will 
rise up beneath its banner: Belgium, Holland and, above all, England, and then at 
last the Slav tribes too" (p. 308). 
APPENDIX 
"The main features of the ideal" of the Russian people: 1. "the universal 
conviction, shared by the entire people, that the earth, the whole earth watered by 
their sweat and fertilised by the labour of their own hands, belongs to the people; 
2. that the right to use it belongs not to the individual, but to the «community», to 
the «communal assembly» which shares it out among individuals for «a fixed 
period»; 3. quasi-absolute autonomy, communal self-administration and in conse­
quence the resolutely hostile attitude of the «community» towards the state" (p. 10). 
"The three negative features are: 1. the patriarchal state; 2. the engulfing of 
the individual by the «communal assembly»; 3. faith in the Tsar. One could add 
4. the Christian faith, whether of the established church or the sects (p. 10); but 
this plays a less significant part in Russia than in Western Europe" (I.e.). 
Points 2 and 3 are "natural consequences" of point 1, the «patriarchal state». 
Father, «communal assembly», the Tsar (p. 15). "The «community» is his world. It 
is nothing but the natural extension of his family, his clan. It is for this reason that 
the patriarchal principle dominates in it, the same odious despotism and the same 
general submissiveness and hence too the KopeHHa« (quintessential, deeply 
rooted) injustice and the same radical denial of every right of the individual, as in 
the family too. The decisions of the «communal assembly», whatever they may be, 
are law. «Who dares to go against the communal assembly?» enthuses the peasant with 
«amazement»... In the «communal assembly» only the «elders», the heads of the 
family, have the right to vote... But above the «community», above all the 
communities, stands the Tsar, the «universal» patriarch and progenitor, the father of 
all Russia. Hence his power is without limit" (p. 15). "Every community forms a 
«closed whole», and in consequence no community has, or feels the need for, any 
independent organic bonds with other communities. They are only joined to each 
other through the «Tsar, the Father», and only by virtue of the supreme, fatherly 
power which he wields" (pp. 15, 16). 

=====第557页=====
527 
Frederick Engels 
NOTE ON PAGE 29 OF THE HISTOIRE 
DE LA COMMUNE 599 
(M. THIERS' CEASEFIRE OF OCTOBER 30, 1870) 6(>° 
It took all the stupidity and deceitfulness of the men of 
September 4601 to call the news of this ceasefire "good news". 
Good indeed—for the Prussians. 
The capitulation of Metz had just restored freedom of action to 
6 Prussian army corps—120,000 men. Nobody but Trochu and 
Jules Favre could have failed to see that the imminent arrival of 
this new army in the centre of France would make any attempt to 
relieve Paris almost impossible, that this was not the moment for 
concluding ceasefires but for mounting a supreme military effort. 
Only a fortnight remained to do this; but this fortnight was 
precious, it was the critical phase of the war. 
This was the situation. 
In order to effect the blockade of Paris, the Germans had had 
to employ all their troops, with the exception of 3 divisions of 
infantry. They had no reserves, for these 3 divisions had, by 
occupying Orléans and Châteaudun forfeited this capacity, being 
held in check by the army of the Loire. To the west, north and 
east there was nothing but cavalry which, despite observing and 
covering a wide expanse of country, was incapable of holding it 
against infantry. 
By the end of October the German line encircling Paris was 
already very heavily fortified towards the city; but any attack 
coming from outside would of necessity encounter the Prussians in 
open country. The appearance of 50,000 men, even young troops 
such as those which France then had at its disposal, would have 
been sufficient to break the blockade and restore communications 
between Paris and the rest of the country. But we have seen that it 
was necessary to act swiftly, and this is what happened: 

=====第558页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
The Paris government accepted a ceasefire which, although of 
short duration, gave relief to the German troops exhausted by the 
labours and sleepless nights of the blockade (October 30). 
For his part, d' Aurelle de Paladines concentrated his army on 
November 2 at Vierzon with the intention of marching on 
Beaugency, of crossing the Loire there and advancing between the 
Prussians (22nd Division) occupying Châteaudun and the 
Bavarians who were holding Orléans. The march from Vierzon to 
Beaugency was about 45 kilometres and could easily be accom­
plished in two days. But if we are to believe a German source 
(Militärische Gedanken und Betrachtungen etc. 3), Gambetta was 
simple enough to believe that an army of 40,000 men could travel 
by railway at the same speed as an ordinary person. So he ordered 
the general—instead of making his army march—to transport it 
by railway from Vierzon to Tours and from there to Beaugency. 
The general protested; Gambetta insisted. So instead of a march 
of two days and 45 kilometres, the army of the Loire made a 
railway journey of 180 kilometres which took it five days and 
which, moreover, could not remain hidden from enemy reconnais­
sance. Not until the 7th was it once again concentrated at 
Beaugency and ready for action. But three precious days had been 
lost, and the enemy had knowledge of the movement carried out. 
And what days! November 3 was the most critical day: the 
Prussian cavalry, a whole brigade, was forced to abandon Mantes 
and to retire to Vert in the face of numerous francs-tireurs 602; on the 
other hand, considerable French forces of all the arms were 
observed marching from Courville in the direction of Chartres. If 
the army of the Loire, instead of riding around in railway 
carriages, had attacked on the 4th, which it could have done; if it 
had pushed on between the Bavarians and the 22nd Prussian 
Division, which was an easy matter; if it had used its great 
numerical superiority to inflict a comprehensive defeat on them in 
turn and then to advance on Paris—then Paris would almost 
certainly have been liberated. 
Moltke was by no means oblivious to the danger and had 
decided, if need be, to act as Napoleon had acted at Mantua603 : to 
lift the blockade, to sacrifice the siege park under formation at 
Villacoublay, to concentrate his army for action in open country 
and not to restore the blockade until victory was won, that is, after 
the arrival of the Metz army. The baggage of the Versailles 
a [H. von Hannecken,] Militärische Gedanken und Betrachtungen über den 
deutsch-französischen Krieg der Jahre 1870 und 1871 vom Verfasser des "Krieges um 
Metz", Mainz, 1871, pp. 185-86.— Ed. 

=====第559页=====
Note on p. 29 of Histoire de la Commune 529 
headquarters had already been loaded on to waggons; all was 
ready for departure, all that remained was to harness the horses 
(according to the Swiss colonel von Erlach, an eye-witness 3). 
If the Prussians had been forced to lift the blockade of Paris, 
this might have given rise to pressure from the rest of Europe and 
an honourable peace.b In any event, the moral effect of such a feat 
would have been immense, first on Europe and then particularly 
on France and finally, in the opposite sense, on the Germans. And 
the material effects of such a feat! Paris would have had fifteen to 
twenty days at least to take in fresh supplies by all the railway lines 
from the south and the west, which would have enabled it to 
prolong its defence by one or two months. Moreover, an 
equivalent respite would have been obtained to organise the 
armies of the provinces; it would then no longer have been 
necessary to send them into battle without discipline, without 
training, without equipment, almost without arms. To give France 
a chance of success all that was needed was time; the opportunity 
to obtain it occurred on November 3 and 4; we have seen how this 
opportunity was missed. 
Let us, however, follow the course of events. 
Paris did not even make a sortie. 
For a week the forces approaching Paris from the west made no 
attempt to attack. This is not surprising. These forces must have 
been rather weak; Gambetta's decree instructing M. de Kératry to 
organise the army of the west is dated October 22! 
There remained the army of the Loire, which had come into the 
line on November 7 at Beaugency. Not until the 9th did d' Aurelle 
attack the Bavarians at Coulmiers; as soon as the latter saw that 
the retreat of the 22nd Prussian Division, which was marching 
towards them from the direction of Chartres, was assured, they 
retired to Tours, where this division joined them the following 
day, November 10. D' Aurelle moved no more. Meanwhile, three 
corps,  60,000 men, of the Metz army were approaching from the 
Seine by forced marches. Two more Prussian divisions (the 3rd 
and the 4th), which had been sent by rail from Metz, had already 
arrived outside Paris. Moltke could therefore afford to direct the 
17th Prussian Division to Tours, where it arrived on the 12th. 
There were thus 4 German divisions, about 35,000 men, in the 
a Franz von Erlach, Aus dem französisch-deutschen Kriege 1870-1871. 
Beobachtungen und Betrachtungen eines Schweizer-Wehrmanns, Leipzig-Bern, 1874, 
p. 230.— Ed. 
b For details, see F. Engels, "Fortified Capitals" (present edition, Vol. 22).— Ed. 
36-1317 

=====第560页=====
530 Frederick Engels 
line against the army of the Loire, which henceforth ceased to 
cause them any anxiety. 
However, on November 14 considerable French forces moved 
from Dreux towards Houblon, two days' march from Versailles. 
Moltke, who still had nothing but his cavalry in this direction, was 
unable to conduct sufficient reconnaissance to discover what forces 
might lie behind this advance guard. On that day he was once 
again about to abandon Versailles and to lift the blockade 
(Blume a). This time, however, it was not a matter of days but of 
hours only. The first corps of the Metz army (IXth) reached 
Fontainebleau the same day; the Illrd was due at Nemours 
between the 16th and the 18th; and the Xth on the 19th at Joigny 
sur Yonne. Moltke directed the 17th Division to Rambouillet, the 
22nd to Chartres, the Bavarians to Auneau, that is between the 
army of the Loire, to which he left open the road to Paris, and the 
troops who were threatening Versailles from the west. This time 
d'Aurelle's inactivity was his salvation; if he had advanced into the 
gap that had opened up in front of him he would have been 
crushed between the two German forces ready to fall on his 
flanks. On November 19 the three corps of the 2nd Prussian army 
occupied Fontainebleau and Nemours, with their reserves on the 
Yonne; on November 20 the 1st army under Manteuffel had 
assembled on the line of the Oise from Compiègne to Noyon; the 
Metz army was protecting the blockade of Paris to the north and 
the south; the last chance of lifting the blockade had been lost, 
thanks to Trochu, Gambetta and d'Aurelle, whose mutual failings 
complemented one another, one might say, with the much-
vaunted precision of the Prussian battalions. 
Written at the beginning of February Printed according to the manu-
1877 script 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Translated from the French 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XV, 
Moscow 1933 Published in English for the first 
time 
a W. Blume, Die Operationen der deutschen Heere von der Schlacht bei Sedan bis zum 
Ende des Krieges..., Berlin, 1872, pp.  69-71.—  Ed. 

=====第561页=====
531 
Karl Marx 
[MARGINAL NOTES ON ADOLPH WAGNER'S LEHRBUCH 
DER POLITISCHEN OEKONOMIE 
(SECOND EDITION), VOLUME I, 1879] 604 
1. Mr. Wagner's conception, the "socio-legal conception" (p. 2). a 
Thereby finds itself "in accord with Rodbertus, Lange and Schaf­
fte" 605 (p. 2). For the "main points of the foundation" he refers to 
Rodbertus and Schaf fie. Mr. Wagner says even of piracy as "unlawful 
acquisition" by entire peoples, that it is only robbery if "a true jus 
gentium h is presumed to obtain" (p. 18, Note 3). 
His research is primarily devoted to the "conditions of economic 
life in a community" and he "determines from them the sphere of the 
economic freedom of the individual" (p. 2). 
"The 'instinct to satisfy one's needs' " "does not function, and is not meant to 
function, as a pure force of nature, but, like every human instinct, it is subject to the 
guidance of reason and conscience. Every act resulting from it is therefore an 
answerable one, and is always governed by a moral judgement, though this is 
admittedly" (!) "itself liable to historical change" (p. 9). 
As for "Labour" (p. 9, § 2), Mr. Wagner does not distinguish 
between the  concrete character  of each  kind of  labour  and the expenditure 
of labour power common to all these concrete types of labour (pp. 9, 
10). 
"Even the mere management of wealth for the purpose of procuring revenue always 
necessitates activities which belong to the concept of labour, and likewise the 
employment of the income thus acquired for the satisfaction of needs" (p. 10, 
Note 6). 
According to Wagner the historico-legal are the "social categories" 
(Note 6, p. 13). 
"In particular natural monopolies of location have the effect, especially in urban" 
(înatural monopoly of the location in the City of London!) "conditions, then under 
a Here and below Marx gave in brackets pages of Adolph Wagner's book.— Ed. 
b International law.— Ed. 
36* 

=====第562页=====
532 Karl Marx 
the influence  of the  climate  for the  agricultural production  of entire countries, 
further, natural monopolies  of the specific fertility  of the land,  e.g.  with especially good 
vineyards,  and  indeed even between different peoples,  e.g. in the  sale  of tropical 
products  to countries  of the  temperate zone". //"One example  are the  export duties 
on products  of a  kind  of natural monopoly, which  are  imposed  in some countries 
(Southern Europe, tropical countries)  on the  safe assumption that they will  be 
passed  on to the  foreign consumers" (Note 11,  p. 15). In  deducing export duties  in 
the Southern countries from this,  Mr.  Wagner shows that  he knows nothing  of the 
"history"  of these duties//3—"that goods  at least partially free  in nature become 
purely economic ones, sold  as a  matter  of business  to the  highest bidder"  (p. 15). 
The sphere of regular exchange (sale) of goods is their market 
(p. 21). 
Among economic goods: "Relations  to persons  and  things  (res  incorporales) whose 
material completeness  is based  on an  abstraction:  a) from  absolutely  free commerce: 
the cases  of customers, firms,  etc.,  when advantageous relations with other people, 
which have been formed through human activity,  may be  granted  and  acquired  for 
payment;  b) due to  certain legal limitations  of commerce: exclusive manufacturing 
rights,  real equities, privileges, monopolies, patents,  etc." (pp. 22, 23). 
Mr. Wagner subsumes "services" under "economic goods" (p. 2,3, 
Note 2 and p. 28). His real motive in doing so is his desire to 
portray Privy Councillor Wagner as a "productive worker"; for, he 
says 
"the answer  is prejudicial  to an  assessment  of all of  those classes which 
professionally perform personal services, such  as servants,  the  members  of the  liberal 
professions,  and  hence also  of the  state. Only  if services  are  reckoned  in with 
economic goods,  are the  aforesaid classes productive  in the  economic sense"  (p. 24). 
The following is highly characteristic of the way of thinking of 
Wagner and company: 
Rau had observed: it depends on the "definition of wealth and 
also of economic goods" whether "services also belong to them or 
not"b. Whereupon Wagner states: "such a definition" of "wealth" 
must be "undertaken which includes services among economic goods" 
(p. 28). 
"The decisive reason" is, however, 
"that  the  means  of satisfaction cannot possibly consist solely  of material goods, 
because needs  are not  only related  to the  latter,  but also to personal services  (in particular 
those  of the  state, such  as legal protection, etc.)"  (p. 28). 
Wealth : 
1. purely economic  ... "the  supply  of economic goods available  at a  given time  as the 
real stock  for the  satisfaction  of needs"  is "wealth  as such", "parts  of the  total  or 
people's  or national wealth". 
a Square brackets encountered  in Marx's actual manuscript have been replaced 
with two  oblique lines.— Ed 
b K. H. Rau,  Grundsätze  der  Volkswirthschaftslehre,  5th ed., Heidelberg,  1847, 
p. 63.—  Ed. 

=====第563页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 533 
2. "As an historico-legal concept ... the stock of economic goods in the possession or 
property of an entity", "possession of wealth" (p. 32). The latter is an historico-legal 
relative concept of  property.  Property conveys only certain powers of  disposal  and certain 
powers of exclusion vis-à-vis others. The extent of these powers varies" //i.e. 
historically// (p. 34). "All wealth in the second sense is individual wealth, the wealth 
of a physical or a legal entity" (I.e.). 
Public  wealth, 
"in particular the wealth of compulsory communal economies, thus especially the 
wealth of  states,  regions and communities. This wealth is designated for public use (such as 
roads,  rivers, etc.) and ownership thereof is assigned to the state etc., as the legal 
representative of  the public (nation, local population, etc.) or it is actual  state  and communal 
wealth,  namely, administrative  wealth,  which also goes to make possible the fulfilment of 
public services, or finance wealth, employed by the state to acquire revenues as the 
means for the fulfilment of its services" (p. 35). 
Capital,  capitale, is a translation of xe<|>àX.eiov signifying the 
claim  in respect of a sum of money, as opposed to the interest 
(TÔXOS).  In the Middle Ages there emerged capitale, caput pecuniae 
for the main thing, the essential, the original (p. 37). In German 
the word Hauptgeld was used (p. 37). 
"Capital, source of earnings, stock of  goods  bearing interest: a supply of mobile means of 
acquisition." As opposed to: "stock for use: a quantity of mobile consumable wares 
put together in any respect at all" (p. 38, Note 2). 
Circulating  and standing capital (p. 38, 2(a) and 2(b)). 
Value.  According to Mr. Wagner, Marx's theory of value is the 
"cornerstone  of his socialist system" (p. 45). As I have never 
established  a "socialist system", this is a fantasy of Wagner,  Schaf fie 
e tutti quanti. 3 
Further:  according to which Marx 
"finds the common social substance of exchange-value, the only thing he is here 
concerned with, in labour, the magnitude of exchange-value in the socially necessary 
labour time", etc. [p. 45]. 
Nowhere  do I speak of "the common social substance of exchange-
value";  I rather say that exchange-values (exchange-value, without 
at least two of them, does not exist) represent something common to 
them,  which "is quite independent of their use-values"  //i.e.  here 
their  natural form//, namely "value". This is what I write: 
"Therefore,  the common substance that manifests itself in the 
exchange-value  of commodities, whenever they are exchanged, is 
their value. The progress of our investigation will lead us back to 
exchange-value  as the only form in which the value of com­
modities  can manifest itself or be expressed. For the present, 
a And all such people.— Ed 

=====第564页=====
534 Karl Marx 
however, we have to consider the nature of value independently of 
this, its form" (p. 13).a 
Thus I do not say "the common social substance of exchange-
value" is "labour", and as I deal with the form of value, i.e. the 
development of exchange-value, at some length in a separate 
section, it would be curious if I were to reduce this "form" to a 
"common social substance", labour. Mr. Wagner also forgets that 
for me neither "value" nor "exchange-value" are subjects, but the 
commodity. 
Further: 
"This"  (Marxian) "theory is, however, not so much a general theory of value as 
a theory of  cost,  related to Ricardo" (loc. cit.). 
Mr. Wagner could have familiarised himself with the difference 
between me and Ricardo both from Capital and from Sieber's work h 
(if he knew Russian). Ricardo did indeed concern himself with 
labour solely as a measure of the magnitude of value, and was 
therefore unable to find any link between his theory of value and 
the nature of money. 
When Mr. Wagner says that it is not a "general theory of 
value", he is quite right in his own sense, since he means by a 
general theory of value the hair-splitting over the word "value", 
which enables him to adhere to the traditional German professori­
al confusion between "use-value" and "value", since both have the 
word "value" in common. But when he goes on to say that it is a 
"theory of cost", then either it amounts to a tautology: commodities, 
as values, only represent something social, labour, and as far as the 
magnitude of value of a commodity is determined, according to me, 
by the quantity of the labour-time contained, etc., in it, in other words 
the normal amount of labour which the production of an article 
costs,  etc.; and Mr. Wagner proves the contrary by declaring that 
this, etc., theory of value is not the "general" one, because it does 
not correspond with Mr. Wagner's view of the "general theory of 
value". Or else he says something incorrect: Ricardo (following 
Smith) lumps value and production costs together; I have already 
expressly pointed out in A Contribution to the Critique of Political 
a K. Marx, Das Kapital, Bd. I, Hamburg, 1872, p. 13. See K. Marx, Capital, 
Vol. I, Part I, Chapter I, Section 1: "The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value 
and Value (the Substance of Value and the Magnitude of Value)" (present edition, 
Vol. 35).—  Ed. 
b H. 3H6epT>, Teopin  vfcHHocmu  u Kanumajia /f. Puxapdo «a  cen3U cr> no3du%üuiVMu 
donoAHeHWMu  u pa3hRcn,eHinMU.  Onumr>  KpumuKo-aKOHOMimecKazo  njcjitdoeamn, Kiev, 
1871.—  Ed. 

=====第565页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 535 
Economy as well as in the notes in Capital3 that values and 
production prices (which merely express in money the costs of 
production) do not coincide. Why not? That I have not told Mr. 
Wagner. 
Furthermore, I "proceed arbitrarily" when I 
"attribute these costs solely to what is termed labour output in the narrowest 
sense of the term. That always presupposes proof which is hitherto lacking, namely 
that the production process is possible entirely without the mediation of the activity 
of private capitalists in amassing and employing capital" (p. 45). 
Quite the reverse: instead of foisting such future proofs on me, 
Mr. Wagner first ought to have proved that a social production 
process, not to mention the production process in general, did not 
exist in the very numerous communities which existed before the 
appearance of private capitalists (the Old Indian community, the 
South Slav family community, etc.). Besides, Wagner could only 
say: the exploitation of the working class by the capitalist class, in 
short, the character of capitalist production as depicted by Marx, is 
correct, but he is mistaken in regarding this economy as transitory, 
while Aristotle, on the contrary, was mistaken in not regarding the 
slave economy as transitory. 
"As long as such proof has not been furnished" //in other words, as long as the 
capitalist economy exists//, "Then profit on capital is also in fact //the club-foot or 
ass's ear reveals itself here// "a 'constitutive' element of value, not, as in the socialist 
view, simply a deduction from, or 'robbery' of, the worker" (pp. 45, 46). 
What "a deduction from the worker'' is, deduction from his skin, etc., 
is not evident. At any rate, in my presentation even, "profit on 
capital" is in actual fact not "a deduction from, or robbery of, the 
worker". On the contrary, I depict the capitalist as the necessary 
functionary of capitalist production and demonstrate at great 
length that he not only "deducts" or "robs" but enforces the 
production of surplus value, thus first helping to create what is to be 
deducted; what is more, I demonstrate in detail that even if only 
equivalents were exchanged in the exchange of commodities, the 
capitalist—as soon as he pays the worker the real value of his 
labour-power—would have every right, i.e. such right as corres­
ponds to this mode of production, to surplus-value. But all this 
does not make "profit on capital" the "constitutive" element of 
value but only proves that the value not "constituted" by the labour 
of the capitalist conceals a portion which he can appropriate 
a See present edition, Vol. 29 and Marx's Capital, Vol. I, Part II, Chapter V 
and Part III, Chapter IX, Section 1: "The Degree of Exploitation of Labour-
Power" (present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed. 

=====第566页=====
536 Karl Marx 
"legally", i.e. without infringing the law corresponding to the 
exchange of commodities. 
"That theory is unduly preoccupied with this single value-determining element" 
III. Tautology. The theory is false because Wagner has a 
"general theory of value" which does not agree with it; his 
"value" is thus determined by "use-value", as is actually proved by 
the professorial salary; 2. Mr. Wagner substitutes for value the 
"market-price" at a given time, or the commodity-price diverging 
from it, which is something very different from value//, "[it 
considers] the costs, not the other, usefulness, utility, the demand 
element"  //i.e.  it does not lump together "value" and use-value, 
which is, after all, such a desirable thing for a born Confusiusa like 
Wagner//. 
"Not only does it not correspond to the formation of exchange-value in present-day 
commerce" 
//he means price formation, which does not affect the determina­
tion of value in any way: moreover, the formation of exchange-value 
CERTAINLY does take place in present-day commerce, as any speculator, 
adulterater of goods, etc., knows, and this has nothing in common 
with value formation, but has a keen eye for formed values; what is 
more, in, e.g., the determination of the value of labour power I 
proceed from the assumption that it is really paid at its full value, 
which is in fact not the case. Mr. Schäffle is of the opinion in 
Capitalismus, etc., that that is "magnanimous" or some such thing. 
He simply means a scientifically necessary procedure//, 
"but neither, as Schäffle excellently and indeed conclusively" (!) "demonstrates in 
the Quintessenz and especially in the Socialer Körper, does it correspond to 
conditions as they are bound to take shape in the Marxian hypothetical social state". 
//That is the social state, which Mr. Schäffle was courteous 
enough to "shape" for me,is transformed into "the Marxian" (not 
the "social state" foisted on to Marx in Schäffle's hypothesis).// 
"This may be strikingly demonstrated with the example of grain and such like, 
whose exchange-value would—owing to the influence of fluctuating harvests when 
demand is fairly constant—of necessity have to be regulated in some other way than 
simply according to costs even in a system of 'social taxes, " [p. 45]. 
//So many words, so much nonsense. First, I have nowhere 
spoken of "social taxes", and in my investigation of value I have 
dealt with bourgeois relations, not with the application of this 
a A pun on Confucius and confusion.— Ed. 
b A.Schäffle, Bau und Leben des socialen  Körpers. — Ed. 

=====第567页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 537 
theory of value to a "social state" not even constructed by me but 
by Mr. Schäffle for me. Second, if the price of grain rises after a 
bad harvest, then its value rises, for one thing, because a given 
amount of labour is contained in a smaller product; for another 
thing, its selling price rises by much more still. What has this to do 
with my theory of value? The more the grain is sold over its value, 
the more other commodities, whether in their natural form or in 
money form, will be sold under their value by exactly the same 
amount, even if their own money price does not fall. The total 
value remains the same, even if the expression of this total value in 
its entirety were to increase in money, in other words, if the sum 
total of "exchange-value" according to Mr. Wagner were to rise. 
This is the case if we assume that the drop in price of the total of 
the other commodities does not cover the over-value price (excess 
price) of the grain. But in this case, the exchange-value of money 
has fallen pro tanto* beneath its value; the total value of all 
commodities does not only remain the same, but even remains the 
same expressed in money, if money is included among the 
commodities. Further: the rise in price of grain beyond the 
increase in its value determined by the bad harvest will in any case 
be smaller in the "social state" than it is with present-day 
profiteering in grain. But then the "social state" will organise 
production from the outset in such a way that the annual supply 
of grain is only minimally dependent on changes in the weather. 
The volume of production—including supply and consumption— 
will be rationally regulated. Finally, supposing Schäffle's fantasies 
about it come true, what is the "social tax" meant to prove for or 
against my theory of value? Just as little as the coercive measures 
taken during a food shortage on a ship or in a fortress or during 
the French Revolution, etc., which pay no regard to value; and 
how terrible for the "social state" to infringe the laws of value of 
the "capitalist (bourgeois) state", hence, too, the theory of value! 
Nothing but infantile rot!// 
The same Wagner graciously quotes from Rau: 
"In order to avoid misunderstandings, it is necessary to establish what is meant 
by value pure and simple, and it is in conformity with German usage to choose use-value 
for this purpose"b (p. 46). 
Derivation of the concept of value (p. 46 ff.) 
It is from the value-concept that use-value and exchange-value are 
a Accordingly.— Ed. 
b K. H. Rau, Grundsätze der Volkswirthschaftslehre, I. Abt., Leipzig and 
Heidelberg, 1868, p.  88.—  Ed. 

=====第568页=====
538 Karl Marx 
supposed to be derived d'abord 3 by Mr. Wagner, not as with me 
from a concretum, the commodity, and it is interesting to follow this 
scholasticism in its latest Grundlegung}" 
"It is a natural striving of man to arrive at a clear awareness and understanding of 
the relationship which inner and outer goods bear to his needs. This is done through 
the appreciation (valuation) by which value is attributed to goods or things of the 
outside world and this value is measured" (p. 46), and he says, p. 12: "All means of 
satisfying one's needs are called goods." 
Thus,  if in the first sentence we replace the word "goods" with its 
Wagnerian conceptual content, then the first sentence of the passage 
quoted becomes: 
"It is a natural striving of 'man' to arrive at a clear awareness and 
understanding of the relationship which 'the inner and outer means 
of satisfying his needs' bear to his needs." We may simplify this 
sentence somewhat by dropping "the inner means", etc., as Mr. 
Wagner happens to do immediately in the very next sentence by 
means of the word "or". 
"Man"? If the category "man" is meant here, then he has "no" 
needs at all; if man in isolated juxtaposition with nature, then each 
individual must be considered a non-gregarious animal; if a man 
already existing in some kind of society—and this is what Mr. 
Wagner implies, since his "man" does have a language, even 
though he lacks a university education—then as a starting-point 
the specific character of this social man must be presented, i.e. the 
specific character of the community in which he lives, since in that 
case production, i.e. the process by which he makes his living, already 
has some kind of social character. 
But for a professorial schoolmaster the relations between men 
and nature are a priori not practical, that is, relations rooted in 
action, but theoretical, and two relations of this kind are packed up 
together in the first sentence. 
First: as the "outer means of satisfying his needs" or "outer goods" 
become transformed into "things of the outside  world"  in the next 
sentence, the first interlocked relation assumes the following 
form: man finds himself in relation to the things of the outside world 
as means of satisfying his needs. But men do not by any means 
begin by "finding themselves in this theoretical relationship to the 
things of the outside  world".  They begin, like every animal, by eating, 
drinking, etc., that is not by "finding themselves" in a relationship, 
but actively behaving, availing themselves of certain things of the 
outside world by action, and thus satisfying their needs. (They 
a first of all.— Ed. 
b Grundlegung (Foundation)—the title of Part One of Wagner's work.— Ed. 

=====第569页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 539 
start, then, with production.) By the repetition of this process the 
capacity of these things to "satisfy their needs" becomes imprinted 
on their brains; men, like animals, also learn "theoretically" to 
distinguish the outer things which serve to satisfy their needs from 
all other. At a certain stage of evolution after their needs, and the 
activities by which they are satisfied, have, in the meanwhile, 
increased and further developed, they will linguistically christen 
entire classes of these things which they distinguished by 
experience from the rest of the outside world. This is bound to 
occur, as in the production process—i.e. the process of approp­
riating these things—they are continually engaged in active 
contact amongst themselves and with these things, and will soon 
also have to struggle against others for these things. But this 
linguistic label purely and simply expresses as a concept what 
repeated activity has turned into an experience, namely that 
certain outer things serve to satisfy the needs of human beings 
already living in certain social context //this being an essential 
prerequisite on account of the language//. Human beings only give 
a special (generic) name to these things because they already know 
that they serve to satisfy their needs, because they seek to acquire 
them by more or less frequently repeated activity, and therefore 
also to keep them in their possession; they call them "goods" or 
something else which expresses the fact that they use these things 
in practice, that these things are useful to them, and they give the 
thing this character of utility as if it possessed it, although it would 
hardly occur to a sheep that one of its "useful" qualities is that it 
can be eaten by human beings. 
Thus:  human beings actually started by appropriating certain 
things of the outside world as means of satisfying their own needs, 
etc. etc.; later they reached a point where they also denoted them 
linguistically as what they are for them in their practical 
experience, namely as means of satisfying their  needs,  as things which 
"satisfy" them. Now, if one terms the fact that human beings not 
only treat such things practically, as means of satisfying their 
needs,  but also denote them in their thoughts and then 
linguistically as things which "satisfy'' their needs, and hence 
themselves //as long as the need of man is not satisfied he is at 
variance with his needs and thus with  himself//;  if one terms this, 
"according to German linguistic usage", "attributing value" to 
them, then one has proved that the general concept "value" stems 
from the behaviour of human beings towards the things found in 
the outside world which satisfy their needs, and consequently that 
this is the generic concept of "value", and that all other kinds of 

=====第570页=====
540 Karl Marx 
value, such as the chemical value [valency]a of the elements, are no 
more than variations of it.b 
It is "the natural striving" of a German economics professor to 
derive the economic category "value" from a "concept", and this he 
achieves by simply renaming what is vulgoc called "use-value" in 
political economy as "value" pure and simple, "according to 
German linguistic usage". And as soon as "value" pure and simple 
has been found, it serves in turn to derive "use-value" from "value 
pure and simple". To do this, one merely has to replace the "use" 
fragment, which one dropped earlier, in front of "value" pure 
and simple. 
In fact it is Rau (see p. 88d) who tells us plainly that it "is 
necessary" (for the German professorial schoolmasters) "to lay 
down what is meant by value pure and simple", naively adding: 
"and it is in accordance with German linguistic usage to  select  use-value 
to this end". //In chemistry the chemical valency of an element is 
the number at which one of its atoms is able to combine with the 
atoms of other elements. But the combining weight of the atoms is 
also called "equivalency", the equal value of different elements, 
etc., etc. Therefore one must first define the concept "value pure 
and simple", etc., etc.// 
If man relates to things as "means of satisfying his needs", then he 
relates to them as "goods", according to Wagner. He grants them the 
attribute of being "goods"; the content of this operation is in no way 
altered by the fact that Mr. Wagner renames this "attributing 
value". His own lazy consciousness immediately arrives at "an 
understanding" in the following sentence: 
"This is done through the appreciation (valuation) by which value is attributed to 
goods or things of the outside world and this value is measured" [p. 46]. 
We shall waste no words on the fact that Mr. Wagner derives 
value from valuation (he himself adds "valuation" in brackets 
after the word appreciation in order to arrive "at a clear awareness 
and understanding" of the matter). "Man" has the "natural 
a A play on Wert meaning "value" and also "valency".— Ed. 
b Deleted in the manuscript: "In the case of Mr. Wagner, however, this 
'deduction' becomes even more splendid, since he deals with 'man' not with 'men'. This 
very simple deduction is expressed by Mr. Wagner like this: ' "It is a natural striving of 
man" (read: of the German economics professor), "the relationship" whereby things 
of the outside world are not only means of satisfying human needs, but are 
acknowledged linguistically as such, and therefore also serve...'" — Ed. 
c Commonly.— Ed. 
d The page reference is to Rau's Grundsätze der Volkswirthschaftslehre. — Ed. 

=====第571页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 541 
striving" to do this, to "appreciate" goods as "values", and thus 
permits Mr. Wagner to derive the promised achievement of the 
"concept of value in general". Not for nothing does Wagner 
smuggle in with the word "goods" the phrase "or the things of the 
outside  world".  His starting point was that man "relates" to the 
"things of the outside world", which are means of satisfying his 
needs,  as to "goods". So he appreciates these things by the very fact 
that he relates to them as "goods". And we have already had an 
earlier "paraphrase" for this appreciation, to the effect that, e.g.: 
"As a needy being, man is in constant contact with the outside  world  surrounding him 
and acknowledges that therein lie many of the conditions for his life and well-being" 
(p. 8). 
This,  however, means no more than that he "appreciates the 
things of the outside world" insofar as they satisfy his "needy 
being", being means of satisfying his needs and therefore, as we 
have already heard, relates to them as "goods". 
Now it is possible, particularly if one feels the "natural" 
professorial "striving" to derive the concept of value in general, to 
do this: to give "the things of the outside world" the attribute of 
"goods" and dub it "attributing value" to them. One might also 
have said: Since man relates to the things of the outside world 
which satisfy his needs as to "goods", he "prizes" them, thus 
attributing "price" to them, and thus the derivation of the concept 
"price pure and simple" by "man"'s own methods is supplied 
READY  CUT to the German professor. Everything that the professor is 
unable to do  himself,  he makes "man" do; but this man is himself 
nothing more than the professorial man who claims to have 
understood the world once he has arranged it under abstract 
headings. But in so far as "attributing value" to the things of the 
outside world is simply another way of phrasing the expression of 
giving them the attribute of "goods", this is far from being the 
same, as Wagner wishes to make out, as attributing "value" to the 
"goods" themselves as a designation distinct from their "being 
goods". It is simply substituting the word "value" for the word 
"goods". //As we have seen, the word "price" could also be 
substituted. Even the word "treasure" could be substituted; since 
"man"  labels certain "things of the outside world" "goods", he 
"treasures" them, and therefore relates to them as to a "treasure". 
Thus it can be seen how the three economic categories value, price 
and treasure could be conjured up by Mr. Wagner at a stroke out 
of "man's natural striving" to provide the professor with his 
bone-headed system of concepts (fancies).// But Mr. Wagner has 
the dim instinct to step out of his labyrinth of tautology and worm 

=====第572页=====
542 Karl Marx 
his way into a "further something" or a "something further". 
Hence the phrase: "by which value is attributed to goods or things of 
the outside world, etc." Since the labelling of "things of the outside 
world" as goods, i.e., the distinguishing and fixing of these (in the 
mind) as means of satisfying human needs, is also dubbed by 
Mr. Wagner "attributing value to things", he can no more call this 
attributing value to "the goods" themselves than he could talk 
about attributing value to the "value" of the things of the outside 
world. But the salto mortale is performed with the words 
"attributing value to goods or the things of the outside world". 
Wagner should have said: the dubbing of certain things of the 
outside world "goods" may also be called "attributing value" to 
these things, and this is the Wagnerian derivation of the "concept of 
value" pure and simple or in general. The content is not altered by 
this change of linguistic expression. It is still only the distinguishing 
or fixing in the mind of the things of the outside world which are 
means of satisfying human needs; in fact, simply the perception and 
acknowledgement of certain things of the outside world as means of 
satisfying the needs of "man" (who as such, however, is actually 
suffering from a "need of concepts"). 
But Mr. Wagner wishes to make us, or  himself,  believe that 
instead of giving two names to the same content he has progressed 
from the designation "goods" to a further developed designation 
"value", distinct from the first, and he does this simply by 
substituting the word "goods" for "things of the outside world", a 
process which is further "obscured" by the fact that he rather 
substitutes the "things of the outside world" for "the goods". His 
own confusion thus achieves the certain effect of confusing his 
readers. He might also have reversed this splendid "derivation" as 
follows. By differentiating the things of the outside world, which are 
means of satisfying his needs, as such means of satisfaction, from 
the other things of the outside world, and therefore according 
them special distinction, he pays tribute to them, attributes value to  them,  or 
gives them the attribute of "value". This can also be expressed by 
saying that he grants them the attribute of "goods" as a characteristic, 
or respects or values them as "goods". Thereby the concept "goods" 
is attributed to the "values" or to the things of the outside world. And 
thus the concept of "goods" in general is "derived" from the concept 
of "value". All derivations of this kind are simply concerned with 
diverting attention from a problem which one is not capable of 
solving. 
But in the same breath Mr. Wagner proceeds in all haste from 
the "value" of goods to the "measurement" of this value. 

=====第573页=====
Notes  on Wagner's Lehrbuch  der  politischen Oekonomie 543 
The content would remain exactly  the  same  if the  word "value" 
had not  been smuggled  in at all. It  might  be said:  By dubbing 
certain things  of the  outside world which,  etc., as  "goods",  man  will 
eventually come  to compare these "goods" with  one  another,  and 
according  to the  hierarchy  of his  needs will arrange them  in a  certain 
order,  i.e. if one  likes  to call it so,  "measure" them. Wagner  may not 
speak  at all of the  development  of the  real measure of  these goods  here, 
i.e. of the  development  of their measure  of quantity,  as this would 
remind  the  reader  too  sharply  how  little what  is otherwise meant  by 
"measure  of value"  is dealt with here. 
//That  the  distinguishing  of (reference  to)  things  of the  outside 
world which  are  means  of satisfying human needs  as "goods"  may 
be dubbed "attributing value  to these things"—this Wagner  was 
able to prove  not  only  by means  of "German linguistic usage",  as 
Rau did, but  also: there  is the  Latin word dignitas  = dignity, merit, 
rank,  etc.,  which when applied  to things also means "value"; 
dignitas  is derived from dignus,  and  this from  die,  POINT  OUT,  SHOW, 
auszeichnen, zeigen; dignus thus means  "POINTED OUT";  hence,  too, 
digitus,  the  finger with which  one  points  out a  thing, refers  to it; 
Greek 8eix-vvu.i, Sàx-ruXoç (finger); Gothic: ga-tecta (dico); German: 
zeigen;  and we  could arrive  at a lot  more "derivations" bearing  in 
mind that 8eixvv|xt  (or ôetxvuco)  (to make visible,  to bring  to light,  to 
refer to)  has the  same basic stem  as ôéxo|xca —that  is ôéx (to hold  out, 
to take).I'/ 
What  a lot of  banality, tautological confusion, hair-splitting  and 
underhand manoeuvring  Mr.  Wagner manages  to pack into  not 
quite  7 lines. 
No wonder that after this feat,  the  obscure  man (vir obscurus) 
continues with great self-assurance: 
"The much disputed concept of value, still obscured  by many investigations frequently 
of merely apparent depth, resolves  itself"  (INDEED)  //RATHER—"involves"  itself// "if, as 
has been done hitherto" //namely  by Wagner//,  "we  take  the  needs  and the  economic 
nature  of man as our  starting-point  and on  arriving  at the  concept of goods—tie  it up  with 
the concept  of value"  (p. 46). 
Here  we have  the  concept juggling, whose supposed development 
according  to the vir obscurus boils down  to "tying  up", and to a 
certain extent "tying  on". 
Further derivation  of the  concept  of value: 
Subjective  and  objective value. Subjective  and, in the  most general 
sense,  the value  of goods  = importance which  "is attributed  to the goods 
on account  of their usefulness  ... not a  quality  of the  things  in 
themselves, even  if it  objectively presupposes  the  usefulness  of a 
thing" //thus presupposing "objective" value//.  In the  objective 

=====第574页=====
544 Karl Marx 
sense one also understands by "value" and "values" the value-
possessing goods, in which (!) good and value, goods and values 
become essentially "identical concepts" (pp. 46, 47). 
After taking what is usually termed "use-value" and dubbing it 
"value in general" and then the "concept of value" pure and simple, 
Wagner can surely not fail to recall that the "value" "derived" (!) "in 
this way" (well, well!) is "use-value". After dubbing "use-value" the 
"concept of value" in general, or "value pure and simple", he 
discovers, on second thought, that he has simply been drivelling on 
about "use-value", and has thus "derived" it, drivelling and deriving 
now being for him "essentially" identical mental operations. But at 
this juncture we discover how subjective the hitherto "objective" 
confusion of ideas of the aforesaid Mr. Wagner really is. For he 
reveals a secret to us. Rodbertus had written a letter to him which 
may be read in the Tübingen Zeitschrift* of 1878, in which he, 
Rodbertus, expounds why there is "only one kind of value", 
use-value. 
"I" (Wagner) "have come to support this view, the importance of which I have 
already emphasised in the first edition" [p. 48]. 
Of what Rodbertus says, Wagner says: 
"This is quite correct and necessitates an alteration of the usual illogical 
'division' of 'value' into use-value and exchange-value, which I had still undertaken in 
§ 3 [in Wagner § 35] of the first edition" (p. 48, Note 4), 
and the same Wagner places me (p. 49, Note) amongst those 
according to whom "use-value" should be entirely "removed" 
"from the science". 
All this is "drivel". De prime  abord, h I do not proceed from 
"concepts", hence neither from the "concept of value", and am 
therefore in no way concerned to "divide" it. What I proceed 
from is the simplest social form in which the product of labour 
presents itself in contemporary society, and this is the "commodi­
ty". This I analyse, initially in the form in which it appears. Here I 
find that on the one hand in its natural form it is a thing for use, 
alias a use-value; on the other hand, a bearer of exchange-value, and 
from this point of view it is itself an "exchange-value". Further 
analysis of the latter shows me that exchange-value is merely a 
"form of expression", an independent way of presenting the value 
contained in the commodity, and then I start on the analysis of the 
a A. Wagner, "Einiges von und über Rodbertus-Jagetzow", Zeitschrift für die 
gesammte Staatswissenschaft, Vol. XXXIV, Tübingen, pp. 199-237.— Ed. 
b To begin with.— Ed. 

=====第575页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 545 
latter. I therefore state explicitly, p. 36, 2nd ed.a: "When, at the 
beginning of this chapter, we said, in common parlance, that a 
commodity is both a use-value and an exchange-value, we were, 
precisely speaking, wrong. A commodity is a use-value or object of 
utility, and a 'value'. It manifests itself as this two-fold thing which 
it is, as soon as its value assumes an independent form of  expression 
distinct from its natural form—the form of exchange-value", etc. 
Thus I do not divide value into use-value and exchange-value as 
opposites into which the abstraction "value" splits up, but the 
concrete social form of the product of labour, the "commodity", is on 
the one hand, use-value and on the other, "value", not exchange-
value, since the mere form of expression is not its own content. 
Second: only a vir ohscurus who has not understood a word of 
Capital can conclude: Because Marx in a note in the first edition 
of Capital 606 rejects all the German professorial twaddle about 
"use-value" in general, and refers readers who want to know 
something about real use-values to "manuals dealing with mer­
chandise"—for this reason use-value plays no part in his work. 
Naturally it does not play the part of its opposite, of "value", 
which has nothing in common with it, except that "value" occurs 
in the term "use-value". He might just as well have said that 
"exchange-value" is discarded by me because it is only the form of 
expression of value, and not "value"  itself,  since for me the 
"value" of a commodity is neither its use-value nor its exchange-
value. 
When one comes to analyse the "commodity"—the simplest 
concrete element of economics—one must exclude all relations 
which have nothing to do with the particular object of the analysis. 
Therefore I have said in a few lines what there is to say about the 
commodity in so far as it is a use-value, but on the other hand I 
have emphasised the characteristic form in which use-value—the 
product of labour—appears here, that is: "A thing can be useful, 
and the product of human labour, without being a commodity. 
Whoever [directly] satisfies his needs with the produce of his own 
labour, creates, indeed, use-values but not commodities. In order 
to produce commodities, he must not only produce use-values, but 
use-values for others, social use-values" (p. 15).b //This the root of 
a K. Marx, Das Kapital, Bd. I, Hamburg, 1872. See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 
Part I, Chapter I, Section 3, Point 4: "The Elementary Form of Value Considered 
as, a Whole" (present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed. 
~ b K. Marx, Das Kapital, Bd. I, Hamburg, 1872. See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, 
Part I, Chapter I, Section 1: "The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and 
Value (the Substance of Value and the Magnitude of Value)" (present edition, 
Vol. 35).—  Ed. 
37-1317 

=====第576页=====
546 Karl Marx 
Rodbertus' "social use-value".// Consequently use-value—as the 
use-value of a "commodity"—itself possesses a specific historical 
character. In primitive communities in which, e.g., means of 
livelihood are produced communally and distributed amongst the 
members of the community, the common product directly satisfies 
the vital needs of each community member, of each producer; 
the social character of the product, of the use-value, here lies in its 
(common) communal character. //Mr. Rodbertus on the other hand 
transforms the "social use-value" of the commodity into "social 
use-value" pure and simple, and is hence talking nonsense.// 
As may be seen from the above, it would be sheer nonsense, in 
an analysis of the commodity—since it presents itself on the one 
hand as a use-value or goods, on the other hand as "value"—to 
"tie up" at this juncture all sorts of banal reflexions about 
use-values or goods which do not enter into the world of 
commodities, such as "state goods", "communal goods", etc. as 
Wagner and the German professor  IN GENERAL  does, or about goods 
like "health", etc. Where the state is itself a capitalist producer, as 
in the exploitation of mines, forests, etc., its product is a 
"commodity" and hence possesses the specific character of every 
other commodity. 
On the other hand the vir obscurus has overlooked the fact that 
even in my analysis of the commodity I do not come to a halt with 
its dual way of presenting  itself,  but immediately proceed to show 
that in this duality of the commodity there presents itself the dual 
character of the labour whose product it is: of useful labour, i.e. the 
concrete modes of the labours which create use-values, and of 
abstract labour, of labour as expenditure of labour power, regardless of 
the "useful" way in which it is expended (on which the 
presentation of the production process later depends); that in the 
development of the value form of the commodity, in the final instance 
its money form, and thus of money, the value of a commodity 
presents itself in the use-value of the other commodity, i.e. in its 
natural form; that surplus-value itself is derived from a "specific" 
use-value of labour power belonging to it exclusively, etc., etc., that, 
in other words, for me use-value plays an important part quite 
different from its part in economics hitherto, but note bene it still 
only comes under consideration when such a consideration stems 
from the analysis with regard to economic formations, not from 
arguing hither and thither about the concepts or words "use-
value" and "value". 
For this reason when analysing the commodity I do not 
immediately drag in definitions of "capital", not even when 

=====第577页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 547 
dealing with the "use-value" of the commodity. Such definitions 
are bound to be sheer nonsense as long as we have advanced no 
further than the analysis of the elements of the commodity. 
What annoys (shocks) Mr. Wagner about my presentation, 
though, is that I will not do him the favour of complying with the 
patriotic German professorial "striving" for confusing use-value 
with value. Although German society is very much post festum, it 
has nevertheless gradually emerged from the feudal subsistence 
economy, or at least its predominance, into capitalist society, but 
the professors are still standing with one foot in the old 
muck—naturally enough. From being the serfs of landowners 
they have turned into the serfs of the state, vulgo the government. 
Therefore our vir obscurus too, who has not even noticed that my 
analytic method, which does not proceed from man but from a 
given economic period of society, has nothing in common with the 
German-professorial association-of-concepts method ("words are 
excellent for fighting with, with words a system may be built" 3), 
therefore he says: 
"In harmony with the view of Rodbertus and also of Schaffte I place the use-value 
character of all value in the fore, and emphasise the assessment of use-value all the 
more, since the assessment of exchange-value is simply not applicable to many of 
the most important economic goods", 
what compels him to speak out? so, as a civil servant, he feels 
obliged to confuse use-value and value! 
"neither to the state and its  services,  nor to other social economic relations" (p. 49, 
Note). 
//This reminds one of the old chemists before the science of 
chemistry: as cooking butter, which is simply called butter in 
everyday life (according to the Nordic custom), has a soft 
consistency, they called chloride, butter of zinc, butter of antimony, etc. 
butter juices, thus, to use the words of the vir obscurus, "firmly 
adhering to the butter character of all chlorides, zinc and 
antimony compounds".// The whole rigmarole boils down to this: 
Because certain goods, especially the state (goods!) and its 
"services" //particularly the services of its professors of political 
economy// are not "commodities", the opposing characteristics 
contained in the "commodities" themselves //which also appear 
explicitly in the commodity form of the product of labour// must 
therefore be confused with one another! In the case of Wagner 
and Co. it is anyway hard to maintain that they have more to 
gain if their "services" are determined according to their "use-
a W. Goethe, Faust, Erster Theil, "Studierzimmer." —Ed. 
37* 

=====第578页=====
548 Karl Marx 
value", according to their tangible "content" [Gehalt], rather than 
according to their "salary" [Gehalt] (through a "social tax", 
as Wagner expresses it [p. 45], i.e. are "assessed" according to 
their payment* 
//The only thing which clearly lies at the bottom of the German 
stupidity is the fact that linguistically the words value [Wert] or 
worth [Würde] were first applied to the useful things themselves 
which existed for a long time, even as "products of labour", 
before becoming commodities. But this has as little to do with the 
scientific determination of the "value" of the commodity as the 
fact that the word salt was first used by the ancients for cooking 
salt, and consequently sugar, etc. also figure as varieties of salt 
from Pliny onwards  (INDEED,  all colourless solids soluble in water 
and with a peculiar taste), and therefore the chemical category 
"salt" includes sugar, etc.// 
//As the commodity is bought by the purchaser not because it 
has value but because it is a "use-value", and is used for definite 
purposes, it goes without saying that 1. use-values are "assessed" 
i.e. their quality is investigated (just as their quantity is weighed, 
measured, etc.); 2. if different sorts of commodities can be 
substituted for one another for the same use, one or the other will 
be given preference, etc., etc.// 
In Gothic there is only one word for Wert and Würde: vairths, 
TU|XT|,  //TI|X<XO),  assess, i.e. evaluate; to determine the price or value, 
to rate; metaphorically: to appreciate, esteem, honour, distinguish. 
Ti-irr) — assessment, hence: determination of value or price, evaluation, 
valuation. Then: estimation, also, value, price itself (Herodotus, 
Plato),  ai TifjuxC—expenses in Demosthenes. Then: estimation, honour, 
respect, place of honour, honorary post, etc., Rost's Greek-German 
Dictionary! 3// 
Value, price (Schulze, Glossar 0) Gothic: vairths, adj., 'ct£ios, Cxavoç. 
Old Norse: verdhr, worthy, verdh, value, price; Anglo-Saxon: 
veordh, vurdh; English: worth, adj. and noun, value and dignity 
("Middle  High  German:  wert,  genitive  werdes, adj.  dignus  and  likewise  pfenning-
wert; wert,  gen. werdes, value,  worth,  splendour;  aestimatio,  commodity  of definite  value, 
e.g. pfenwert,  pennyworth; werde:  meritum,  aestimatio, dignitas,  precious  character" 
(Ziemann:  Middle High German  Dictionary^). 
a German Gehalt means both content  and  salary.—  Tr. 
b V. Ch. Fr. Rost,  Deutsch-Griechisches  Wörterbuch,  Zweite  Abteilung, M-Z, 
Göttingen,  1829, p. 359.— Ed 
c E. Schulze,  Gottlisches  Glossar,  Magdeburg, 1847, p. 411.— Ed 
d A. Ziemann,  Mittelhochdeutsches Wörterbuch  zum Handgebrauch,  Quedlinburg 
and Leipzig, 1838, pp. 634-35.— Ed 

=====第579页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 549 
Wert and Würde [value and worth] are thus closely related in 
both etymology and meaning. What conceals the fact is the 
inorganic (incorrect) inflexion of Wert which has become custom­
ary in Modern High German: Werth, Werthes instead of Werdes, 
since Gothic th corresponds to High German d, not th =  t, and this is 
indeed still the case in Middle High German (wert, gen.  werdes,  loc. 
cit.).  According to the rule in Middle High German, d at the end 
of a word became t, giving wert instead of  werd,  but genitive werdes. 
But all this has as much or as little to do with the economic 
category "value" as with the chemical valency of the chemical elements 
(atomicity) or with the chemical equivalents or equal values 
(combining weights of the chemical elements). 
Furthermore it should be noted that—even in this linguistic 
connection—if it follows automatically, as if by the nature of the 
thing, from the original identity of Würde and Wert that this word 
also referred to things, products of labour in their natural form—it 
was later directly applied unchanged to prices, i.e. value in its 
developed value-form, i.e. exchange-value, which has so little to do 
with the matter that the same word continued to be used for worth in 
general, for honorary offices, etc. Thus, linguistically speaking, there 
is no distinction here between use-value and value. 
Let us now turn to the authority quoted by the vir obscurus, to 
Rodbertus //whose essay may be scrutinised in the Tübinger 
Zeitschrift//. The passage by Rodbertus cited by the vir obscurus is 
as follows: 
From the text on page 48: 
"There is only one kind of value, and that is use-value. This is either individual 
use-value or social use-value. The former stands in a relation to the individual and 
his needs, quite regardless of any social organisation." 
//This is sheer nonsense (cf. Capital, p. 171 a), where, however, it 
says that the  labour-process,  as a useful activity for the production 
of use-values, etc., is "equally common to all its" (human life's) 
"forms of society" and "is independent of each of them".// //First, it is 
not the word "use-value" which stands in relation to the 
individual, but concrete use-values, and which of these "stand in a 
relation" to him (for these people everything always "stands"; 
everything is a question of "standing"15) is entirely dependent on 
the level of the social production process, therefore also corres­
ponding to "a social organisation". But if Rodbertus only wishes to 
a K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part III, Chapter VII, Section 1: "The Labour-
Process or the Production of Use-Values" (see present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed 
b A play on words: "steht" —stands and "ständisch" —of, or related to, the social 
estates.— Ed. 

=====第580页=====
550 Karl Marx 
make the trivial statement that use-value which really stands in 
relation to an individual as an object of utility, relates to him as an 
individual use-value for him—then this is either a trivial tautology 
or it is incorrect, since not to mention such things as rice, maize, 
wheat or meat //which does not stand in any relation to a Hindu 
as food//, an individual's need for the title of Professor or Privy 
Councillor or an order is possible only in quite a definite "social 
organisation"//. 
"The second is use-value, which a social organism consisting of many individual 
organisms (or individuals) has" (p. 48, text). 
Lovely German! Is it the "use-value" of the "social organism" 
which is meant here, or is it a use-value in the possession of a 
"social organism" (as e.g. land in primitive communities), or is it 
the definite "social" form of use-value in a social organism, as e.g. 
in places where commodity production predominates, the use-
value which a producer supplies must be a "use-value for others" 
and in this sense a "social use-value"? This is nothing but hot air 
and will lead us nowhere. 
And so on to the second proposition of Wagner's Faust3: 
"Exchange-value is simply the historical mantle and appendage of the social 
use-value from a particular period of history. By taking an exchange-value as the 
logical opposite of use-value, one is placing an historical concept in logical contrast to 
a logical concept, which is logically not admissible" (p. 48, Note 4). "That is quite 
correct!" crows Wagner ibidem. 
Who is the "one" who is committing this? That Rodbertus 
means me, we may take for granted, since according to R. Meyer, 
his famulus, he has written a "big, fat manuscript" against 
CapitaLb Who is placing things in logical contrast? Mr. Rodbertus, 
for whom "use-value" and "exchange-value" are both by nature 
mere "concepts". In fact in every price-list every individual sort of 
commodity undergoes this illogical process, distinguishing itself 
from the others as goods, use-value, as cotton, yarn, iron, grain, etc., 
and representing "goods" qualitatively different from the others toto 
coelo, c but simultaneously representing its price as qualitatively the 
same but quantitavely different of  the same  essence.  It presents itself in 
its natural form for him who uses it, and in value-form, which is quite 
different from it and "common" to all other commodities, i.e. as 
exchange-value. The only "logical" contrast here is in Rodbertus and 
the German professorial schoolmasters related to him who proceed 
from the "concept" of value, not from the "social thing", the 
a I. e. Rodbertus.— Ed 
b R. Meyer, Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsaetze von Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Berlin 
[1881],  Vol. I, p. 42.— Ed. 
c In every respect.— Ed 

=====第581页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 551 
"commodity", who get this concept to split up into itself (duplicate 
itself),  and then argue about which of these two phantoms of the 
mind is the real Jacob!3 
But what lurks in the gloomy background to these high-flown 
phrases is simply the immortal discovery that in all circumstances 
man must eat, drink, etc. //one cannot even continue: "clothe 
himself,  or have a knife and fork or bed and dwelling", as this is 
not the case in all circumstances//; in short, that in all circumstances 
he must find external things already available in nature to satisfy 
his needs and appropriate them or fashion them out of what 
nature provides; in this actual procedure of his he thus always 
relates practically to certain external things as "use-values", i.e. 
he always treats them as objects for his use; hence according to 
Rodbertus use-value is a "logical" concept; thus, since man must 
also breathe, "breathing" is a "logical" concept, but not a 
"physiological" one at all. The entire shallowness of Rodbertus, 
however, emerges in his contrast between "logical" and "histori­
cal" concepts! He grasps "value" (the economic value, in contrast 
to the use-value of the commodity) only in its form of expression, 
in exchange-value, and since this only occurs when at least some 
part of the products of labour, the objects of utility, function as 
"commodities"—this not, however, happening from the outset, but 
only at a certain period of social development, in other words, at a 
definite stage of historical development —then exchange-value is a 
"historical" concept. Now if Rodbertus—and I will point out later 
why he did not see it—had gone on to analyse the exchange-value 
of commodities—for it only exists where commodity occurs in the 
plural, different sorts of commodities—then he would have found 
"value" behind this form of expression. If he had further gone on 
to investigate value, he would have further found that here the 
thing, the "use-value", amounts to a mere concrétisation of human 
labour, as the expenditure of equal human  labour-power,  and therefore 
this content is presented as the concrete character of the thing, as 
a character appertaining essentially to the thing  itself,  although 
this objectivity does not appear in its natural form //which, 
however, necessitates a special form of value//. He would have 
found, then, that the "value" of the commodity merely expresses 
in a historically developed form something which also exists in all 
other historical forms of society, albeit in a different form, namely the 
social character of labour, insofar as it exists as expenditure of "social" 
labour-power. If, then, "the value" of the commodity is merely a 
a Genesis 25:26.— Ed. 

=====第582页=====
552 Karl Marx 
particular historical form of something which exists in all forms of 
society, the same must be true of the "social use-value", as it 
characterises the "use-value" of the commodity. Mr. Rodbertus has 
the measure of the magnitude of value from Ricardo; but he 
himself has neither examined nor grasped the substance of value 
any more than Ricardo did; e.g. the "communal" character of the 
[labour process] in the primitive community as the common 
organism of the labour-powers belonging together, and hence that 
of their labour, i.e. the expenditure of these powers. 
Further treatment of Wagner's twaddle on this issue super­
fluous. 
Measure of the magnitude of value. Mr. Wagner incorporates me 
here,  but finds to his regret that I have "eliminated" the "labour 
involved in capital formation" (p. 58, Note 7). 
"In commerce regulated by social organs, the determination of tariff values or 
tariff prices must be carried out with due consideration to this cost-element" //his 
term for the quantum of labour expended in production, etc.//, "as used to happen 
in principle in the case of the former state and trade tariffs, and would again have 
to take effect under any new tariff system" //read "socialist"!//. "However, in free 
commerce the costs are not the sole basis for determining exchange-values and 
prices, and cannot be in any conceivable social situation. For regardless of costs, there 
must always occur fluctuations in use-value and  need,  whose influence on 
exchange-value and prices (both contract and tariff prices) then modifies the influence 
of costs, and is bound to do so", etc. (pp. 58, 59). "The"  //i.e.  this!// "astute 
correction of the socialist doctrine of value... we owe to Schäffle"(l), who says in Soz. 
Körper,* III, p. 278: "No matter what kind of social influence over needs and 
production exists, there is no avoiding the fact that all needs always remain in 
equilibrium qualitatively and quantitatively with production. But if this is so, the 
social cost-value quotients cannot simultaneously be considered proportionally as social 
use-value quotients" (p. 59, Note 9). 
That this merely amounts to the triviality of market-prices rising 
and falling above or below value and to the assumption that the 
theory of value developed by him for bourgeois society is 
predominant in the "Marxian social state" is shown by Wagner's 
phrase: 
"They" (prices) "will occasionally deviate from them" [costs] to a lesser or 
greater extent, rising for goods whose use-value has become greater and falling for 
those whose use-value has become smaller. Only in the long run will costs continually 
assert themselves as the decisive regulator", etc. (p. 59). 
Law. As for the fantasies of the vir obscurus about the 
economically creative influence of the law, one phrase will suffice, 
although he is forever dragging out the absurd point of view 
which it exemplifies: 
"Individual enterprise has at its head, as the organ of its technical and economic 
a A. E. Fr. Schaffle, Bau und Leben des socialen Körpers. — Ed. 

=====第583页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 553 
activity..., a person as a legal and economic subject. Furthermore, this person is no 
purely economic entity but at the same time dependent on the arrangement of the 
law. For the latter determines who is to count as a person, and consequently who 
can stand at the head of a business", etc. (p. 65). 
Communications and transport (pp. 75-76), p. 80 (Note). 
From p. 82: where the "exchange in the (natural) constituents of 
the mass of goods" //oi an economy, alias dubbed "exchange of 
goods" by Wagner, is declared to be Schaf fle's "social exchange of 
matter"—at least, one case of it; but I also used the word in the 
"natural" process of production for the exchange of matter 
between man and nature// has been borrowed from me, where 
exchange of matter first occurs in the analysis of C— M—C a and 
interruptions in the exchange of form, later also termed 
interruptions in the exchange of matter. 
What Mr. Wagner goes on to say about the "inner exchange" of 
the goods in one branch of production (in his case an "individual 
enterprise"), partly with reference to their "use-value", partly with 
reference to their "value", is also discussed by me in the analysis 
of the first phase of  C— M—C,  namely C—M, in the example of 
the linen-weaver (Capital, pp. 85, 86-87), where I conclude by 
saying: "Our owners of commodities therefore find out that the 
same division of labour that turns them into independent private 
producers, [also] makes the social process of production and their 
relations within that process independent of them themselves, and 
that the seeming mutual independence of the individuals from one 
another is supplemented by a system of all-round material 
dependence" (Capital, p. 87). 
Contracts for the commercial acquisition of goods. Here the vir 
obscurus places mine and his on their heads. For him the law is 
first, and then comes commerce; in reality it is the other way 
round: first there is commerce, and then a legal system develops out 
of it. In the analysis of the circulation of commodities I have 
demonstrated that in developed bartering the participants tacitly 
acknowledge one another as equal persons and owners of the 
respective goods to be exchanged by them; they already do that 
while offering their goods to each other and agreeing to trade 
with each other. This actual relation, which only arises through 
and in the exchange, is later given legal form in the contract, etc.; 
a Commodity—money—commodity.— Ed. 
b K. Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Part I, Chapter III, Section 2: "The Medium of 
Circulation" (see present edition, Vol. 35).— Ed. 

=====第584页=====
554 Karl Marx 
but this form neither creates its content, the exchange, nor the 
relationship between the persons inherent in it, but vice versa. Wagner, 
on the other hand: 
"This acquisition" //oi goods through commerce// "necessarily presupposes a 
definite legal system, on whose basis" (!) "commerce takes place", etc. (p. 84). 
Credit. Instead of giving the development of money as a means of 
payment, Wagner immediately turns the process of circulation, 
insofar as it occurs in such a form that the two equivalents do not 
confront each other as C— M at the same time, into a "credit 
transaction' 1 (p. 85 ff.), which is "tied up" with the fact that this is 
frequently linked with the payment of "interest"; it also serves to 
"inspire confidence" and thus to depict "confidence" as a basis for 
"credit". 
About Puchta's* etc., juridical conception of "wealth", accord­
ing to which  debts,  too, belong to it as negative  components  (p. 86, Note 
8). 
Credit is "consumptive credit" or "productive credit" (p. 86). The 
former b predominating chiefly on a lower level of culture, the latterc 
on a "higher". 
As for the causes of debt //causes of pauperism: fluctuations in 
the harvest, war service, slave competition// in Ancient Rome 
(Jhering, 3rd ed., p. 234, II, 2. Geist des römischen Rechts). 6 
According to Mr. Wagner, "consumptive credit" prevails on the 
"lower level" among "lower, distressed" and "higher, extravag­
ant" classes.  IN FACT,  in England and America "consumptive credit" 
is generally prevalent with the development of the deposit-bank systeml 
"In particular ... productive credit proves to be an economic factor of the 
economy based on private ownership of land and movable capital and allowing free 
competition. It is tied up with the possession of wealth, not with wealth as a purely 
economic category", and is therefore only a "hxstorico-legal category" (!) (p. 87). 
Dependence of individual enterprise and wealth on the effects of the 
outside  world,  especially the influence of the state of the economy. 
1. Changes in use-value: improve in some cases with the passage 
of time, being the condition for certain processes in nature (wine, 
cigars, violins, etc.). 
"Deteriorate in the great majority of cases... dissolve into their material 
constituents, coincidences of every kind." Corresponds to "change" in exchange-
value in the same direction, "increase in value" or "decrease in value" (pp. 96, 97). 
Vid concerning the house-rent agreement in Berlin (p. 97, Note 2). 
a F. G. Puchta, Pandekten, Leipzig, 1877, §§ 34 and 219.— Ed 
b In the manuscript: "latter".— Ed. 
c In the manuscript: "former".— Ed 
d Rudolph von Jhering, Geist des römischen Rechts auf den verschiedenen Stufen 
seiner Entwicklung, Leipzig, 1874, pp.  234-59.—  Ed 

=====第585页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 555 
2. Changes in human knowledge of the properties of the goods: 
thereby "increasing wealth" in a positive case. //Use of coal for the 
smelting of iron in England around 1620, when the decline in forests 
was already threatening the existence of the ironworks; chemical 
discoveries, such as that of iodine (utilisation of iodine-bearing salt 
springs). Phosphorite as a fertiliser, anthracite as a heating agent. 
Substances for gas-lighting, photography. Discovery of dyes and 
medicines. Gutta-percha, rubber. Vegetable ivory (from Phytelephas 
macrocarpa). 607 Creosote. Paraffin-wax candles. The use of asphalt, 
of pine-needles (pine-needle wool), of the gases in the blast-furnace, 
coal-tar for the preparation of aniline, woollen rags, sawdust, etc., 
etc.//.  In negative  cases,  a decrease in utility and therefore in value (as 
following the discovery of trichinae in pork, poisons in dyes, 
plants, etc.) (pp. 97, 98). Discovery of mining products in the 
earth, of new useful properties of these products, discovery 
of a new application for them increases fortune of the landowner 
(p. 98). 
3. Economic situation. 
Influence of all of the external "conditions", which "essentially 
determine the production of goods for commerce, demand and sale" 
... hence their "exchange-value", also that of "the individual finished 
goods" ... "entirely or mainly independently" of the "economic 
subject", "or proprietors" (p. 98). The economic situation  becomes  a 
"crucial factor" in the "system of free competition" (p. 99). Thus 
someone—"by means of the principle of private property"—gains 
"what he has not  earned",  and so someone else incurs a "forfeit", 
"economically unwarranted losses". 
Concerning speculation (Note 10, p. 101). Housing prices (p. 102, 
Note 11). Coal and iron industry (p. 102, Note 12). Innumerable 
changes in technology reduce the value of industrial products as 
the instruments of production (pp. 102, 103). 
In "an economy progressing in population and prosperity, the favourable chances 
...preponderate, albeit with occasional temporary and local setbacks and fluctuations, 
in the case of landed property, especially in the case of urban (city) property" 
(p. 102). 
"Thus the economic situation directs profits into the hands of the landed 
proprietor" (p. 103). "These, like most other profits on value due to the state of the 
economy... are simply nothing but "gambling winnings", to which correspond "gambling 
losses" (p. 103). 
Ditto about "Grain Trade" (p. 103, Note 15). 
It must thus be 
"openly acknowledged: ... the economic situation of the individual or family" is 
"essentially another product of the economic situation" and this "necessarily 
undermines the significance of personal economic responsibility" (pp. [104,] 105). 

=====第586页=====
556 Karl Marx 
If, therefore, "the present organisation of the economy and the 
legal basis for it" (!), "hence private ownership of ... land and 
capital" etc. is "for them mainly an immutable institution", then, 
after a good deal of prattle, there are no means "of combatting ... 
the causes" Hoi the ensuing evils, such as stagnation in sales, crises, 
the dismissal of workers, wage-cuts, etc.//, "hence not of the evil 
itself",  whereas Mr. Wagner imagines he is combatting the 
"symptoms", the "consequences of the evil" by meeting "profits 
arising from the state of the economy" with "taxes"—the "losses", 
"economically unwarranted", the product of the state of the 
economy, by a "rational ... system of insurance" (p. 105). 
This,  says the obscure man, is the result of considering the 
present mode of production and its "legal basis" as "immutable"; 
but his research, going more deeply than socialism, will get to 
grips with the "issue  itself".  Nous verrons* won't we? 
Chief individual elements affecting the state of the economy. 
1. Fluctuations in the harvest yields of staple foods under the 
influence of the weather and political conditions, such as disruptions 
in cultivation due to war. Producers and consumers affected by it 
(p. 106). //On grain merchants: Tooke, History of Pricesh ; for 
Greece: Böckh, Staatshaushalt der Athener, I, 1, § 15; for Rome: 
Jhering, Geist, p. 238. c Increased mortality among the lower strata of the 
population nowadays with every slight rise in prices, "certainly a  proof 
how little the average wage of the mass of the working classes  exceeds  the 
amount absolutely essential for life" (p. 106, Note 19).// Improvements 
in means of communication II "at the same time", he adds in Note 20, 
"the most important condition for a speculative grain trade able to 
level out prices"//, changes in cultivation methods H "crop rotation 
economy", by means of "the cultivation of various products which are 
favoured or handicapped differently by varying weather 
conditions" //; hence smaller fluctuations in grain prices within shorter 
periods of time compared with "the Middle Ages and antiquity". But 
fluctuations still very great even now (see Note 22, p. 107; FACTS 
ibid.). 
2. Changes in technology. New production methods. Bessemer steel 
in place of iron, etc., p. 107 (cf. Note 23). Introduction of machines 
instead of manual labour. 
a We'll see.—Ed 
b Th. Tooke and W. Newmarch, A History of Prices, and of the State of the 
Circulation, during the Nine Years 1848-1856, Vol. V, London, 1857, Part I: "On the 
Prices of Corn from 1847 to 1856".— Ed. 
c Rudolph von Jhering, Geist des römischen Rechts auf den verschiedenen Stufen 
seiner Entwicklung. —Ed. 

=====第587页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 557 
3. Changes in the means of communication and transport, influencing the 
spatial movement of men and goods. Thereby in particular... the value of land and 
the articles of low specific value; whole branches of production compelled to make a 
difficult transition to other working methods (p. 107). 
//In addition Note 24, ib. 
The increase in land value in the vicinity of good communications on account of the 
better sales of products made there; the facilitation of population concentration in 
towns, hence enormous rise in value of urban land and land- value in the vicinity of 
such places. Transport made easier from areas with hitherto low prices for grain and 
other agricultural and forestry raw materials, mining products to areas with higher 
prices; the result being a deterioration of the economic situation for all elements of 
the population with a more stable income in the former3 areas, and on the other 
hand the favouring of the producers and particularly the landowners in the same 
places. The easier transport (importl) of grain and other substances of low specific 
value has the reverse effect. Favours the consumers but prejudicial to the 
producers in the country of origin; necessitating a transition to other kinds of 
production, as in England from grain cultivation to stock-raising in the forties, as a 
result of the competition from cheap East European corn in Germany. Difficult 
situation for German farmers (first) owing to the climate, then owing to the recent 
large wage increases, which they are not able to add on to the products as easily as 
the industrialists, and so on.// 
4. Changes in taste! Fashions, etc., often occurring rapidly in a 
short space of time. 
5. Political changes in the sphere of national and international 
commerce (war, revolution, etc.); insofar as confidence and lack of 
confidence [become] more and more important with increasing division 
of labour, the extension of international etc., commerce, the role of 
the credit factor, the monstrous dimensions of modern warfare, etc. 
(p. 108). 
6. Changes in agricultural, business and trade policy (example: 
Reform of the British Corn Laws). 
7. Changes in the geographic distribution and overall economic 
situation of the whole population, such as migration from the country 
into the towns (pp. 108, 109). 
8. Changes in the social and economic situation of individual strata 
of the population, such as through granting the freedom of 
coalition, etc. (p. 109).  11 The French 5 milliards,608 Note 29, ib.// 
Costs in the individual enterprise. In the "value"-producing 
"labour", in which all costs resolve themselves, "labour" in the 
proper broad sense, in particular, must also be included, whereby 
it "embraces everything which is necessary by way of purposeful 
human activities for the creation of revenues", hence particularly 
"the intellectual labour of the leader and the activity whereby 
a In the manuscript: "latter".— Ed 

=====第588页=====
558 Karl Marx 
capital is created and employed", "therefore" the "capital gain" 
financing this activity also belongs to the "constitutive elements of 
costs".  "This view stands in contradiction to the socialist theory of 
value and costs and critique of capital" (p. 111). 
The obscure man falsely attributes to me the view that "the 
surplus-value produced by the workers alone remains, in an 
unwarranted manner, in the hands of the capitalist entrepreneurs" 
(Note 3, p. 114). In fact I say the exact opposite: that the 
production of commodities must necessarily become "capitalist" 
production of commodities at a certain point, and that according 
to the law of value governing it, the "surplus-value" rightfully 
belongs to the capitalist and not the worker. Instead of engaging 
in such sophistry, the academic socialist character of the vir 
obscurus proves itself with the following banality, that the 
"uncompromising opponents of the socialists" "overlook the numerous actual 
cases of exploitative relations in which net profits are not properly" (!) "distributed, and 
the individual enterprise production costs of the companies are reduced far too much 
to the detriment of the workers (including the lenders of capital) and to the 
advantage of the employers" (I.e.). 
National income in England and France (p. 120, x—9)-
The annual gross income of a nation: 
1. Sum total of goods newly produced that year. Domestic raw 
materials being included entirely according to their value; the 
articles manufactured out of these and out of foreign materials //to avoid 
a double assessment of raw products// at the amount of increase in 
value attained by manufacturing labour; raw materials and semi­
manufactured goods sold and transported in trade, at the amount of 
the increase in value effected thereby. 
2. Import of money and commodities from abroad in the form of 
interest from the claims of the country arising from credit business, 
or from capital investments by home nationals abroad. 
3. Freightage actually paid to domestic shipping companies by 
means of the import of foreign goods during the course of foreign 
trade and transit-trade. 
4. Cash or commodities imported from abroad in the form of 
remittances to aliens staying in the country. 
5. The import of non-repayable gifts, such as permanent tributes to 
the country from abroad, or continuing immigration and consequent 
regular immigration wealth. 
6. Value surplus from the import of commodities and money resulting 
from international3 trade //but then deduct, 2. export abroad//. 
a Marx has mistakenly written "domestic" for "international".— Ed. 

=====第589页=====
Notes on Wagner's Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie 559 
7. Sum value of revenue from useful wealth (as from dwelling-
houses, etc.) (pp. 121, 122). 
For the net income deduct, among other things, the "export of 
goods in payment for the freightage of foreign shipping companies" 
(p. 123). //The matter is not so simple: the price of production 
(domestic) + freight = selling price. If the country exports its own 
commodities in its own ships, then the foreign country pays the 
freight charges, if the market price prevailing there, etc.// 
"Besides permanent tributes, regular payments to foreign subjects abroad (bribes 
and retainers, as paid by Persia to Greeks, payments to foreign scholars under 
Louis XIV, St. Peter's Money609) must be taken into account" (p. 123, Note 9). 
Why not the subsidies which the German princes regularly used 
to receive from France and England? 
Vid. the naive sorts of income components of private individuals 
consisting of "services performed by state and Church" (p. 125, 
Note 14). 
Individual and national assessment of value. 
The destruction of a part of a stock of  goods  in order to sell the rest 
at a higher price is called by Cournot, Recherches sur les principes 
mathématiques de la théorie des  richesses,  1838, "une véritable création 
de richesse dans le sens commercial du mot" a (p. 127, Note 3). 
Cf. as regards the decline of private individuals' consumption 
supplies, or, as Wagner terms it, of their "useful capital", in our cultural 
period, in Berlin in particular, p. 128, Note 5, p. 129, Notes 8 and 
10; in addition, too little money or working capital proper in the 
production enterprise  itself,  p. 130 and ibid., Note 11. 
Comparatively greater importance of foreign trade nowadays, p. 131, 
Note 13, p. 132, Note 3. 
Manuscript completed after January 1881 Printed according to the manus­
cript 
First published, in Russian, in the Marx-
Engels Archives, Book V, Moscow, Lenin­
grad, 1930 
a "A true creation of wealth in the commercial sense of the word".— Ed. 

=====第590页=====

=====第591页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第592页=====

=====第593页=====
563 
[DECLARATION BY KARL MARX 
ON HIS NATURALISATION IN ENGLAND] 610 
I Carl Marx 
of No. 1 Maitland Park Road Haverstock Hill in the County of Middlessex, Doctor of 
Philosophy, do solemnly and sincerely declare as follows: 
That the statements contained in the paper writing now produced and shown to 
me marked with the letter "A" purporting to be a Memorial addressed by myself 
to The Right Honourable Richard Assheton Cross, Esq., M.P., Her Majesty's Principal 
Secretary of State for the Home Department, praying for the Grant of a Certificate 
of Naturalisation under the provisions of the Act of Parliament made and passed in 
the 33rd year of the Reign of Her present Majesty Queen Victoria, Cap. 14 intituled 
"An Act to amend the Laws relating to the Legal Condition of Aliens and British 
Subjects", are true as therein set forth. 
And I make this solemn Declaration conscientiously believing the same to be 
true and by virtue of the provisions of an Act made and passed in the 6th year of 
the Reign of His late Majesty King William IV intituled "An Act to repeal an Act 
of the present Session of Parliament intituled 'An Act for the more effectual 
Abolition of Oaths and Affirmations taken and made in various Departments of the 
State, and to substitute Declarations in law thereof and for the more entire 
suppression of voluntary and contra-judicial Oaths and Affidavits and to make 
other provisions for the abolition of unnecessary Oaths'". 
Declared at Number 82 Saint 
Martin's Lane in the County 
of Middlessex this first day 
of August One thousand eight 
hundred and seventy four J 
Before me 
Christ. R.  Cuff, 
A London Commissioner to 
administer oaths in Chancery, [signed] 
Karl Marx 
38* 

=====第594页=====
564 Appendices 
Detective Officer's 
Special Report METROPOLITAN POLICE OFFICE 
Scotland Yard 
17th August 1874 
Carl Marx.—Naturalisation. 
With reference to the above I beg to report that he is the notorious German 
agitator, the head of the International Society, and an advocate of Communistic 
principles. This man has not been loyal to his own King and Country. 
The referees Messrs Seton, Mathesen, Manning, and Adcock are all British born 
subjects, and respectable householders. The statements made by them with 
reference to the time they have known the applicant are correct. 
W. Reimers —Sergeant 
J. Williams—Sergeant 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Reproduced from a photocopy 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 45, of the originals 
Moscow, 1975 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第595页=====
565 
[SPEECHES BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
AT THE MEETING HELD TO CELEBRATE 
THE 36TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE GERMAN WORKERS' 
EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY IN LONDON, 
FEBRUARY 7, 1876]6n 
Comrade Carl Marx then spoke about the work of the Society 
since its inception. The Society had been founded in 1840 by Carl 
Schapper in collaboration with 6 other like-minded persons. There 
existed an organisation within the Society, "The League of the 
Just",612 which had its seat in various countries and opposed the 
oppression of the people. Four or five nationalities had been 
involved in the foundation of this Society. In 1845613 a congress 
had been convened in London at which the Communist Manifesto 
had been worked out and whose motto was: "Proletarians of All 
Countries, Unite!" Marx then gave a most interesting account of 
the associations in those days, stating that the number of members 
had reached a level of 400-500. In March 1848 the Society was 
closed down by the British government,614 which was otherwise 
not so swift to resort to police measures. The Chartist movement, 
which had received a great deal of support from the Society, may 
have been the cause of the closure. The organisation called "The 
League of the Just" was dissolved in 1849,615 whereupon many 
members moved to America. In the fifties the Society worked 
more by  itself,  though it had always remained a refuge for the 
persecuted and oppressed. Marx then went on to discuss the 
present movement, stressing that the Society had contributed to its 
rise and he hoped that it would continue to do so. 
Comrade Frederick Engels then recalled a faithful champion of 
truth and justice, Wilhelm Weitling. He was in fact the first person 
to try to spread the Communist idea in Germany. He was 
extradited by Switzerland to the Prussian government, which kept 
him in prison for a considerable time without any grounds. 
Weitling had died in America. His book Garantien der Harmonie 

=====第596页=====
566 Appendices 
und Freiheit had appeared at the advice of his friends. The speaker 
further recalled Comrade Moll, who had been one of the first 
members and had been killed in Southern Germany in the battle 
for freedom. The speaker then came to the movement in 
Germany, saying that in his view it had achieved a strength 
unmatched in any country hitherto. The speaker was of the opinion 
that the socialist movement was bound to go forward, since agitators 
such as Bismarck, Eulenburg and Tessendorf were active on its 
behalf.  [...] 
Comrade Wroblewski, speaking in French, said: As long as there 
are Poles alive, the great movement of workers will have defenders 
in them; they will show by word and deed that their place is 
wherever the cause of the proletariat is being fought for. Speaker 
pays tribute to the workers' movement in all countries. 
Comrade Engels translates Wroblewski's speech into German and 
then provides information on his activities. Wroblewski was a 
general and in 1863, during the Polish revolution, 616 managed to 
keep 2 Russian armies in check with a small band; he was 
sentenced to death by the Russian government and succeeded at 
some risk in escaping to France, where he earned his daily bread 
as a worker. When the Paris Commune rose up, he took part in its 
battles and defended the southern part of Paris617; also con­
demned to death by the Versailles people, he was fortunate 
enough to escape; he was still suffering greatly from the wounds 
he had incurred. [...] 
First published in Der Volksstaat, No. 24, Printed according to the news-
February 27, 1876 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第597页=====
567 
[FREDERICK ENGELS' NOTICE 
ON THE DEATH OF HIS WIFE, LYDIA BURNS] 
I herewith notify my friends in Germany that in the course of 
last night death deprived me of my wife Lydia, née Burns. 
London, September 12, 1878 
Frederick Engels 
First published in Vorwärts, No. 110, 
September 18, 1878 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第598页=====
568 
[ACCOUNT OF KARL MARX'S INTERVIEW 
WITH THE CHICAGO TRIBUNE CORRESPONDENT] 
KARL MARX 
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENCE OF THE TRIBUNE 
London, Dec.  18.—  In a little villa at Haverstock Hill, in the 
northwest portion of London, lives Karl Marx, the corner-stone of 
modern Socialism. He was exiled from his native country— 
Germany—in 1844,619 for propagating revolutionary theories. In 
1848 he returned, but in a few months was again exiled. He then 
took up his abode in Paris, but his political theories procured his 
expulsion from that city in 1849, and since that year his 
headquarters have been in London. His convictions have caused 
him trouble from the beginning. Judging from the appearance of 
his home, they certainly have not brought him affluence. 
Persistently during all these years he has advocated his views with 
an earnestness which undoubtedly springs from a firm belief in 
them, and, however, much we may deprecate their propagation, 
we cannot but respect to a certain extent the self-denial of the now 
venerable exile. 
OUR CORRESPONDENT HAS CALLED UPON HIM 
twice or thrice, and each time the Doctor was found in his library, 
with a book in one hand and a cigarette in the other. He must be 
over 70 years of age. His physique is well-knit, massive, and erect. 
He has the head of a man of intellect, and the features of a 
cultivated Jew. His hair and beard are long, and iron-gray in 
color. His eyes are glittering black, shaded by a pair of bushy 
eyebrows. To a stranger he shows extreme caution. A foreigner 
can generally gain admission; but the ancient-looking German 
woman3 who waits upon visitors has instructions to admit none 
a Helene Demuth. — Ed. 

=====第599页=====
Appendices 569 
who hail from the Fatherland, unless they bring letters of 
introduction. Once into his library, however, and, having fixed his 
one eye-glass in the corner of his eye, in order to take your 
intellectual breadth and depth, so to speak, he loses that 
self-restraint, and unfolds to you a knowledge of men and things 
throughout the world apt to interest one. And his conversation 
does not run in one groove, but is as varied as are the volumes 
upon his library shelves. A man can generally be judged by the 
books he reads, and you can form your own conclusions when I 
tell you a casual glance revealed Shakespeare, Dickens, Thackeray, 
Molière, Racine, Montaigne, Bacon, Goethe, Voltaire, Paine; 
English, American, French blue-books; works political and 
philosophical in Russian, German, Spanish, Italian, etc., etc. 
During my conversations I was struck with 
HIS INTIMACY WITH AMERICAN QUESTIONS 
which have been uppermost during the past twenty years. His 
knowledge of them, and the surprising accuracy with which he 
criticised our National and State legislation, impressed upon my 
mind the fact that he must have derived his information from 
inside sources. But, indeed, this knowledge is not confined to 
America, but is spread over the face of Europe. When speaking of 
his hobby,— Socialism,— he does not indulge in those melodrama­
tic flights generally attributed to him, but dwells upon his Utopian 
plans for "the emancipation of the human race" with a gravity 
and an earnestness indicating a firm conviction in the realization 
of his theories, if not in this century, at least in the next. 
Perhaps Dr. Karl Marx is better known in America as the author 
of "Capital", and the founder of the International Society, or at 
least its most prominent pillar. In the interview which follows, you 
will see what he says of this Society as it at present exists. 
However, in the meantime, I will give you a few extracts from the 
printed general rules of 
THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY, 
published in 1871, by order of the General Council, from which 
you can form an impartial judgment of its aims and ends. The 
preamble sets forth3 "That the emancipation of the working 
classes must be conquered by the working classes themselves; that 
a Further come quotations from the General Rules and Administrative Regulations 
of the International Working Men's Association which appeared in London in December 
1871 (see present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 3-20).— Ed 

=====第600页=====
570 Appendices 
the struggle for the emancipation of the working classes means not 
a struggle for class privileges and monopolies, but for equal rights 
and duties, and the abolition of all class rule; that the economical 
subjection of the man of labor to the monopolizer of the means of 
labor—that is, the sources of life—lies at the bottom of servitude 
in all its forms, of all social misery, mental degradation, and 
political dependence; that all efforts aiming at the universal 
emancipation of the working classes have hitherto failed from 
want of solidarity between the manifold divisions of labor in each 
country", and the preamble calls for "the immediate combination 
of the still disconnected movements". It goes on to say that the 
International Association acknowledge "no rights without duties, 
no duties without rights",—thus making every member a worker. 
The Association was formed at London "to afford a central 
medium of communication and co-operation between the Work-
ingmen's Societies in the different countries, aiming at the same 
end, namely: the protection, advancement, and complete emanci­
pation of the working classes". "Each member," the document 
further says, "of the International Association, on removing his 
domicile from one country to another, will receive the fraternal 
support of the associated workingmen." 
THE SOCIETY CONSISTS 
of a General Congress, which meets annually; a General Council, 
which forms "an international agency between the different 
national and local groups of the Association, so that the 
workingmen in one country can be constantly informed of the 
movements of their class in every other country". This Council 
receives and acts upon applications of new Branches or Sections to 
join the International, decides differences arising between the 
Sections, and, in fact, to use an American phrase, "runs the 
machine". The expenses of the General Council are defrayed by 
an annual contribution of an English penny per member. Then 
come the Federal Councils or Committees, and local Sections, in 
the various countries. The Federal Councils are bound to send one 
report at least every month to the General Council, and every 
three months a report on the administration and financial state of 
their respective branches. Whenever attacks against the Interna­
tionals are published, the nearest Branch or Committee is bound 
to send at once a copy of such publication to the General Council. 
The formation of Female Branches among the working classes is 
recommended. 

=====第601页=====
Appendices 571 
THE GENERAL COUNCIL 
comprises the following: R. Applegarth, M. J. Boon, Frederick 
Bradnick, G. H. Buttery, V. Delahaye, Eugène Dupont (on mis­
sion),  William Hales, G. Harris, Hurliman, Jules Johannard, 
Harriet Law, Frederick Lessner, Lochner, Charles Longuet, 
C. Martin, Zévy Maurice, Henry Mayo, George Milner, Charles 
Murray, Pfander, John Roach, Rühl, Sadler, Cowell Stepney, 
Alfred Taylor, W. Townshend, E. Vaillant, John Weston. The 
Corresponding Secretaries for the various countries are: Leo 
Frankel, for Austria and Hungary; A. Herman, Belgium; T. Mot-
tershead, Denmark; A. Serraillier, France; Karl Marx, Germany 
and Russia; Charles Rochat, Holland; J. P. McDonnell, Ireland; 
Frederick Engels, Italy and Spain; Walery Wroblewski, Poland; 
Hermann Jung, Switzerland; J. G. Eccarius, United States; Le 
Moussu, for French branches of United States. 
During my visit to Dr. Marx I alluded to the platform given by 
J. C. Bancroft Davis in his official report of 1877,620  as the clearest 
and most concise exposition of Socialism that I had seen. He said 
it was taken from the report of the Socialist reunion at Gotha, 
Germany, in May, 1875. 621 The translation was incorrect, he said, 
and he 
VOLUNTEERED A CORRECTION, 
which I append as he dictated: 
First—Universal, direct, and secret suffrage for all males over 
20 years, for all elections, Municipal and State. 
Second—Direct legislation by the people. War and peace to be 
made by direct popular vote. 
Third—Universal obligation to militia duty. No standing army. 
Fourth—Abolition of all special legislation regarding press-laws 
and public meetings. 
Fifth—Legal remedies free of expense. Legal proceedings to be 
conducted by the people. 
Sixth—Education to be by the State,—general, obligatory, and 
free.  Freedom of science and religion. 
Seventh—All indirect taxes to be abolished. Money to be raised 
for State and Municipal purposes by a direct progressive income 
tax. 
Eighth—Freedom of combination among the working classes. 
Ninth—The legal day of labor for men to be defined. The work 
of women to be limited, and that of children to be abolished. 

=====第602页=====
572 Appendices 
Tenth—Sanitary laws for the protection of life and health of 
laborers, and regulation of their dwellings and places of labor, to 
be enforced by persons selected by them. 
Eleventh—Suitable provision respecting prison-labor. 
In Mr. Bancroft Davis' report there is 
A TWELFTH CLAUSE, 
the most important of all, which reads: "State aid and credit for 
industrial societies, under democratic direction." I asked the 
Doctor why he omitted this, and he replied: 
"When the reunion took place at Gotha, in 1875, there existed a 
division among the Social Democrats. The one wing were partisans 
of Lassalle; the others, those who had accepted in general the 
programme of the International organization, and were called the 
Eisenach party. That twelfth point was not placed on the platform, 
but placed in the general introduction by way of concession to the 
Lassallians. Afterwards it was never spoken of. Mr. Davis does not 
say that it was placed in the programme as a compromise having 
no particular significance, but gravely puts it in as one of the 
cardinal principles of the programme." 
"But," I said, "Socialists generally look upon the transformation 
of the means of labor into the common property of society as the 
grand climax of the movement." 
"Yes;  we say that this will be the outcome of the movement, but 
it will be a question of time, of education, and the institution of a 
higher social status." 
"This platform," I remarked, "applies only to Germany and one 
or two other countries." 
"Ah!" he returned, "if you draw your conclusions from nothing 
but this, you know nothing of the activity of the party. Many of its 
points have no significance outside of Germany. Spain, Russia, 
England, and America have platforms suited to their peculiar 
difficulties. The only similarity in them is the end to be attained." 
"And that is the supremacy of labor?" 
"That is the 
EMANCIPATION OF LABOR." 
"Do European Socialists look upon the movement in America as 
a serious one?" 
"Yes;  it is the natural outcome of the country's development. It 
has been said that the movement has been imported by foreigners. 

=====第603页=====
Appendices 573 
When labor movements became disagreeable in England, fifty 
years ago, the same thing was said; and that was long before 
Socialism was spoken of. In America, only since 1857 has the labor 
movement become conspicuous. Then Trades Unions began to 
flourish; then Trades-Assemblies were formed, in which the 
workers in different industries united; and after that came 
National Labor Unions.622 If you consider this chronological 
progress, you will see that Socialism has sprung up in that country 
without the aid of foreigners, and was merely caused by the 
concentration of capital and the changed relations between the 
workmen and their employers." 
"Now," asked our correspondent, "what has Socialism done so 
far?" 
"Two things," he returned. "Socialists have shown the general 
universal struggle between capital and labor,— 
THE COSMOPOLITAN CHARACTER, 
in one word,—and consequently tried to bring about an under­
standing between the workmen in the different countries, which 
became more necessary as the capitalists became more cosmopoli­
tan in hiring labor, pitting foreign against native labor not only in 
America, but in England, France, and Germany. International 
relations sprang up at once between the workingmen in the 
different countries, showing that Socialism was not merely a local, 
but an international problem, to be solved by the international 
action of workmen. The working classes moved spontaneously, 
without knowing what the ends of the movement will be. The 
Socialists invent no movement, but merely tell the workmen what 
its character and its ends will be." 
"Which means the overthrowing of the present social system," I 
interrupted. 
"This system of land and capital in the hands of employers, on 
the one hand," he continued, "and the mere working power in 
the hands of the laborers to sell as a commodity, we claim is 
merely an historical phase, which will pass away and give place to 
A HIGHER SOCIAL CONDITION. 
We see everywhere a division of society. The antagonism of the 
two classes goes hand in hand with the development of the 
industrial resources of modern countries. From a Socialistic 
standpoint the means already exist to revolutionize the present 

=====第604页=====
574 Appendices 
historical phase. Upon Trades-Unions, in many countries, have 
been built political organizations. In America the need of an 
independent Workingmen's party has been made manifest. They 
can no longer trust politicians. Rings and cliques have seized upon 
the Legislature, and politics has been made a trade. But America 
is not alone in this, only its people are more decisive than 
Europeans. Things come to the surface quicker. There is less cant 
and hypocrisy than there is on this side of the ocean." 
I asked him to give me a reason for the rapid growth of the 
Socialistic party in Germany, when he replied: "The present 
Socialistic party came last. Theirs was not the Utopian scheme 
which made some headway in France and England. The German 
mind is given to theorizing, more than that of other peoples. From 
previous experience the Germans evolved something practical. 
This modern capitalistic system, you must recollect, is quite new in 
Germany in comparison to other States. Questions were raised 
which had become almost antiquated in France and England, and 
political influences to which these States had yielded sprang into 
life when the working classes of Germany had become imbued 
with Socialistic theories. Therefore, from the beginning almost of 
modern industrial development, they have formed an 
INDEPENDENT POLITICAL PARTY. 
They had their own representatives in the German Parliament. 
There was no party to oppose the policy of the Government, and 
this devolved upon them. To trace the course of the party would 
take a long time; but I may say this: that, if the middle classes of 
Germany were not the greatest cowards, distinct from the middle 
classes of America and England, all the political work against the 
Government should have been done by them." 
I asked him a question regarding the numerical strength of the 
Lassallians in the ranks of the Internationalists. 
"The party of Lassalle," he replied, "does not exist. Of course 
there are some believers in our ranks, but the number is small. 
Lassalle anticipated our general principles. When he commenced 
to move after the reaction of 1848, he fancied that he could more 
successfully revive the movement by advocating co-operation of 
the workingmen in industrial enterprises. 623 It was to stir them 
into activity. He looked upon this merely as a means to the real 
end of the movement. I have letters from him to this effect." 
"You would call it his nostrum?" 
"Exactly. He called upon Bismarck, told him what he de-

=====第605页=====
Appendices 575 
signed, and Bismarck encouraged Lassalle's course at that time 
in every possible way." 
"What was his object?" 
"He wished to use the working classes as a set-off against the 
middle classes who instigated the troubles of 1848." 
"It is said that you are the head and front of Socialism, Doctor, 
and from your villa here pull the wires of all the associations, 
revolutions, etc., now going on. What do you say about it?" 
The old gentleman smiled: "I know it. 
IT IS VERY ABSURD; 
yet it has a comic side. For two months previous to the attempt of 
Hoedel,625 Bismarck complained in his North German Gazette that I 
was in league with Father Beckx, the leader of the Jesuit 
movement, and that we were keeping the Socialist movement in 
such a condition that he could do nothing with it."a 
"But your International Society in London directs the move­
ment?" 
"The International Society has outlived its usefulness and exists 
no longer. It did exist and direct the movement; but the growth of 
Socialism of late years has been so great that its existence has 
become unnecessary. Newspapers have been started in the various 
countries. These are interchanged. That is about the only 
connection the parties in the different countries have with one 
another. The International Society, in the first instance, was 
created to bring the workmen together, and show the advisability 
of effecting organization among their various nationalities. The 
interests of each party in the different countries have no similarity. 
This spectre of the Internationalist leaders sitting at London is a 
mere invention. It is true that we dictated to foreign societies 
when the Internationalist organization was first accomplished. We 
were forced to exclude some Sections in New York, among them 
one in which Madam Woodhull was conspicuous. That was in 
1871.b  There are several American politicians—I will not name 
them—who wish to trade in the movement. They are well known 
to American Socialists." 
a See the Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, Nos. 229, 234, 251 and 259, 
September 30, October 5 and 24, November 2, 1877 ("Politischer Tagesbericht").— 
Ed 
b K. Marx, "Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation Passed by the 
General Council of the I.W.A. in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872" (see 
present edition, Vol. 23, p. 124).— Ed. 

=====第606页=====
576 Appendices 
"You and your followers, Dr. Marx, have been credited with all 
sorts of incendiary speeches against religion. Of course you would 
like to see the whole system destroyed, root and branch." 
"We know," he replied after a moment's hesitation, "that violent 
measures against religion are nonsense; but this is an opinion: as 
Socialism grows, 
RELIGION WILL DISAPPEAR. 
Its disappearance must be done by social development, in which 
education must play a great part." 
"The Rev. Joseph Cook, of Boston,—you know him—" 
"We heard of him; a very badly informed man upon the subject 
of Socialism." 
"In a lecture lately upon the subject, he said: 'Karl Marx is 
credited now with saying that, in the United States, and in Great 
Britain, and perhaps in France, a reform of labor will occur without 
bloody revolution, but that blood must be shed in Germany, and in 
Russia, and in Italy, and in Austria.'"3 
"No Socialist," remarked the Doctor, smiling, "need predict that 
there will be a bloody revolution in Russia, Germany, Austria, and 
possibly in Italy if the Italians keep on in the policy they are now 
pursuing. The deeds of the French Revolution may be enacted 
again in those countries. That is apparent to any political student. 
But those revolutions will be made by the majority. No revolution 
can be made by a party, 
BUT BY A NATION." 
"The reverend gentleman alluded to," I remarked, "gave an 
extract from a letter which he said you addressed to the 
Communists of Paris in 1871. Here it is: 'We are as yet but 
3,000,000 at most. In twenty years we shall be 
50,000,000-100,000,000 perhaps. Then the world will belong to 
us, for it will be not only Paris, Lyons, Marseilles, which will rise 
against odious capital, but Berlin, Munich, Dresden, London, 
Liverpool, Manchester, Brussels, St. Petersburg, New York,—in 
short, the whole world. And before this new insurrection, such as 
history has not yet known, the past will disappear like a hideous 
nightmare; for the popular conflagration, kindled at a hundred 
a F. J. Cook, "Secret Socialistic Societies". See Joseph Cook, Boston Monday 
Lectures, Vol. 2, London, 1893, p. 30.— Ed. 

=====第607页=====
Appendices 577 
points at once, will destroy even its memory.' 3 Now, Doctor, I 
suppose you admit the authorship of that extract?" 
"I never wrote a word of it. I never write 
SUCH MELODRAMATIC NONSENSE. 
I am very careful what I do write. That was put in Le Figaro, over 
my signature, about that time. There were hundreds of the same 
kind of letters flying about then. I wrote to the London Times and 
declared they were forgeries 0; but, if I denied everything that has 
been said and written of me, I would require a score of 
secretaries." 
"But you have written in sympathy with the Paris Communists?" 
"Certainly I have, in consideration of what was written of them 
in leading articles; but the correspondence from Paris in English 
papers is quite sufficient to refute the blunders propagated in 
editorials. The Commune killed only about sixty people; Marshal 
MacMahon and his slaughtering army killed over 60,000. There 
has never been a movement so slandered as that of the 
Commune." 
"Well, then, to carry out the principles of Socialism do its 
believers advocate assassination and bloodshed?" 
"No great movement," Karl Marx answered, "has ever been 
inaugurated 
WITHOUT BLOODSHED. 
The independence of America was won by bloodshed, Napoleon 
captured France through a bloody process, and he was overthrown 
by the same means. Italy, England, Germany, and every other 
country gives proof of this, and as for assassination," he went on 
to say, "it is not a new thing, I need scarcely say. Orsini tried to 
kill Napoleon; Kings have killed more than anybody else; the 
Jesuits have killed; the Puritans killed at the time of Cromwell. 
These deeds were all done or attempted before Socialism was 
known. Every attempt, however, now made upon a Royal or State 
individual is attributed to Socialism. The Socialists would regret 
very much the death of the German Emperor0 at the present time. 
a Ibid.— Ed. 
b See K. Marx and F. Engels, "To the Editor of The Times"; K. Marx, "To the 
Editorial Boards of the Volksstaat and the Zukunft" and "To the Editor of De 
Werker" (see present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 285, 288-90 and 291).— Ed. 
c William I.— Ed. 
39-1317 

=====第608页=====
578 Appendices 
He is very useful where he is; and Bismarck has done more for 
the cause than any other statesman, by driving things to 
extremes." 
I asked Dr. Marx 
WHAT HE THOUGHT OF BISMARCK. 
He replied that "Napoleon was considered a genius until he fell; 
then he was called a fool. Bismarck will follow in his wake. He 
began by building up a despotism under the plea of unification. 
His course has been plain to all. The last move is but an attempted 
imitation of a coup d'etat626; but it will fail. The Socialists of 
Germany, as of France, protested against the war of 1870 as 
merely dynastic. They issued manifestoes627 foretelling the Ger­
man people that, if they allowed the pretended war of defense to 
be turned into a war of conquest, they would be punished by the 
establishment of military despotism and the ruthless oppression of 
the productive masses.628 The Social Democratic party in Germany, 
thereupon holding meetings and publishing manifestoes for an 
honorable peace with France, were at once prosecuted by the 
Prussian Government, and many of the leaders imprisoned.629 Still 
their Deputies alone dared to protest, and very vigorously too, in 
the German Reichstag, against the forcible annexation of French 
provinces.630 However, Bismarck carried his policy by force, and 
people spoke of the genius of a Bismarck. The war was fought, 
and, when he could make no more conquests, he was called upon 
for original ideas, and he has signally failed. The people began to 
lose faith in him. His popularity was on the wane. He needs 
money, and the State needs it. Under a sham Constitution he has 
taxed the people for his military and unification plans until he can 
tax them no longer, and now he seeks to do it with no 
Constitution at all. For the purpose of levying as he chooses, he 
has raised the ghost of Socialism, and has done everything in his 
power 
TO CREATE AN EMEUTE." 
"You have continual advices from Berlin?" 
"Yes,"  he said, "my friends keep me well advised. It is in a 
perfectly quiet state, and Bismarck is disappoited. He has expelled 
forty-eight prominent men,—among them Deputies Hasselmann 
and Fritzsche, and Rackow, Baumann, and Auer, of the Freie 
Presse. 631 These men kept the workmen of Berlin quiet. Bismarck 

=====第609页=====
Appendices 579 
knew this. He also knew that there were 75,000 workmen in that 
city upon the verge of starvation. Once those leaders were gone, 
he was confident that the mob would rise, and that would be the 
cue for a carnival of slaughter. The screws would then be put 
upon the whole German Empire; his pet theory of blood and 
irona  would then have full sway, and taxation could be levied to 
any extent. So far no erneute has occurred, and he stands to-day 
confounded at the situation and the ridicule of all statesmen." 
First published in The Chicago Tribune, Reproduced from the newspaper 
No. 6, January 5, 1879 
Signed: H. 
a An allusion to Bismarck's speech at the 94th session of the Budget 
Commission of the Prussian Chamber of Deputies on September 30, 1862, Berliner 
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 458, October 2, 1862 (morning issue).— Ed. 
39* 

=====第610页=====
580 
[SIR MOUNTSTUART ELPHINSTONE GRANT DUFFS 
ACCOUNT OF A TALK WITH KARL MARX 
FROM A LETTER TO CROWN PRINCESS VICTORIA]  632 
February 1, 1879 
Madam, 
Your Imperial Highness,3 when I last had the honour of seeing 
you, chanced to express some curiosity about Carl Marx and to ask 
me if I knew him. I resolved accordingly to take the first 
opportunity of making his acquaintance; but that opportunity did 
not arise till yesterday when I met him at luncheon and spent 
three hours in his company. 
He is a short, rather small man with grey hair and beard which 
contrast strangely with a still dark moustache. The face is 
somewhat round, the forehead well shaped and filled up—the eye 
rather hard but the whole expression rather pleasant than not, by 
no means that of a gentleman who is in the habit of eating babies 
in their cradles—which is I daresay the view which the Police 
takes of him. 
His talk was that of a well-informed nay learned man—much 
interested in Comparative Grammar which had led him into the 
Old Slavonic and other out of the way studies and was varied by 
many quaint turns and little bits of dry humour, as when speaking 
of Hesekiel's life of Prince Bismarck he always referred to it, by 
way of contrast to Dr. Busch's book, as the Old Testament.15 
It was all very positif slightly cynical—without any appearance 
of enthusiasm—interesting and often, as I thought, showing very 
correct ideas when he was conversing of the past or the present; 
but vague and unsatisfactory when he turned to the future. 
a Victoria Adelaide Mary Louisa.— Ed. 
b See G. Hesekiel, Das Buch vom Grafen Bismarck, Bielefeld and Leipzig, 1869; 
M. Busch, Graf Bismarck und seine Leute während des Kriegs mit Frankreich, Vols. 1-2, 
Leipzig, 1878.— Ed. 

=====第611页=====
Appendices 581 
He looks, not unreasonably, for a great and not distant crash in 
Russia; thinks it will begin by reforms from above which the old 
bad edifice will not be able to bear and which will lead to its 
tumbling down altogether. As to what would take its place he had 
evidently no clear idea, except that for a long time Russia would 
be unable to exercise any influence in Europe. 
Next he thinks that the movement will spread to Germany 
taking there the form of a revolt against the existing military 
system. 
To my question "But how can you expect the army to rise 
against its commanders?" he replied—you forget that in Germany 
now the army and the Nation are nearly identical. These Socialists 
you hear about are trained soldiers like anybody else. You must 
not think of the standing army only. You must think of the 
Landwehr 633—and even in the standing army there is much 
discontent. Never was an army in which the severity of the 
discipline led to so many suicides. The step from shooting oneself 
to shooting one's officer is not long and an example of the kind 
once set is soon followed. 
But supposing I said the rulers of Europe came to an 
understanding amongst themselves for a reduction of armaments 
which might greatly relieve the burden on the people what would 
become of the Revolution which you expect it one day to bring 
about? 
Ah was his answer they can't do that. All sorts of fears and 
jealousies will make that impossible. The burden will grow worse 
and worse as science advances for the improvements in the Art of 
Destruction will keep pace with its advance and every year more 
and more will have to be devoted to costly engines of war. It is a 
vicious circle—there is no escape from it. But I said you have 
never yet had a serious popular rising unless there was really great 
misery. You have no idea he rejoined how terrible has been the 
crisis through which Germany has been passing in these last five 
years. 634 
Well I said supposing that your Revolution has taken place and 
that you have your Republican form of Government—it is still a 
long long way to the realization of the special ideas of yourself and 
your friends. Doubtless he answered but all great movements are 
slow. It would merely be a step to better things as your Revolution 
of 1688 was—a mere stage on the road.635 
The above will give Your Imperial Highness a fair idea of the 
kind of ideas about the near future of Europe which are working 
in his mind. 

=====第612页=====
582 Appendices 
They are too dreamy to be dangerous except just in so far as 
the situation with its mad expenditure on armaments is obviously 
and undoubtedly dangerous. 
If however within the next decade the rulers of Europe have 
not found means of dealing with this evil without any warning 
from attempted revolution I for one shall despair of the future of 
humanity at least on this continent. 
In the course of conversation Carl Marx spoke several times 
both of Your Imperial Highness and of the Crown Prince3 and 
invariably with due respect and propriety. Even in the case of 
eminent individuals of whom he by no means spoke with respect 
there was no trace of bitterness or savagery—plenty acrid and 
dissolvent criticism but nothing of the Marat tone. 
Of the horrible things that have been connected with the 
International he spoke as any respectable man would have done. 
One thing which he mentioned showed the dangers to which 
exiles who have got a revolutionary name are exposed. The 
wretched man Nobiling, he had learned, had when in England 
intended to come to see him. If he had done so he said I should 
certainly have admitted him for he would have sent in his card as 
an employé of the Dresden Bureau of Statistics and as I occupy 
myself with Statistics it would have interested me to talk with 
him—What a pleasant position I should have been in he added if 
he had come to see me!!" 
Altogether my impression of Marx, allowing for his being at the 
opposite pole of opinion from  oneself,  was not at all unfavourable 
and I would gladly meet him again. It will not be he who whether 
he wishes it or not will turn the world upside down. 
First published in A. Rothstein's article Reproduced from MEGA2 
"A Meeting with Karl Marx", The Times, Bd. 1/25, S. 438-41 
Literary Supplement, July 15, 1949 
a Frederick William.— Ed. 

=====第613页=====
583 
[ACCOUNT OF AN INTERVIEW 
OF KARL MARX WITH JOHN SWINTON, 
CORRESPONDENT OF THE SLW]636 
KARL MARX 
One of the most remarkable men of the day, who has played an 
inscrutable but puissant part in the revolutionary politics of the 
past forty years, is Karl Marx. A man without desire for show or 
fame, caring nothing for the fanfaronade of life or the pretence of 
power, without haste and without rest, a man of strong, broad, 
elevated mind, full of far-reaching projects, logical methods, and 
practical aims, he has stood and yet stands behind more of the 
earthquakes which have convulsed nations and destroyed thrones, 
and do now menace and appal crowned heads and established 
frauds, than any other man in Europe, not excepting Joseph 
Mazzini  himself.  The student of Berlin, the critic of Hegelianism, 
the editor of papers, and the old-time correspondent of the New 
York Tribune, he showed his qualities and his spirit; the founder 
and master spirit of the once dreaded International and the 
author of "Capital", he has been expelled from half the countries 
of Europe, proscribed in nearly all of them, and for thirty years 
past has found refuge in London. He was at Ramsgate, 63 the 
great seashore resort of the Londoners, while I was in London, 
and there I found him in his cottage, with his family of two 
generations. The saintly-faced, sweet-voiced, graceful woman of 
suavity who welcomed me at the door was evidently the mistress of 
the house and the wife of Karl Marx. And is this massive-headed, 
generous-featured, courtly, kindly man of 60, with the bushy 
masses of long revelling gray hair, Karl Marx? His dialogue 
reminded me of that of Socrates—so free, so sweeping, so 
creative, so incisive, so genuine—with its sardonic touches, its 
gleams of humor, and its sportive merriment. He spoke of the 
political forces and popular movements of the various countries of 

=====第614页=====
584 Appendices 
Europe—the vast current of the spirit of Russia, the motions of 
the German mind, the action of France, the immobility of 
England. He spoke hopefully of Russia, philosophically of 
Germany, cheerfully of France, and sombrely of England— 
referring contemptuously to the "atomistic reforms" over which 
the Liberals of the British Parliament spend their time. Surveing 
the European world, country after country, indicating the features 
and the developments and the personages on the surface and 
under the surface, he showed that things were working toward 
ends which will assuredly be realized. I was often surprised as he 
spoke. It was evident that this man, of whom so little is seen or 
heard, is deep in the times, and that, from the Neva to the Seine, 
from the Urals to the Pyrenees, his hand is at work preparing the 
way for the new advent. Nor is his work wasted now any more 
than it has been in the past, during which so many desirable 
changes have been brought about, so many heroic struggles have 
been seen, and the French republic has been set up on the 
heights. As he spoke, the question I had put, "Why are you doing 
nothing now?" was seen to be a question of the unlearned, and 
one to which he could not make direct answer. Inquiring why his 
great work "Capital", the seed field of so many crops, had not 
been put into English as it has been put into Russian and French3 
from the original German, he seemed unable to tell, but said that 
a proposition for an English translation had come to him from 
New York.638 He said that that book was but a fragment, a single 
part of a work in three parts, two of the parts being yet 
unpublished, the full trilogy being "Land", "Capital", "Credit",639 
the last part, he said, being largely illustrated from the United 
States, where credit has had such an amazing development. 
Mr. Marx is an observer of American action, and his remarks 
upon some of the formative and substantive forces of American 
life were full of suggestiveness. By the way, in referring to his 
"Capital", he said that any one who might desire to read it would 
find the French translation much superior in many ways to the 
German original.640  Mr. Marx referred to Henri Rochefort the 
Frenchman, and in his talk of some of his dead disciples, the 
stormy Bakunin, the brilliant Lassalle, and others, I could see how 
his genius had taken hold of men who, under other circumstances, 
might have directed the course of history. 
a Kanumaiih. Kpumuxa nojiumimecKoü  aKOHOMiu.  CoHHHeme KapAa Mapicca. 
nepeB04T> CT> HÏ>MeqKaro.  TOMT.  nepBbift. Kmira I. "npoqeccb npoH3B04CTBa 
KanHTaAa", C.-rieTep6ypn>, 1872; Le Capital Par Karl Marx. Traduction de 
M. J. Roy, entièrement revisée par l'auteur, [Vol. I,] Paris.— Ed. 

=====第615页=====
Appendices 585 
The afternoon is waning toward the twilight of an English 
summer evening as Mr. Marx discourses, and he proposes a walk 
through the seaside town and along the shore to the beach, upon 
which we see many thousand people, largely children, disporting 
themselves. Here we find on the sands his family party—the wife, 
who had already welcomed me, his two daughters with their 
children, and his two sons-in-law,3 one of whom is a Professor in 
King's College, London,b and the other, I believe, a man of 
letters.0 It was a delightful party—about ten in all—the father of 
the two young wives, who were happy with their children, and the 
grandmother of the children, rich in the joysomeness and serenity 
of her wifely nature. Not less finely than Victor Hugo himself 
does Karl Marx understand the art of being a grandfather; but, 
more fortunate than Hugo, the married children of Marx live to 
cheer his years. Toward nightfall he and his sons-in-law part from 
their families to pass an hour with their American guest. And the talk 
was of the world, and of man, and of time, and of ideas, as our 
glasses tinkled over the sea. The railway train waits for no man, and 
night is at hand. Over the thought of the babblement and rack of the 
age and the ages, over the talk of the day and the scenes of the 
evening, arose in my mind one question touching upon the final law 
of being, for which I would seek answer from this sage. Going down 
to the depth of language, and rising to the height of emphasis, 
during an interspace of silence, I interrogated the revolutionist and 
philosopher in these fateful words, "What is?" And it seemed as 
though his mind were inverted for a moment while he looked upon 
the roaring sea in front and the restless multitude upon the beach. 
" What is?" I had inquired, to which, in deep and solemn tone, he 
replied: "Struggle!" 
At first it seemed as though I had heard the echo of despair; 
but, peradventure, it was the law of life. 
First published in The Sun, No. 6, Reproduced from the newspaper 
September 6, 1880 
a Jenny and Charles Longuet with their children—Jean, Henri and Edgar— 
and Laura and Paul Lafargue.— Ed. 
b Paul Lafargue.— Ed. 
c Charles Longuet. — Ed. 

=====第616页=====
586 
[STATEMENT ON THE CLOSURE OF L'ÉGALITÉ] 641 
The editorial board of L'Egalité* had concluded an agreement 
with a printer 6 for two years, under which the latter bore the 
expenses and shared the profits equally with the editorial board. A 
sale of 6,000 copies would cover the expenses. The first issue sold 
3,800 copies straightaway. But by the third issue the printer 
already declared that he no longer wished to pay out money in 
order to disseminate ideas which he did not share; henceforth he 
would pay only for the setting and the paper, the editorial board 
would have to provide the rest. Reference to the contract did not 
help.  Accept or the paper closes (c'est à prendre ou à laisser). In 
return, he finally allowed the editorial board to receive the income 
from advertisements and sales outside Paris. Four days later the 
printer declared that this also had to stop; the editorial board 
would have to take over the newspaper on its own account. Since 
the board lacked the resources to do this, the newspaper was thus 
doomed. The editorial board will sue the man for breach of 
contract, but the newspaper remains dead and buried. The whole 
secret is that the man is being given a large Orleanist paper to 
print and has evidently been told that he must first show the 
damned socialists the door; after all, they had committed the 
crime of advocating the confiscation of the Orleans fortune. 
Sent by Engels to Zurich on March 1, Printed according to the news-
1883 paper 
First published in Der Sozialdemokrat, Published in English for the first 
No. 11, March 8, 1883 time 
a Gabriel Deville, Jules Guesde, Paul Lafargue, Emile Massard. — Ed. 
b A. Le Tailleur.— Ed. 

=====第617页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第618页=====

=====第619页=====
589 
NOTES 
1 Engels worked on the Refugee Literature series, with interruptions, from 
mid-May 1874 to April 1875. The articles were published as they were 
completed in the German Social-Democrats' newspaper, Der Volksstaat. 
In 1875, Article V appeared as a separate pamphlet under the title Soziales 
aus Rußland (see Note 52). 
Articles I, II and V were included by Engels in a collection of his works, 
Internationales aus dem "Volksstaat" (1871-75), Berlin, 1894. 
Individual articles were published in English, in full or abridged, in a 
number of collections. p. 3 
2 This article from the Refugee Literature series was written by Engels in 
mid-May-early June 1874 and printed in Der Volksstaat, No. 69, June 17, 1874 
under his signature. The subtide, "A Polish Proclamation", was added by 
Engels when the article was reprinted in 1894 (see Note 1). 
The article was prompted by the address of the society called "The Polish 
People" (see Note 4) to the English people on the occasion of Alexander IFs 
visit to England in May 1874. The stated purpose of the visit was the Emperor's 
wish to see his daughter Maria, the Duke of Edinburgh's wife, but actually it 
was undertaken to relax the tensions between Russia and England engendered 
by their clash of interests in Central Asia and Iran. Alexander II, who resided 
in Windsor Castle during his visit, came to London on May 15 and 18. On the 
measures taken by the London police see also Marx's letter to Ludwig 
Kugelmann of May 18, 1874 (present edition, Vol. 45). 
This article was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx and 
F. Engels, The Russian Menace to Europe, London [1953], pp. 109-15, under the 
title "A Polish Proclamation". p. 5 
3 A reference to the assassination attempt on the Russian Emperor Alexander II 
made by Antoni Berezowski in Paris in 1867. Berezowski was sentenced to twenty 
years of hard labour. p. 5 
4 The Polish People (Zwia.zek Ludu Polskiego)—a revolutionary-democratic society 
set up in September 1872 on the initiative of Walery Wroblewski, Ludwik 
Oborski and Jan Krynski. The society included a number of Polish rev­
olutionaries, members of the Paris Commune, and supported the line pursued 
by the General Council of the International Working Men's Association. It drew 

=====第620页=====
590 Notes 
on the best traditions of the society Lud Polski of the 1840s, and linked the 
national and social emancipation of the Polish people with the international 
working-class movement. Its newspaper was the Wici p. 5 
5 Engels is referring to the war between the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) and 
France, on the one hand, and Austria, on the other, which lasted from April 29 
to July 1859. 
Before the war Russia and France signed a secret treaty in Paris (on 
March 3, 1859) whereby Russia undertook to observe benevolent neutrality in 
the case of a Franco-Italian war against Austria. 
The Austro-Prussian war of 1866 for supremacy in Germany was a major 
stage in the unification of Germany "from above" under Prussian hegemony, 
while the Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71 between France, on the one hand, 
and Prussia, Bavaria and Saxony, on the other, completed Germany's national 
unification under the aegis of the Prussian monarchy. p. 6 
6 Engels is referring to the invasions of the Huns in the 5th century, of the Avars 
in the 6th century, and of the Mongols and Tartars in 1241, 1259 and 1287. 
p. 6 
7 The reference is to the Polish-Turkish wars of the 17th century  (1620-21, 
1672-76 and 1683-99). On September 12, 1683, Polish troops led by Jan 
Sobieski, in collaboration with the Austrian army and the armies of the German 
principalities, smashed the Turkish army at Vienna. In 1699 the last war with 
Turkey ended with the Karlowitz Peace Treaty and the Turks' pledge to cease 
warring with Poland. p. 6 
8 Engels gives this quotation according to the Address of the Polish Refugees to the 
English People, p. 3, which differs from the corresponding passage in Pogodin's 
book (see M. n. IToro^HHt,  TIOA^CKOÜ  eonpocr»,  Moscow, 1867, pp. 54-55). 
p. 7 
9 On February 6 (17), 1772, on the initiative of Prussia, a convention was signed 
in St. Petersburg, soon joined by Austria, defining preliminary terms for the 
partition of Poland. The final version was signed on July 25 (August 5) of the 
same year. This partition undermined the national independence of Poland, 
which was in a state of deep social and political crisis (see Note 72). By the 
fourth state, Engels probably meant Rzecz Pospolita, which was left with about 
two-thirds of its territory (on the role of the Polish nobility in these events, see 
this volume, p. 55). p. 7 
10 The Polish Constitution -of May 3, 1791 (Ustawa Rzadowa. Prawo Uchwalone) 
conveyed the aspirations of the progressive sections of the nobility and the 
urban bourgeoisie. It abolished the liberum veto and the elective monarchy (see 
Note 72). To consolidate the central authority and put an end to anarchy, it 
introduced hereditary monarchy and granted the urban bourgeoisie certain 
political and economic rights. Having removed some of the drawbacks of the 
state system of Rzecz Pospolita and crippled the political position of the big 
feudal aristocracy, the Constitution left virtually intact the feudal mode of 
production. The peasantry was still in bondage to the feudal aristocracy and the 
szlachta. But the Constitution alleviated to some extent the position of peasant 
serfs by recognising the legal force of commutation agreements between 
landowners and peasants (see also Engels' article "The Frankfurt Assembly 
Debates the Polish Question", present edition, Vol. 7, p. 351). p. 7 
11 A reference to the opposition of the Polish magnates to the introduction of 
the Constitution of May 3, 1791. They summoned troops from Russia 

=====第621页=====
Notes 591 
which smashed the resistance of the Polish army and overthrew the 
government. Simultaneously, Prussia renounced its allied treaty with Poland 
under the pretext of its having been concluded prior to the Constitution of 
May 3. These events eventually led to a second partition of Poland between 
Russia and Prussia on January 12 (23), 1793. Soon after the second partition a 
resistance movement against the invaders gained strength in Poland, and in 
March 1794, an uprising headed by Tadeusz Kosciuszko flared up. It led to the 
establishment of a provisional Polish government, on which Russia and Prussia 
declared war. The defeat of the uprising resulted in the third partition of 
Poland on the basis of the St. Petersburg Convention of October 13 (24), 1795, 
signed by Russia, Prussia and Austria. This partition put an end to Polish 
statehood. p. 7 
12 The Manifesto of December 4, 1836 was issued in Paris by the refugee 
organisation Towarzystwo Demokratyczne Polskie. As a whole it was of a 
bourgeois-democratic character. 
The Manifesto, drawn up in late 1845 and published on February 22, 1846, 
was issued by the revolutionary government in Cracow. 
The Manifesto of January 22, 1863 was a programme of action published by 
the provisional committee Rzad Narodowy (Komitet Centralny) on the day 
when the Polish uprising began (see Note 14). The Manifesto and the decrees 
published at the same time outlined the insurgents' programme and called 
on the Polish people to take up arms. They also demanded that the estates' 
privileges and distinctions be abolished, and land be turned over to the peasants. 
p. 7 
13 The free city of Cracow (the Cracow Republic) was set up in 1815 by decision of 
the Congress of Vienna (1814-15). The formation of the Cracow Republic was a 
compromise reached by the governments of Russia, Austria and Prussia which 
laid claims to Cracow. This independence was purely nominal since in practice 
the Republic's constitution, which was determined by the above states or 
"guardians" and consolidated the rule of the landowners and bigger 
merchants, was limited by the residents of these states. After the suppression of 
the anti-feudal uprising of 1846 the Cracow Republic was abolished (see Note 25). 
p. 8 
14 A reference to the national uprising of 1863-64 in the Kingdom of Poland, the 
territory annexed to Russia by decision of the Vienna Congress of 1815. The 
uprising, which was directed against the tsarist autocracy, was provoked by the 
crisis of feudal relations within the Kingdom of Poland. The uprising began in 
January 1863. Its principal motive forces were the urban masses: artisans, 
workers and students. From the summer of 1863 a substantial part of the 
insurgent detachments was made up of peasants. However, the National 
Central Committee, which headed the uprising (see Note 12) and consisted 
mostly of the representatives of the petty-bourgeoisie and lesser nobility, did 
not dare encroach on the privileges of big landowners, and this isolated the 
movement from the majority of peasants. This was one of the main reasons for 
the defeat of the uprising. The governments of West European states, on 
whose interference the conservative leaders of the uprising pinned their hopes, 
did not go beyond diplomatic démarches and in fact betrayed the insurgents. 
The uprising was, by and large, crushed by the Tsarist government by the 
autumn of 1863, though some units of the insurgents continued the struggle 
until the end of 1864. 
The Polish uprising of 1863-64 met with warm support and sympathy in 

=====第622页=====
592 Notes 
Russian and European revolutionary-democratic quarters. The solidarity of the 
European workers with the Polish national liberation movement played a certain 
part in organising the International Working Men's Association (the First 
International). p. 8 
15 The Peace of Teschen was signed on May 13, 1779 on the conclusion of the war 
between Prussia and Austria for the Bavarian succession (1778-79). Russia was 
initially a mediator between the belligerents and after the signing of the treaty 
was, together with France, declared the guarantor state. p. 9 
16 On April 21, 1849, Francis Joseph of Austria appealed for help to Nicholas I, 
and in May 1849 the Russian army entered Hungary to take part in the 
suppression of the Hungarian Revolution of 1848-49. The capitulation of the 
Hungarian revolutionary army at Vilâgos on August 13, 1849 sealed the defeat 
of the revolution in die European countries. p. 9 
17 The reference is to the uprising of the Paris proletariat (June 23-26, 1848), 
which was brutally suppressed by the French bourgeoisie. It was the climax of 
the 1848 revolution in France and had an impact on revolutionary events in 
other European countries. Marx and Engels appraised the uprising and its 
historic significance in a series of articles published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, and in The Class Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850 (see present edition, 
Vol. 7, pp. 130-49; Vol. 10, pp. 67-70). p. 9 
18 In May and October 1850 Warsaw was the scene of conferences in which 
representatives of Russia, Austria and Prussia were involved. They were 
convened on the initiative of the Russian Tsar in view of the mounting struggle 
between Austria and Prussia for mastery in Germany. The Tsar acted as arbiter 
in the dispute between Austria and Prussia and used his influence to make 
Prussia abandon its attempts to form a political confederation of German states 
under its own aegis. 
On November 28, 1850 in Olmütz (Olomouc), an agreement was signed 
between Prussia and Austria under which Prussia was forced to temporarily 
renounce its claims to hegemony in Germany (see also this volume, p. 103). 
p. 9 
19 The Crimean war (1853-56), or the Eastern war, was waged by Russia against the 
allied forces of Britain, France, the Kingdom of Piedmont and Turkey for 
supremacy in the Near East. It ended with the signing of the Paris Peace 
Treaty (1856). The war is described by Marx and Engels in the articles included 
in volumes 13-15 of the present edition. p. 9 
20 During the Austro-Italo-French war of 1859 (see Note 5), the Russian Minister 
for Foreign Affairs Alexander Gorchakov issued a circular on May 27, 1859, 
which effectively prevented the intervention of the small German states in the 
conflict. p. 9 
21 Engels is referring to the Austro-Prussian war of 1866 (see Note 5). p. 9 
22 Probably a hint at the Declaration of Neutrality issued by the Russian 
government and carried by Pravitelstvenniy vestnik (The Government Herald), 
No. 148, July 11 (23), 1870. For Austria-Hungary, the Russian stand was virtually 
a warning not to get involved into the war between France and 
Prussia. p. 9 
23 Engels uses the term Haupt- und Staatsaktionen (principal and spectacular 
actions), which has several meanings. In the 17th and the first half of the 18th 
century it meant plays performed by German touring companies. The plays, 

=====第623页=====
Notes 593 
which were rather formless, presented tragic historical events in a bombastic 
and at the same time coarse and farcical way. 
Secondly, the term can be used to denote major political events. It was used 
in this sense by a trend in German historical science known as "objective 
historiography". Leopold Ranke was one of its chief representatives. He 
regarded Haupt- und Staatsaktionen as the main subject-matter of history. 
p. 9 
24 Engels is referring to the decisive battle of the Austro-Prussian war of 1866 (see 
Note 5), which took place on July 3, 1866, at Königgrätz (Hradec Krâlové), 
near the village of Sadowa. The batde of Sadowa ended in a crushing defeat 
for the Austrian troops and decided the outcome of the war. p. 9 
25 The reference is to the national liberation and anti-feudal uprising in the city 
of Cracow (Galicia). The insurgents seized power on February 22, 1846 and set 
up a National Government which issued a manifesto abolishing feudal services. 
The uprising was put down in early March 1846. In November 1846 Austria, 
Prussia and Russia signed a treaty incorporating Cracow in the Austrian 
Empire. 
On the uprising of 1863-64 see Note 14. p. 10 
26 In the days of the Paris Commune about 400 Polish revolutionary refugees 
fought side by side with the Paris workers. The best-known among them were 
Walery Wroblewski and Jaroslaw Dabrowski. General Wröblewski com­
manded one of the three Commune's armies. In early May 1871 General 
Dabrowski was appointed commander-in-chief of all the Commune's armed 
forces. p. 10 
27 Kulturkampf (struggle for culture)—the name given by bourgeois liberals to a 
system of measures implemented in the 1870s by Bismarck's government under 
the banner of a campaign for secular culture. It was directed against the 
Catholic Church and the Party of the Centre (see Note 292). Under the pretext 
of the anti-Catholic struggle Bismarck's government also intensified the national 
oppression of the Polish lands which had fallen under Prussia's sway. With this 
end in view it passed laws restricting the rights of the Catholic clergy. The law 
of March 1872 stripped the clergy of the right to supervise school education, 
thus undermining the influence of the Polish clergy in this field. Education was 
now controlled by the Empire's officials. Additionally, by the edicts of 
October 26, 1872 and October 27, 1873, all schools in Posen were to use 
German. p. 10 
28 Article II in Engels' Refugee Literature series was prompted by the pamphlet 
Aux Communeux (To Communards), which was published in London in June 
1874 on behalf of a group of Paris Commune refugees. It was a kind of 
programme of the Blanquists, members of La Commune révolutionnaire (see 
Note 31). 
Engels' article appeared in Der Volksstaat, No. 73, June 26, 1874, under the 
heading "Flüchtlings-Literatur". Engels changed it to "Programm der 
Blanquistischen Kommune-Flüchtlinge" when reprinting this article in 1894 in 
the collection Internationales aus dem Volksstaat (1871-75). 
It was published in English for the first time in the collection: K. Marx, The 
Civil War in France. Enlarged edition. Chicago, Kerr, 1934, pp. 133-44, under 
the title "The Program of the Blanquist Fugitives from the Paris Commune". 
p. 12 
29 A reference to the emigration of royalists at the time of the French Revolution. 
40-1317 

=====第624页=====
594 Notes 
It grew sharply after the uprising of August 10, 1792 in Paris and the overthrow of 
Louis XVI. p. 12 
30 By the "secret Alliance" Engels calls here the Alliance of Socialist Democracy. 
Central Section which was founded by Bakunin in Geneva in May 1869, and in 
fact guided the activities of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy. It was dissolved 
in 1871 and in place of it the Section of Propaganda and Revolutionary Action was 
founded in Geneva on September 6, 1871. The Section of Propaganda was 
organised by the former members of the Central Section, Nikolai Zhukovsky, 
Charles Perron and others, and some French refugees, Jules Guesde and 
Benoit Malon in particular. On September 8, October 4 and 20, 1871, the 
section applied to the General Council with the request to be admitted to the 
International. The General Council refused to comply because it had received a 
negative opinion on the matter from the Romance Federal Committee in 
Geneva. 
The Alliance of Socialist Democracy was founded by Bakunin in Geneva in 
October 1868 as an international organisation of the anarchists. In 1869 the 
Alliance approached the General Council of the International Working Men's 
Association with a request to be admitted to the International. The General 
Council agreed to admit individual sections of the Alliance provided the latter 
dissolved as an independent organisation. On entering the International 
Bakunin did not actually comply with this decision and incorporated the 
Alliance into it under the guise of a section (called the "Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy. Central Section"). Marx, Engels and the General Council vigorous­
ly fought the Alliance exposing it as a sect hostile to the working-class 
movement (for details see present edition, Vol. 23). The Hague Congress of the 
International (1872) dealt a severe blow to the Bakuninists and expelled the 
Alliance's leaders from the International (see Note 38). p. 12 
31 Late in 1872 the French Blanquist refugees withdrew from the International as 
a protest against the decision of the Hague Congress to transfer the seat of the 
General Council to New York. They set out their position in the pamphlet 
Internationale et Révolution. A propos du Congrès de la Haye par des Réfugiés de la 
Commune. Ex-membres du Conseil Général de l'Internationale, London, 1872. The 
Blanquists also accused the International of "escaping from revolution". In 
1873 they set up the society called La Commune révolutionnaire. p. 13 
32 Engels is referring to the uprising of May  12-13,  1839 in Paris prepared by the 
Society of the Seasons (La Société des Saisons), a secret republican socialist 
organisation that existed in Paris in 1837-39. It was founded by Auguste 
Blanqui and Armand Barbes for the purpose of overthrowing Louis Philippe's 
bourgeois monarchy, establishing a republic and implementing revolutionary 
egalitarian ideas. As a result of its conspiratorial tactics the society was 
suppressed when it attempted to stage the uprising. p. 13 
33 A reference to the Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71,  the siege of Paris and the 
suppression of the Communards between May 21 and 28, 1871. p. 15 
34 The monarchists had an absolute majority in the French National Assembly 
which began its work in Versailles in 1871, but the supplementary elections of 
1873 showed that the republicans' influence was increasing. p. 15 
35 An allusion to the "de-Christianisation" policy pursued with particular vigour 
in the autumn of 1793 by the Left Jacobins. The campaign was spearheaded 
against the counter-revolutionary sections of the clergy. However, the mass of 
the population, particularly the peasantry, opposed the closing down of 

=====第625页=====
Notes 595 
churches. In late November, the Jacobin leader Maximilien Robespierre 
condemned this policy, and on December 5-8, 1793, the Convention passed a 
decree on the freedom of worship. p. 16 
A reference to the former members of the International's General Council 
Arthur Arnaud, Edouard Vaillant, Frédéric Cournet, Constant Martin, 
Edouard Marguerittes and Gabriel Ranvier (see Note 31). Speaking about 
"those five", Engels probably excluded Ranvier from this group (see Engels' 
letter to Sorge of November 16, 1872, present edition, Vol. 44). p. 16 
Engels' third article in the Refugee Literature series was written in late 
July-September 1874 in connection with the publication, in a journal entitled 
Vperyod! (Forward!), of Pyotr Lavrov's article «AfcTonncb paôonaro  ABHJKCHDI» 
(A Chronicle of the Labour Movement), and his polemic with the Russian 
revolutionary Pyotr Tkachov. Engels considers the following pamphlets: 
n. H. TKa*ieB"b, 3adauu peeoJiwiiioHuoü nponazandu eu Pocciu. TIucbMo K& 
pedaxmopy xypnaJia «Bnepedb!» (The Tasks of Revolutionary Propaganda in 
Russia. A Letter to the Editor of the Forward! Magazine), and [II. A. AaBpoB,] 
PyccKoü  cou.iojn>HO-pe80JiwiiioHHOü  MonodeDicu.  TIo noeody ôpowwpvi: «3adauu 
pe80JiH}uioHH(w  nponazaudbi eh Pocciu» (To the Russian Social-Revolutionary 
Youth. Apropos of the Pamphlet: The Tasks of Revolutionary Propaganda in 
Russia). 
Engels' article was printed in Der Volksstaat, Nos. 117 and 118, October 6 
and 8, 1874. Italicisation in the quotations is by Engels. He does not always 
observe the authors' italics. This article is published in English for the first 
time.  p. 19 
When discussing the mandates at the Hague Congress of the First International 
(September 2-7, 1872), the question arose of the Bakuninist Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy (see Note 30) as a secret sectarian organisation whose existence 
within the framework of the International went against its Rules. On the 
suggestion of Marx and some other delegates, a commission was set up to 
investigate the Alliance's clandestine activities. On September 5, 1872 it discussed 
Engels' report (see present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 228-38) and the reports of other 
Congress delegates concerning the Alliance. Having examined the materials, the 
commission arrived at the conclusion that the Alliance's activities were 
incompatible with the line of the International, and at the Congress meeting of 
September 7 it proposed that Bakunin and Guillaume, as well as a number of 
other members of the secret Alliance, be expelled from the International 
Association. The Congress approved as a whole the proposal of the commission 
and decided to make public the documents it had at its disposal which 
pertained to the Alliance. In pursuance of this decision, in April-July 1873, 
Marx and Engels in collaboration with Paul Lafargue wrote The Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association, which was 
published as a pamphlet in French in August 1873 (see present edition, 
Vol. 23). p. 20 
The German translation of the work by Marx and Engels, The Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association (see Note 38), 
appeared in 1874 under the title: "Ein Complot gegen die Internationale 
Arbeiter-Association. Im Auftrage des Haager Congresses verfaßter Bericht über 
das Treiben Bakunin's und der Allianz der socialistischen Demokratie. Deutsche 
Ausgabe von 'L'alliance de la démocratie socialiste et l'association inter­
nationale des travailleurs'. Uebersetzt von S. Kokosky. Braunschweig. Druck 
und Verlag von W. Bracke, 1874". Kokosky's translation was edited by Engels (see 

=====第626页=====
596 Notes 
Engels' letter to Friedrich Adolf Sorge, November 25, 1873, present edition, 
Vol. 44). p. 20 
40 Sergei Nechayev, a Russian revolutionary, conspirator and anarchist, set up an 
underground organisation Narodnaya rasprava (People's Judgment) in Moscow 
in late 1869, consisting mostly of students of the Agricultural and Forestry 
Academy (see Note 527). Blackmail, mystification and deceit practised by 
Nechayev provoked a protest by student Ivan Ivanov, a member of the 
organisation. Fearing exposure, Nechayev staged his assassination and fled 
abroad. In Geneva, he tried to justify the assassination in the  People's  Judgment 
magazine, No. 2, 1870, and to print a programme of the organisation which, in 
Marx's and Engels' definition, was "a beautiful model of barrack-room 
communism" (see present edition, Vol. 23, p. 543). With the exception of 
individual Bakuninists and Pyotr Tkachov, the various trends in the Russian 
liberation movement unanimously condemned Nechayev's methods. p. 22 
41 Engels is referring to the quarrel between Achilles and Agamemnon, the Greek 
leader in the Trojan War. It is described in Book I of Homer's  Iliad,  p. 24 
42 Mons veneris—literally the Mountain of Venus. Situated between Sonabe and 
Thiiringe the mountain was, according to medieval German legends, the place 
where Venus lived. There, she held her court with heathen splendour and 
revelry. None of those who, charmed by music and sensuous allurements, 
entered her abode ever returned except Tannhäuser. p. 25 
43 Lavrov probably hints at the fictitious World Revolutionary Alliance, on behalf 
of which Bakunin and Nechayev published, in 1869, a number of leaflets and 
pamphlets urging immediate revolution. p. 26 
44 Engels wrote the fourth article in the Refugee Literature series on the advice of 
Marx. Having acquainted himself with Tkachov's Offener Brief an Herrn 
Friedrich Engels. Verfasser der Artikel " Flüchtlings-Literatur" in Nr. 117 und 118 des 
"Volksstaat" (Zurich, 1874), Marx passed it on to Engels with the following note 
upon the cover: "Go to it, but in jovial fashion. So stupid, that Bakunin may 
have contributed. What Peter Tkachov is above all trying to tell his readers is that 
you had treated him as an enemy, and he therefore invents all manner of 
disputes that never occurred" (see Marx's letter to Engels, February-March 
1875,  present edition, Vol. 45). 
The article was printed by Der Volksstaat, Nos. 36 and 37, March 28 and 
April 2, 1875. 
Excerpts from it were published in English for the first time in the 
collection: K. Marx, F. Engels, On Literature and Art, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1978, pp. 114, 408-09. In full, it appears in English for the first time. 
p. 29 
45 This story is ascribed to Canning. He mentions three London tailors from 
Tooley Street who addressed a petition to the House of Commons opening with 
the words "We, the people of England!" p. 30 
46 An ironical allusion to the law of July 9, 1873, which introduced a single 
monetary system in Germany, including a 10-mark coin. p. 31 
47 Bashibazouks—irregular detachments of the Turkish army in the 18th and 19th 
centuries; the name was also given to troops noted for cruelty, plunder and 
lack of discipline. p. 33 
48 A hint at Nikolai Chernyshevsky's What Is to Be Done? written in 1862 at the 
time of his imprisonment at the Peter and Paul Fortress (St. Petersburg). The 

=====第627页=====
Notes 597 
novel was a kind of programme of action for the more aware sections of 
Russia's young people. It had great impact on public consciousness and an 
important formative influence upon many revolutionaries. p. 35 
49 The 1870s saw a new period in the development of Narodism (Russian 
populism), a movement of the intelligentsia, representatives of all strata of the 
population, at the bourgeois-democratic stage of the emancipation struggle in 
Russia (1861-95). Thousands of revolutionaries, as well as representatives of the 
democratic intelligentsia, began propaganda work in the countryside ("going 
into the thick of the people") in order to prepare a peasant revolution. In the 
spring and summer of 1874 the Narodniks launched large-scale mass action. In 
the autumn of 1874 mass arrests began, which Engels mentions in this article. 
He probably took the information about them, including the arrests of workers, 
from the editorial in Vperyod! headed "Panic in the Government" (written by 
Lavrov). "Going into the thick of the people" had been stopped by the 
government by late 1875. p. 37 
50 See Note 40. p. 37 
51 Marx believed that the Revolutionary Catechism was written by Bakunin in the 
summer of 1869 (see K. Marx and F. Engels, The Alliance of Socialist Democracy 
and the International Working Men's Association, present edition, Vol. 23, 
pp. 544-45). The real author of the Catechism was, most probably, Nechayev. The 
text was coded and several copies of it were printed in Geneva. p. 37 
52 Article V from Engels' Refugee Literature was printed by Der Volksstaat, Nos. 43, 
44 and 45 on April 16, 18 and 21, 1875, and as a separate pamphlet in Leipzig 
in late June-early July 1875 under the title Soziales aus Rußland (On Social 
Relations in Russia). In the second half of May Engels wrote an introduction to 
the pamphlet (see this volume, pp. 100-04), which was reproduced together 
with the article in the 1894 edition: F. Engels, Internationales aus dem 
"Volksstaat" (1871-75). 
This article was printed in English for the first time in: K. Marx, F. Engels, 
Selected Works in three volumes, Volume Two, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
1969,  pp. 387-98. p. 39 
53 The corvée (labour rent)—one of the forms of feudal land rent, unpaid forced 
labour of the serf peasant working on the estate of the feudal landowner and 
using his own tools. After the abolition of serfdom in Russia in 1861, part of 
the peasants that earlier belonged to the landowner (the so-called temporarily 
bound peasants) were obliged to perform gratuitous labour for the landowner 
or to pay quit-rent for the use of land. In 1881 a law was passed making the 
redemption of the peasants' plots obligatory, and abolishing the corvée in its 
overt form. However, it continued to exist as a statute labour up to the 1900s. 
p. 41 
54 On February 19, 1864 the Russian Tsar passed an edict introducing an 
agrarian reform in Poland: the land that was in the peasants' use was to become 
their own property. Some of landless peasants were returned plots taken away 
earlier by the landlords. The latter were compensated from the treasury for 
the land that passed to the peasants. Despite the tiny size of most of the new 
holdings, and the fact that their owners were compelled to work on the 
landed estates, the reform of 1864 cleared the way for the development of 
capitalism in Poland to a larger extent than the reform of 1861 did in Russia. 
p. 41 
55 A reference to the reform of 1864 in Russia, which introduced Zemstvos— 

=====第628页=====
598 Notes 
elective bodies for administering local matters (the building of roads and 
bridges, the organisation of schools, supplies of hospitals, expert agricultural 
assistance). p. 41 
56 The truck system—a barter system introduced between employer and employed, 
which means the practice of paying wages otherwise than in cash (see F. Engels, 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England, present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 470, 
471, 473, 539, 542). p. 42 
57 Engels is referring to the sub-lease system in Ireland, under which middlemen, 
whose number could be up to a dozen, stood between the big landowner and 
the peasant working on the leased plot of land. p. 42 
58 A reference to the Russian version of Utopian socialism developed in the early 
1850s by Alexander Herzen, a founder of revolutionary Narodism (see 
Note 49). Herzen believed that Russia would pass on to socialism in an 
"original" way thanks to the village commune, emancipation of peasants with 
land, peasant self-government, and the traditional right of the peasants to land. 
p. 43 
59 Samoyeds—an old Russian name for a number of Siberian minor nationalities 
(Nentsi, Entsi, Nganasani and Selkups), which spoke Uralic languages, p. 43 
60 Marx read Flerovsky's book in 1870. In a letter to the committee members of 
the Russian Section of the International of March 24, 1870 he expressed his 
appreciation of the book (see present edition, Vol. 21, pp. 110-11). Later 
Engels too read the book. p. 44 
61 A reference to the Peasant War (1773-75) headed by Yemelyan Pugachov. 
p. 49 
62 Engels is referring to the uprising which was launched in July 1873 by 
petty-bourgeois republicans and the Bakuninists in Andalusia and Valencia. It 
undermined the position of the left-republican government of Francisco Pi y 
Margall which came into office in 1873 as a result of the declaration of the first 
republic in Spain during the revolution of 1868-74. For more details, see 
Engels' The Bakuninists at Work (present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 585-95). p. 49 
63 Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne is a forceful work in which 
Marx exposed the unseemly methods used by the Prussian police state against 
the communist movement. The pamphlet was published in Basle in January 
1853,  but in March almost the whole edition (2,000 copies) was confiscated by 
the police in the Baden frontier village of Weill on the way to Germany. In the 
USA the work was first published in instalments (on March 6 and April 2 and 
28, 1853) in the Boston democratic newspaper Neue-England-Zeitung and at the 
end of April 1853 it was printed as a separate pamphlet by the same publishing 
house. 
In 1874 this work was reprinted in 13 instalments in Der Volksstaat 
(Leipzig), with Marx named as its author for the first time. Preparing a 
separate edition of the Revelations, Wilhelm Liebknecht, the editor of the 
newspaper, on October 29, 1874 requested Marx to write a preface for it. On 
January 27, 1875, Der Volksstaat published Marx's epilogue to the Revelations 
dated January 8, 1875. The Revelations appeared as a book in Leipzig in 1875, 
reproducing the text from Der Volksstaat with this epilogue. p. 51 
64 Documents of which Marx was not aware, specifically the letter of Moses Hess 
to Joseph Weydemeyer of July 21, 1850, confirm that Hess was the author of 

=====第629页=====
Notes 599 
the Red Catechism (Rother Kathechismus für das deutsche Volk, New York and 
Boston [1849 or 1850]). The place of publication is fictitious; the pamphlet was 
published in Germany in 1850. p. 51 
65 The reptile funds—special money funds at the disposal of Bismarck which he 
used to buy venal journalists, nicknamed reptiles. The nickname was current in 
Germany in the 1870s. Bismarck was the first to use it, although in a different 
sense, speaking in the Prussian Chamber of Deputies on January 30, 1869 (by 
reptiles, he referred to the circles hostile to the government). However, the 
Left-wing press began to apply the word to the semi-official press bribed by the 
government. Speaking in the Reichstag on February 9, 1876, Bismarck was 
forced to admit that the new meaning of the word "reptiles" had gained wide 
currency in Germany. p. 52 
66 By the State Inquisition Marx means the Council of Ten set up in the Republic 
of Venice in the 14th century, and the Collegium of State Inquisitors formed 
by it in the 15th century. p. 52 
67 A conference of Austrian, Prussian, Bavarian, Saxonian and other ministers 
held in Karlsbad in 1819 adopted decrees to fight opposition movements 
spearheaded against the reactionary customs and laws in the German states and 
advocating the unification of Germany. The Karlsbad Decrees in particular 
made it possible to prosecute participants in the political demonstration in 
Gambach (May 1832) and in the actions of revolutionary democrats, including 
members of the Burschenschaften (see Note 151) in Frankfurt am Main in 
April 1833. They were repealed by the Federal Diet (see Note 150) on April 2, 
1848.  p. 53 
68 The Programme of the International Working Men's Association was set forth 
by Marx in the "Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International 
Association" and in the preamble to the "Provisional Rules of the Association". 
These documents were published for the first time by the General Council of 
the International in the pamphlet Address and Provisional Rules of the Working 
Men's International Association, Established September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting 
Held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, London (see present edition, Vol. 20). 
p. 53 
69 An allusion to the defeat of Prussia by Napoleonic France at Jena on October 
14, 1806. The defeat led to Prussia's capitulation and revealed the instability of 
the social and political system of the Hohenzollern feudal monarchy, p. 54 
70 Marx has "inneres Düppel", an expression first used in the meaning of "enemy 
within" ("Düppel im Innern") in a political survey published in the 
Bismarckian Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung on September 30, 1864. It became 
widely current later. 
Düppel (DybbÖl) —Danish fortification in Schleswig which the Prussians 
captured by storm on April 18, 1864, during the war of Prussia and Austria 
against Denmark. p. 54 
71 This article reproduces Marx's and Engels' speeches at the meeting of January 
23, 1875 in London organised by the Polish People society (see Note 4) to 
mark the 12th anniversary of the Polish uprising of 1863-64. It was written by 
Engels for Der Volksstaat and printed in it on March 24, 1875. The meeting was 
chaired by Walery Wrôblewski. Speaking at it were members of the more 
advanced section of the revolutionary-democratic refugees from Poland, Russia, 
Germany, France and some other countries. Among them were members of the 

=====第630页=====
600 Notes 
Paris Commune Leo Frankel and Prosper Olivier Lissagaray. A report of the 
meeting, including the text of Marx's and Engels' speeches, was carried by the 
Polish magazine Wici (Zurich) on January 30, 1875, the Russian newspaper 
Vperyod! (Forward!) (February 15), and other periodicals. p. 55 
72 Engels is referring to the system of constitutional principles of Rzecz Pospolita 
introduced after the formation of this state in 1569, Rzech Pospolita was a 
limited monarchy headed by an elective Diet, the king and the Polish nobility 
enjoying unlimited rights. The most odious principle was that of liberum veto, 
the right of any member of the Diet to ban any of its decisions, which by the 
18th century resulted in extreme political anarchy and social and economic crisis. 
On the first partition of Poland, see Note 9. p. 55 
73 The reference is to the participation in the American War of Independence 
(1775-83) of Tadeusz Kosciuszko and Kazimierz Pulaski, who were promoted 
to brigadier general for their service. p. 55 
74 It is the first French Constitution, passed on September 3, 1791 by the National 
Convention. It was based on the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the 
Citizen adopted by the French Constituent Assembly on August 26, 1789, 
during the French Revolution. It proclaimed the main principles of the 
revolution: sovereignty of the people and the natural rights of man, the right to 
freedom, property, security and resistance to oppression. p. 55 
75 The reference is to the military alliance concluded on February 7, 1792 by 
Austria and Prussia, supported by Russia,against the revolutionary France. On 
September 20, 1792, in the battle of Valmy, the French revolutionary army 
defeated the forces of the Austro-Prussian coalition. p. 55 
76 The Italian region Venice, part of the Austrian Empire in 1797-1805 and 
1814-66, was a centre of the Italian national liberation movement against 
Austrian oppression. 
By "a threefold Venice" Engels implies the territories acquired by Prussia as 
a result of the three partitions of Poland (see notes 9 and 11) and the Vienna 
Treaty of 1815, as well as Schleswig-Holstein annexed by Prussia as a result of 
the Danish war of 1864 and Alsace-Lorraine annexed in the Franco-Prussian 
war of  1870-71.  p. 56 
77 See Note 14. p. 56 
78 As is clear from the report in Vperyod! (Forward!), No. 3, February 15 (3), 
1875,  "The Anniversary of the Polish Uprising of 1863 in London", the 
secretary of the newspaper's editorial board, Valerian Smirnov, spoke at the 
meeting of January 23, 1875 (see Note 71). Stressing the identity of interests of 
the Russian and the Polish workers, he declared, on behalf of the Russian 
revolutionaries, that each of them was ready, "when the time of the Polish 
people's revolution would arrive", to join the ranks of the Poles in order to 
gain "social freedom for the Polish people". Also speaking at the meeting was 
another Russian refugee, Dmitry Solovyov, who warned against the possible 
compromise between the szlachta liberal party and the Tsarist government. 
p. 57 
79 The reference is to the amnesty of the Polish patriots kept prisoners in Prussia 
for an attempted uprising in Posen in 1846. The amnesty was declared by 
Frederick William IV in March 1848 under pressure of public opinion, p. 58 
80 On May 15, 1848, Paris workers led by Blanqui, Barbes and others took 
revolutionary action against the anti-labour and anti-democratic policy of the 

=====第631页=====
Notes 601 
bourgeois Constituent Assembly, which opened on May 4. The demonstrators 
forced their way into the assembly premises, demanded the formation of a 
Ministry of Labour and presented a number of other demands, e.g., that 
assistance be rendered to the insurgent Poles in Posen. An attempt was made to 
form a revolutionary government. National Guards from the bourgeois 
quarters and the regular troops succeeded, however, in restoring the power of 
the Constituent Assembly. The leaders of the movement were arrested and put 
on trial. p. 58 
81 In the report on this meeting carried by Vperyod! (Forward!), No. 3, February 
15 (3), 1875—"The Anniversary of the Polish Uprising of 1863 in London"— 
the following sentence was added: "It is therefore necessary to popularise the 
principles of the International Association among the Polish people." This 
sentence, which was not included in the reports printed by the Polish 
periodicals (see Note 71) or in Engels' text for Der Volksstaat, was written in by 
Valerian Smirnov, who prepared the report for  Vperyod!  and insisted that he had 
heard it from Marx  himself.  In a letter to Marx of February 15, 1875, Smirnov 
asked him to confirm this fact. Marx's reply has not been found. p. 58 
82 Engels wrote this article at the moment when, in the spring of 1875, relations 
between the German Empire and France sharply deteriorated after the French 
National Assembly approved the Projet de loi relatif à la constitution des cadres et 
des effectifs de l'armée active et de l'armée territoriale. Resolute Russian diplomatie 
interference prevented a war in Europe. Attaching great importance to Engels' 
article, which contained a critique of German militarism from the proletarian 
internationalist stand, the Volksstaat editorial board intended to publish it as a 
separate pamphlet. However, this intention was not carried out. p. 59 
83 See Note 65. p. 59 
84 In German the word Gründung is used here: a reference to Griindertum, the 
period of "prosperity" in Germany in 1871-73. It was made possible, to a large 
extent, by the war reparations of five thousand million francs and the 
annexation of Alsace and Lorraine under the terms of the Frankfurt Peace 
Treaty (1871), which concluded the Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71.  Railway 
construction and the building of heavy-industry enterprises was in full swing, 
accompanied by the investment of enormous capital; industrial, construction 
and commercial joint-stock companies were mushrooming, as were banks and 
social security companies. 
By 1873, the period of Gründertum in Germany had resulted in a crash 
followed by a protracted economic crisis that also affected Austria, Belgium, 
Britain, France, Holland, Italy, Russia and the USA, and continued up to 1879. 
p. 59 
85 Landsturm —military militia formed in Prussia in 1813-14 from persons between 
the ages of 18 and 42 ineligible for military service because of disability, age, 
health, etc. The Landsturm was a reserve of the third levy. The Landsturm Law 
{Gesetz über den Landsturm) of February 12, 1875 developed the law of 
November 9, 1867 and provided for replenishing the Landwehr (see Note 90) 
from the Landsturm in case of threat of a hostile invasion. p. 59 
86 Engels analyses the new French Cadre Law (of March 12, 1875) on the basis of 
the information contained in the article "Das Gesetz über die Cadres in 
Frankreich" published in the Kölnische Zeitung, Nos. 90-92 and 94, on April 1-3 
and 5, 1875. p. 59 

=====第632页=====
602 Notes 
87 Zouaves—French colonial troops first formed in 1830. Originally they were 
composed of Algerians and French colonists and later of Frenchmen only, 
while Algerians were formed into special regiments of riflemen. 
Turcos (Algerian riflemen)—French light infantry recruited, from 1842, 
from among the Algerians, with the exception of the officer corps and, partly, 
non-commissioned officers. p. 60 
88 In the French army breech-loaders were called Chassepôts (from the inventor's 
name).  They were adopted in the French army in 1867-68. p. 60 
89 Under the law of, 1868, die mobile guards were composed of persons of call-up 
age, fit for military service, who had not done either active military service or 
service in the reserves, and were intended for guard duty at the frontiers, 
service at the rear, and for garrison duties. By the beginning of the 
Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71,  the formation of mobile guards had not yet 
taken place; persons between the ages of 20 and 40 were recruited to it at the 
time of war. p. 61 
90 Landwehr (the army reserve) in Prussia was formed at the time of the struggle 
against Napoleonic rule. In the 1840s, it was made up of persons up to 40 years 
of age who had served three years in the army and had been on the reserve list 
for at least two years. In peacetime, the Landwehr units were engaged in 
occasional military exercises; at the time of war, they were to do rear and 
garrison service. During the Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71,  the Landwehr was 
used in active service along with the regular troops. p. 61 
91 See Note 24. p. 61 
92 The reference is to the 200,000-strong Second Loire Army formed in 
October-November 1870 by the French government mostly from recruits. This 
is also a reference to the battle at Loigny-Poupry, near Orleans, of December 2, 
1870,  where two French corps of the Loire Army suffered a defeat, and the 
batde of Le Mans, Western France, of January 10-12, 1871, where the Loire 
Army was also forced to retreat and sustained considerable losses. p. 62 
93 Under the law of May 2, 1874 ("Reichs-Militärgesetz", Reichs-Gesetzblatt, Berlin, 
1874,  No. 1002), the second reserve (Ersatzreserve) consisted of men of call-up 
age who had been given grace due to insignificant disability or family 
circumstances. In wartime, it was used to replenish the army. p. 63 
94 A punning reference to the name The Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation 
founded in 962 by the German King Otto I. It included, at different times, 
German, Italian, Austrian, Hungarian and Bohemian lands, Switzerland and 
the Netherlands, forming a motley conglomeration of feudal kingdoms and 
principalities, church lands and free towns with different political structures, 
legal standards and customs. By the 18th century, the Empire, with a Hapsburg 
at its head, lost all political significance, and ceased to exist on August 6, 1806 
as a result of the victory of Napoleon's army. p. 66 
95 Engels' letter to August Bebel written between March 18 and 28, 1875 is closely 
connected with Marx's Critique of the Gotha Programme (see this volume, 
pp. 75-99) and is traditionally published together with the latter work. It 
conveyed the joint opinion of Marx and Engels concerning the fusion of two 
German workers' parties, the Eisenachers and the Lassalleans, scheduled for 
early 1875. The immediate reason for the letter was the publication of the draft 
programme of the future united Social-Democratic Workers' Party of Germany 
(Programm der deutschen Arbeiterpartei) in Der Volksstaat (the organ of the 

=====第633页=====
Notes 603 
Eisenachers) and the Neuer Social-Demokrat (the organ of the Lassalleans) on 
March 7, 1875. The draft programme was approved with slight changes by the 
unity congress at Gotha on May 22-27, 1875, and came to be known as the 
Gotha Programme. 
This letter was first published by Bebel, after the lapse of 36 years, in his 
Aus meinem Leben, Zweiter Teil, Stuttgart, 1911. In the present edition the letter 
is printed according to this book. 
It was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, Critique of  the Gotha 
Programme, Lawrence, London [1933], pp. 51-62. p. 67 
96 A reference to one of Lassalle's programme theses on the establishment of 
workers' producer associations with the aid of the state. Lassalle and his followers 
repeatedly emphasised that what they had in mind was a state in which power 
would pass into the hands of the working people through universal suffrage. 
p. 67 
97 Engels is referring to the Programm und Statuten der sozial-demokratischen 
Arbeiter-Partei, adopted at the general German workers' congress in Eisenach in 
August 1869 and published in the Demokratisches Wochenblatt on August 14, 
1869.  The congress founded the Social-Democratic Workers' Party of Germany. 
By and large the programme complied with the principles of the International 
Working Men's Association. p. 67 
98 The "honest men"—nickname of the members of the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party (the Eisenachers), as distinct from the members of the General 
Association of German Workers (the Lassalleans), the "dishonest men". 
p. 68 
99 The German People's Party, established in September 1868, embraced the 
democratic section of the bourgeoisie, mostly in the South-German states. The 
party opposed the establishment of Prussian hegemony in Germany and 
advocated the idea of a federative German state. p. 68 
100 A reference to the following articles of the draft Gotha Programme: 
"The German workers' party demands as the free basis of the state: 
"1. Universal, equal and direct suffrage by secret ballot for all males who 
have reached the age of 21, for all elections in the state and in the community. 
2. Direct legislation by the people with the right to initiate and to reject bills. 
3. Universal military training. A people's militia in place of the standing army. 
Decisions regarding war and peace to be taken by a representative assembly of 
the people. 4. Abolition of all exceptional laws, in particular the laws on the 
press,  associations and assembly. 5. Jurisdiction by the people. Administration 
of justice without fees. 
"The German workers' party demands as the intellectual and moral basis 
of the state: 
"1. Universal and equal education of the people by the state. Compulsory 
school attendance. Free instruction. 2. Freedom of science. Freedom of 
conscience." p. 68 
101 The reference is to the Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71. 
p. 68 
102 The League of Peace and Freedom—a pacifist organisation set up in Switzerland 
in 1867 with the active participation of Victor Hugo, Giuseppe Garibaldi and 
other democrats. The League asserted that it was possible to prevent wars by 
creating the "United States of Europe". Its leaders did not disclose the social 
sources of wars and often confined anti-militarist activity to mere declarations. 

=====第634页=====
604 Notes 
At the General Council meeting of August 13, 1867 Marx spoke against the 
International's official participation in the League's Inaugural Congress, since 
this would have meant solidarity with its bourgeois programme, but recom­
mended that some members of the International should attend the Congress in 
their personal capacity in order to support revolutionary-democratic decisions 
(see present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 426-27, and Marx's letter to Engels of 
September 4, 1867, present edition, Vol. 42). p. 69 
103 On page 5 of his Arbeiterlesebuch Lassalle quotes a passage about the "iron law 
of wages" from his pamphlet Offnes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur 
Berufung eines Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig, Zurich, 1863, 
pp. 15-16. p. 69 
104 Philippe Joseph Bûchez, one of the first ideologists of the so-called Christian 
socialism, advanced a plan for the establishment of workers' producer 
associations with the aid of the state. p. 69 
105 On October 12, 1875 Engels wrote to Bebel concerning this programme that, 
since both workers and their political opponents "interpreted it communistical-
ly", "it is this circumstance alone which has made it possible for Marx and myself not 
to disassociate ourselves publicly from a programme such as this. So long as our 
opponents as well as the workers continue to read our views into that programme, 
we are justified in saying nothing about it" (see present edition, Vol. 45). 
p. 71 
106 In March 1872 August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht were sentenced to two 
years'  confinement in a fortress for their adhesion to the International Working 
Men's Association and their socialist views. In April Bebel was sentenced, in 
addition, to nine months' imprisonment and deprived of his mandate as a 
Reichstag member for "insulting His Majesty". Liebknecht was released on 
April 15, 1874, while Bebel was freed on April 1, 1875. p. 73 
107 Marx's Critique of the Gotha Programme, which analyses the draft programme of 
the future united Social-Democratic party, is a major contribution to the key 
theoretical issues of scientific communism and an example of uncompromising 
struggle against opportunism. It was written in April-early May 1875 and 
intended for the leadership of the Eisenachers. The manuscript Marginal Notes 
on the Programme of the German Workers' Party (Randglossen zum Programm der 
deutschen Arbeiterpartei) is prefaced by Marx's letter to Wilhelm Bracke of 
May 5, 1875 and forms a single whole with it. The work was sent to the 
leadership of the Eisenach party (specifically, to Wilhelm Bracke) on May 5. 
For the first time, Critique of the Gotha Programme was published by Engels 
in 1891, together with Marx's letter to Bracke, despite opposition on the part of 
the opportunist German Social-Democratic leaders. It appeared in the 
theoretical organ of the German Social-Democrats, Die Neue Zeit, Vol. 1, 
No. 18, with Engels' foreword. As is known from Engels' letter to Karl Kautsky 
of February 23, 1891 (see present edition, Vol. 49), he had to agree to certain 
changes and omissions. 
The Critique was published in English for the first time, according to the 
text in Die Neue Zeit, in The Socialist Series, number one, under the title: "The 
Socialist Programme. By Karl Marx", The Socialist Labour Press, Glasgow 
[1918].  p. 75 
108 Yhe authorised French translation of Volume One of Capital was published in 
instalments in Paris between 1872 and 1875 (Le Capital Par Karl Marx. 

=====第635页=====
Notes 605 
Traduction de M. J. Roy, entièrement revisée par l'auteur. [Vol. 1.] Paris, 
éditeurs, Maurice Lachâtre et C ie). After the final instalments had been 
published, the whole was brought together and published as a book. Since 
Lachâtre was prosecuted for his activity during the Paris Commune and his 
shop sequestered in 1875, the legal rights were passed on to A. Quest, a 
government official, who did his best to hold up the printing and distribution 
of the book. p. 78 
109 Marx is referring to the following passage in the Rules and Administrative 
Regulations of the International Working Men's Association: "That the economical 
subjection of the man of labour to the monopoliser of the means of labour, 
that is the sources of life, lies at the bottom of servitude in all its forms, of all 
social misery, mental degradation, and political dependence" (see present 
edition, Vol. 20, p. 441). p. 83 
110 An allusion to Lassalle's secret contacts with the Bismarck government 
(mid-May 1863-February 1864). He promised support to the Prussian 
government in its struggle against the liberal bourgeoisie in exchange for the 
introduction of universal suffrage in the country. p. 83 
111 The reference is to the address "An die Parteigenossen!" (Der Volksstaat, 
No. 105, October 31, 1873) issued by the leadership of the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party before the elections to the German Reichstag on January 10, 
1874.  p. 89 
112 An ironical reference to Hasselmann, the editor-in-chief of the Neuer 
Social-Demokrat p. 89 
113 In its editorial article (the "Politischer Tagesbericht" section) the Norddeutsche 
Allgemeine Zeitung, No. 67, March 20, 1875, wrote in connection with the draft 
programme of the Social-Democratic Party of Germany that "the Social-
Democratic propaganda has become cautious in some ways: it has disavowed 
internationalism". p. 90 
114 See Note 103. p. 91 
us See Note 96. p. 93 
H6 The Liverpool Financial Reform Association was founded in 1848, and for a long 
time Robertson Gladstone was its President. Its aim was to "advocate the 
adoption of a simple and equitable system of direct taxation, fairly levied upon 
property and income, in lieu of the present unequal, complicated, and 
expensively-collected duties upon commodities" ( Tracts of the Liverpool Financial 
Reform Association, Liverpool, 1851, p. VII). p. 96 
117 See Note 27. p. 97 
118 Engels wrote this introduction for a separate edition of Article V from his 
Refugee Literature series (see Note 52). p. 100 
1i9 Engels is referring to his own and Marx's articles in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Organ der Demokratie, which was edited by Marx in 1848-49 and published in 
Cologne, and, above all, to his "The Frankfurt Assembly Debates the Polish 
Question" and their joint work "German Foreign Policy and the Latest Events 
in Prague" (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 337-81 and 212-15). p. 103 
12° Engels is referring to the talks that took place in Warsaw in October 1850 
between Francis Joseph I of Austria and the Prussian Minister-President 
Friedrich Wilhelm von Brandenburg, with the Russian Tsar Nicholas I as the 
mediator. p. 103 

=====第636页=====
606 Notes 
121 The Russian Tsar Alexander II and the Minister for Foreign Affairs Alexander 
Gorchakov visited Berlin in May 1875 at the time of the sharp deterioration of 
relations between France and Germany (see Note 82). p. 103 
122 Engels is referring to the confidential circular of the International's General 
Council ("An alle Sectionen und Mitglieder der IAA, New York, 16. Mai 
1875").  The Council proposed changing the decision to hold a general 
congress in September 1875, adopted at the Geneva Congress of the 
International in 1873, and convening a congress or conference in July 1876 in 
Philadelphia (USA) during the world industrial exhibition there. This was a 
calculation to guarantee the security of working-class delegates from Europe. 
p. 105 
123 The reference is to the German Workers' Educational Society founded in London 
in February 1840. After the establishment of the Communist League in 1847 its 
members played the leading role in the Society. During various periods of its 
activity die Society had branches in working-class districts in London. In 1847, 
1849-50 and in the late 1850s-mid-1870s, Marx and Engels took an active part 
in the Society's work. Its members were involved in the activity of the 
International Working Men's Association. The Society at large joined the 
International in 1-865 as a section. It existed up to 1918, when it was closed 
down by the British government. p. 105 
124 On December 25-26, 1872 Brussels hosted the Congress of the Belgian 
Federation of the International, at which the anarchists had a majority. The 
Congress voted down the decisions of the Hague Congress, stated its refusal to 
maintain contacts with the General Council in New York, and resolved to 
support the decisions of the international congress of anarchists which was held 
in Saint-Imier on September 15, 1872 and which openly declared the split of 
the International. In a resolution of May 30, 1873, the General Council said 
that the Belgian Federation had, in consequence of its actions, dissociated itself 
from the International. 
For the Alliancists see Note 30. p. 105 
125 The contacts of the General Council of the International in New York with 
Austria, Germany and Switzerland were maintained through Friedrich Adolph 
Sorge, who corresponded with Wilhelm Liebknecht, Johann Philipp Becker, 
Johann Schwarzinger and others. p. 106 
126 Engels made this speech in German at the international meeting held on 
January 22, 1876 to mark the anniversary of the Polish uprising of 1863 and 
sponsored by die Polish People society (see Note 4). Afterwards, between 
January 22 and February 1, at the request of Walery Wroblewski, the Polish 
socialist who had chaired the meeting, Engels wrote the speech in French. This 
manuscript was used for the translation in this volume. The French text was 
probably used as the original for the first publication of the speech in Vperyod!, 
since the Russian text printed there (in the report on the meeting in the section 
"A Chronicle of the Labour Movement") is identical to the French text. 
p. 107 
127 As some of his contemporaries stated, when Nicholas I received the news of the 
February revolution of 1848 in France, he exclaimed: "Gentlemen, mount your 
horses! A republic has been proclaimed in France!" p. 107 
128 See Note 119. p. 107 

=====第637页=====
Notes 607 
129 Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag was written by Engels in February 
1876.  Its publication in Der Volksstaat and as a separate impression provoked 
irritation on the part of the authorities. As Engels wrote to Karl Kautsky on 
May 23, 1884, "'Prussian Schnapps' was a personal insult to Bismarck" (see 
present edition, Vol. 47). p. 109 
130 A reference to the first Peace of Paris concluded on May 30, 1814 between the 
principal members of the sixth anti-French coalition (Russia, Austria, Britain 
and Prussia) and France after Napoleon's defeat. p. 112 
131 Under the impact of the July Revolution of 1830 in France, urban dwellers in 
Saxony, Brunswick, Hanover, Hesse-Cassel, and other German lands launched 
revolutionary action, and an anti-feudal peasant revolt flared up in Hesse-
Darmstadt, which was suppressed by troops. p. 116 
132 A reference to the Anglo-French commercial treaty signed on January 23, 
1860,  which signified a triumph for the advocates of free trade in both 
countries and served the interests of the British industrial bourgeoisie. Under 
one of its articles tariffs for French wine were cut by  half,  and England 
undertook to further reduce them depending on the percentage of alcohol in 
the wine (see K. Marx, "The New Treaty Between France and England", 
present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 341-44). p. 118 
133 A Greek myth says that at the time of the campaign against Troy the Greeks 
mistakenly engaged in combat with the troops of their ally Telephus, the son of 
Heracles. Telephus was wounded by Achilles and got cured when some rust from 
Achilles' spear was applied to his wound, following the oracle's prophecy. 
p. 119 
134 As legend has it, Antonio da Correggio uttered these words standing before 
Raphael's Saint Cecilia. p. 119 
135 Der Volksstaat, No. 24, February 27, 1876, p. 2, had "along Russian lines". The 
misprint was pointed out in Der Volksstaat, No. 27, March 5 in the "Berich­
tigung" section. p. 120 
136 A reference to the administrative reform of 1872 in Prussia (Kreisordnung für 
die Provinzen Preußen, Brandenburg, Pommern, Posen, Schlesien und Sachsen. 
Vom 13. Dezember 1872. In: Gezetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen 
Staaten, No. 41, Berlin, 1872). It abolished the patrimonial power of the Junkers 
and introduced elements of local self-government (elective elders in the 
communities, district councils at the Landrats elected in accordance with the 
representation system, etc.). The reform was aimed at consolidating the state 
apparatus and strengthening centralisation in the interests of the Junkers as a 
class.  The Junkers in fact retained power in their localities themselves or by their 
protégés holding most of the elective posts. p. 121 
137 Engels is referring to the following works by Theodor von der Goltz: Beitrag 
zur Geschichte der Entwicklung ländlicher Arbeiterverhältnisse im nordöstlichen 
Deutschland bis zur Gegenwart, Berlin, 1846; Ländliche Arbeiterwohnungen, 
Königsberg and Tilsit, 1865; Die ländliche Arbeiterfrage und ihre Lösung, Danzig, 
1872;  Die Lage der ländlichen Arbeiter im Deutschen Reich, Berlin, 1875; Die 
soziale Bedeutung des Gesindewesens, Danzig, 1873. p. 121 

=====第638页=====
608 Notes 
138 By decision of the Congress of Vienna (September 18, 1814-June 9, 1815), 
the greater part of the lands on the left and right banks of the Rhine and of 
those adjoining Westphalia were incorporated into Prussia. p. 121 
139 The reference is to the uprisings in Western and Southern Germany (May 
1849),  which were part of the German people's campaign for the implementa­
tion of the Imperial Constitution approved in March 1849 by the Frankfurt 
National Assembly. The most powerful struggle in support of it developed in 
the Bavarian Palatinate and Baden. The combined Palatinate-Baden insurgent 
army, which included many workers' units, put up strong resistance to the 
Prussian-Bavarian-Wiirttemberg troops who greatly exceeded the insurgents in 
numbers and strength. The insurgents' last stronghold, Rastatt, fell on July 23. 
The uprisings in the Palatinate and Baden in the spring and summer of 1849 were 
the closing events of the German revolution (see also F. Engels, "The 
Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution", present edition, Vol. 10, 
pp. 147-239). p. 121 
140 Little Germany—a plan for the unification of Germany from above under 
Prussia's aegis and excluding Austria; it was supported by the majority of the 
German bourgeoisie. p. 121 
141 The Federal Council (Bundesrat), the supreme organ of the German Empire, 
consisted of 58 appointed representatives of 25 German states. With the 
Reichstag, which was elected by direct universal and equal ballot, it formed the 
Empire's legislative power. At the time of Bismarck, the Federal Council was a 
counter-weight to the Reichstag. Its policies were shaped mostly by Prussia, 
which was represented by 17 deputies and had the right of veto in questions 
pertaining to amendments in the constitution. p. 122 
142 See Note 132. p. 124 
143 A reference to the commercial treaty between Italy and the Customs Union 
signed on December 31, 1865. 
The Customs Union (Zollverein) of German states, which established a 
common customs frontier, was set up in 1834 and headed by Prussia. By the 
1840s the Union embraced most of the German states with the exception of 
Austria, the Hanseatic cities (Bremen, Hamburg, Lübeck), and a few small 
states.  Brought into being by the need to create an all-German market, the 
Customs Union became a factor in the promotion of the political unification of 
Germany. p. 124 
144 Under the Frankfurt Peace Treaty of May 10, 1871, which concluded the 
Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71,  France, among other things, was obliged to 
pay war reparations of five thousand million francs. p. 125 
145 The Holy Alliance, an association of European monarchs, was founded in 
September 1815 on the initiative of the Russian Tsar Alexander I and the 
Austrian Chancellor Metternich to suppress revolutionary movements and 
preserve feudal monarchies in European countries. During the 1848-49 
revolution and subsequendy, counter-revolutionary circles in Austria, Prussia 
and Russia attempted to revive the Holy Alliance in a modified form. 
p. 125 
146 Engels wrote Wilhelm Wolff in June-September 1876 for Die Neue Welt, a 
journal edited by Wilhelm Liebknecht. Marx himself had intended to write a 
short biography of  Wolff,  one of the most prominent German proletarian 

=====第639页=====
Notes 609 
revolutionaries, to whom he dedicated the first volume of his Capital. Marx's 
"Biographical Notes on Wilhelm  Wolff"  exist, written immediately after Wolff's 
death (see present edition, Vol. 19, pp. 335-36). However, Marx could not carry 
out his plan since at that time he did not have the necessary information on the 
earlier period of Wolff's life. 
With the biographical material, Engels gives a synopsis of Wolff's series of 
articles on the condition of the Silesian peasants written for the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung in 1849. The publication of Wolff's articles was one of the steps taken 
by the newspaper to involve Germany's peasant masses in the revolution. The 
articles present a broad factual and statistical picture of the exploitation of the 
peasants and demand that the peasants be given back the milliard marks that 
the landowners had stolen from them in the form of redemption payments. His 
articles entitled Die schlesische Milliarde were a tremendous success with the 
readers. In Silesia the Peasants' Union made 10,000 copies of the issues carrying 
these articles and distributed them among the peasants free of charge. 
In 1886 Engels' Wilhelm Wolff was published as the first part of the 
introduction to Wolff's book Die schlesische Milliarde. Abdruck aus der "Neuen 
Rheinischen Zeitung" März-April 1849. Mit Einleitung von Friedrich Engels, 
Hottingen-Zurich, 1886; the second part of the introduction was a newly 
written work "On the History of the Prussian Peasants" (see present edition, 
Vol. 26). In that edition, Engels substantially supplemented the text of Wilhelm 
Wolff and omitted the chapters containing a synopsis of Wolff's articles. 
In the passages dealing with Wolff's articles Engels renders rather than 
quotes the author. p. 129 
147 Wolff was prosecuted for his report Die oberschlesischen Wilddiebe und das 
preußische Militär. Breslau, published in Freikugeln, No. 27, February 13, 1845, 
and sentenced to three months' confinement in a fortress. p. 131 
148 The reference is to the Edikt den erleichterten Besitz und den freien Gebrauch des 
Grund-Eigenthums, so wie die persönlichen Verhältnisse der Land-Bewohner betreffend, 
which was passed on October 9, 1807 and came into force on November 11, 
1810.  p. 132 
149 Demagogues (in Germany) were participants in the opposition movement of 
intellectuals. The name became current after the Karlsbad conference of 
ministers of the German states in August 1819 (see Note 67), which adopted a 
special decree against the intrigues of the Demagogues. p. 133 
150 The Federal Diet (Bundestag)—a representative body of the German Confeder­
ation, an ephemeral union of German states, founded in 1815 by decision of 
the Congress of Vienna. Though it had no real power it was nevertheless a 
vehicle for feudal and monarchist reaction. During the 1848-49 revolution in 
Germany reactionary circles made vain attempts to revive the Federal Diet, 
intending to use it to prevent the democratic unification of Germany. After the 
defeat of the revolution the Federal Diet received its former rights in 1850 and 
survived till 1866. p. 133 
151 Students' Associations (Burschenschaften) were formed in Germany during the 
liberation struggle against Napoleon I. They advocated the unification of 
Germany. In them, progressive ideas existed side by side with extreme natio­
nalism. On the persecution of the Burschenschaften, see Note 67. p. 133 
152 Wilhelm Wolff's letter to Fritz Reuter of December 30, 1863 which Engels 
mentions was first published in the Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft, No. 6, 
1957,  pp. 1244-45. p. 133 
41-1317 

=====第640页=====
610 Notes 
153 Fritz Reuter's allusion is to the so-called constitutional conflict in Prussia 
between the government and the liberal opposition of the Chamber of Deputies 
(1860-66). In the course of it Bismarck was appointed Minister-President 
(September 24, 1862). He exercised authority in the absence of a budget 
approved by the Chamber and, therefore, his power could be effectively 
restricted only through refusal to pay taxes. p. 133 
154 Wolff  was  released from  the  fortress  on July  30, 1838. See  Marx's "Biographi­
cal Notes  on Wilhelm  Wolff"  (present edition,  Vol. 19, p. 335). p. 133 
155 Having been pardoned, Wolff lived in the estate of the Polish landowner Tytus 
Adam Dziafynski as a tutor. In the summer of 1840 he returned to Silesia. 
p. 134 
156 Quoted from The Old Testament (Psalms 35:20). Engels is referring here to the 
Pietists. 
The Pietists—adherents of a Lutheran trend which arose in Germany in the 
17th century. Distinguished by extreme mysticism, it rejected rites and attached 
special importance to personal religious experience. p. 135 
157 A reference to the Allgemeines Landrecht für die Preußischen Staaten promulgated 
in 1794. It included criminal, state, civil, administrative and ecclesiastical law 
and bore a distinct imprint of obsolete feudal legal standards. 
After the annexation of the Rhine Province to Prussia in 1815 (see 
Note 138), the Prussian government tried to introduce Prussian Law into 
various legal spheres there to replace the French bourgeois codes in force in 
the province. This was accomplished by passing a series of laws, edicts and 
instructions aimed at restoring the feudal privileges of the nobility (primogeni­
ture),  Prussian criminal and marriage law, etc. These measures were resolutely 
opposed in the province and repealed after the March revolution by special 
decrees issued on April 15, 1848. p. 135 
158 In his letter of December 30, 1863 to Fritz Reuter (see Note 152), Wilhelm 
Wolff wrote that the manuscript of one of his articles, which had fallen in the 
hands of the police, served as a pretext to institute court proceedings against 
him for infringing the press law (see Note 147). p. 135 
159 This book was written by the police officials Wermuth and Stieber. The 
appendices to the first part, which purported to tell the history of the workers' 
movement for the information of police agents, reproduce some of the 
Communist League's documents that had fallen into the hands of the police. 
The second part contained a "black list" and biographical particulars of people 
connected with the workers' and democratic movement. p. 135 
160 See Note 123. p. 135 
161 Engels is referring to the Bureau de Correspondance set up in Brussels in 1845 by 
the German democratic journalist Sebastian Seiler (later a member of the 
Communist League). In October 1847, when Seiler withdrew from the bureau 
for reasons unknown, it was headed by Wilhelm Wolff and Louis Heilberg. 
p. 136 
162 The  German Workers' Society  in Brussels  was  founded  by  Marx  and  Engels  at 
the end of  August  1847, its aim  being  the  political education  of the  German 
workers  who  lived  in Belgium  and the  dissemination  of the  ideas  of scientific 
communism among them. With Marx, Engels  and their followers  at its  head, 
the Society became  the  legal centre rallying  the  revolutionary proletarian forces 

=====第641页=====
Notes 611 
in Belgium. Its most active members belonged to the Communist League. The 
Society played an important part in founding the Brussels Democratic 
Association. After the February 1848 revolution in France, the Belgian 
authorities arrested and banished many of its members. p. 136 
163 Wolff arrived  in Breslau (Silesia)  on April  13, 1848.  There  he joined  the  newly 
established Democratic Club,  and was  active  in the  propaganda campaign 
during the elections to the Frankfurt Parliament and the Berlin National 
Assembly. p. 137 
164 Wolff arrived  in Cologne  in mid-June  1848. p. 137 
165 xhe  Democratic Society  in  Cologne  was set up in  April  1848; it  embraced 
workers  and  artisans,  as well  as small businessmen. Marx, Engels  and other 
editors  of the  Neue Rheinische Zeitung, who directed  the  Society's work, wanted 
to orientate it towards a struggle against the counter-revolutionary policy of the 
Prussian ruling circles and to expose the liberal bourgeoisie's policy of 
agreement. In April 1849, Marx and his followers, who had actually begun to 
organise an independent mass proletarian party, considered it best to dissociate 
themselves from the petty-bourgeois democrats and withdrew from the Society. 
Meanwhile, they continued to support the revolutionary actions of the German 
democratic circles. p. 138 
16<5 See Note 17. p. 138 
167 On August 26, 1848 in the Swedish city of Malmö, an armistice was signed in 
the war between Denmark and Prussia, which was part of the revolutionary 
struggle of the German people for the unification of Germany. In September 
1848,  the Frankfurt National Assembly ratified the armistice, which the 
Prussian government accepted from fear of the mounting revolutionary mood 
in Germany. This provoked a wave of protest and led to an uprising in 
Frankfurt am Main on September 18, 1848, which was suppressed by Prussian 
and Austrian troops. p. 138 
168 The Agreement Assembly (Vereinbarungsversammlung) was the name given to 
the Prussian National Assembly convened in Berlin in May 1848 to draw up a 
constitution and consisting mostly of liberals leaning towards a compromise 
with the King. Frederick William IV, who spoke at the opening of the 
Assembly on May 22, demanded that when working out the constitution the 
deputies should be "in agreement with the Crown". p. 138 
169 The immediate reason for the conflict was the shooting down on July 31, by 
the garrison of the Schweidnitz fortress in Silesia, of the civil guard and 
townspeople, as a result of which 14 people were killed and 32 seriously 
wounded. In the resolution of the Prussian National Assembly of August 9, 
1848 the Minister of War was asked to warn officers to abstain from 
"reactionary tricks", and it was recommended that they resign from the army if 
they disagreed with the resolution. The Auerswald-Hansemann Ministry raised 
no objections because it was sure the deputies would not demand faithful 
implementation of the resolution. But the Minister of War's non-observance of 
the Assembly's recommendations led to a conflict between the Government and 
the Assembly and to a ministerial crisis. p. 138 
170 Public meetings took place in Cologne on September 7, 13, 17 and 20, 1848. 
One of them, held on September 13 and organised by Wolff on behalf 
of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung editorial board, the Democratic Society and 
the Cologne Workers' Association, elected a Committee of Public Safety con-
41* 

=====第642页=====
612 Notes 
sisting of 30 people. It included the leaders of the above-mentioned organisa­
tions and editors of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Engels proposed a draft 
address to the Berlin Assembly urging its deputies not to abandon their posts 
even under threat of armed force. The draft was unanimously approved. 
p. 138 
171 The first issue of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung that appeared after the lifting of 
the state of siege in Cologne was dated October 12, 1848; under the procedure 
prevailing at that time it was printed on October 11. p. 140 
172 These events took place  on February  28, 1849. p. 140 
173 The reference is to the transfer of the sittings of the Prussian National 
Assembly (see Note 168) from Berlin to Brandenburg» This was the beginning 
of a counter-revolutionary coup d'état in Prussia, which ended with the 
dissolution of the National Assembly and the imposition of a Constitution by 
the King on December 5, 1848 (the so-called imposed constitution; see 
Note 178). p. 140 
174 The agrarian bill was submitted for consideration to the Prussian National 
Assembly on July 11, 1848. The debate began on October 10 and was not 
finished due to the dissolution of the Assembly (see Note 173). See Marx's 
article "The Bill Proposing the Abolition of Feudal Obligations" (present 
edition, Vol. 7, p. 295). p. 141 
175 Under the Law of 1821 the peasant was either to transfer to the landowner 
one-third to a half of his plot or pay its value in cash as redemption for the 
corvée and obligations. p. 142 
17<5 See Note 25. p. 143 
177 Between August 1848 and January 1849 the Neue Rheinische Zeitung published 
a series of feature articles by Georg Weerth entitled Leben und Thaten des 
berühmten Ritters Schnapphanski, which ridiculed Prince Lichnowski, a big Silesian 
landowner killed during the September insurrection in Frankfurt am Main (see 
Note 167). He was described under the name of Ritter Schnapphanski (from 
Schnapphahn, a highwayman, scrounger, and rogue). p. 144 
178 On December 5, 1848 the Prussian National Assembly was dissolved and the 
Constitution imposed by the King made public (see Note 173). The Constitu­
tion introduced a two-chamber system; the age and property qualifications 
made the First Chamber a privileged Chamber of Gentry. By the electoral law 
of December 6, 1848, the right to vote in the two-stage elections to the Second 
Chamber was granted only to the so-called independent Prussians. The royal 
authority was vested with sweeping powers—the King was authorised to 
convene and dissolve the Chambers, appoint ministers, declare war and 
conclude peace. He was vested with full executive power, while sharing 
legislative power with the Chambers. p. 147 
179 Gardeners (Gärtner) and cottagers (Häusler) had small plots of land but no 
draught animals, while the "livers-in" (Zuhausinnewohnern) were landless 
day-labourers. p. 148 
180 Land registers (Urbarien)—inventories of feudal land possessions in Germany, 
Austria, Hungary and Bohemia introduced in the 12th century. They also 
contained the lists of peasant landholders and their duties. From the 13th 

=====第643页=====
Notes 613 
century the term Urbarien also began to be applied to inventories of taxes and 
other incomes as provided by law. p. 149 
181 A mistake in Die Neue Welt: this land register (Kataster) was introduced in 
1843.  See A. Meitzen, Der Roden und die landwirthschaftlichen Verhältnisse des 
Preussischen Staates nach dem Gebietsumfange vor 1866, Vol. 1, Berlin, 1868, p. 18. 
p. 150 
182 Mediatised peers in Germany—owners of the imperial fiefs who formerly used 
to be in direct bondage to the Emperor of the Holy Roman Empire of the 
German Nation (see Note 94), and were then subordinated to major princes, in 
the given case to the King of Prussia. p. 150 
183 Waiters (Heuler) —the name of the republican democrats in Germany in 
1848-49 applied to the moderate constitutionalists who, in turn, called their 
opponents "agitators" (Wühler). p. 151 
184 Engels uses the word Sportelgelder here, which means fees payable by peasants 
for the conduct of legal cases. p. 152 
185 Mortmain—in the Middle Ages the right of the feudal lord to inherit the 
property of a dead serf peasant. Since the property and the land of the dead 
peasant usually went to his heirs, the latter were obliged to pay an onerous fee 
for them to the lord. p. 159 
186 Water-Polacks (Wasserpolacken)—original name of ferrymen on the Oder who 
were mainly natives of Upper Silesia. Subsequently it became widespread in 
Germany as a nickname for Silesian Poles. p. 160 
187 A hint at Marx's and Engels' dissatisfaction with the line pursued by Wilhelm 
Liebknecht, editor-in-chief of Der Volksstaat, the official organ of the German 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party (from October 1876, Vorwärts became the 
party's central organ; Liebknecht was also on its editorial board). Specifically, 
their displeasure was provoked by the publication of articles of a more general 
nature giving "pictures of future society" to the detriment of those "on topical 
questions" (see Engels' letter to Marx of May 28, 1876, present edition, Vol. 45). 
p. 164 
188 See Note 183. p. 164 
189 On May 14, 1849, on the order of Frederick William IV, the Prussian deputies 
were recalled from the Frankfurt Parliament. Wolff began his work in 
Parliament on May 21. p. 164 
190 Engels is referring to the demonstration of petty-bourgeois democrats in Paris 
on June 13, 1849, organised by the Montagne in protest against sending 
French troops to suppress the revolution in Rome (see also K. Marx, The Class 
Struggles in France, 1848 to 1850, present edition, Vol. 10, p. 99). p. 165 
191 See Papiers et correspondance de la famille impériale. Édition collationnee sur le texte 
de l'imprimerie nationale, Vol. 2, Paris,  1870-71,  p. 161. p. 167 
192 After Frederick William IV of Prussia refused to accept the Imperial Crown 
offered him by the Frankfurt National Assembly, Prussia and Austria recalled 
their deputies. Deputies of other German states also left the Assembly. The 
left-wing petty-bourgeois deputies who remained in Frankfurt transferred the 
sessions to Stuttgart, on May 30, 1849, where the Assembly was dispersed by 
the Württemberg government's troops. p. 168 

=====第644页=====
- 614 Notes 
193 The Federal Council (Bundesrat) —the Swiss government which, in accordance 
with the Constitution of September 12, 1848, had legislative and executive 
power. p. 169 
194 The letters of Marx, Engels and Marx's wife Jenny show that Wolff moved to 
Manchester in September 1853. p. 170 
195 This letter opens a new period in Engels' work for the Italian newspaper La 
Plebe. He had contributed to it in 1871-72, when it was the organ of the 
International's sections and sided with the General Council in its struggle 
against the Bakuninists. At the request of its editor, Enrico Bignami, Engels 
resumed work for it in 1877, when La Plebe again began to appear regularly. 
Between late February 1877 and late March 1879 Engels wrote a number of 
articles on various subjects which appeared in the "Da Londra" section without 
a title. p. 172 
196 The elections to the German Reichstag were held on January 10, 1877. 
p. 172 
197 At the elections to the German Reichstag on January 10, 1877 the German 
Social-Democrats received more votes (493,288) than at the 1874 elections (see 
Note 204). p. 172 
198 By the abstentionists Engels means the Italian anarchists, specifically Andrea 
Costa, Carlo Cafiero, Errico Malatesta and Carmelo Palladino, who did not 
recognise the need for political struggle on the part of the working class. They 
believed that the workers' participation in elections to representative bodies 
would only consolidate the power of the bourgeois state. p. 173 
199 See Note 90. p. 173 
200 The reference is to a public meeting in Tivoli convened on the initiative of the 
Central Electoral Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party of 
Germany. 
A notice about it was printed in the Vorwärts, No. 7, January 17, 1877. 
p. 173 
201 In late February 1877 Engels received several January and February issues of 
La Plebe sent by Enrico Bignami from Italy. In a letter to Marx of March 6 he 
wrote about his intention to prepare this material for the Vorwärts, central 
organ of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party of Germany (see present edition, 
Vol. 45). Engels realised his plan in this article. 
It was published in English for the first time in the collection: Marx, Engels, 
Lenin, Anarchism and Anarcko-Syndicalism, International Publishers, New York, 
1972.  p. 174 
202 See notes 30 and 38. p. 174 
203 Hereinafter Engels quotes Bakunin's letter to the Spanish socialist Francisco 
Mora of April 5, 1872 published, with other documents of the Alliance, in 
section XI of Marx's and Engels' work The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the 
International Working Men's Association (see present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 578-
80). p. 174 
204 At the 1874 elections the German Social-Democrats received 351,952 votes. 
p. 175 
205 The Swiss Workers' Association (Schweitzer Arbeiterbund) was set up at the 
congress of workers of trade, co-operative and other organisations, which took 

=====第645页=====
Notes 615 
place in Olten on June 1-3, 1873. Eighty delegates attended the Congress. This 
was the country's first mass, nation-wide workers' organisation. p. 176 
206 The North-Italian Federation was established on October 15, 1876 in Milan on 
the initiative of the local circle for the study of social problems, at a meeting 
which was also attended by representatives of the socialist sections and circles of 
Lombardy, Veneto, Piedmont, Ferrara and the canton of Ticino (Switzerland). 
p. 177 
207 This and the following articles (see this volume, pp. 181-82, 203-05) were 
printed unsigned in La Plebe (see also Note 195). p. 179 
208 The meeting chaired by John Bright was held on May 16, 1877 at Exeter Hall 
in London. Of the 2,594 participants, 1,218 were members of the National 
Agricultural Labourers' Union, set up in May 1872, whose membership had 
reached 86,000 by 1874. Joseph Arch, the Union's leading activist, spoke on the 
attitude of English agricultural labourers to the Russo-Turkish war. He said 
that they "were determined their blood should not be spilt and their treasure 
expended in the support of Turkey ... there was not a class of her Majesty's 
subjects in the British realm that suffered more from the Crimean war than 
did the farm labourers. They had felt the pinch of hunger and want for twenty 
years in consequence of it" (quoted from "The County Franchise", The Daily 
News, No. 9694, May 17, 1877). p. 179 
209 The following two resolutions were passed by the meeting of May 16, 1877 at 
Exeter Hall: "That in the opinion of this Conference it would be desirable to 
adopt an uniform Parliamentary franchise for borough and county constituen­
cies;  ... That it would be desirable so to redistribute political power as to obtain 
a more complete représentation of the opinion of the electoral body" (quoted 
from "The County Franchise", The Daily News, No. 9694, May 17, 1877). 
p. 179 
210 Probably a reference to the appeal to Prime Minister Disraeli, Lord 
Beaconsfield, signed by representatives of the workers from England, Scotland 
and Ireland on March 6, 1877 (see "The Premier and Factory Operatives", The 
Times, No. 28883, March 7, 1877). p. 180 
211 See Note 208. p. 181 
212 A reference to the strikes of agricultural labourers in the counties of Central 
and Eastern England for a shorter working day and higher wages. They took 
place in 1872-74 and were headed by the National Agricultural Labourers' 
Union. By April 1874 the strikers managed to secure a pay rise. p. 181 
213 See Note 208. p. 182 
214 Engels wrote this work in mid-June 1877 at the request of Wilhelm Bracke, a 
leader of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party of Germany, for the Volks-
Kalender which he edited (see Bracke's letter to Engels of April 13, 1877). It 
was published in English for the first time in: Karl Marx, Man, Thinker and 
Revolutionist A symposium edited by D. Ryazanoff, London [1927], pp. 17-34. 
p. 183 
215 A reference to Marx's stay in Kreuznach in May-October 1843, the time when 
he conceived the idea of his Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of 
Law (see present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 3-129). 
When writing this work, he felt the need for more historical material, and 

=====第646页=====
616 Notes 
with this in mind he began to study problems related, not only to the theory 
and history of the state as a whole, but also to the history of particular 
countries (England, France, Germany, the United States, Italy, Sweden) and 
major world-historical events, in particular the French Revolution, as can be 
seen from his five notebooks containing excerpts (the Kreuznach Notebooks). 
Having moved to Paris in 1844, Marx concentrated on political economy in his 
scientific studies. Their results were set forth in the work known as the 
Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (see present edition, Vol. 3, 
pp. 229-346). p. 184 
216 Engels is referring above all to Marx's "Critical Marginal Notes on the Article 
'The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a Prussian' " (see present edition, 
Vol. 3, pp. 189-206), which was one of the reasons for the closing down of the 
Vorwärts! and the expulsion of Marx and a number of other contributors from 
France by Guizot's order of January 16, 1845 issued under pressure from the 
Prussian government. p. 184 
217 Engels' supposition has not been substantiated by facts. p. 184 
218 The "Speech on the Question of Free Trade" was based on the material 
prepared by Marx for a speech he was to have delivered at the Congress of 
Economists in September 1847 (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp.  279-81, 
287-90). Marx intended to speak at the Congress but its organisers closed the 
debate and refused to give him the floor. An account of Marx's speech 
appeared in the Belgian newspaper Atelier Démocratique on September 29, 
1847.  p. 184 
219 See Note 162. p. 184 
220 The First Congress of the Communist League was held in London on June 2-9, 
1847.  It was a final stage in the reorganisation of the League of the Just (see 
Note 378). The activity of Marx and Engels directed towards the ideological 
and organisational unity of the socialists and advanced workers prompted the 
leaders of the League, who resided in London from November 1846, to ask for 
their help in reorganising the League and drafting its new programme. When 
Marx and Engels were convinced that the leaders of the League of the Just 
were ready to adopt the principles of scientific communism as its programme, 
they accepted the offer to join the League made to them late in January 1847. 
Engels' active participation in the work of the Congress affected the course and 
the results of its proceedings. The League was renamed the Communist 
League, the old motto of the League of the Just "All men are brothers" was 
replaced by a new, Marxist one: "Working Men of All Countries, Unite!" The 
last sitting on June 9 approved the draft programme and the draft Rules of the 
League, which had been drawn up either by Engels or with his involvement 
(see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 96-103 and 585-88). 
The Second Congress of the Communist League was held on November 
29-December 8, 1847. It instructed Marx and Engels to draw up the League's 
programme. In pursuance of this decision, the Manifesto of the Communist Party 
was written in January (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 477-519). p. 187 
221 See Note 17. p. 188 
222 See Note 173. p. 188 
223 See Note 139. p. 188 
224 xhis refers to the Austro-Italo-French war between the Kingdom of Sardinia 
(Piedmont) and France, on the one hand, and Austria, on the other (April 29 

=====第647页=====
Notes 617 
to July 8, 1859). On July 11, the French and Austrian emperors concluded a 
separate preliminary peace in Villafranca. p. 189 
225 See Note 191. p. 189 
226 See Note 84. p. 193 
227 Marx wrote this letter to the Otechestvenniye Zapiski editorial board probably in 
November 1877, soon after the magazine had printed, in October 1877, an 
article by the ideologist of Russian Narodism (populism) Nikolai Mikhailovsky, 
"Karl Marx Before the Tribunal of Mr. Zhukovsky". Mikhailovsky's article 
was a reply to the review of Volume One of Marx's Capital written by the 
Russian bourgeois economist Yuly Zhukovsky, "Karl Marx and His Book on 
Capital", and printed by Vestnik Yevropy, No. IX, 1877. 
Marx's manuscript has come down to us in the form of a rough draft and 
contains many corrections and deletions. Two versions of the second part of 
the letter are extant, a concise and a longer one. With slight stylistic changes, 
the concise version repeats the more detailed one. The letter had not been 
posted and was found by Engels among Marx's papers after his death. Engels 
considered it necessary to make copies of the manuscript and enclosed one of 
them in his letter to Vera Zasulich in Geneva of March 6, 1884 (see present 
edition, Vol. 47). Marx's letter was first published in Russian in 1886 in Vestnik 
Narodnoi Voli, No. 5, in Geneva, and in German in the New-Yorker Volkszeitung, 
No. 5, May 3, 1887 and in the Sozialdemokrat, No. 23, June 3, 1887 in Zurich. 
The letter was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, "The 
Economic Development of Russia", The Plebs, No. 5, May 1920, pp. 70-72. 
p. 196 
228 The term poor whites was applied in the ante-bellum South to those 
non-slaveholders who fell in the social class below yeomen farmers, artisans and 
sturdy frontiersmen. As originally used, the term carried a stigma beyond 
poverty and was applied only to a small group, usually squatters on the poorest 
lands.  p. 201 
229 This article, published unsigned in La Plebe, No. 3, January 22, 1878 (in the 
"Da Londra" section), had a short editorial preface: "From our vast and 
important correspondence from London we cite passages which are relevant to 
our present-day political and social situation." 
The article was published in English for the first time, abridged, in: 
K. Marx, F. Engels, On the United States, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1979. 
p. 203 
230 Engels borrowed the data pertaining to the development of the socialist press 
in these countries mostly from the Vorwärts, No. 152, December 30, 1877, and 
No. 3, January 9, 1878. p. 203 
231 Kathedersozialisten (armchair or academic socialists)—representatives of a trend 
in bourgeois socialism that emerged in Germany in the 1860s-70s. In 1873 its 
champions (Gustav Schmoller, Adolph Wagner and Lujo Brentano) set up the 
society Verein für Sozialpolitik which had its own printed organ, Schriften des 
Vereins für Sozialpolitik. Katheder-Socialists supported Bismarck's social policy, 
advocated class harmony and opposed the workers' revolutionary action. The 
term was used by a liberal, one Heinrich Bernhard Oppenheim, in the polemic 
with Adolph Wagner (see National-Zeitung, No. 573, December 7, 1871). 
p. 203 

=====第648页=====
618 Notes 
232 The attempt on Bismarck's life was made by a cooper's apprentice, Eduard 
Kulmann, on July 13, 1874 in Bad-Kissingen. It was staged by die Catholic 
clergy, which was outraged by the Kulturkampf policy (see Note 27). Bismarck 
was slighdy wounded in the arm. p. 203 
233 The reference is to the attempt of the French President Marshal MacMahon, 
the monarchists' placeman, to accomplish an anti-republican coup d'état. On 
May 16, 1877, die government herald Journal Officiel carried MacMahon's 
letter, which expressed dissatisfaction with the actions of Jules Simon, a 
bourgeois republican and Chairman of the Council of Ministers. The following 
day, a new ministry headed by Duke de Broglie, a monarchist, was appointed. 
On June 25 the Chamber of Deputies, formed mostly of republicans, was 
dissolved, and new elections were scheduled for October 14, 1877. However, at 
these elections the republicans scored a decisive victory. The attempt of 
MacMahon and his supporters (General Auguste Ducrot, Orleanist Anselme 
Batbie, and others) to bring about a coup d'état on December 13 met with the 
resistance of junior officers and particularly the soldiers, who shared the 
republican leanings of the French peasantry. On December 14 a government 
headed by Jules Dufaure was formed. MacMahon was forced to retire in 
January 1879 before his time was up. Moderate republican Jules Grévy was 
elected President. The bourgeois-republican system was established in France. 
p. 204 
234 In 1877, a struggle between the workers and the employers flared up in the 
USA. One of its major features was the railway strike in Eastern Virginia in 
July 1877, triggered off by a 10-per cent cut in the wages at the three main 
railway lines leading to the West: Pennsylvania, Baltimore-Ohio, and New York 
Central. It took government troops and armed detachments of employers to 
suppress the strike. p. 204 
235 On the financial crisis of 1873, see Note 84. p. 204 
236 A reference to the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78. p. 204 
237 The year 1789—the beginning of the French Revolution; 1793—the period of 
the Jacobin dictatorship. p. 205 
238 Engels wrote this article for the American weekly The Labor Standard published 
in 1876-1900 by Joseph Patrick McDonnell, an activist in the Irish workers' 
movement who had emigrated to the USA. It appeared in Nos. 43-47 on 
March 3, 10, 17, 24 and 31,1878. p. 207 
239 The reference is to the Bakuninists. See notes 30 and 38. p. 209 
240 The battle of Sedan took place on September 1, 1870, in die course of the 
Franco-Prussian war (1870-71), in which the French army was defeated. The 
Sedan catastrophe brought nearer the collapse of the Second Empire and led to 
the declaration of the republic in France-on September 4, 1870. p. 211 
241 Engels is referring to the behaviour of the Prussian middle class at the time of 
the Franco-Prussian war. On January 18, 1871, during the siege of Paris, the 
German Empire was ceremonially proclaimed at Versailles: 30 deputies of the 
Reichstag handed an address to King William I requesting him to accept the 
Imperial Crown. p. 212 
242 See Note 38. p. 213 
243 The international anarchist congresses, in which representatives of the Alliance 
of Socialist Democracy's secret organisations took part, were held in Saint-Imier 

=====第649页=====
Notes 619 
(September 15-16, 1872), Geneva (1873), Brussels (1874), Berne (1876) and 
Verviers (1877). The Saint-Imier Congress passed a decision opposing the 
resolutions of the Hague Congress and the expulsion of Bakunin and 
Guillaume from the International. p. 213 
244 The reference is to the abortive attempt of Italian anarchists to launch an 
uprising in Bologna early in the morning of August 8, 1874. p. 214 
245 In 1877, 26 Italian anarchists, who attempted an insurrection, captured the 
villages of Letion and Gallo not far from Naples. It was promptly suppressed 
by the police. p. 214 
246 The Ghent Socialist Congress of September 9-16, 1877 was an attempt to unite 
the various socialist trends on an international scale. The Congress was 
attended by representatives of socialist parties (both established ones and those 
in the process of formation), as well as delegates of the anarchist International. 
Wilhelm Liebknecht represented the German Social-Democratic Party. On the 
major issues, the Congress adopted decisions directed against the anarchist 
minority. Specifically, it confirmed Article 7a added to the International's Rules 
by the Hague Congress on the need to set up an independent political party of 
the proletariat (see present edition, Vol. 23, p. 243). The Congress showed that 
the anarchist trend was falling apart and that Marxism prevailed in the 
international working-class movement. To a certain extent the Ghent Congress 
paved the way for the formation of the Second International. Marx wrote to 
Friedrich Adolph Sorge on September 27, 1877: "The Ghent Congress, 
whatever else it left to be desired, at least had the advantage that Guillaume and 
Co. were totally abandoned by their former allies" (see present edition, 
Vol. 45). p. 215 
247 See Note 62. p. 216 
248 At the Ghent Congress (see Note 246), the Spanish Federation was represented 
by the Bakuninists José Garcia Vinas and Tomas Gonzalez Morago. It is 
possible that the third delegate mentioned by Engels was Trinidad Soriano. 
p. 216 
249 See Note 45. p. 216 
250 The reference is to the New Madrid Federation (Nueva Federacion Madrilena) 
formed on July 8, 1872 by the members of the Emancipacion editorial board, 
who had been expelled from the Madrid Federation by an anarchist majority 
when the newspaper exposed the activities of the secret Alliance in Spain (José 
Mesa, Francisco Mora, Pablo Iglesias, etc.). Paul Lafargue played an active part 
in the organisation and work of the New Madrid Federation. The Federation 
fought against the spread of anarchist influence in Spain, popularised the ideas 
of scientific socialism, and campaigned for the establishment of an independent 
proletarian party in Spain. Engels contributed to its newspaper, La Emancipa­
cion.  p. 216 
251 That was the first workers' congress in Portugal; it was held in Lisbon on 
February 1-4, 1877. The congress signified the final formation of the 
Portuguese Socialist Party founded in 1875; it adopted the Rules and a 
programme similar to the Gotha programme of the Socialist Workers' Party of 
Germany (see this volume, pp. 81-99) and elected the Party Central Committee. 
p. 217 

=====第650页=====
620 Notes 
252 After the Paris Commune the government adopted measures aimed against the 
organisations of the First International in Italy. In the summer of 1871 the 
International Democratic Society of Florence, which had twice publicly stated its 
sympathy with the Commune, and the Naples section of the International, were 
dissolved. p. 217 
253 The Griitli Society (Grütliverein), a Swiss petty-bourgeois reformist organisation, 
was founded in 1838 as an educational society for artisans and workers. The 
name Grütliverein was chosen to emphasise the Swiss national character of the 
association. Legend has it that in 1307, representatives of three Swiss cantons 
met at Grüdi meadow and formed an alliance to fight against the arbitrary rule 
of the Habsburgs. 
For the "Workmen's Confederation" mentioned in the text see Note 205. 
p. 218 
254 The new Swiss Factory Law of March 23, 1877 was put into force by the 
referendum of October 21, 1877 despite the resistance by the bourgeoisie. 
p. 218 
255 In April 1870 the first Social-Democratic group was set up in Copenhagen on 
the initiative of Niels Lorenzo Petersen, a representative of the General Council 
of the International Working Men's Association. In the summer of 1871 the 
first section of the I.W.M.A. and somewhat later the Danish Federal Council 
were set up. p. 219 
256 Members of the International in Denmark managed to win over to their side a 
substantial part of the peasantry. The United Left received 53 mandates at the 
elections to the Folketing in November 1873, and 71 mandates in April 1876. 
p. 219 
25? See Note 17. p. 221 
258 Napoleon's coup d'état of December 2, 1851 resulted in the regime of the 
Second Empire. p. 221 
259 The mass revolutionary action in Paris which took place on September 4, 1870 
led to the fall of the Second Empire and the declaration of the republic headed 
by the bourgeois government of National Defence. p. 222 
260 See Note 233. p. 223 
261 The reference is to the elections of October 14, 1877 (see Note 233), in which 
the republicans received 321 seats; the monarchists won 208 votes. p. 223 
262 The law of 1872 in France introduced universal military service. At the same 
time it abolished the system of substitutes under which a person liable to 
military service could hire a substitute for money to serve instead of  himself. 
p. 224 
263 Engels is referring to the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78. p. 227 
264 See Note 14. p. 228 
265 This letter, signed by Marx, was written by Engels and him on June 12, 1878; a 
fragment of this letter in Engels' handwriting remains extant. p. 230 
266 The reference is to the international congress (June 13-July 13, 1878) convened 
in Berlin on the initiative of Austria-Hungary and Britain, which opposed the 
consolidation of Russia's position in the Balkans. The Congress ended with the 
signing of the Treaty of Berlin which altered the terms of the San Stefano 

=====第651页=====
Notes 621 
Peace Treaty of 1878 that concluded the Russo-Turkish war of 1877-78. The 
new terms were unfavourable for Russia and the Slavic nations of the Balkan 
Peninsula. (See also Note 309.) p. 230 
267 In his will drawn up on August 27, 1864, five days before his death, Lassalle 
named Bernhard Becker as his successor as President of the General 
Association of German Workers, and the Berlin lawyer Aurel Holthoff and 
Lothar Bucher as the executors of his will. p. 230 
268 The reference is to the assassination attempt on William I made on May 11, 
1878 by tinner Emil Hödel (Hoedel), who had been earlier expelled from the 
Leipzig Social-Democratic Association, and to that of June 2 made by the German 
anarchist Karl Eduard Nobiling who had never been a member of the German 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party. These events gave rise to a vicious campaign 
against the socialists and were an excuse for the promulgation of the 
Anti-Socialist Law in October 1878. p. 231 
269 The German battleship Großer Kurfürst sank on May 31, 1878 in Pas de Calais 
at Folkestone (England) as a result of a collision with the German ship König 
Wilhelm. p. 231 
270 See Note 65. p. 231 
271 Marx's letter "Herr Bucher" (see this volume, pp. 230-31) was reprinted from 
The Daily News by many German papers. A number of errors were made in the 
translations; this prompted Bücher to come up with his "Declaration", to which 
Marx replied with the given item printed in German newspapers under the title 
"Marx und Bucher". p. 232 
272 Marx wrote this article in early July 1878 in reply to Howell's "The History of 
the International Association" published by a monthly review, The Nineteenth 
Century. Howell's article contained libellous information about the history of the 
International and Marx's role in it. The editorial board of the monthly refused 
to print Marx's reply, and it appeared in The Secular Chronicle, And Record of 
Freethought Progress, Vol. X, No. 5, August 4, 1878. p. 234 
273 By the congress, Howell is referring to the London Conference of the 
International held on September 25-29, 1865; taking part in its work were 
members of the Central Council (later renamed the General Council) and 
delegates from the International's sections in France, Germany, Belgium and 
Switzerland. The Conference heard the report of the Central Council, 
approved its financial statement and the programme of the International's first 
congress to be held in Geneva in September 1866. The London Conference, 
which Marx did a great deal to organise, played an important role at the time 
of the International's establishment. For the minutes of the Conference see 
The General Council of the First International, 1864-1866. The London Conference 
1865. Minutes, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1974. p. 234 
274 The agenda of the London Conference, which was drawn up by Marx and 
approved by the General Council on July 25, 1865, thus defined the paragraph 
on the attitude of the working class to the struggle for the independence of 
Poland: "The Muscovite invasion of Europe, and the re-establishment of an 
integral and independent Poland" (see The General Council of the First 
International, 1864-1866. The London Conference 1865. Minutes, p. 305). At the 
Conference session of September 27, 1865, the delegates adopted the following 
resolution: "4th. That it is imperative to annihilate the invading influence of 

=====第652页=====
622 Notes 
Russia  in Europe  by applying  to Poland  'the  right  of every people  to dispose  of 
itself, and  re-establishing that country  on a  social  and  democratic basis" (ibid., 
p. 246). p. 235 
275 Marx  did not put the  religious question  on the  agenda  of the  London 
Conference  of 1865 (see  Note  274). At the  September  27 session this question, 
supported  by Le Lubez, Fribourg, Holtorp, Howell  and  Tolain,  was  included 
on the  agenda  of the  prospective congress. However, drawing  up "Instructions 
for the  Delegates  of the  Provisional General Council.  The  Different Questions", 
whose main provisions were adopted  by the  Geneva Congress  as resolutions, 
Marx simply wrote under point  11:  "Religious Question.  To be  left  to the 
initiative  of the  French"  (see The  General Council  of the  First International, 
1864-66.  The  London Conference  1865.  Minutes,  p. 351). p. 236 
2'6 See  notes  30 and 38. p. 236 
277 By the  "Fenian troubles" Marx means  the  abortive attempt  at an  uprising 
staged  by the  Fenians  in February-March  1867. It was  scheduled  for February 
11 ; the plan  was  drawn  up with  the assistance  of the  French republican Gustave 
Paul Cluseret,  the  future military delegate  of the  Paris Commune.  The  British 
authorities learned about  the  preparations;  the  uprising, which assumed  the 
form  of isolated actions,  was  brutally suppressed. 
The Fenians were Irish revolutionaries  who  named themselves after  the 
"Féne",  the ancient population  of Ireland. Their first organisations appeared 
in the  1850s  in the USA  among  the Irish immigrants  and  later  in Ireland  itself. 
The secret Irish Revolutionary Brotherhood,  as the  organisation  was  known  in 
the early 1860s, aimed  at establishing  an independent Irish republic  by means 
of an armed uprising.  The  Fenians,  who  expressed  the  interests  of the  Irish 
peasantry, came chiefly from  the  urban petty bourgeoisie  and  intellectuals,  and 
believed  in conspiratorial tactics.  The  British government attempted  to suppress 
the Fenian movement  by severe police reprisals.  p. 237 
278 John Bredford Leno, member  of the  General Council  of the  First International 
(1864-67), mentioned this episode  in his  autobiography  The  Aftermath, London, 
1892,  pp.  71-72.  p. 237 
279 The  French Rural Assembly—a derogatory nickname  of the  National Assembly 
which  met in  Bordeaux  on  February  12, 1871 and  consisted mostly  of 
monarchists: provincial landowners, officials, rentiers  and  tradesmen elected  in 
the rural constituencies. 
In late  1871 the  Assembly undertook  an investigation  of the  events  of the 
Paris Commune.  Its  findings were published  in Enquête parlementaire  sur 
l'insurrection  du 18 mars, Vols. I-III, Versailles,  1872. p. 237 
280 See  Note  268. p. 238 
281 Pseudomorph —a term designating  a natural  or synthetic mineral having  the 
crystalline form  of another mineral rather than that normally characteristic  of 
its composition.  p. 238 
282 Marx probably sets forth  the  circular issued  by the  Spanish government  to the 
governors  of the  Spanish provinces.  It said,  in part: "This communist sect  is a 
veritable conspiratorial society opposing everything existing. Having declared  its 
absolute negation  of God and the  State, property  and the  family,  it tries  to elevate 
its socio-political theories  to the  category  of principles.  Its theories cannot  be 

=====第653页=====
Notes 623 
considered by organised society otherwise than as a criminal philosophical Utopia" 
(Gaceta de Madrid,  No. 17, January 17, 1872). p. 238 
283 The reference is to Pius IX's encyclic issued on December 8, 1864, "Quanta 
cura", and Syllabus complectens praecipuos nostrae aetatis errores qui notantur in 
Allocutionibus consistorialibus, in Encyclicis aliusque Apostolicis litteris sanctissimi 
Domini Nostri Pii Papae IX", Cologne, 1864, pp. 23 and 29. p. 238 
284 On March 14, 1872 the French National Assembly promulgated a law banning 
the International's organisations in France. At their meetings in Bad Gastein in 
August 1871 and Salzburg in September 1871, the German and the Austrian 
emperors specially discussed a joint campaign against the International. 
p. 239 
285 By mid-1878, Social-Democratic parties existed in Germany (from 1869), 
Switzerland (from June 1878), Denmark (from 1876), Portugal (from 1875), and 
Belgium (from 1877). In the USA, the unity congress of socialist organisations 
held in Philadelphia founded the Labor Party of the USA, which in December 
1877 was named the Socialist Labor Party of the USA. p. 239 
286 Marx wrote these notes on the basis of the stenographic report on the first 
debate in the Reichstag of the Anti-Socialist Law (Gesetz gegen die gemein­
gefährlichen Bestrebungen der Sozialdemokratie. See: Stenographische Berichte 
über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags, Vol. 1, Berlin, 1878, pp. 29-91). 
The report was sent to Marx by Wilhelm Bracke, a leader of the German 
Social-Democrats. Marx's and Engels' letters (Marx to Engels on September 17, 
Engels to Marx on September 18 and Marx to Jenny Marx on September 17, 
1878,  see present edition, Vol. 45) show that they closely followed the debates 
in the Reichstag and the comments of the British press. The Law was passed on 
October 21, 1878 (see Note 289). 
Marx intended this piece to be the basis for an article in The Daily News 
(see Marx's letter to Engels of September 24, 1878, present edition, Vol. 45), 
but his plan remained unrealised. 
For the first time, Marx's manuscript was published in Russian in the 
Marx-Engels Archives, Vol. I (VI), 1932, pp. 389-400. It appeared in German in 
Werke, Bd. 34, S. 491-500. 
Excerpts from this work were published in English for the first time in: 
K. Marx, F. Engels, V. I. Lenin, On the Socialist Revolution, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1978, pp. 61-62, and in: K. Marx and F. Engels, The Socialist 
Revolution, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1981, pp. 241-42. 
In the present edition the work is printed according to the manuscript. The 
italics in the quotations are Marx's. p. 240 
287 See Note 268. p. 240 
288 The King's speech on the occasion of the opening of the newly elected 
Reichstag (July 30, 1878) was made on September 9 by Count Otto 
Stolberg-Wernigerode, Vice-Chancellor of the German Empire, on the instruction 
of Crown Prince Frederick III (see Stenographische Berichte..., Vol. 1, Berlin, 1878, 
pp. 1-2). p. 240 
289 The  Exceptional Law against the Socialists (Gezetz gegen die gemeingefährlichen 
Bestrebungen der Sozialdemokratie —the Law against the Harmful and 
Dangerous Aspirations of Social-Democracy) was introduced by the Bismarck 
government, supported by the majority in the Reichstag, on October 21, 1878 

=====第654页=====
624 Notes 
to counter the socialist and workers' movement. This law, better known as the 
Anti-Socialist Law, made the Social-Democratic Party of Germany illegal, 
banned all party and mass workers' organisations, and the socialist and workers' 
press;  on the basis of this law socialist literature was confiscated and 
Social-Democrats subjected to reprisals. However, during its operation the 
Social-Democratic Party, assisted by Marx and Engels, uprooted both opportu­
nist and "ultra-Left" elements and managed to substantially strengthen and 
widen its influence among the people by skilfully combining illegal and legal 
methods of work. Under pressure from the mass workers' movement, the 
Anti-Socialist Law was abrogated on October 1, 1890. For Engels' assessment of 
the law, see his article "Bismarck and the German Working Men's Party" (this 
volume, pp. 407-09). p. 240 
290 Bebel is probably referring to the official despatch "Die Frevelthat vom 
2. Juni" carried by the special issue of the Neue Preußische Zeitung, No. 126, 
June 4, 1878, with the note: "with some corrections". p. 241 
291 At the sitting of September 13, 1878 the Navy Minister Albrecht von Stosch 
promised to promote the publication of the materials pertaining to the sinking 
of the battleship Großer Kurfürst (see Note 269) on which the Reichstag was 
insisting (see Begründung, Beantwortung und Besprechung der Interpellation des 
Abgeordneten Mosle, betreffend den Zusammenstoß der Panicerschichte "König 
Wilhelm" und "Großer Kurfürst"). p. 242 
292 The Ultramontanes —representatives of a religious and political trend in 
Catholicism, advocates of the right of the Pope to interfere into the domestic 
affairs of any state. 
In this case, by the Ultramontane party Marx means the so-called Party of 
the Centre, a political party of German Catholics formed in  1870-71,  which 
mirrored the separatist tendencies prevailing among the higher clergy, 
landowners and bourgeoisie in Western and South-Western Germany. The 
party had a certain influence among the peasantry, petty bourgeoisie and 
workers and was in opposition to the Bismarck government, which was waging 
a vigorous campaign against it (see Note 27). p. 243 
293 Eulenburg is referring to his speech in the Reichstag on May 23, 1878 during 
the debate of the Anti-Socialist Law submitted for consideration after Hödel's 
assassination attempt on May 11, 1878 (see Note 268). On May 24 the 
Reichstag rejected the Bill by 251 votes against 57 (see Stenographische Berichte 
über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags, Vol. 2, Berlin, 1878, p. 1511). 
p. 243 
294 Hödel was executed on August 16, 1878. Nobiling died on September 10, 1878, 
as a result of an attempt to shoot himself in the head after the assassination 
attempt on William I's life (see Note 268). p. 243 
295 See Note 65. p. 244 
296 Marx probably made this remark on the basis of what Wilhelm Bracke said 
about the series of essays in the Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung in his speech of 
September 17, 1878, during the debate of the Anti-Socialist Law in the 
Reichstag (see Stenographische Berichte..., Vol. 1, Berlin, 1878, p. 83). p. 245 
297 Vera Zasulich made an assassination attempt on St. Petersburg's Governor 
Trepov on January 24 (February 5), 1878, who had ordered the arrested 
revolutionary Bogolyubov to be lashed; the gendarme chief Mezentsov was 
murdered by Sergei Stepnyak-Kravchinsky on August 4 (16) of the same year. 

=====第655页=====
Notes 625 
Vera Zasulich was acquitted by the jury. Her trial in St. Petersburg provoked a 
lively response in the European press. p. 245 
298 The congress of the anarchist Jura Federation was held on August 3-5, 1878 in 
Fribourg (Switzerland). Its resolution was printed by L'Avant-Garde, No. 33, 
August 26, 1878, p. 2. 
The Jura Federation, an anarchist organisation in Switzerland which was 
founded at a congress in Sonvillier (1871), united a number of small sections of 
the First International. It played the role of the international ideological and 
organisational centre of the anarchist movement and was led by members of 
the Bakuninist secret Alliance of Socialist Democracy, James Guillaume and 
Adhémar Schwitzguébel. In 1873 the Jura Federation was expelled from the 
International for its refusal to adhere to the decisions of the Hague Congress 
of the International (1872). The Bulletin de la Federation jurassienne de 
l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs was, in fact, the anarchists' central 
theoretical organ. The Federation ceased to exist in 1878. p. 246 
299 Marx and Engels exposed the activities of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy 
(see notes 30 and 38) in their work The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the 
International Working Men's Association (written in collaboration with Paul 
Lafargue) (see present edition, Vol. 23). It was published as a pamphlet in 
French (L'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste et l'Association Internationale des 
Travailleurs, London, Hamburg, 1873) and in the German translation (Ein 
Complot gegen die Internationale Arbeiter-Association, Brunswick, 1874). 
By the attempts on the members of the "Marxian tendency", Marx is 
referring to assaults on Nikolai Utin in Zurich on June 18, 1872, on 
Francisco Mora in September 1872, on Pablo Iglesias in Madrid on 
November 12, 1872, and on Anselmo Lorenzo in the same year (see present 
edition, Vol. 23). p. 246 
soo The Puritans and Levellers—two political groups at the time of the English 
Revolution of the 17th century. The Puritans expressed the interests of the 
Calvinist Protestants; from the first half of the 17th century their movement 
was a political opposition to absolutism, the ideological banner of the 
Revolution. The complexity of the Puritans' social and political composition and 
religious convictions (by the early 17th century, two main trends, the 
Presbyterians and the Independents, were already clearly discernible) inevitably 
led to a sharp controversy within the "Puritan" parliamentary faction in the 
course of the Revolution. In 1645-47 a split took place among the 
Independents, as a result of which their Left wing, the Levellers, parted 
company with them. The Levellers were representatives of a radical democratic 
trend. They wanted to transform England into a republic with a one-House 
Parliament elected by universal suffrage, to remove all inequalities and 
introduce other democratic reforms. Attempting to get their programme 
accepted as the basis of the republican system, the Levellers instigated army 
mutinies in May and September 1649 but were defeated; after that, the 
movement declined. 
The Hébertistes, at the time of the French Revolution, a political group in 
the Left Jacobin camp which was named after Jacques René Hébert, one of its 
leaders, and took its final shape in the winter of 1793-94. The trend conveyed 
the social discontent of small working men, demanded that the maximum be 
strictly observed and that profiteering and sabotage be ruthlessly combated. In 
March 1794, the Hébertistes threatened to rise against the Jacobin Committee 
of Public Safety but failed to gain the support of the revolutionary sections. On 
42-1317 

=====第656页=====
626 Notes 
March 14, 1794, most of their leaders and activists were arrested and 
guillotined. p. 247 
301 The National Association (Deutscher National- Verein) (September 15, 1859 to 
October 19, 1867) was a party of the German liberal bourgeoisie which 
advocated the unification of Germany (without Austria) in a strong centralised 
state under the aegis of the Prussian monarchy. Its inaugural congress was held 
in Frankfurt in September 1859. p. 248 
302 The reference is to the American Civil War (1861-65) and the French 
Revolution at the end of the 18th century. p. 248 
303 This passage from the Manifesto of the Communist Party reads: "The 
Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that 
their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social 
conditions" (see present edition, Vol. 6, p. 519). The Manifesto was published 
in February 1848 on behalf of the Communist League, whose first congress 
took place in June 1847 (see notes 220 and 590). p. 249 
304 Eulenburg is referring to Bebel's statement in his speech of September 16 that 
at one time the "socially dangerous" aspirations of Social-Democracy were 
extensively supported by the Prussian government with a view to counteracting 
the opposition of the bourgeoisie. p. 250 
305 At the 1871 elections to the Reichstag, Social-Democrats received 124,655 votes 
(3.2 per cent) and two mandates in the Reichstag; in 1874—351,952 votes (6.8 
per cent) and ten mandates, one of which was lost as a result of supplementary 
elections; in 1877—493,288 (9.1 per cent) and 13 mandates, one of which was 
lost in supplementary elections; and in 1878—437,158 votes (7.6 per cent) and 
nine mandates. p. 250 
306 This article was the last one in the series of articles sent by Engels to La Plebe. 
It appeared there on March 30, 1879 (No. 12), in the section "Nostra 
corrispondenza. Da Londra" without a title and was signed by Engels* name. It 
was prefaced by a short editorial introduction: "We have received a report 
from London from our outstanding friend F. Engels, one of the most 
prominent and illustrious leaders of international socialism. 
"This report deserves particular attention thanks to the appreciation by 
Engels of the present situation in Germany and Russia. Therefore we find it 
useful to acquaint our readers with it too. 
"We give almost the whole translation of this report." p. 251 
307 The reference is to the supplementary-elections to the Reichstag which were 
held in the Western electoral district of Breslau on February 5, 1879 because of 
the death of its deputy Heinrich Bürgers. The elections, which took place after the 
promulgation of the Anti-Socialist. Law (see Note 289), demonstrated the strength 
and unity of the working  class.  The workers nominated their own candidate Julius 
Kräcker, who received 7,544 votes, which, however, were not enough to get 
elected. (Engels wrote to Wilhelm Liebknecht on March 1, 1879: "The election in 
Breslau has made a splendid impression here too." See present edition, Vol. 45.) 
At the supplementary elections of February 27 in the Saxonian electoral district 
of Waldheim-Debeln, the Social-Democratic candidate won 4,322 votes. 
p. 251 
308 When "going into the thick of the people" in 1873-75 failed (see Note 49), the 
Narodniks who had managed to escape arrest set up a new organisation in 

=====第657页=====
Notes 627 
St. Petersburg in 1876, which in 1878 came to be known as Zemlya i Volya 
(Land and Freedom). In their practical work, its members founded permanent 
"settlements" of revolutionaries in the countryside for the purpose of 
establishing close contacts with the peasantry and preparing a popular 
revolution. As the rest of the Narodniks, they believed that Russia's 
development could follow a non-capitalist social and economic path; its basis 
was to be the village commune. Regarding the peasantry as the main 
revolutionary force, members of Land and Freedom also conducted propagan­
da among workers, students and soldiers. Their achievement was the formation 
of a strong, battleworthy revolutionary organisation. Proceeding from the 
inevitability of a "forceful overthrow", they placed primary importance with 
"agitation through action" (strikes, mutinies, demonstrations). They considered 
terrorism acceptable only as a means of self-protection and taking vengeance on 
the government. Engels is referring specifically to the actions of Vera Zasulich 
and Sergei Stepnyak-Kravchinsky (see Note 297). - p. 252 
309 The reference is to the decisions of the Berlin international congress which 
revised the terms of the San Stefano Peace Treaty (see Note 266). In 
accordance with these decisions, the territory of self-governing Bulgaria 
envisaged by the San Stefano Treaty was cut by over a  half,  and an 
autonomous province, Eastern Roumelia, was formed out of Bulgarian regions 
to the south of the Balkans that was to remain under the Turkish rule; the 
territory of Montenegro was also substantially curtailed. The Treaty of Berlin 
confirmed that part of Bessarabia, which Russia had lost in 1856, was to be 
returned to her, but it also authorised the occupation of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina by Austria-Hungary. The Russian government was forced to 
submit the San Stefano Treaty for revision to the international congress under 
pressure from Britain, which had seized Cyprus on the eve of the cong­
ress. 
The Treaty of Berlin was signed by representatives of Russia, Germany, 
Austria-Hungary, France, Great Britain, Italy and Turkey. p. 252 
310 After the Anti-Socialist Law came into force in October 1878 (see Note 289), 
the publication of the Party's central organ, Vorwärts, as well as of other Party 
newspapers, was banned in Germany. In July-September 1879, when preparing 
to start the publication, in Zurich,of a new central organ of the Socialist Workers' 
Party of Germany, the newspaper Der Sozialdemokrat, lively negotiations (mostly-
through correspondence), concerning the newspaper's political line and the 
composition of its editorial board, were under way between Leipzig (see 
Note 316), Zurich (see Note 315), Paris (Karl Hirsch) and London (Marx and 
Engels). 
The draft of this letter was written by Engels after September 11 (see 
Engels' letter to Marx of September 11, 1879, present edition, Vol. 45) as a 
reply to August Bebel's letter of August 20, and on September 17-18, when 
Marx returned to London (see Note 311), it was discussed by them and given 
its final shape. This document, which has come down into history as the 
"Circular Letter", is one of the principal statements of Marx and Engels against 
Right-wing opportunism. In a letter to Sorge of September 19, 1879, Marx 
called it a circular letter intended "just for private circulation among the 
German leaders" (see present edition, Vol. 45). 
In English, the letter was first published in the magazine International Press 
Correspondence, No. 39, Berlin, 1931, pp. 737-38 (an excerpt), and practically in 
full in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Correspondence 1846-1895, Lawrence, London, 
42* 

=====第658页=====
628 Notes 
1934,  pp. 362-77. The italics in the letters of third persons to each other and to 
Marx and Engels are Engels'. p. 253 
3U Between August 8 and 20, Marx stayed on the Isle of Jersey, and between 
August 21 and September 17, 1879, he visited his eldest daughter Jenny in 
Ramsgate. p. 253 
312 A reference to the programme article "Rückblicke auf die sozialistische 
Bewegung in Deutschland" written by Karl Höchberg (pen-name Ludwig 
Richter), Eduard Bernstein, and Karl August Schramm and printed anony­
mously in the Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik (Jg. 1, 1. Hälfte, 
Zurich-Oberstrass, 1879) published by Höchberg in Zurich. This issue was 
received by Engels on August 28, 1879 immediately upon his return from 
Eastbourne. 
On September 13 Höchberg visited Engels in London (on Engels' 
assessment of the authors' stand, see Note 315). p. 253 
313 Engels' letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht of August 20, 1879 has not been found 
(for its content, see Engels' letter to Marx of August 20, 1879, present edition, 
Vol. 45). Bebel wrote to Engels on the same day (August 20) and could not, of 
course, see this letter. p. 253 
3i4 Liebknecht's letter of July 28, 1879 was in fact received by Hirsch, which is 
borne out by his letter to Marx of August 2, 1879. p. 253 
3i5 The supervisory committee or the Zürichers—Eduard Bernstein, Karl Höchberg 
and Karl August Schramm. On September 15, 1879 Engels wrote to Johann 
Philipp Becker concerning the stand of this committee: "The Zurich editorial 
committee which, under the general management of the Leipzigers, is to 
supervise and censor the paper, consists of Höchberg, Schramm and 
Bernstein ... all three are revealed to be common or garden bourgeois and 
pacific philanthropists" (see present edition, Vol. 45). p. 254 
316 The Leipzig controlling committee or the Leipzigers —August Bebel, Wilhelm 
Liebknecht and Louis Viereck to whom Engels is referring, drawing on 
Hirsch's information. In actual fact the Leipzig editorial committee originally 
comprised August Bebel, Wilhelm Fritzsche and Wilhelm Liebknecht, who were 
later joined by Karl Grillenberger and Ignaz Auer, who did not reside in 
Leipzig. p. 254 
317 On May 17, 1879 the Social-Democratic Deputy Max Kayser made a speech in 
the Reichstag in support of the government's project for protective customs 
tarriffs. Marx and Engels sharply condemned Kayser, who supported the 
proposal introduced in favour of the big industrialists and landowners to the 
detriment of the masses, as well as the licence given to Kayser by some of the 
German Social-Democratic leaders (see letters: Engels to Marx of August 20, 
Marx to Engels of September 10, Marx to Sorge of September 19, and Engels 
to Bebel of November 14 and 24, 1879, present edition, Vol. 45). 
Hirsch sharply criticised Kayser's speech in his articles "Die Zolldebatte", 
"Aus Breslau schreibt man der Laterne", and "Zur Kaiser'schen Rede und 
Abstimmung", which appeared in Die Laterne, a weekly published by Hirsch 
(Nos.  21 and 23, May 25 and June 8, 1879). p. 258 
318 Hirsch and Höchberg met in Paris on August 15 and 16, 1879. p. 258 
3i9 Engels is referring here to the German Workers' Educational Society in 
London (see Note 123), which he ironically calls "the local association, 
Freiheit". The newspaper Die Freiheit was published at the time by Johann 
Most on the instruction and with the means of the Society. p. 258 

=====第659页=====
Notes 629 
320 Hirsch received this information from Höchberg when they met in Paris (see 
Note 318) and conveyed it to Engels in a letter of August 23, 1879. p. 259 
32i See Note 289. p. 260 
322 Bismarck's plan to introduce state management of all the German railways (see 
this volume, pp. 277-79) was discussed at the congress of the German 
Social-Democrats in Gotha in August 1876. The congress voted for the transfer 
of the privately owned railways to the state but noted also that the concentration of 
the railways in the hands of the Imperial government would promote the class 
interests of the bourgeoisie and the militarists (see Protokoll des Socialisten-
Congresses zu Gotha vom 19. bis 23. August 1876, Berlin, 1876, p. 89). p. 261 
323 The reference is to the barricade fighting in Berlin on March 18, which 
marked the beginning of the 1848-49 revolution in Germany. p. 265 
324 An ironical reference to Johann Miquel, a former member of the Communist 
League and subsequenüy a leader of the National Liberals' right wing, who was 
founder and member of various joint-stock companies. 
On "the crash of 1873" that followed the period of "prosperity" in Germany, 
see Note 84. p. 266 
325 Tne reference is to the Anti-Socialist Law passed by the German Reichstag in 
October 1878 (see Note 289). p. 266 
326 See Note 316. p. 269 
327 Marx and Engels wrote this item at the request of Maltman Barry, a British 
journalist, formerly a member of the General Council of the First Internation­
al. Barry intended to publicly expose Karl Blind, a former democrat, a 
National Liberal from the 1860s, who printed an article "Prince Napoleon and 
European Democracy" in Fraser's Magazine (Vol. 20, London, 1879, pp. 504-
21). 
Marx made several additions to the extant manuscript, which was written 
mostly by Engels. 
It was published in English for the first time in MEGA%, Abt. 1, Bd. 25, 
Berlin, 1985, S. 186-87. p. 270 
328 Throughout his London emigration, Karl Blind contributed to a number of 
newspapers: Hermann (London), The North British Daily Mail (Glasgow), The 
Morning Star (London), The Daily News (London), and The Pall Mall Gazette 
(London). For an assessment of his activity, see Marx's letter to Liebknecht of 
April 6, 1871 (present edition, Vol. 43). p. 270 
329 The reference is to the provisional government headed by the petty-bourgeois 
democrat Brentano, which was formed in Baden in the spring of 1849 during 
the uprising in Southern and Western Germany in defence of the Imperial 
Constitution (see Note 139). p. 270 
330 See Note 190. p. 270 
331 Having suppressed the bourgeois revolution in Italy (1848-49), the French 
troops, sent to the Papal States in 1849 for the restoration of the Pope's secular 
power, continued to occupy Rome up to 1870. For this reason, at the beginning 
of the Franco-Prussian War the Italian government rejected the proposal to 
conclude an alliance against Prussia, and on September 20, 1870 incorporated 
Rome into the Kingdom of Italy. The Pope's secular power ceased to exist. 
p. 271 
332 This work was written for the French socialist newspaper L'Égalité in late 

=====第660页=====
630 Notes 
February 1880. When working on it, Engels used facts found in Rudolph 
Meyer's Politische Gründer und die Corruption in Deutschland, Leipzig, 1877 (see 
Engels' letter to August Bebel of November 24, 1879, present edition, Vol. 45). 
p. 272 
333 See Note 289. p. 272 
334 In 1862, when the German working-class movement was livening up, Lassalle 
began a propaganda campaign with a view to establishing a political 
organisation of the German proletariat. Its outcome was the founding of the 
General Association of German Workers (Allgemeiner Deutscher Arbeiterverein) 
at the congress of workers' associations held in Leipzig on May 23, 1863. The 
formation of the Association was an important step in the development of an 
independent nation-wide workers' movement in Germany and helped emanci­
pate the workers from the ideological influence of the liberal bourgeoisie. 
However, the Association had a sectarian character and was guided in its work 
by Lassalle's somewhat outdated and Utopian ideas. 
When the International Working Men's Association (the First International) 
was formed, the sectarian, nationalistic line of the General Association's 
Lassallean leadership began to hinder the involvement of German workers in 
the international proletarian organisation. As the ideas of Marxism and the 
experience of the class struggle spread among them, the authority of the 
Lassallean doctrines was undermined, and the Association began to draw closer 
to the other trend in German Social-Democracy, the Social-Democratic Workers' 
Party (the Eisenachers) founded in 1869 and headed by Bebel and Liebknecht. 
At the congress held in Gotha in May 1875 the General Association of German 
Workers and the Social-Democratic Workers' Party united into a single 
organisation, the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany. p. 273 
335 An allusion to the reparations received by Germany as a result of the 
Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71 (see Note 144). p. 273 
336 The Crédit mobilier (Société générale du Crédit mobilier) —a French joint-stock 
bank founded in 1852 by the Péreire brothers. Closely connected with and 
protected by the government of Napoleon III, it engaged in large-scale 
speculation. The bank was involved, in particular, in the railway-building 
business. It went bankrupt in 1867 and was liquidated in 1871. p. 273 
337 The campaign for the introduction of protectionist laws unfolded in Germany 
at the outset of the 1873 crisis (see Note 84). On February 15, 1876 a number 
of protectionist unions formed a single organisation, Centralverband Deutscher 
Industrieller zur Beförderung und Wahrung nationaler Arbeit. In 1876, during the 
agrarian crisis, big landowners, Prussian Junkers above all, joined the 
campaign. In October 1877 the industrial and agrarian advocates of the reform 
concluded an agreement. In March 1878 a non-partisan Freie wirtschaftliche 
Vereinigung was formed, which 204 deputies joined at the very first session of 
the Reichstag in September-October 1878. In December of that year, Bismarck 
submitted his preliminary draft of the customs reform to a specially appointed 
commission. On July 12, 1879 the final draft was approved by the Reichstag, 
and came into force on July 15. The new customs tariff provided for a 
substantial increase in import taxes on iron, machinery and textiles, as well as on 
grain, cattle, lard, flax, timber, etc. p. 274 
338 The Discount Society (Discontogesellschaft)—a discount bank founded in 1851 
by David Hansemann in Berlin which later served as the model for this type of 

=====第661页=====
Notes 631 
establishment. In the 1870s, it mostly engaged in speculation in railway shares. 
p. 277 
339 The Imperial Railways Office (Reichseisenbahnamt) was founded on June 27, 
1873 and began to function on September 19 of that year. Its first director, 
Alfred Scheele, was involved in all speculations of the Discount Society (see 
Note 338), having a seat on its Board of Directors. p. 278 
340 See Note 141. p. 278 
341 The reference is to the Prussian Maritime Trading Company (Preussische 
Seehandlungsgesellschaft), a trade and credit society founded in 1772 and 
enjoying a number of important state privileges. It granted large credits to the 
government and from 1820 in fact acted as its banker and broker. In 1904 it 
was made the official Prussian State Bank. p. 278 
342 A paraphrase of the following passage from the "First Address of the General 
Council of the International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian 
War" written by Marx between July 19 and 23, 1870: "After her victory did 
Prussia dream one moment of opposing a free Germany to an enslaved France? 
Just the contrary. While carefully preserving all the native beauties of her old 
system, she superadded all the tricks of the Second Empire, its real despotism 
and its mock democratism, its political shams and its financial jobs, its 
high-flown talk and its low legerdemains. The Bonapartist regime, which till then 
only flourished on one side of the Rhine, had now got its counterfeit on the 
other. From such a state of things, what else could result but war?" (see present 
edition, Vol. 22, pp. 5-6). p. 280 
343 In 1880, at Paul Lafargue's request, Engels rewrote three chapters of 
Anti-Dühring —Chapter I of the Introduction and chapters I and II of Part III 
(see present edition, Vol. 25)—into a separate popular work first printed in 
three issues of the French journal La Revue socialiste, in March-May 1880, and 
then, in the same year, as a separate pamphlet entitled Socialisme utopique et 
socialisme scientifique. Working on it, Engels made a number of additions and 
changes in the text. The translation into French was done by Paul Lafargue. A 
major impetus to the international currency of the work was the publication, in 
1882,  of the first authorised German edition entitled Die Entwicklung des 
Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft in which Engels also made some 
additions. Already in Engels' lifetime, the work was translated into many 
European languages and gained wide currency among the workers, thus 
effectively promoting the dissemination of Marxist ideas. The translations were 
made from the French pamphlet and, mostly, from the German edition. 
The fourth authorised German edition of the work appeared in Berlin in 
1891.  Engels made a number of additions in it, which he did not include in the last 
edition of Anti-Dühring published in his lifetime, in 1894 (see these additions in 
the present edition, Vol. 25, pp. 630-42). 
In the publication of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific a significant place 
attaches to the authorised English translation, made by Edward Aveling from the 
fourth German edition of 1891, which appeared in London in 1892. Engels called 
the first English-language publication in The People, a socialist New York 
newspaper (August-October 1891), a "pirated" edition with its miserable English 
(see Engels' letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, October 24, 1891, present edition, 
Vol. 49). 
In the present edition, the work is reproduced from the authorised English 
edition of 1892 checked against the French edition of 1880 and the German 

=====第662页=====
632 Notes 
edition of 1891. The English translation is practically identical to the text of the 
fourth German edition; the more or less significant discrepancies are indicated 
in footnotes. p. 281 
344 See Note 289. p. 286 
345 According to Rousseau's theory, originally people lived in the natural state of 
equality. The emergence of private property led to property and political 
inequality which was consolidated by the appearance of the state. In the future 
only the state based on the people's voluntary accord was supposed to be 
capable of securing the citizens' political and economic equality (the Contrat 
social of Rousseau). 
This theory is developed in Rousseau's Discours sur l'origine et  les fondemens 
de l'inégalité parmi les hommes, Amsterdam, 1755, and Du contrat social; ou, 
Principes du droit politique, Amsterdam, 1762. p. 286 
346 The Reformation (16th century)—a broad socio-political and ideological 
anti-feudal movement of complex social content and composition. It assumed a 
religious form of struggle against the Catholic doctrine and Church and spread 
over most of Western and Central Europe. Its climax was the Peasant War 
in Germany in 1524-25. 
The Anabaptists (rebaptisers) belonged to one of the most radical and 
democratic religious-philosophical trends spread in Switzerland, Germany and 
the Netherlands during the Reformation. Members of this sect were so called 
because they repudiated infant baptism and demanded a second, adult baptism. 
p. 287 
347 Engels is referring to the "true Levellers" or "Diggers", who broke away from 
the democratic republican Levellers' movement during the English bourgeois 
revolution of the mid-17th century. Representing the poorest sections of the 
population suffering from feudal and capitalist exploitation in town and 
countryside, the Diggers, in contrast to the rest of the Levellers, who defended 
private property, carried on propaganda for community of property and other 
ideas of egalitarian communism, attempting to establish common ownership of 
the land through collective ploughing of communal waste land. p. 287 
348 Engels has in mind, above all, Thomas More's Utopia (1516) and Tommaso 
Campanula's City of the Sun (1623). p. 287 
349 The Reign of Terror, the period from May 31, 1793 to July 26, 1794, was one 
of the Jacobin revolutionary democratic dictatorship in France, when the 
Jacobins used revolutionary terror in response to the counter-revolutionary 
terror of the Girondists and the Royalists. 
The Directorate or Directory (consisting of five directors of whom one was 
re-elected every year) was the leading executive body in France set up under 
the 1795 Constitution, adopted after the fall of the Jacobin revolutionary 
dictatorship in the summer of 1794. It governed France until Bonaparte's coup 
d'état of 1799 and expressed the interests of the big bourgeoisie. p. 288 
350 The reference is to the motto of the French Revolution "Liberté, Egalité, 
Fraternité". p. 289 
351 Saint-Simon's first work, Lettres d'un habitant de Genève à ses contemporains, was 
written in Geneva in 1802 and published anonymously in Paris in 1803, without 
specifying the place and date of publication. Engels made use of: G. Hubbard, 
Saint-Simon, sa vie et ses travaux. Suivi de fragments des plus célèbres écrits de 

=====第663页=====
Notes 633 
Saint-Simon, Paris, 1857. This edition contains inaccuracies in dating some of 
Saint-Simon's works. 
Fourier's first major work was Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées 
générales written in the first years of the 19th century and anonymously 
published in Lyons in 1808 (Leipzig was indicated on the title page as the place 
of publication, probably for reasons of censorship). 
New Lanark—a cotton mill near the Scottish town of Lanark; it was built in 
1784 together with a small settlement. p. 289 
352 Saint-Simon's idea that the purpose of society ought to be to improve the "lot 
of the class that is the most numerous and the most poor" is conveyed most 
distinctly in his last work, Nouveau christianisme, which first appeared 
anonymously in Paris in 1825. p. 291 
358 A reference to the Correspondance politique et philosophique. Lettres de H. Saint-
Simon a un Américain. The letters were published in the collection: H. Saint-
Simon, L'industrie, ou Discussions politiques, morales et philosophiques, dans l'intérêt 
de tous les hommes livrés à des travaux utiles et indépendant, Vol. 2, Paris, 1817. In 
Hubbard's edition (see Note 351), this passage is to be found on pp. 155-57. 
p. 292 
354 The allied armies of the sixth anti-French coalition (Russia, Austria, Britain, 
Prussia, and others) entered Paris on March 31, 1814. Napoleon's empire fell, 
and he was forced to abdicate and was exiled to the Island of Elba. The first 
restoration of the Bourbon monarchy took place in France. 
The Hundred Days—the period of the short-lived restoration of Napoleon's 
empire, which  . lasted from the day of his arrival in Paris from Elba on 
March 20, 1815 to his second deposition on June 22 following his defeat at 
Waterloo (see Note 356). p. 292 
355 The reference is to the following two works written by Saint-Simon with his 
follower Augustin Thierry: De la réorganisation de la société européenne, ou de la 
nécessité  et des moyens de rassembler  les peuples de l'Europe en un seul  corps  politique, en 
conservant à chacun son indépendance nationale, Paris, 1814, and Opinion sur les 
mesures à prendre contre la coalition de 1815, Paris, 1815. In Hubbard's edition (see 
Note 351), passages from the first work are to be found on pp. 149-54, and the 
content of both works is set forth on pp. 68-76. p. 292 
356 On June 18, 1815 at Waterloo (Belgium), Napoleon's army was defeated by the 
Anglo-Dutch troops commanded "by Wellington and the Prussian army 
commanded by Blücher. p. 292 
357 Charles Fourier wrote in his Théorie des quatre mouvements: "Social advances 
and changes of periods are brought about by virtue of the progress of women 
towards liberty, and the decadences of the social order are brought about by 
virtue of the decrease of liberty of women." And further: "The extension of 
the privileges of women is the general principle of all social progress" (Fourier, 
Oeuvres complètes, Vol. I, Paris, 1841, pp. 195-96). p. 293 
358 Robert Owen, The Revolution in the Mind and Practice of the Human Race; or, the 
Coming Change from Irrationality to Rationality, London, 1849. The facts from 
Owen's biography were borrowed from the same source. p. 295 
359 In January 1815, at a public meeting in Glasgow, Owen proposed a number of 
measures to improve the conditions of children and adults employed at 

=====第664页=====
634 Notes 
factories. The Bill tabled on Owen's initiative in June 1815 was passed by 
Parliament only in July 1819, and only with reference to child labour. It 
forbade the employment of children under nine years of age in cotton spinning 
and weaving mills and also night work of children under sixteen; for this 
category the working day was limited to twelve hours, not counting breaks for 
meals; since these were arranged by mill-owners as they thought fit, the working 
day often lasted fourteen hours or more. p. 296 
360 In October 1833 a congress of co-operative societies and trade unions was held 
in London with Owen in the chair, at which the Grand National Consolidated 
Trades' Union of Great Britain and Ireland was formally established; its Charter 
was adopted in February 1834. According to Owen's idea, the Union was to 
take over the management of production, organise it along co-operative lines, 
and accomplish a complete transformation of society by peaceful means. 
Having met widi strong resistance from the state and industrialists, the Union 
ceased to exist in August 1834. p. 296 
361 The reference is to the Equitable Labour  Exchange  Bazaars which were founded 
by workers' co-operative societies in various English towns and cities; the first 
of these bazaars set up by Robert Owen in London on September 3, 1832 
existed until mid-1834. p. 296 
362 Proudhon's idea of organising a bank of exchange was first expounded in his 
Organisation du Crédit et de la Circulation et Solution du problème social which 
appeared in early April 1848, and was developed in detail in his later works. 
Proudhon's main idea was to replace gold and silver, as means of circulation, 
with bank-notes which were, in fact, impersonal bills. These notes were secured 
by products of labour which, as Proudhon believed, made them drastically 
different from the paper money issued by banks and secured by precious 
metals, landed estates, etc. 
An attempt to carry through this project was the foundation, on 
January 31, 1849, of the Banque du peuple (People's Bank), which, however, 
went bankrupt and was closed down in early April 1849. p. 297 
363 Le neveu de Rameau was written by Denis Diderot around 1762 and later revised 
twice by him. It was first published, in Goethe's German translation, in Leipzig in 
1805.  The French original was published in Oeuvres inédites de Diderot, Vol. 2, 
Paris,  1821, which was actually put out in 1823. p. 298 
364 The Alexandrian period (Alexandrian culture, Alexandrian age) derives its name 
from the Egyptian city of Alexandria, a major centre of Hellenic culture. 
Alexandria, to which thousands of Greeks moved in die 3rd century B.C., saw 
the flourishing of mathematics, mechanics (Euclid and Archimedes), geog­
raphy, astronomy, physiology and other sciences. p. 299 
365 Kant's nebular hypothesis, according to which the solar system was originally 
formed out of a rotating nebulous mass, is expounded in his Allgemeine 
Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels, oder Versuch von der Verfassung und dem 
mechanischen Ursprünge des ganzen Weltgebäudes nach Newtonischen Grundsätzen 
abgehandelt, Königsberg and Leipzig, 1755. The book was published anony­
mously. 
Laplace's hypothesis of the origin of the solar system was set out for the 
first time in the last chapter of his treatise Exposition du système du monde, 
Vols.  I-II, Paris, 4th year of the French Republic  [1796].  In the sixth edition of 

=====第665页=====
Notes 635 
this book (1835), the last one prepared in Laplace's lifetime and published after his 
death, the hypothesis is expounded in Note VII to the work. 
The existence in space of incandescent masses of gas similar to the original 
nebulous mass, which was postulated by the Kant-Laplace nebular hypothesis, 
was proved in 1864 by the English astronomer William Huggins, who made an 
extensive use of spectral analysis introduced in 1859 by Gustav Kirchhoff and 
Robert Bunsen. Here Engels uses the book by P. A. Secchi, Die Sonne, 
Brunswick, 1872, pp. 787, 789-90. p. 302 
366 Carl von Linné, the Swedish natural scientist, was opposed to the theory of the 
historical development of the organic world. He believed that the number of 
species remained constant and stable since the time of their "creation" (see 
C. Linnaeus, Systema naturae, first edition, 1735). p. 303 
367 Engels is referring to the uprising of Lyons weavers in late November 1831, 
which was brutally suppressed by the government. p. 304 
368 The Chartists—participants in the first mass political revolutionary movement 
of the English proletariat in the 1830s-50s, who campaigned for the 
introduction of the People's Charter (see Note 427). It was the highest stage of 
the struggle of the working class in the period before the emergence of 
Marxism. p. 304 
369 These wars were waged by the major European states for hegemony in trade 
with India and America and for colonial markets. Initially, the principal rivals 
were Britain and the Netherlands, later, Britain and France. Britain emerged 
victorious, controlling nearly all world trade by the end of the 18th century. 
p. 313 
370 See Note 322. In 1879-82, the bulk of private railways in Prussia were handed 
over to the state. Later, it continued buying out the railways. p. 318 
37' See Note 341. p. 318 
372 The figures showing the total wealth of Great Britain and Ireland are cited 
from Robert Giffen's report, "Recent Accumulations of Capital in the United 
Kingdom", made at the Statistical Society on January 15, 1878 and printed by 
the London Journal of the Statistical Society, Vol. XLI, Part.I, March 1878, 
pp. 12, 21. p. 323 
373 Marx probably wrote this "Note" at the request of L'Egalité's editorial board in 
late March or early April 1880 as the editorial introduction to his work to be 
published by the newspaper (it published only the foreword and § 1 of 
Chapter I). 
The Introduction was published in English for the first time in: Marx, 
Engels, Lenin, On Scientific Communism, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972, 
p. 34. p. 326 
374 Marx is referring, above all, to Proudhon's speech in the French National 
Assembly on July 31, 1848 (see Compte rendu des séances de l'Assemblée nationale, 
Vol. II, Paris, 1849, pp. 770-82). Marx devoted a special article to it entitled 
"Proudhon's Speech against Thiers" which was published in the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung, No. 66, August 5, 1848 (present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 321-24). 
p. 327 
375 Marx drew up this questionnaire in the first half of April 1880 at the request 
of Benoît Malon, publisher of La Revue socialiste. It was printed on April 20 
there anonymously and also appeared as a separate leaflet (25,000 copies), 

=====第666页=====
636 Notes 
which was distributed throughout France. That Marx was its author was 
established from his letter to Sorge of November 5, 1880 (see present edition, 
Vol. 46). As distinct from Marx's manuscript, in the French edition the items 
were numbered consecutively and two more questions were added (No. 88: 
"Describe the action by the members of arbitration boards", and No. 101: 
"General observations"); besides there were some other additions. 
The introduction opening the questionnaire noted that it was the first 
serious attempt to form an opinion of the condition of the French working 
class,  and called on all urban and agricultural workers, as well as all socialists of 
France, to take part in it. It said: "We hope to find support for our cause 
among all the urban and agricultural workers, who understand that they alone 
can describe the hardships they endure with the full knowledge of the matter; 
that they alone, and not the saviours sent by Providence, can vigorously apply 
remedies in the struggle against social evils from which they suffer; we count 
also on the socialists of all schools who, striving for a social reform, must strive 
for an exact and definite knowledge of the conditions under which the working 
class,  the class to which the future belongs, works and begins to move. 
"These instructions of labour must be the first act which the Social-Democrats 
must perform in order to prepare a social renovation." 
The French edition of the "Questionnaire" was the basis for the Italian (La 
Lotta, Milan, Nos. 1, 2, 8, July 1, 2, 8, 1880), the Polish (Kwestyjonaryjusz 
robotniczy, 1880, supplement to Nos. 10-11 of the Rôwnosc, July-August 1880), 
and the Dutch (Recht voor Allen, October 30, 1880) translations. 
The "Questionnaire" was published in English for the first time as a leaflet, 
A Workers' Enquiry. By Karl Marx, London, Communist Party of Gr. Britain 
[1926]. 
In the present edition the "Questionnaire" is printed according to Marx's 
manuscript written in English and, in part, in French. p. 328 
The Introduction to the French edition of Engels' Socialism: Utopian and 
Scientific (see Note 343) was written by Marx on about May 4-5, 1880. The 
manuscript contains a postscript in Marx's handwriting: "Dear Lafargue, here 
is the outcome of my consultations (yesterday evening) with Engels. Tidy up 
the language, leave the substance intact." The Introduction was initialled P.L. 
(Paul Lafargue) in the pamphlet. 
The French version of the Introduction was used as the basis for the Polish 
(in: Przedswit, No. 6/7, December 1, 1881, and in: Fr. Engels, Socyjalizm utopijny 
a naukowy, Geneva, 1882, pp. III-V) and Russian translations (in: Sotsialistiches-
koye znaniye, No. 1, Moscow, 1884, pp. 89-92). 
In the present edition the Introduction is printed according to Màrx's 
manuscript checked against the 1880 edition. The main discrepancies are pointed 
out in the footnotes. p. 335 
A reference to the Communist Correspondence Committee formed by Marx and 
Engels at the beginning of 1846 in Brussels. Its aim was to prepare the ground 
for the creation of an international proletarian party. The Committee had no 
strictly defined composition. Besides the Belgian communist Philippe Gigot, 
Joseph Weydemeyer, Wilhelm  Wolff,  Edgar von Westphalen and others were 
its members at various times. As a rule, the Committee discussed problems 
of communist propaganda, corresponded with the leaders of existing pro­
letarian organisations: the League of the Just (see Note 378) and the Chartists 
(see Note 368), tried to draw Proudhon, Cabet and other socialists into its work, 
and issued lithographed circulars. On the initiative of Marx and Engels, 

=====第667页=====
Notes 637 
correspondence committees and groups connected with the Brussels Committee 
were set up in Silesia, Westphalia and the Rhine Province, Paris and London. 
These committees played an important role in the development of international 
proletarian contacts and the organisation of the Communist League in 1847. 
p. 335 
378 The League of the Just, the first political organisation of German workers and 
artisans, was formed between 1836 and 1838 as a result of a split in the 
Outlaws' League, which consisted of artisans led by petty-bourgeois democrats. 
Besides Germans, the League of the Just included workers of other 
nationalities. The views of its members showed the influence of various Utopian 
socialist ideas, primarily those of Wilhelm Weitling. p. 336 
379 Prominent members of the League of the Just (see Note 378): typesetter Karl 
Schapper, watchmaker Joseph Moll and others, were connected with the 
Blanquist secret Société des Saisons, which organised the Paris uprising of 
May  12-13,  1839 (see Note 32). Schapper and Moll took part in the uprising, 
were prosecuted by the French authorities and compelled to leave for England, 
where they headed local branches of the League. p. 336 
380 See Note 220. p. 336 
381 The Democratic Association (Association démocratique) was founded in Brussels 
in the autumn of 1847 and united proletarian revolutionaries, mainly German 
emigrants, and advanced bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats. On 
November 15, 1847, Marx was elected its Vice-President (the President was 
Lucien Jottrand, a Belgian democrat), and under his influence it became a 
centre of the international democratic movement. p. 336 
382 The events of this period are described in Engels' The Campaign for the German 
Imperial Constitution (see present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 147-239). p. 336 
383 After the socialist congress held in Marseilles in October 1879 set up the French 
Workers' Party (Parti Ouvrier Français), a group of French socialists headed by 
Jules Guesde addressed Marx and Engels, through Paul Lafargue, requesting 
them to help to draft an electoral programme of the French Workers' Party. Its 
preamble was formulated by Marx who dictated it to Guesde. Engels wrote to 
Eduard Bernstein about it on October 25, 1881: "A masterpiece of cogent 
reasoning, calculated to explain things to the masses in a few words" (see present 
edition, Vol. 46). Marx and Engels also took part in drawing up the practical 
section of the programme (the minimum programme; see Note 384). 
The programme was first published in Le Précurseur, No. 25, June 19, 
1880;  however, Malon adulterated some of its tenets and "introduced sund­
ry changes for the worse", Engels wrote to Eduard Bernstein on October 20, 
1882 (see present edition, Vol. 46). The preamble in L'Égalité, No. 24, 
June 30, 1880 was probably printed from Guesde's notes. The programme 
appeared also in Le Prolétaire, July 10, 1880, La Revue socialiste, No. 10, 
July 20, 1880, and in a number of other French newspapers. 
In 1880, the electoral programme was adopted as "the minimum 
programme" of the French Workers' Party at the Havre Congress. Its first 
separate edition appeared in Paris in 1883 under the title Le Programme du Parti 
Ouvrier. 
In English, the preamble was published in full for the first time in: Marx, 
Engels, The Socialist Revolution, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1981, pp. 252-53. 
p. 340 
\ 

=====第668页=====
638 Notes 
384 Further, L'Egalité printed the minimum programme: 
A. Political Programme 
1. Abolition of all laws on the press, meetings and associations, and 
especially the law against the International Working Men's Association.— 
Suppression of labour-books, this registration of the working class, and all 
articles of the code of law which place the workers in an unequal position 
vis-à-vis the employer. 
2. Suppression of the budget for the cults and the return to the nation of 
"property, movable and immovable, belonging to religious corporations and 
considered unalienable" (the decree of the Commune of April 2, 1871), 
including the industrial and commercial enterprises of these corporations. 
3. Universal arming of the people. 
4. The commune is the master of administration and the police. 
B. Economic Programme 
1. Weekly day of rest on Mondays, in other words, the issue of a law 
forbidding the employers to demand tfiat the employees work on Mondays.— 
Legal reduction of the working day to 8 hours for adults.—A ban on the use 
of child labour under the age of 14 by private enterprises, and legal reduction 
of the working day to 6 hours for the ages 14 to 18. 
2. The fixing of minimum wage by law determined annually in accordance 
with the local prices for foodstuffs. [This item was entered into the programme 
on Guesde's insistence; see Marx's letter to Sorge, November 5, 1880, present 
edition, Vol. 46.] 
3. Equal wages for workers of both sexes. 
4. Scientific and technical instruction for all children at the expense of 
society provided by the state and the commune. 
5. Elimination of any interference whatsoever of the employers in the 
management of the workers' mutual aid societies, insurance funds, etc., 
restoration of the exclusively workers' management in these matters. 
6. The employers' responsibility for accidents guaranteed by their paying a 
deposit in proportion to the number of employed workers and those dangers 
that the work at the given enterprise presents. 
7. Workers' participation in drawing up special rules for the various 
workshops.—Abolition of the employers' self-usurped right to impose fines on 
the workers or detract from their wages (the Commune's decree of April 27, 
1871). 
8. Revision of all contracts pertaining to the alienation of public property 
(banks, railways, mines, etc.), and exploitation of all state enterprises by the 
workers employed there. 
9. Abolition of all indirect taxes and the transformation of all direct taxes 
into a progressive tax on incomes exceeding 3,000 francs and on legacies 
exceeding 20,000 francs. p. 340 
385 This letter of greeting was read out at the meeting held on November 29, 1880 
in Geneva to commemorate the Polish uprising of 1830 (see Note 389). The 
meeting was convened by the editorial board of the Polish magazine Râwnosc 
and attended by nearly 500 socialists of different nationalities: Poles, Russians, 
Germans, Austrians, Frenchmen, Italians and Swiss. For Engels' assessment of 
the magazine's stand, see his letter to Kautsky of February 7, 1882 (present 
edition, Vol. 46). 
The original of the letter is not extant. It was published for the first time in 

=====第669页=====
Notes 639 
French in the Précurseur, No. 49, December 4, 1880, and in Polish (translation 
from the French) in Sprawozdanie z migdzynarodowego zebrania zwolanego w 
50-letnia rocznice listopadowego powstania przez redakcyje "Rownosci" w Genewie, 
Geneva, 1881, pp. 30-32. The discrepancies between the texts are indicated in 
the footnotes. 
In English, the letter was published for the first time in the magazine The 
Class Struggle, Vol. 2, No. 5, New York, 1918, pp. 573-75. p. 343 
386 On the first partition of Poland, see Note 9. 
On the participation of Poles in the American War of Independence, see 
Note 73. p. 343 
387 The reference is to the Polish national liberation uprising of March 
12-November 16, 1794 led by Tadeusz Kosciuszko. p. 343 
388 After the defeat of the 1794 uprising and the third partition of Poland (see 
Note 11), some of the participants in the uprising emigrated to France. In 
October 1796, the Polish general Jan Henryk Dabrowski submitted to the 
Directory (see Note 349) a plan for the formation of Polish legions which could 
fight against Austria. In January 1797 two Polish legions were formed within 
General Bonaparte's army. p. 343 
389 This refers to the Polish national liberation uprising of November 1830-October 
1831.  Its participants belonged mosdy to the revolutionary gentry, and its 
leaders to the aristocracy. The uprising was crushed by Russia aided by Prussia 
and Austria. Lack of support from the peasantry, due to the leaders' refusal to 
abolish serfdom, contributed to its defeat. p. 343 
390 On the Cracow uprising of 1846, see Note 25. 
The programme drawn up during die Cracow uprising by Edward 
Dembowski and expressing the interests of the peasantry and the urban poor 
demanded that the landless be given land, and that the condition of the 
working class be drastically improved by establishing national or "social" 
workshops. p. 344 
M» See Note 220. p. 344 
392 The public meeting in Brussels of February 22, 1848 was held to mark the 
second anniversary of the Cracow uprising. Marx and Engels were present and 
made speeches of greeting (see present edition, Vol. 6, pp. 545-52). p. 344 
393 The reference is to the participation of Polish refugees in the European 
revolutionary movement of 1848-49. A number of prominent Polish rev­
olutionaries took an active part in the revolutionary events in Hungary (Jozef 
Bern, Henryk Dembinski und Ludwik Wysocki) and in the final stage of the 
revolution in Germany (Wiktor Heltman, Aleksander Krzyzanowski, Ludwik 
Mieroslawski). The poet Adam Mickiewicz organised a Polish legion in Italy for 
the struggle against Austrian oppression. Mieroslawski led the struggle of the 
Sicilian insurgents against the troops of the Neapolitan King Ferdinand Bourbon. 
A Polish Southern legion was formed on the territory of the Danubian 
Principalities, which was involved in the liberation struggle of the local population. 
p. 344 
3** See Note 17. p. 344 
395 See Note 14. p. 344 

=====第670页=====
640 Notes 
396 See Note 26. p. 344 
397 Dissent on issues of tactics and theory in the Narodnik Land and Freedom (see 
Note 308) led to its split into two organisations in 1879, People's Will and the Black 
Redistribution. A major theoretical problem in the Russian revolutionary 
movement of the time was that of the role of the village commune in the country's 
political and social transformation. On February 16, 1881, on behalf of her 
comrades, members of the Black Redistribution who later joined the Marxist 
Emancipation of Labour group, Vera Zasulich asked Marx to express his opinion 
on the prospects of Russia's historical development, and particularly the future 
of the village commune: "You are not unaware that your Capital is enjoying 
great popularity in Russia... But what you probably do not know is the role 
which your Capital plays in our discussions of the agrarian question in 
Russia and our rural commune. You know better than anvone else how 
important and urgent this question is in Russia..., especially for our socialist 
party... 
"You will therefore understand, Citizen, to what extent we are interested in 
your opinion on this question and what great service you will be rendering us 
by conveying your ideas on the possible future of our rural commune and the 
theory of the historical inevitability for all countries of the world to pass 
through all the phases of capitalist production." 
Marx wrote four drafts of his reply to Vera Zasulich's letter. Their analysis 
and comparison with the final version show that he went from a more detailed 
exposition of his views to a most laconic one. The first three drafts are 
published in this volume; the fourth, consisting of only two .paragraphs, which 
have been included into the final version posted to Zasulich on March 8, 1881 
(see this volume, pp. 370-71), is not reproduced in this edition. 
For the first time, Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich and its drafts were 
published by the Marx-Engels Institute in: Marx-Engels Archives, Moscow, 1924 (in 
Russian translation), and Marx-Engels-Archiv. Zeitschrift des Marx-Engels-Instituts in 
Moskau, Vol. I, Frankfurt am Main [1925] (in the original French). However, due 
to the complex structure of the manuscript (see Note 298), in these editions some 
paragraphs were inserted in the wrong place and certain words deciphered 
incorrectly. The original version of the drafts, in strict accordance with the 
manuscript, was first published in: MEGA 2, Abt. I, Bd. 25, Berlin, 1985, 
S. 219-42. 
The earlier publications in English (in: Marx, Engels, Selected Works in three 
volumes, Vol. 3, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1970, pp.  152-61;  Marx, Engels, 
Lenin, The Way to Socialism Bypassing Capitalism, Novosti Press, Moscow, 1980, 
pp. 32-34; Late Marx and the Russian  Road.  Marx and the Peripheries of Capitalism, 
London [1984]) were based on the French text in the first publication in the 
Marx-Engels-Archiv. p. 346 
398 Yhe first and second drafts of Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich (see this volume, 
pp. 346-64) contain many deletions, insertions and marks for transferring 
passages from one page to another, etc. The first draft, the longest one, has 
seven large-size sheets filled in on both sides and contains many repetitions. 
The second draft is shorter and consists of three sheets: it is an attempt 
at a more concise exposition of the problem. The most significant deletions 
and indications for the transfer of fragments of the text are given in 
footnotes. p. 346 
399 An allusion to the following passage from Zasulich's letter to Marx of 
February 16, 1881: "... the theory of the historical inevitability for all countries 

=====第671页=====
Notes 641 
of the world to pass through all the phases of capitalist production" (see 
Note 397). p. 346 
400 Zasulich wrote to Marx on February 16, 1881: "Recently we have often heard 
the opinion that the rural commune is an archaic form which history, scientific 
socialism—in a word all that is the most indisputable—condemns to death" 
(for Marx's interpretation of "the archaic form" of the commune, see this 
volume, p. 350). p. 349 
401 The expression "new pillars of society" (nouvelles colonnes de la société) dates 
back to Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin's yb\>3Kuw,e Monpeno (The Monreper 
Asylum), St. Petersburg, 1880, pp. 181, 189. There was a copy of this book in 
Marx's library containing his numerous marginal notes and markings. 
p. 349 
402 The reference is, in particular, to the conquest of Italy by the Germanic tribe 
of Ostrogoths in 493 under the leadership of Theodoric. They founded a vast 
kingdom with Ravenna as the capital, which incorporated Italy, Sicily, Dalmatia 
and the lands to the north of Italy. p. 350 
403 Artel—an association of small producers in pre-revolutionary Russia. There 
were carpenters', fishermen's, masons', wood-cutters', agricultural and other 
artels.  p. 352 
404 In 321 B.C. during the second Samnite war the Samnites defeated the Roman 
legions in the Caudine pass, near the ancient Roman town of Caudium, and 
compelled them to go under the "forks", which was the greatest shame for the 
defeated army. Hence the expression "to go under the Caudine Forks", i.e., to 
undergo extreme humiliation. p. 353 
405 In 1237-41 Russian territories were invaded by the Mongols and Tartars 
who established a harsh rule there in the interests of the Mongol nomadic 
military-feudal nobility. After 240 years of resistance Russia finally threw off 
the Mongol yoke in 1480. p. 353 
406 Volost—an administrative-territorial division in Russia in the llth-first half of 
the 20th centuries. Marx wrote the word in Russian in the original, p. 353 
407 Decurions, at the time of the decline of the Roman Empire, an estate embracing 
landowners of medium means. They were entrusted with the distribution and 
collection of taxes and the spending of public money. When entering office, 
they contributed considerable sums, and were then obliged to spend money for 
public needs and compensate for arrears when collecting taxes out of their own 
property. As the taxes in money and in kind rose, the decurions' position 
deteriorated to such an extent that by the edicts of 316 and 325 they were 
made to hold their offices for life, while their duties became hereditary and 
were only cancelled by death or financial ruin. p. 354 
4<>8 See Note 398. p. 360 
409 The reference is to the general statute on the organisation of cities passed by 
Catherine II on April 21, 1785. Among other things, it included the 
regulations concerning the organisation of the trades into guilds and the rights 
and obligations of the craftsmen and apprentices. p. 361 
410 Marx is probably referring to a similar passage from the French edition of his 
Capital, p. 341: "Private property, based on personal labour, this property 
which welds, so to say, an isolated and autonomous worker to the external 
43-1317 

=====第672页=====
642 Notes 
conditions of labour, will be supplanted by capitalist private property, based on 
the exploitation of the labour of others, on wage labour." p. 361 
411 Marx replies to the following passage in Vera Zasulich's letter: "Recently we 
have often heard the opinion that the rural commune is an archaic form which 
history, scientific socialism—in a word all that is the most indisputable— 
condemns to death. The people preaching this call themselves your disciples 
par excellence: 'Marxists'. Their strongest argument is often: 'Marx says so.' 
" 'But how do you deduce this from his Capital? In it, he does not deal with the 
agrarian question and does not speak about Russia,' the objection is put to 
them. 
"'He would have said this if he had spoken about our country,' your 
disciples reply, possibly just a bit too boldly." p. 361 
412 Marx is referring, above all, to Pyotr Lavrov, Hermann Lopatin and Nikolai 
Danielson, with whom he kept in touch for years, as well as Lev Gartman, 
Nikolai Morozov and others, with whom he became acquainted in  1880-81. 
p. 361 
413 The third draft consists of three single and one double sheet. Marx made a fair 
copy of the first four pages of the draft (a rough copy of the third and fourth 
pages is also extant). The last paragraph on p. 4 is crossed out (it is given in the 
footnote on p. 368 of this volume). The next two paragraphs beginning with "The 
English themselves attempted" up to the words "amidst a general turmoil in 
Russian society" are written on the third sheet on which earlier Marx started to 
write a letter and where the words "3 March 1881. My dear Sir, I shall in...", 
written in English, are extant. The end of the draft from the words "The 
familiarity of the Russian peasant" is on p. 1 and the top of p. 2 of the double 
sheet, with a note in its left corner "II Ende", and contains many deletions. 
On the fourth draft, see notes 397 and 414. p. 364 
414 The final version of Marx's letter to Vera Zasulich written on March 8, 1881 
includes the full text of the fourth draft consisting of only two paragraphs ("A 
nervous complaint ... my so-called theory" and "Hence the analysis provided in 
Capital ... conditions of spontaneous development"); for this reason, it has not 
been printed separately in this edition. 
Marx's letter to Zasulich was known to many Russian revolutionary 
Marxists, Georgi Plekhanov among them. p. 370 
415 Marx is probably referring to the request to write a work on the Russian rural 
commune made by the revolutionary Narodnik Nikolai Morozov in December 
1880 on behalf of the Executive Committee of the People's Will (see Note 
417).  p. 370 
416 On March 21, 1881 Russian, Polish, Czech and Serbian socialists held a meeting 
in London to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the Paris Commune. It was 
organised by the Russian revolutionary Narodniks Lev Gartman and Hermann 
Lopatin, with Gartman as the chairman. 
Having been invited but unable to attend the meeting, Marx and Engels 
greeted it with an address to the chairman written in Engels' hand on 
March 21, 1881. 
In English the address was published for the first time in: K. Marx and 
F. Engels, On the Paris Commune, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1980, pp. 271-
72. p. 372 
417 On March 1, 1881 in pursuance of the sentence passed by the People's 

=====第673页=====
Notes 643 
Will Executive Committee, Emperor Alexander II was assassinated in St. Peters­
burg. 
People's Will was a revolutionary Narodnik organisation formed in Russia in 
August 1879 after the split in the Land and Freedom (see Note 308). Its founders 
were professional revolutionaries, advocates of political struggle against the 
autocracy. People's Will was the largest and most important revolutionary 
organisation of the raznochintsi (bourgeois-democratic) period in Russia's 
emancipation movement. Its activity was at its greatest in the early 1880s. 
p. 372 
418 Using § 28 of the Anti-Socialist Law (see Note 289), on November 28, 1878 
Bismarck introduced the so-called minor state of siege in Berlin and its 
environs. In the spring of 1880 the operation of the Anti-Socialist Law was 
extended for another five years. p. 372 
419 On March 19, 1881 Johann Most's newspaper Freiheit (No. 12) carried his 
article "Endlich!" devoted to the assassination of Alexander II (see Note 417), 
and a report entitled "England" about the attempt to explode the Lord Mayor's 
mansion in the London City. These publications were used as a pretext for 
Most's arrest by the British authorities on March 30; in June he was sentenced 
to 16 months' imprisonment. 
While criticising Most's anarchist views and his pseudo-revolutionary 
phraseology (see Marx's letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge of September 19, 
1879,  present edition, Vol. 45), Marx and Engels still believed it necessary to 
rise to his defence. Most's case was used by Bismarck during the debates on 
socialists in the German Reichstag on March 30 and 31, 1881. 
This letter was written in Engels' handwriting and signed by both Marx and 
Engels when it appeared in The Daily News. p. 374 
420 "A Fair Day's Wages for a Fair Day's Work" is the first in the series of articles 
written by Engels at the request of George Shipton, Secretary of the London 
Trades Council and editor of The Labour Standard, the organ of British trade 
unions. Engels contributed to it from May to early August 1881. The articles 
appeared regularly, almost weekly, as unsigned editorials. All in all, eleven 
articles were written, with the last one, "Social Classes—Necessary and 
Superfluous", printed on August 6. Engels stopped contributing to the paper 
because of the growth of opportunist elements in its editorial board (see Engels' 
letters to Marx of August 11, to George Shipton of August 10, 1881, and to 
Johann Philipp Becker of February 10, 1882, present edition, Vol. 46). 
p. 376 
421 On June 21, 1824, under mass pressure, Parliament repealed the ban on the 
trade unions by adopting "An Act to repeal the Laws relative to the 
Combination of Workmen, and for other Purposes therein mentioned" (the 
reference is to the repeal of "An Act to prevent unlawful Combinations of 
Workmen 12th July 1799"). However, in 1825 it passed a Bill on workers' 
combinations ("An Act to repeal the Laws relating to the Combination of 
Workmen, and to make other Provisions in lieu thereof 6th July 1825") which, 
while confirming the repeal of the ban on the trade unions, at the same time 
greatly restricted their activity. In particular, mere agitation for workers to join 
unions and take part in strikes was regarded as "compulsion" and "violence" 
and punished as a crime. p. 376 
422 Yhe Poor Law adopted in England in 1834 provided for only one form of 
relief for the able-bodied poor: workhouses with a prison-like regime in which 
43* 

=====第674页=====
644 Notes 
the workers were engaged in unproductive, monotonous and exhausting 
labour. The people called the workhouses "Bastilles for the poor". p. 377 
423 The Court of Chancery or Court of Equity—one of the high courts of England 
which after the judicial reform of 1873 became a division of the High Court of 
Justice. The jurisdiction of the court, presided over by the Lord Chancellor, 
covered matters concerning inheritance, contractual obligations, joint-stock 
companies, etc. In a number of cases, the powers of this court overlapped those 
of other high courts. In counterbalance to the English common law accepted in 
other courts, the legal proceedings at the Court of Chancery were conducted 
on the basis of the so-called law of equity. p. 379 
424 See Note 422. p. 383 
425 The reference is to the Vienna Congress of European monarchs and their 
ministers (September 1814 to June 9, 1815), which set up a system of 
all-European treaties after the wars of the European powers against Napoleonic 
France. p. 383 
426 Engels is referring to the landlords' discontent with the Land Bill passed by the 
Gladstone government on August 22, 1881 for the purpose of distracting the 
Irish peasants from the revolutionary struggle. The Bill restricted the 
landlords' right to evict tenants from their plots if they paid the rent in time; 
the rent was fixed for 15 years in advance. Despite the fact that the 1881 Law 
gave the landlords a chance to sell their lands to the state at a profit, and that 
the fixed rent remained very high indeed, the English landowners still opposed 
the Law trying to preserve their unlimited rule in Ireland. Despite the Law, 
illegal evictions from the land continued, which provoked the resistance of the 
Irish tenants (see notes 456, 462, 463). p. 384 
427 The People's Charter, which contained the demands of the Chartists (see 
Note 368), was published in the form of a Parliamentary Bill on May 8, 1838. 
It contained six points: universal suffrage (for men of 21 and over), annual 
Parliaments, vote by ballot, equal electoral districts, abolition of the property 
qualification for MPs and payment of MPs. Petitions urging the adoption of 
the People's Charter were turned down by Parliament in 1839, 1842 and 1848. 
p. 386 
428 The reference is to the second Reform Bill approved by Parliament on August 
15, 1867 under pressure from the mass working-class movement and direct 
participation in it of the General Council of the First International. Under the 
new law, the property qualification for the voters was lowered, and their 
number doubled; suffrage was granted also to part of skilled workers. The bulk 
of the working population, however, was still deprived of the right to vote. 
p. 386 
429 Starting from the late 1870s, the British working-class movement gradually 
freed itself from the influence of the Liberal Party. 
The more advanced section of the workers took part in the activities of 
radical organisations and clubs, and campaigned for Irish self-determination. 
In 1879 the Midland Social-Democratic Association was set up in Birmingham, 
and in 1881 the Labour Emancipation League in London. Of great importance 
was the Democratic Federation founded in London in June 1881 and in 1884 
transformed into the Social-Democratic Federation, which openly recognised 
Marxist principles. p. 387 
430 T^ main question discussed in the House of Commons during the debate on 

=====第675页=====
Notes 645 
concluding a commercial treaty with France was the new common customs 
tariff adopted by the French government on May 8, 1881, which provided for 
some restrictions on imports in the interest of French industry. Despite the 
fact that the talks about the new treaty were repeatedly resumed throughout 
the year, the parties concerned failed to find an acceptable solution. 
p. 389 
431 A. J. Balfour was elected to Parliament from Hertford, in Southeast England. 
p. 389 
432 The Manchester School—a trend in economic thinking which reflected the 
interests of the industrial bourgeoisie. Its supporters, known as Free Traders, 
advocated removal of protective tariffs and non-intervention by the govern­
ment in economic life. The centre of the Free Traders' agitation was Manchester, 
where the movement was headed by two textile manufacturers, Richard Cobden 
and John Bright. In the 1840s and 1850s, the Free Traders were a sepa­
rate political group, which later formed the Left wing of the Liberal Party. 
p. 389 
433 This refers to the protective tariff tabled in Congress by the Republican Justin 
Smith Morrill and passed by the Senate on March 2, 1861. It raised customs 
duties considerably. Later, during the American Civil War and in 1867 and 
1869,  die tariff was repeatedly revised, and by 1869 it had raised the average 
size of import duties to 47 per cent. In 1870 and 1872, these duties were 
lowered to 10 per cent, but this was cancelled in 1875. p. 390 
434 The first British colony which was granted the status of a dominion (in 1867) was 
Canada. p. 390 
435 After the abolition of the East India Company in August 1858 India was placed 
under direct administration of the British Crown. Seeking to protect the 
national textile industry, the authorities introduced a  5-per  cent duty on the 
English cotton goods imported by India. However, as early as 1879 the 
Lancashire manufacturers managed to get these duties cancelled, and in 1882 
the duties on other goods were also abolished. 
The British East India Company was founded in 1600. It enjoyed a monopoly of 
trade with the East Indies and played a decisive part in the establishment of the 
British colonial empire. p. 390 
436 The reference is to the coalition wars of European states against the French 
Republic (1792-1802) and against Napoleon (1805-15). p. 390 
437 In 1814 and 1822 the French authorities introduced high import tariffs on 
iron, in 1819, on grain, cattle and wool, and in 1826, doubled the tariffs on pig 
iron and steel. p. 390 
438 The economic development of Germany was most adversely affected by her 
political fragmentation, the absence of universal commercial laws, internal 
customs barriers, and the multiplicity of currencies and of the weight and 
measure systems. On May 26, 1818 Prussia alone passed a law on the abolition of 
internal duties and the introduction of a universal customs  tariff.  p. 390 
439 The Corn Laws, the first of which were passed as early as the 15th century, 
imposed high import duties on agricultural products in order to maintain high 
prices for these products on the domestic market. The Corn Laws served the 
interests of the big landowners (see Note 440). p. 390 

=====第676页=====
646 Notes 
440 The Anti-Corn Law League was founded in 1838 by the Manchester 
manufacturers and Free Trade leaders Richard Cobden and John Bright. By 
demanding complete freedom of trade, the League fought for the abolition of 
the Corn Laws (see Note 439). In this way, it sought to weaken the economic 
and political position of the landed aristocracy and lower the cost of living, thus 
making possible a lowering of the workers' wages. After the repeal of the Corn 
Laws (June 1846), the League ceased to exist. p. 390 
441 See Note 337. p. 391 
442 See Note 383. p. 394 
443 At the municipal elections of January 9, 1881, the French Workers' Party obtained 
40,000 votes and won all seats in the Town Council of Commentry. 
p. 394 
444 From September 9, 1879 to June 15, 1881, the deputies to the Reichstag from 
the Social-Democratic faction were: August Bebel, Wilhelm Bracke, Friedrich 
Wilhelm Fritzsche, W Tilhelm Hasselmann, Max Kayser, Wilhelm Liebknecht, 
Klaus Peter Reinders, Julius Vahlteich and Philipp Wiemer. After the death 
of Bracke and Reinders, their seats were filled by Ignaz Auer and Wilhelm 
Hasenclever. 
At the Wyden Congress held on August 22, 1880, Hasselmann was expelled 
from the party and, correspondingly, from the Parliamentary group. At the 
supplementary elections the deputy mandate from Hamburg was received by 
Georg Wilhelm Hartmann. p. 396 
445 The Boards of Guardians—local government bodies in England elected to 
administer the Poor Laws in parishes or districts. p. 396 
446 In his letter John Noble quotes Richard Cobden's speeches in the House of 
Commons made on February 24, 1842 (see Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. 
Third series, Vol. 60, London, 1842, p. 1045) and February 27, 1846 (ibid., 
Vol. 84, London, 1846, pp. 285-86), as well as the address of the Anti-Corn 
Law League adopted by it at the Manchester meeting on August 20, 1842 and 
printed by The Times, No. 18069, August 23, 1842. p. 400 
447 Engels was living in Manchester from December 1842 to late August 1844, 
where he studied commerce at the cotton mill belonging to the Ermen & 
Engels firm. p. 400 
448 Engels describes his participation in the meeting of the Anti-Corn Law League 
in Salford in 1843 in his "Letters from London (I)" (see present edition, 
Vol. 3, pp. 381-82). 
On the People's Charter, see Note 427. p. 402 
449 In 1879, as a result of the merger of the Flemish and the Brabant socialist 
parties, the Belgian Socialist Party (Parti socialiste belge) was formed. 
In 1881, the Social-Democratic groups in the Netherlands formed the 
Social-Democratic Union (Sociaal-Demokraatische Bond). 
In the same year, the politically advanced and class-conscious workers and 
revolutionary intellectuals formed the Revolutionary-Socialist Party of Romagna 
(Partito Rivoluzionario di Romagna), which was the first step in the work to 
found an Italian workers' party. p. 405 
450 See Note 285. p. 405 
451 The reference is to the second electoral reform in England introduced in 1867 
(see Note 428). Under the new law, the property qualification in the counties 

=====第677页=====
Notes 647 
was reduced to £12 of annual rent for tenant farmers; in the cities and towns 
suffrage was granted to all householders and lessees of houses, as well as to 
tenants residing in the locality for at least a year, and paying no less than £10 
in rent. p. 405 
452 St. Stephen's—the chapel where the House of Commons held its sessions from 
1547 and until the fire of 1834. p. 405 
453 The Irish Land Bill was passed on August 22, 1881 (see Note 426). p. 405 
454 See Note 427. p. 406 
455 See Note 289. p. 407 
456 The introduction of the Land Bill (see Note 426) met with resistance on the 
part of the Irish tenants. Using the Coercion Act passed in March 1881, Chief 
Secretary for Ireland Forster applied extraordinary measures by sending 
troops to Ireland to evict the tenants who refused to pay the rent. p. 407 
457 The reference is to the elections to the Reichstag of January 10, 1877 and July 
30, 1878. p. 408 
458 See Note 268. p. 408 
459 Coercion Bills were passed by the British Parliament several times throughout 
the 19th century with a view to suppressing the revolutionary and national 
liberation movement in Ireland. Under them a state of siege was declared on 
Irish territory, and the English authorities were granted extraordinary powers. 
p. 408 
460 On April 27, 1880 Georg Wilhelm Hartmann won the mandate at the 
supplementary elections to the Reichstag in the second district of Hamburg (see 
Note 444). p. 408 
461 A minor state of siege was declared in Leipzig on June 27, 1881. Earlier, it had 
been introduced in Berlin (see Note 418) and on October 28, 1880, in 
Hamburg-Altona and the environs. p. 408 
462 Using the Coercion Act,in May-October 1881 the English authorities arrested 
prominent Irish deputies, members of the Irish National Land League (see 
Note 463) headed by Charles Parnell, who opposed the introduction of the 
Land Bill of 1881 (see Note 426). Among the prisoners was John Dillon, an 
Irish political leader, member of the British Parliament, one of the League's 
leaders. p. 408 
463 The Irish National Land League—a mass organisation founded in 1879 by the 
petty-bourgeois democrat Michael Davitt. The League united large sections of 
the Irish peasantry and the urban poor, and was supported by the progressive 
section of the Irish bourgeoisie. Its agrarian demands mirrored the spontane­
ous protest of the Irish masses against the landlords' and national oppression. 
However, some of the League's leaders adopted an inconsistent stand, and this 
was used by bourgeois nationalists (Parnell and others), who sought to reduce 
the activity of the League to the campaign for Home Rule, i.e. for the granting 
to Ireland of limited self-government within the framework of the British 
Empire. They did not advocate the abolition of English landlordism, a demand 
advanced by the revolutionary democrats. In 1881 the Land League was 
banned, but in actual fact it continued its activity until the late 1880s. 
p. 409 
464 On July 20, 1881 Norris A. Clowes, the New-York Star correspondent, asked 
Engels to write a review of the British labour movement. Being pressed for 

=====第678页=====
648 Notes 
time,  Engels referred him to his articles which The Labour Standard was at the 
time publishing as editorials (see this volume, pp. 376-409, 411-18). In response 
to Clowes' stated wish to enter into communication with Most, Engels advised 
him to write to the Freiheit editorial board. In this letter to the Freiheit, which is 
printed according to the manuscript, Engels informs the editorial board about 
this. The letter is written in German and English. 
This letter was first published in the original in MEGA2 , Abt. I, Bd. 25, 
Berlin, 1985, S. 274. p. 410 
465 Noiris A. Clowes was recommended to Engels by Theodor Friedrich Cuno, a 
prominent figure in the German workers' movement, in a letter of July 10, 
1881.  After the Hague Congress of the First International (1872), Cuno 
emigrated to the USA and took part in the work of the International there. 
p. 410 
466 An allusion to the fact that at the time Most was kept under arrest (see Note 
419).  p. 410 
467 This refers to the activities of the Anti-Corn Law League (see Note 440). 
p. 411 
468 In 1873-78, England entered the period of "great depression", a profound 
industrial crisis aggravated by the agrarian crisis, which lasted until the 
mid-1890s. The year 1874 witnessed a drop in the production of coal and iron 
ore. In 1875, the output of the cotton industry also decreased. p. 411 
469 See Note 422. p. 412 
470 Thg system of internal excise—one of the main types of indirect taxes, mostly on 
everyday essentials (salt, sugar, coffee, matches, etc.), as well as municipal, 
transport and other widely used services. It is included in the price of goods or 
service  tariff,  and is thus shifted onto the consumer. Excise duty is an important 
source of revenue for the state budget in the capitalist countries. 
In the USA each state has its own excise system, covering cigarettes, alcohol 
and petrol. The first excise on whisky was introduced in the USA on March 3, 
1791.  p. 414 
471 See Note 432. p. 414 
472 This refers to the movement for Parliamentary reform in England in  1830-31. 
The 1832 Reform Act in England granted the franchise to property owners 
and leaseholders with no less than £10 annual income. The workers and the 
petty bourgeoisie, who were the main force in the campaign for the reform, 
remained unenfranchised. p. 416 
473 The laws passed by the British Parliament on June 26, 1846—"An Act to 
amend the laws relating to the importation of corn" and "An Act to alter 
certain duties of customs"—abolished all restrictions on the import of grain 
into Great Britain, which was a major victory for the industrial bourgeoisie over 
the landed aristocracy (see also notes 439 and 440). p. 416 
474 Engels wrote this draft in English. Its translation into French was printed in 
L'Egalité, No. 1, December 11, 1881 in the section "Angleterre". The author was 
named in the editorial preface. 
In 1890-91,  Paul Lafargue quoted Engels' speech in his article "K. Marx. 
Persönliche Erinnerungen" (Die Neue Zeit, Jg. 9, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, S. 41-42). 
In 1892, it was translated into Bulgarian from the text in Die Neue Zeit and 

=====第679页=====
Notes 649 
printed in the magazine Den, No. 3/4, Shumen, July-August 1892, pp. 233-34. 
p. 419 
475 On January 19, 1843 the Prussian government decided to suppress as of 
April 1, 1843, the publication of the Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und 
Gewerbe, which had been appearing in Cologne since January 1, 1842 and 
which, under the editorship of Marx (from October 1842), had acquired a 
revolutionary-democratic trend. Marx's resignation from the editorship on 
March 18, 1843 did not cause the government to rescind its decision, and the 
last issue appeared on March 31, 1843. p. 419 
476 At the elections to the German Reichstag of October 27, 1881 the Social-
Democrats received 312,000 votes and 12 mandates. p. 420 
477 Engels wrote this obituary "Jenny Marx, Née von Westphalen" for Der 
Sozialdemokrat. It is based on the draft of his speech over Jenny's grave (see this 
volume, pp. 419-21). 
The obituary was printed in issue No. 50 on December 8, 1881. That was 
Engels' first contribution to Der Sozialdemokrat. 
On December 18, 1881 the obituary was reprinted by the Arbeiter-Wochen-
Chronik (No. 51, Budapest). p. 422 
478 See Note 475. p. 422 
479 See Note 476. p. 423 
480 Marx and Engels wrote this Preface on January 21, 1882 at the request of 
Pyotr Lavrov, who was in close contact with them. On January 23, the text was 
sent to Lavrov (see Marx's letter to Pyotr Lavrov of January 23, 1882, present 
edition, Vol. 46). It was first published, in Russian, in the magazine Narodnaya 
Volya of February 5, 1882. The separate edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party (in Plekhanov's translation) with this preface appeared in 
Geneva in 1882 in the Russian Social-Revolutionary Library series. 
In German, the Preface was first published in Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 16, 
April 13, 1882 (translated from the Russian text in the Narodnaya Volya 
magazine; see Engels' letter to Eduard Bernstein of April 17, 1882, present 
edition, Vol. 46). In 1890 Engels retranslated this preface from Russian into 
German for the new German edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party. It 
was this translation by Engels that served as the basis when the Preface was 
translated into Bulgarian, Polish, Romanian, Dutch, Italian and Czech. 
Later, the lost German manuscript of the Preface was found; its facsimile 
was printed in the Russian edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party that 
appeared in 1948. 
The Preface appeared in English for the first time in: K. Marx, Selected 
Works in two volumes, Vol. 1, International Publishers, New York, 1936, 
pp. 135-37. p. 425 
481 The first Russian edition of the Manifesto of  the Communist Party (the translation is 
ascribed to Mikhail Bakunin or Nikolai Lyubavin) was printed at Chernetsky's 
printing office in Geneva in 1869, where Herzen's Kolokol (The Bell) was printed 
at that time. The translation contained a number of errors which distorted, at 
places, the meaning of the Manifesto. p. 425 
482 After the assassination of Alexander II on March 1, 1881 (see Note 417), 
Alexander III was staying in Gatchina (the Russian tsars' country residence), 
fearing that new terrorist acts would be staged by the Executive Committee of 
the People's Will. p. 426 

=====第680页=====
650 Notes 
483 Engels wrote this article in the second half of April 1882 for Der Sozialdemokrat. 
He regarded it as his first official contribution to the newspaper as a staff 
member (see Engels' letter to August Bebel, June 21, 1882, present edition, 
Vol. 46). 
The ideas he set forth in the article were further developed in his later 
works, "The Book of Revelation" (1883) (present edition, Vol. 26), and "On 
the History of Early Christianity" (1894) (present edition, Vol. 27). 
This work appeared in English for the first time in: Marx and Engels, On 
Religion, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1966, pp. 173-82. p. 427 
484 Aryans—members of any of the prehistoric peoples who spoke Indo-Iranian. 
p. 427 
485 Under the Christian tradition, the name of the Roman Emperor Flavius 
Valerius Constantinus Magnus, who in 330 transferred the capital of the 
empire from Rome to Constantinople, is associated with the radical turn from 
persecution of Christianity to the protection of the new religion, although this 
process had begun under his predecessors. p. 428 
486 Stoic philosophy (3rd cent. B.C.-A.D. 2nd cent.) emerged in Greece; here the 
reference is to the late stoic philosophy (A.D. lst-2nd cent.), which produced 
Seneca, Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius. The stoic doctrine made a strong impact 
on the formation of Christianity. p. 429 
487 Engels is referring to a character in Heine's satirical poem Der Apollogott (from 
Romanzero), a young blade, cantor at the Amsterdam synagogue, who imitated 
Apollo. p. 429 
488 The Epicurean school of materialist philosophy was founded by Epicurus in the 
late 4th century B.C. and existed until the mid-4th century A.D. In their 
philosophical struggle against the Stoics, its members refused to recognise the 
gods'  interference into mundane affairs and proceeded from the assumption 
that matter, which has an inner source of motion, is eternal. p. 430 
489 Engels is referring to the slave uprising of 73-71 B.C. in Rome (according to 
some historians, 74-71 B.C.) led by Spartacus. p. 432 
490 An ironical allusion to Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species by Means of 
Natural Selection, or the Preservation of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. 
p. 435 
491 This work was written by Engels in late August-early September 1882. He had 
promised it to Der Sozialdemokrat on August 9 (see Engels' letter to Eduard 
Bernstein of August 9, 1882, present edition, Vol. 46). It was printed in issue 
No. 37, with Engels' signature, on September 7 under the title "Der Vikar von 
Bray. Aus dem Englischen von Friedrich Engels". Two drafts of the translation 
of the song are extant. 
The text of the song with a footnote quoting several lines from Engels' 
conclusion in Der Sozialdemokrat, was also reprinted by the Vorwärts, Zurich, 
1886,  pp.  369-71. 
Here is Engels' translation of the English song: 
Zu König Karls Zeit, da noch war 
Loyalität zu finden, 
Dient' ich der Hochkirch ganz und gar, 
Und so erwarb ich Pfründen. 
Der König ist von Gott gesetzt — 
So lehrt' ich meine Schafe — 

=====第681页=====
Notes 
Und wer ihm trotzt, ihn gar verletzt, 
Den trifft die Höllenstrafe. 
Denn dieses gilt, und hat Bestand, 
Bis an mein End' soil's wahr sein: 
Daß wer auch König sei im Land, 
In Bray will ich Vikar sein. 
Jakob nahm auf dem Throne Platz, 
Das Papsttum kam zu Ehren: 
Da galt's, die Katholikenhatz 
Ins Gegenteil zu kehren. 
Für mich auch, fand ich, paßten schon 
Roms Kirch' und Priesterorden; 
Kam nicht die Revolution, 
War' ich Jesuit geworden. 
Denn dieses gilt und hat Bestand, 
Bis an mein End' soil's wahr sein: 
Daß wer auch König sei im Land, 
In Bray will ich Vikar sein. 
Als König Wilhelm kam, der Held, 
Und rettete die Freiheit, 
Hab'  ich mein Segel umgestellt 
Nach dieses Windes Neuheit. 
Der Knechtsgehorsam vor'ger Zeit, 
Der war jetzt bald erledigt: 
Der Tyrannei gebt Widerstreit! 
So wurde nun gepredigt. 
Denn dieses gilt und hat Bestand, 
Bis an mein End' soil's wahr sein: 
Daß wer auch König sei im Land, 
In Bray will ich Vikar sein. 
Als Anna wurde Königin, 
Der Landeskirche Glorie, 
Das hatte einen andern Sinn, 
Und da ward ich ein Tory. 
Für unsrer Kirch' Integrität, 
Da galt es jetzt zu eifern, 
Und Mäßigung und Laxität 
Als sündhaft zu begeifern. 
Denn dieses gilt und hat Bestand, 
Bis an mein End' soil's wahr sein: 
Daß wer auch König sei im Land, 
In Bray will ich Vikar sein. 
Als König Georg bracht' ins Land 
Gemäßigte Politik, mein Herr, 
Hab'  nochmals ich den Rock gewandt, 
Und so ward ich ein Whig, mein Herr. 
Das war es, was mir Pfründen gab 
Und Gunst bei dem Regenten; 
Auch schwor ich fast alltäglich ab, 
So Papst wie Prätendenten. 

=====第682页=====
652 Notes 
Denn dieses gilt und hat Bestand, 
Bis an mein End' soil's wahr sein: 
Daß wer auch König sei im Land, 
In Bray will ich Vikar sein. 
Hannovers hoher Dynastie — 
Mit Ausschluß von Papisten — 
Der schwör' ich Treu, so lange sie 
Sich an dem Thron kann fristen. 
Denn meine Treu wankt nimmermehr — 
Veränd'rung ausgenommen — 
Und Georg sei mein Fürst und Herr, 
Bis andre Zeiten kommen. 
Denn dieses gilt und hat Bestand, 
Bis an mein End' soil's wahr sein: 
Daß wer auch König sei im Land, 
In Bray will ich Vikar sein. 
The work was published in English in part for the first time in: K. Marx, 
F. Engels, On Literature and Art, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1976, pp.  429-31. 
p. 436 
492 See Note 337. p. 438 
4i» See Note 27. p. 438 
494 In 1077, the Holy Roman Emperor Henry IV travelled to Canossa (a castle in 
Northern Italy) to beg forgiveness of Pope Gregory VII, with whom he had 
engaged in political struggle. Since that time, the phrase "to go to Canossa" has 
come to mean a humiliating capitulation. 
On May 14, 1872, at the time of the Kulturkampf (see Note 27), Bismarck 
declared in the Reichstag: "We shall not go to Canossa" (see Stenographische 
Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstages, Vol. 1, Berlin, 1872, 
p. 356), thus emphasising his determination to fight to the last against the 
Catholic clergy. However, in the late 1870s-early 1880s, in order to bring 
together all reactionary forces, he reconciled with the Catholic clergy and 
repealed nearly all the laws passed during the Kulturkampf period. p. 438 
495 Engels wrote The Mark in mid-September-the first half of December 1882 as an 
appendix to the German edition of the pamphlet Socialism: Utopian and 
Scientific (see Note 343). The piece was highly appreciated by Marx, who read 
the manuscript (see Marx' letter to Engels, December 18, 1882, present edition, 
Vol. 46). In it Engels made use of some of the materials he had collected when 
researching the history of ancient Germans (see present edition, Vol. 26). In 
1883 this essay was reprinted by Der Sozialdemokrat, Nos. 12-17 on March 15-
April 19, and also published separately and entided Der deutsche Bauer. Was war 
er? Was ist er? Was könnte er sein? (see Note 510). Together with Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific, it was published in German four times in Engels' lifetime. 
The German edition was used when translating it into Danish, Dutch and 
Polish. 
In 1892 The Mark appeared in English, also as an appendix to Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific, in Edward Aveling's translation with Engels' special 
introduction. Engels wrote in this introduction: "The Appendix, 'The Mark', 
was written with the intention of spreading among the German Socialist Party 
some elementary knowledge of the history and development of landed 

=====第683页=====
Notes 653 
property  in Germany. This seemed  all the  more necessary  at a  time when  the 
assimilation  by that party  of the  working people  of the  towns  was in a  fair way 
of completion,  and  when  the  agricultural labourers  and  peasants  had to be 
taken  in hand"  (see  present edition,  Vol. 27). 
In the  present edition,  the  text  is printed according  to the  authorised 
English edition  of 1892  checked against  the  fourth German edition  of 1891, 
which Engels read himself.  The  principal discrepancies  are  pointed  out in 
footnotes.  p. 439 
496 The  WOrks of Georg Ludwig Maurer  (12 volumes), united  by a  common theme, 
are studies  of the  agrarian, urban  and  state systems  of medieval Germany. 
They  are:  Einleitung  zur  Geschichte  der Mark-,  Hof-, Dorf- und  Stadt-Verfassung 
und der  öffentlichen Gewalt, Munich,  1854;  Geschichte  der  Markenverfassung  in 
Deutschland, Erlangen,  1856;  Geschichte  der  Fronhöfe,  der  Bauernhöfe  und der 
Hofverfassung  in  Deutschland, Vols.  I-IV,  Erlangen, 1862-63; Geschichte  der 
Dorfverfassung  in  Deutschland, Vols.  I-II,  Erlangen, 1865-66; Geschichte  der 
Städteverfassung  in Deutschland, Vols.  I-IV,  Erlangen,  1869-71.  The  first, second 
and fourth works specially deal with  the  structure  of the  German mark. 
p. 441 
497 The  Emperor's  Law  (Kaiserrecht) —the  law  promulgated  by the  central authority 
of the  medieval German Empire  (see  Note  94).  Engels used  the  edition  Das 
Keyserrecht nach  der  Handschrift  von 1372 in Vergleichung  mit andern Handschriften 
und mit  erläuternden Anmerkungen herausgegeben  von Dr. H. E.  Endemann, Cassel, 
1846.  The  data cited here  by Engels  can be  found  in the  section  "Von  Rechte 
das die  Waelde hant"  (p. 244). p. 443 
498 Hereinafter when describing  the  farmstead communes Engels uses Hanssen's 
Die Gehöferschaften (Arbgenossenschaften)  im Regierungsbezirk Trier.  Aus den 
Abhandlungen  der  Königl. Akademie  der  Wissenschaften  zu  Berlin,  1863. 
Berlin,  1863, p. 19, and Maurer's Einleitung  zur  Geschichte  der  Mark-,  Hof-, 
Dorf-, und  Stadt-Verfassung  und der  öffentlichen Gewalt, Munich,  1854, p. 74. 
p. 444 
499 The  Leges barbarorum (laws  of the  barbarians)—codes  of law  which originated 
between  the 5th and the 9th  centuries  and  were,  in the  main,  a written record 
of the  customary  or prescriptive  law of the  various Germanic tribes,  p. 444 
500 The  Ripuarian Law—the common  law of the  Ripuarian Franks,  one of the 
Germanic tribes, recorded  in Lex  Ripuaria which  was  written between  the 6th 
and the 8th  centuries.  Lex  Ripuaria  is the  principal source  for the  study  of the 
social system  of the  Ripuarian Franks  and the  process  of their feudalisation. 
Private ownership  of the  arable land  is dealt with  in § 82  (scroll  A) and § 84 
(scroll  B) of Lex  Ripuaria.  See one of the  most complete publications:  Lex 
Ripuaria  et lex Francorum Chamavorum,  ed. by R.  Sohm, Hanover,  1883, 
p. 104. p. 445 
501 Weistiimer—a record  of the  common  law of the  marks  in mediaeval Germany, 
Switzerland  and  Austria,  as well  as in  some  of the  adjacent districts  of 
Bohemia, France  and  other countries, dating back,  in the  main,  to the 
13th-18th centuries.  The  Weistümer mirror  the  economic life,  the  social 
struggle, legal relations  and the  daily life  of the  peasantry  of that period. 
p. 446 
502 Engels  is referring  to the law on  forest thefts ("Gesetz, betreffend  den 
Forstdiebstahl") passed  on  April  15, 1878,  which prohibited, among other 

=====第684页=====
654 Notes 
things, the gathering of herbs, berries and mushrooms without special police 
permission. p. 447 
503 The Schöffen courts were introduced in a number of German states after the 
1848 revolution, and throughout Germany in 1871. At the time they consisted of 
a Crown judge and two jurors (Schöffen) who, as distinct from ordinary 
jurymen, not only gave their verdict of guilty or not guilty but also fixed the 
penalty; their members were specially selected from among the ruling classes. 
p. 448 
504 The Merovingian dynasty—the first royal dynasty in the Frankish state 
(457-751), which derived its name from the legendary forefather Merovaeus. 
The Merovingians' policy promoted the emergence of feudal relations among the 
Franks. p. 450 
505 The Western Frankish Kingdom was formed as a result of the disintegration of 
Charlemagne's empire, which was a short-lived and unstable military and 
administrative union. In 843, under the treaty of Verdun, the empire was 
divided among Charlemagne's three grandsons, children of Louis the Pious. 
One of them, Charles the Bald, received the Western part of the empire, which 
included the bulk of the territory of modern France and formed the Western 
Frankish Kingdom. The lands to the east of the Rhine (the core of future 
Germany) were given to Louis the German, and the strip lying in between, 
from the North Sea to Central Italy, became the realm of Charlemagne's 
eldest grandson, Lothar. p. 450 
506 The crusades were military colonialist expeditions by the big West European 
feudal lords and Italian trading cities under the religious banner of recovering 
Jerusalem and other "Holy Lands" from the Mohammedans. Peasants also took 
part in the crusades, hoping thus to be freed from feudal oppression. History 
knows eight major crusades (1096-99, 1147-49, 1189-92, 1202-04,  1217-21, 
1228-29, 1248-54 and 1270). Not only Mohammedan states in Syria, Palestine, 
Egypt and Tunisia but also the Christian Byzantine Empire were the objects of 
the crusaders' aggressive activities. The crusaders' conquests in the Eastern 
Mediterranean were not lasting, and were recovered by the Mohammedans. 
p. 451 
507 The Thirty Years' War (1618-48)—a European war in which the Pope, the 
Spanish and the Austrian Habsburgs and the Catholic German princes, rallied 
under the banner of Catholicism, fought against the Protestant countries: 
Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, the Republic of the Netherlands and a number of 
Protestant German states. The rulers of Catholic France, rivals of the 
Habsburgs, supported the Protestant camp. Germany was the principal battle 
area and the main object of plunder and territorial claims. The Treaty of 
Westphalia (1648) sealed the political dismemberment of Germany. p. 453 
508 Code civil—Napoleon's civil code issued in 1804, which he introduced in the 
conquered regions of Western and South-Western Germany. It remained in 
force in the Rhine Province after its incorporation into Prussia in 1815. 
p. 454 
509 See Note 69. p. 454 
510 The text that follows is Engels' addition to the separate edition of The Mark 
published in 1883 under the title Der deutsche  Bauer. Was war er? Was ist er? Was 
könnte er sein? (see Note 495). This fragment was published in English for the 

=====第685页=====
Notes 655 
first time in: Marx, Engels, Pre-Capitalist Socio-Economie Formations, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1979, p. 293. p. 456 
511 Engels wrote this Preface for the first German edition of Socialism: Utopian and 
Scientific (see Note 343). The first two paragraphs of the Preface were 
published in the article "Eine neue Propagandabroschüre" printed in Der 
Sozialdemokrat, No. 9, February 22, 1883, and the first full version appeared in: 
F. Engels, Die Entwicklung des Socialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft, 
Hottingen-Zurich, 1882, pp. 3-5 (the book came off the press in March 1883). 
It was used as the basis for four subsequent German editions (two in 1883, and 
in 1891 and 1894), two Dutch editions (1884 and 1885), and the Polish edition 
(1892). 
The Preface was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx and 
F. Engels, Selected Works. In two volumes, Vol. 1, International Publishers, New 
York, 1936, pp. 135-37). p. 457 
512 The German edition of the book was prepared by Engels at the request of the 
Sozialdemokrat editorial board contained in Eduard Bernstein's letter to Engels 
of July 13, 1882 (see Engels' letter to Bernstein, August 9, 1882, present 
edition, Vol. 46). p. 457 
513 Engels wrote this obituary on January 13, 1883 for Der Sozialdemokrat. It 
appeared there on January 18 with a short editorial introduction. On 
January 28, the Arbeiter-Wochen-Chronik reprinted the first two and the last 
paragraphs of the obituary. 
The obituary was published in English for the first time in the collection: 
K. Marx and F. Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, 1971, pp. 323-24. p. 460 
514 Charles Longuet and Jenny Marx were married on October 10, 1872. 
p. 460 
sis See Note 277. p. 460 
5X6 One of the demagogic slogans of the Liberals that brought them victory at the 
elections was Gladstone's promise to solve the Irish question. In the summer 
and autumn of 1869, Ireland was the scene of a widespread campaign for an 
amnesty of the imprisoned Fenians. The numerous meetings (in Limerick and 
other cities) sent petitions to the British government demanding the release of 
the Irish revolutionaries. Gladstone, then head of the British government, 
stated his refusal to comply with these demands in his letters of October 18 and 
23, 1869 to the prominent participants in the amnesty movement Henry 
O'Shea and Isaac Butt (see The Times, Nos. 26579 and 26583, October 23 and 
27, 1869; for Marx's analysis of Gladstone's refusal, see present edition, 
Vol. 21, pp. 407-10). p. 460 
517 New Caledonia—a group of islands in the South-Western part of the Pacific 
with an extremely unhealthy climate, to which the Paris Communards were 
exiled. p. 461 
518 The words "at Argenteuil, France" were arbitrarily inserted by the editors of 
the New Yorker Volkszeitung (in actual fact, Marx died in London). This fact, as 
well as the editors' unauthorised use of Engels' telegram to Sorge of March 14, 
caused Engels' sharp protest which he expressed in his letter to the editors of 
the New Yorker Volkszeitung (see this volume, p. 472). p. 462 
519 Engels wrote the "Draft of a Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx" in English. 
The first publication was in the French newspaper La Justice, No. 27, 

=====第686页=====
656 Notes 
March 20, 1883, in Engels' translation. The text was preceded by a short account 
of the funeral meeting at Marx's graveside which was probably written by Charles 
Longuet, the widower of Marx's eldest daughter, who was present at the 
funeral (in 1880, he had become a member of the Justice editorial board). 
The French text printed by La Justice was used for the Italian translation in 
La Plebe, No. 4, April 1883, p. 41. 
The draft was published in English for the first time in: Karl Marx, Man, 
Thinker and Revolutionist, Lawrence, London, 1927, pp. 43-46. p. 463 
520 Engels wrote this article at the request of Eduard Bernstein for Der 
Sozialdemokrat on about March 18, 1883, immediately after Marx's funeral. He 
also included in it condolences from various persons and organisations, as well 
as Liebknecht's speech at the funeral. 
The publication in Der Sozialdemokrat was reprinted in part (the letter and 
the telegrams from Paris were omitted) in the Hungarian Arbeiter-Wochen-
Chronik, No. 13, April 1, 1883, and in full in the New Yorker Volkszeitung, 
No. 82, April 5, 1883. 
An incomplete publication of this obituary appeared as a supplement to 
Marx's biography printed by the New York Pionier.  Illustrierter  Volks-Kalender für 
1891,  pp. 44-45. 
The article was published in English for the first time in Reminiscences of 
Marx and Engels, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow [1956], 
pp. 348-53. p. 467 
521 See Note 123. p. 467 
522 The Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (Partido Socialista Obrero de Espafia) was 
founded on May 2, 1879 in Madrid by a group of former members of the 
Spanish Federation of the First International. Among its founders were José 
Mesa and Pablo Iglesias and other prominent activists of the Spanish workers' 
movement. The first workers' party in Spain, the Socialist Party launched an 
organised struggle of the Spanish proletariat for social emancipation. Up to 
1881 it was illegal. In 1888, it held its first congress in Barcelona. p. 470 
523 The Cologne Communist Trial (October 4-November 12, 1852) was organised 
and stage-managed by the Prussian government. The defendants were 
members of the Communist League arrested in the spring of 1851 on charges 
of "treasonable plotting". The forged documents and false evidence presented 
by the police authorities were not only designed to secure the conviction of the 
defendants but also to compromise their London comrades and the proletarian 
organisation as a whole. The dishonest tactics resorted to by the Prussian police 
state in fighting the international working-class movement were exposed by 
Engels in his article "The Late Trial in Cologne" and, in greater detail, by 
Marx in his pamphlets Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne 
(see present edition, Vol. 11) and Herr Vogt (Vol. 17, pp. 64-67). p. 471 
524 See Note 220. p. 471 
525 The Royal Society of London for Improving Natural Knowledge—the oldest 
scientific society in Great Britain founded in 1660 and formalised by Royal 
Charter in 1662. p. 471 
526 This article was written by Engels at the request of the editors of Der 
Sozialdemokrat. It appeared there in Nos. 19 and 21 on May 3 and 17, 1883. 
Part I of the article was reprinted by the New Yorker Volkszeitung, No. 120, 

=====第687页=====
Notes 657 
May 19, 1883; Part II (minus the first three paragraphs) appeared in the 
Hungarian Arbeiter-Wochen-Chronik, No. 22, June 3, 1883. 
The letter to Philipp van Patten was translated from Der Sozialdemokrat into 
Polish (published in Przedswit, No. 18, Geneva, May 31, 1883) and into English 
(Bulletin of the Social Labor Movement, New York, June 1883). 
An excerpt from Part I of the article was published in English in: K. Marx, 
F. Engels, The Socialist Revolution, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1981, pp. 262-
63). p. 473 
527 "The Agricultural and Forestry Academy was founded in Petrovsko-Razumovskoye 
near Moscow in 1865. At present it is the Moscow Timiryazev Agricultural 
Academy. p. 473 
528 The St. Petersburg Practical Technological Institute of Emperor Nicholas I was 
founded in 1828. p. 473 
529 This announcement was printed by Der Sozialdemokrat, No. 17, April 19, 1883. 
The students from Odessa asked to write the following words on the wreath: 
"To Karl Marx, the author of Capital and founder of the International 
Working Men's Association, from a group of socialists of the Odessa University, 
his disciples and youth." p. 473 
530 See Note 123. p. 474 
581 Engels is referring to Slavia, the students' association which embraced young 
people from Slavic countries living in Zurich. p. 474 
532 Marx was in Karlsbad from August 19 to September 21, 1874, from August 15 
to September 11, 1875, and from August 15 to September 15, 1876. p. 474 
533 The Central Labor Union in New York—an association of trade unions of New 
York set up in 1882 which in the 1880s was a mass workers' organisation 
embracing white and coloured people, both of American and foreign extraction. 
The Central Labor Union was headed by socialists who recognised the need for 
both professional and political organisation of the workers for the purpose 
of more efficiently guiding the working-class struggle. p. 477 
534 Engels' letter to Philipp van Patten of April 18, 1883 was written in English 
(see present edition, Vol. 47). In this volume, it is reproduced from the original 
checked against the German translation by Engels published in Der Sozialdemok­
rat. The discrepancies are indicated in the footnotes. p. 477 
535 Engels is referring to the exposition of their views in The German Ideology 
(written in 1845-46) (see present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 53, 380-81). p. 477 
536 The defeat of the Paris Commune was followed by counter-revolutionary terror 
and the massacre of the revolutionary French proletariat. Over 30,000 
Communards (according to other data, 40,000) were tortured and shot by 
Versailles troops without trial. The overall number of the executed, the exiled and 
the imprisoned reached 70,000, and, counting those who had fled because of 
reprisals, 100,000. p. 478 
537 A. Loria, La rendita fondiaria e la sua elisione naturale, Milan, Naples, Pisa, 1880. 
The copy of this book sent to Marx had a dedicatory inscription: "To the 
most penetrating, most brilliant and most knowledgeable writer on political 
economy. The author. Mantua. 1879". Loria's letter was dated November 23, 
1879.  p. 479 
588 See Note 231. p. 479 
44-1317 

=====第688页=====
658 Notes 
539 Bakunin's Statehood and Anarchy appeared anonymously in Geneva in 1873 and 
was received by the Bakuninists as a programme document. Marx's work on 
this book was closely associated with the ideological and political struggle waged 
by Marx and Engels and their followers against anarchism, a struggle which 
went on even after the Bakuninists' defeat at the Hague Congress and the 
expulsion of the leaders of the Alliance from the International (see notes 30 
and 38). 
Marx's Notes on Bakunin's Book form an original critical and polemical work 
combining the analysis of the ideas of Bakunin, the ideologist of anarchism 
and, at that time, the principal opponent of Marxism, and profound criticism 
of anarchist doctrines with the development of the basic propositions of scientific 
communism on the state, the dictatorship of the proletariat and the alliance of the 
working class with the peasantry. 
This work is part of a thick notebook of Marx's manuscripts, entitled 
Russica II, 1875, which contains synopses of works by Russian authors. The 
manuscript of the Notes amounts to 24 large-size sheets. Marx wrote direct 
quotations from Bakunin's book in Russian or in German translation, or gave brief 
rendering in German of separate passages. Marx's own text consists of laconic 
comments and lengthier insertions. 
In the present volume all passages from Bakunin's text are in small type; the 
words and passages translated from the Russian are placed in « », and those 
from the German are in " ". Wherever Marx finds one or several 
equivalents to the Russian word in German or other languages these have been 
translated into English. Marx's own remarks are in long primer. The italics in the 
quotations are Marx's unless otherwise stated in the footnotes. p. 485 
540 Bakunin is referring to the representatives of the bourgeoisie who "came 
heartily to hate the present order, the political, economic and social order, who 
had turned their backs on the class that had produced them and had given 
themselves completely to the people's cause" (pp. 6-7). p. 487 
541 The reference is to the suppression of the revolutions in the Kingdom of 
Naples (1820-21) and Spain (1820-23) by decision of the congresses of the Holy 
Alliance (see Note 145), which sent Austrian troops to Italy (Troppau and 
Laibach congresses, 1820-21), and French troops to Spain (Verona congress, 
1822).  p. 488 
542 See Note 16. p. 488 
543 The reference is to the Polish uprisings of 1830 and 1863 (see notes 389 and 
14). p. 488 
544 The first partition of Poland (1772) was initiated by Frederick II of Prussia. 
Catherine II agreed to it because of Russia's difficult position owing to the 
Russo-Turkish war of 1768-74 and Austria's threat to enter the war on the side 
of Turkey (see also Note 9). p. 488 
545 xhe reference is to Prussia's victories in the Austro-Prussian (1866) and the 
Franco-Prussian (1870-71) wars. p. 488 
546 The Geneva Congress of the International Working Men's Association was held 
on September 3-8, 1866. p. 491 
547 At the shooting festival (Schützenfest) in Vienna in August 1868, during the 

=====第689页=====
Notes 659 
discussion of Germany's unification, the South-German democrats, members of 
the People's Party (see Note 99), opposed Prussian hegemony in Germany. They 
advocated the plan for a "Great Germany" that would incorporate all German 
states,  including Austria. p. 492 
548 Wilhelm Liebknecht did not want to break organisationally with the petty-
bourgeois People's Party (see Note 99) which he and Bebel had helped found 
in 1866, but he opposed participation of class-conscious workers in democratic 
organisations. On the other hand, he suggested that the democrats should join 
the workers' party. Marx and Engels always disapproved of Liebknecht's 
inconsistent and conciliatory policy (see, for instance, Marx's letter to 
Kugelmann of June 24, 1868, and Engels' letter to Kugelmann of July 10, 
1869,  present edition, Vol. 43). p. 492 
549 The reference is to the Fifth Nuremberg Congress of the Union of German 
Workers' Associations led by August Bebel which was held on September 5-7, 
1868.  The congress signified the break of the Union's majority from the liberal 
bourgeoisie and its firm adherence to class proletarian stand. By 69 votes 
against 44 the delegates accepted the International's platform, which was put 
concisely in the new programme of the Union proposed to the congress. This 
programme declared the abolition of the capitalist system to be the goal, and 
.the proletarian class struggle the means of attaining it. The congress stated that 
the workers would be able to emancipate themselves only by seizing political 
power and acting "jointly with the workers of all countries". p. 492 
550 The reference is to the French National Assembly, the elections to which were 
held on February 8, 1871. The majority of the deputies were monarchists. 
After the uprising of March 18, 1871, the Assembly fled to Versailles, from 
where it fought against the Commune. p. 492 
551 The Vendôme Column was erected in Paris between 1806 and 1810 as a tribute 
to the military victories of Napoleon I. On May 16, 1871, by the order of the 
Paris Commune, the Vendôme Column was destroyed as a symbol of 
militarism. p. 492 
552 In the spring of 1873 the last units of the Prussian occupation troops were 
withdrawn from French territory. They were stationed there under the terms of 
the Frankfurt Peace of 1871, which concluded the Franco-Prussian war of 
1870-71.  p. 493 
553 Marx is referring to the activities of the Comité de propagande révolutionnaire 
socialiste de la France méridionale. It was founded by the former Paris Commune 
refugees living in Barcelona Charles Alerini and Paul Brousse and the member 
of the International's Lyons section Camille Carnet in the spring of 1873 for 
spreading anarchist ideas in France and among the Commune refugees. 
p. 493 
554 The reference is to Alsace and the north-eastern part of Lorraine captured by 
Germany in the Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71,  to Russia's refusal to observe 
the article of the Paris Treaty of 1856 (see Note 578) which forbade it to 
maintain its navy in the Black Sea, and to the campaign undertaken by the 
Russian government in the spring of 1873 against the Khiva Khanate. 
p. 493 
555 The reference is to the Spanish Revolution of 1808-14 (see K. Marx, 
"Revolutionary Spain", present edition, Vol. 13). p. 494 

=====第690页=====
660 Notes 
556 In 1809 Tirol was the scene of a popular uprising, headed by Andreas Hof er, 
against the Franco-Bavarian occupation. The uprising was a failure, p. 494 
557 See Note 62. p. 494 
558 The Carlists—a reactionary clerical-absolutist group in Spain consisting of 
adherents of the pretender to the Spanish throne Don Carlos, the brother of 
Ferdinand VII. Relying on the military and the Catholic clergy, and making 
use of the support of the backward peasants in some regions of Spain, the 
Carlists launched a civil war in 1833, which in fact turned into a struggle 
between the feudal-Catholic and liberal-bourgeois elements and led to the third 
bourgeois revolution (1834-43). After Don Carlos' death in 1855 the Carlists 
supported his grandson Don Carlos Jr. In 1872, in the situation of political 
crisis and sharper class conflicts, the Carlists stepped up their activity, which 
took on the scope of a new civil war that ended only in 1876. p. 494 
559 fueros here means the charters which, in medieval Spain, established the rights, 
privileges and duties of townspeople and members of village communities in 
matters of local government, jurisdiction, taxation, military service, etc. 
p. 494 
560 A reference to the activity of the Alliance of Socialist Democracy (see Note 30) 
during the fifth bourgeois revolution in Spain (see Note 62). p. 494 
561 The programme of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy was 
drawn up by Bakunin and published as a leaflet in Geneva in 1868 in French 
and German. It proclaimed atheism, equality of classes and the abolition of the 
state,  and rejected the need for political action on the part of the working class 
(for Marx's remarks and criticism of this programme, see present edition, 
Vol. 21, pp. 207-11). p. 495 
562 According to the Austro-Hungarian compromise of 1867 the Habsburg Empire 
was transformed into a dual constitutional monarchy, Austria-Hungary. The 
Czech territories were incorporated into Cisleidiania—part of the empire with 
Austria as its centre, and Slovakia, into Transleithania with Hungary as its 
centre. p. 495 
563 The Great Moravian Kingdom (the Great Moravian Principality) was the 
early-feudal state of the Western Slavs in the 9th-early 10th centuries. At the 
time of its flourishing, it embraced the territories of Moravia, Slovakia, 
Bohemia, Luzica, Pannonia, and probably Malopolska and part of the Slovenian 
lands.  p. 497 
564 An ironical allusion to the following passage from Bakunin's book: "Against 
these people-suppressing trends ... an entirely new trend has finally developed 
leading direcdy to the abolition of all exploitation and all political or legal, as 
well as governmental-administrative oppression, i.e. to the abolition of all 
classes by means of making all estates economically equal, and to the abolition 
of their last stronghold, the State" (p. 74). p. 499 
565 Bakunin is referring to Article 7a, "On the Political Action of the Working 
Class",  which was included into the "General Rules of the International 
Working Men's Association" by the majority vote at the Hague Congress (see 
Note 38). p. 500 
566 St. Wenceslas's croxvn—a symbol of the Czech people's historical right to state 
independence. In the 1860s-early 1870s, the campaign of the Czechs for state 

=====第691页=====
Notes 661 
sovereignty and national equality proceeded under the banner of the 
restoration of the rights of St. Wenceslas's crown. p. 500 
567 Under the direct influence of anarchists, Serbian and Bulgarian students in 
Zurich organised a small group, Slavenski Savez, within the Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy (see Note 30). After several attempts in the spring of 1872 to 
constitute itself as a section of the International and the General Council's 
refusal to recognise it, the group affiliated to the Jura Federation (see 
Note 298) in June-July 1872. The group's programme was drawn up by 
Bakunin and published as "Supplement 'B' " to his Statehood and Anarchy. The 
Slavenski Savez ceased to exist in the summer of 1873. p. 501 
568 Slavophiles (A. Khomyakov, the brothers Aksakov, I. Kireevsky, Yu. Samarin 
and others)—representatives of a trend in the 19th-century Russian social and 
philosophical thought. In the late 1830s-1850s they advanced a theory of 
Russia's unique path of historical development which, in their opinion, differed 
from that of Western Europe. Among the characteristic features of their theory 
were monarchism, a negative attitude to revolution and a leaning towards 
religious-philosophical conceptions. The Slavophiles met mostly at the literary 
salons of Moscow. p. 502 
569 The reference is to the liberation of Moscow on October 22-26, 1612 by the 
people's militia under Minin and Pozharsky, who united the country's patriotic 
forces at the final stage of the struggle against the Polish-Lithuanian and 
Swedish invaders in the early 17th century. p. 502 
570 Bogdan Khmelnitsky led the liberation struggle of the Ukrainian people in 
1648-54 against the rule of the Polish szlachta and for the re-union with 
Russia. As a result, the Ukraine was re-united with Russia in a single state 
(1654).  p. 502 
571 Bakunin is referring to the bloody suppression of the Polish uprising of 
1863-64 (see Note 14) by Mikhail Muravyov, the Governor-General of 
Lithuania and Byelorussia, who was nicknamed "the hangman" for this. p. 503 
572 This remark relates to the Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71,  the beginning of 
which Marx described as follows: "On the German side the war is a war of 
defence, but who put Germany to the necessity of defending herself? Who 
enabled Louis Bonaparte to wage war upon her? Prussia] It was Bismarck who 
conspired with that very same Louis Bonaparte for the purpose of crushing 
popular opposition at home, and annexing Germany to the Hohenzollern 
dynasty" (see present edition, Vol. 22, p. 5). p. 504 
573 See Note 84. p. 505 
574 The three parties are: 
The National-Liberal Party—the party of German and, above all, Prussian 
bourgeoisie formed in the autumn of 1866 after a split in the Party of Progress. 
The policies of the National Liberals mirrored the capitulation of a significant part 
of the liberal bourgeoisie to Bismarck's Junker government after Prussia's victory 
in the Austro-Prussian war of 1866 and the establishment of its supremacy in 
Germany. 
The Party of  Progress  was founded in June 1861. It advocated the unification 
of Germany under Prussian aegis, the convocation of an all-German 
Parliament, and the establishment of a strong liberal Ministry responsible to the 
Chamber of Deputies. Its opposition to the Bismarck government was just so 
many words. 

=====第692页=====
662 Notes 
By the Social-Democratic Party Bakunin means the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party (the so-called Eisenachers) and the General Association of 
German Workers uniting Lassalle's followers (see Note 334). p. 505 
575 As a result of victory in the Austro-Prussian war of 1866, Prussia substantially 
expanded its territory by incorporating small German states. Besides, Austria 
had to renounce its rights to Schleswig and Holstein (see Note 577). 
p. 507 
576 The digging of the Kiel Canal, the project of which was first mentioned in the 
press in the 1870s, began in 1887. The opening took place on June 20, 1895. 
p. 508 
577 After the defeat in the Austro-Danish-Prussian war of 1864 (see Note 70), 
Denmark lost Schleswig, Holstein and Lauenburg, which were declared the 
joint possession of Austria and Prussia. Contrary to the opinion of Gorchakov, 
who considered unification of Germany under Prussia's supremacy damaging 
to Russian interests, Emperor Alexander II did not try to hamper Prussia's 
policy towards Denmark as a sign of gratitude for the "service" rendered by 
Prussia in the suppression of the Polish uprising of 1863 (see Note 14). This is 
what Marx means by his remark. p. 508 
578 The  paris Treaty—the peace treaty that concluded the Crimean war (1853-56) 
(see Note 19). It was signed by Austria, Britain, France, Prussia, Sardinia and 
Turkey, on the one hand, and Russia on the other, at the Congress of Paris on 
March 30, 1856. Under the treaty, Russia ceded the mouth of the Danube and 
part of Bessarabia, renounced its protectorate over the Danubian Principalities 
and its protection of Christians in Turkey, agreed to the neutralisation of the 
Black Sea (involving the closure of the Straits to foreign warships and a ban on 
Russia and Turkey maintaining navies and naval arsenals on the Black Sea), 
and returned the fortress of Kars to Turkey in exchange for Sevastopol and 
other Russian towns held by the Allies. p. 509 
579 A reference to the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation (see Note 94). 
p. 509 
580 The reference is to the events of the Anglo-French-Chinese war of 1856-60 
(Second Opium War). In August 1860 Anglo-French troops captured Tientsin 
and in October 1860 Peking. The Chinese government was forced to sign new, 
very damaging treaties with Britain and France in 1860. The war was an 
important step towards turning China into a semi-colony. p. 510 
581 Preparing for a war with Austria (see Note 5), in the autumn of 1865 in 
Biarritz Bismarck managed to extract a promise of French neutrality in the war 
from Napoleon III in exchange for raising no objections to the incorporation 
of Luxembourg into the French Empire. Bismarck did not keep his promise. 
p. 511 
582 The reference is to the treaties of Tilsit—peace treaties signed on July 7 and 9, 
1807 by Napoleonic France, and Russia and Prussia, members of the fourth 
anti-French coalition. In an attempt to split defeated powers, Napoleon made 
no territorial claims on Russia and even succeeded in transferring some of the 
Prussian monarchy's eastern lands to Russia. The treaty imposed harsh terms 
on Prussia, which lost nearly half its territory to the German states dependent 
on France, was made to pay indemnities and had its army reduced. However, 
Russia, like Prussia, had to break its alliance with Britain and, to its 
disadvantage, join Napoleon's Continental System. Napoleon formed the vassal 

=====第693页=====
Notes 663 
Duchy of Warsaw on Polish territory seized by Prussia during the partitions of 
Poland at the end of the 18th century, and planned to use it as an advanced post in 
the event of war with Russia. p. 511 
583 J. G. Fichte, Reden an die deutsche Nation (Berlin, 1808)—a course of lectures 
delivered by Fichte at Berlin University in the winter of 1807, when after the 
signing of the Peace of Tilsit Germany was in a state of extreme national 
humiliation. They developed the idea of the nation as a collective personality 
having its own, special vocation. Fichte called on his compatriots to unite; he 
believed that political independence can be attained through stronger moral 
principles and an education reform. According to him, a nation should foster 
an awareness of its vocation and duty. p. 511 
584 Nicholas I was married in 1817 to the Prussian Princess Charlotte (Alexandra 
Fyodorovna), daughter of Frederick William III. p. 512 
585 Ligue du Midi—a revolutionary-democratic organisation embracing 15 depart­
ments. It was set up on September 18, 1870 in Marseilles on the initiative of the 
more active section of the middle commercial and industrial bourgeoisie, and 
assumed responsibility for providing local defence in view of the weakness of 
the central authority. The League's programme included the basic democratic 
demands set forth by the French sections of the International. By late 1870 it 
had been declared illegal and disbanded. p. 513 
586 In the notes for his L'Empire knouto-germanique, Bakunin wrote: "It is clear that 
urged by the same logic Mr. Engels could say in a letter written this year to a friend 
of ours, without the slightest irony but, on the contrary,quite seriously, that Mr. 
Bismarck, like King Victor Emmanuel, has rendered immense services to the 
revolution by creating great political centralisation in their respective countries" 
(Archives Bakounine, par A. Lehning, Vol. II, Leiden, 1965, p. 195). 
It is probably this letter by Engels that is interpreted so freely by Bakunin 
in this work. Marx and Engels advocated a revolutionary way of uniting 
Germany and were sharply opposed to both the home and foreign policy 
pursued by Bismarck. In the works included in this volume (see pp. 251-52, 
578),  they emphasised that Bismarck's reactionary domestic policy was turning 
the German proletariat towards revolutionary struggle. p. 513 
587 The reference is to the so-called Doctors' Club, a Berlin group of Young 
Hegelians in which Marx had a prominent place. The Young Hegelians drew 
radical atheistic conclusions from Hegel's philosophy, but at the same time 
removed philosophy from reality, turning it into a self-contained, determining 
force. In fact, the Young Hegelians were withdrawing more and more from 
practical revolutionary action. 
Here and below, Bakunin made many inaccuracies when citing the facts of 
Marx's biography. p. 513 
588 This refers to " The Free" (Die Freien) —a Berlin group of Left Hegelians 
which was formed in the first half of the 1840s and included Edgar Bauer, 
Max Stirner and others. Marx gave a highly negative assessment of the actions 
of "The Free" and of their empty abstract criticism. p. 514 
&89 See Note 378. p. 514 
590 A reference to the Communist League—the first German and international 
communist organisation of the proletariat formed under the leadership of 
Marx and Engels in London early in June 1847 as a result of the reorganisation 
of the League of the Just (see Note 220). The League's members took an active 

=====第694页=====
664 Notes 
part in the bourgeois-democratic revolution in Germany in 1848-49. In 1849 
and 1850, after the defeat of the revolution, it was reorganised and continued 
its activities. In the summer of 1850 disagreements arose between the 
supporters of Marx and Engels and the sectarian Willich-Schapper group, 
which ended in a split within the League. Owing to police persecutions and 
arrests of League members in May 1851, the activities of the Communist 
League as an organisation practically ceased in Germany. On November 17, 
1852,  on a motion by Marx, the London District announced the dissolution of 
the League. The Communist League played an important historical role as the 
first proletarian party based on the principles of scientific communism, as a 
school of proletarian revolutionaries, and as the historical forerunner of the 
International Working Men's Association. p. 514 
591 Marx moved to Brussels on February 3, 1845, after the French government 
had expelled him from Paris by the decree of January 16, 1845. At that time, 
Engels was in Barmen and joined Marx in Brussels on April 5, 1845. 
p. 514 
592 See Note 18. p. 515 
593 See Note 102. p. 516 
594 In the note to the Preface to the first German edition of Volume One of 
Capital Marx wrote: "This is the more necessary, as even the section of 
Ferdinand Lassalle's work against Schulze-Delitzsch, in which he professes to 
give 'the intellectual quintessence' of my explanations on these subjects, 
contains important mistakes. If Ferdinand Lassalle has borrowed almost literally 
from my writings, and without any acknowledgement, all the general 
theoretical propositions in his economic works, e.g., those on the historical 
character of capital, on the connexion between the conditions of production 
and the mode of production, &c. &c. even to the terminology created by me, this 
may perhaps be due to purposes of propaganda. I am here, of course, not 
speaking of his detailed working out and application of these propositions, with 
which I have nothing to do" (see present edition, Vol. 35). p. 516 
595 xhe Geneva Congress of the International Working Men's Association adopted 
the principal ideas set forth in Marx's "Instructions for the Delegates of the 
Provisional General Council. The Different Questions" (present edition, 
Vol. 20, pp. 185-94) as its programme. p. 523 
596 The Nuremberg Congress (see Note 549) sent a delegation to the conference of 
the People's Party (see Note 99), which took place on September 19-20, 1868 in 
Stuttgart and declared the Party's support for the Nuremberg programme. 
p. 524 
597 The second congress of the League of Peace and Freedom was held on 
September 21-25, 1868 in Berne. p. 524 
598 The reference is to the resolution on the League of Peace and Freedom 
adopted by the Brussels Congress of the International on September 12, 1868 
in connection with the League's invitation to attend its congress in Berne in 
September 1868. The invitation was sent to the International on the initiative 
of Bakunin who, being a member of the League's Central Committee, sought to 
establish his authority over the International Working Men's Association (see 
The General Council of the First International, 1868-1870. Minutes, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, 1974, pp. 297-98). p. 524 

=====第695页=====
Notes 665 
599 In 1876 Prosper Olivier Lissagaray, a French republican journalist and member 
of the Paris Commune, published a book in Brussels entitled Histoire de la 
Commune de 1871. The author, who drew on extensive factual material, exposed 
the anti-national policies of the French ruling circles and showed the part 
played by the people in the history of the Paris Commune. In a letter to 
Wilhelm Bracke written on September 23, 1876, Marx said that this book was 
"the first authentic history of the Commune" (see present edition, Vol. 45). 
Believing this work important for the proletarian party, Marx did a great deal 
to have a German translation of it published {Geschichte der Commune von 1871. 
Autorisirte deutsche Ausgabe nach dem vom Verfasser vervollständigten französischen 
Original, Brunswick, 1877). 
Engels' "Note on Page 29 of the Histoire de la Commune" provides, as it 
were, comments on the events that unfolded in France after the capitulation of 
Bazaine's army in Metz on October 27 and until the complete encirclement of 
Paris in mid-November 1870. Engels, who had earlier written a series of articles 
("Notes on the War") for The Pall Mall Gazette (London), which appeared 
between July 1870 and June 1871 (see present edition, Vol. 22), had a good 
knowledge of the course of events and their underlying causes. He sent a copy 
of his comments to Lissagaray who on February 9, 1877 thanked the author for 
"a brilliant commentary" on the military events. Lissagaray included Engels' 
text in the second French edition of his book, part changed and part verbatim. 
Engels' "Note" was first published, in Russian, in 1933. It now appears in 
English for the first time. p. 527 
600 The reference is to the beginning of the talks on a truce held in Versailles on 
October 30 between Thiers, representative of the Government of National 
Defence, and Bismarck. The news about the betrayal that was being prepared 
and the capitulation of Metz that followed prompted the revolutionary action 
of Paris workers on October 31. Bismarck used the inaction of the French 
command during the talks, which allowed him to play for time, and on 
November 6 he broke off the talks. p. 527 
601 Engels comments on the following passage from Lissagaray: "The men of 
September 4 believed themselves to be saved having obtained their aim. They 
put on the same level armistice and capitulation, 'good and bad news', 
convinced that Paris, despaired of victory, will open its arms to peace." 
"The men of September 4"—a group of bourgeois politicians, monarchists 
and clericals, who comprised the so-called Government of National Defence set 
up after the revolution of September 4, 1870 in Paris. p. 527 
602 Francs-tireurs —volunteers organised into small guerrilla units who took part in 
the defence of France against die invaders. The first units were formed during 
the wars against the anti-French coalitions in the late 18th-early 19th century. 
In 1867 francs-tireurs' societies began to spring up in France. When the 
Franco-Prussian war broke out and Prussian troops invaded French territory, 
members of these societies were called to arms by a special decree. When the 
regular French troops were defeated and blockaded in fortresses the number 
of francs-tireurs' units increased sharply. They mainly attacked transports, 
weaker detachments, railway trains and food depots, and did substantial 
damage to the enemy. p. 528 
603 The reference is to the siege of Mantua (June 1796-February 2, 1797) by 
French troops during Napoleon I's Italian campaign of 1796-97. p. 528 

=====第696页=====
666 Notes 
604 The  book which prompted Marx's notes was the second edition of Adolph 
Wagner's Allgemeine oder theoretische Volkswirtschaftslehre, erster Theil:  Grund­
legung, published in Leipzig and Heidelberg in 1879 as the first volume of 
Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie by Adolph Wagner and Erwin Nasse. It has 
been possible to date these notes by Marx's mention in his manuscript (see this 
volume, p. 550) of Rudolph Meyer's Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsaetze von 
Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow which appeared in Berlin after January 1881. 
In English, this work was first published in: K. Marx, Texts on Method. 
Translated and edited by Carver, Oxford, 1975, pp. 179-219. p. 531 
605 Marx is probably referring to the following works: Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Zur 
Erkenntniss unsrer Staatswirtschaftlichen Zustände (Erstes Heft: Fünf Theoreme, 
Neubrandenburg and Friedland, 1842), Soziale Briefe an Kirchmann (Nos. 1-3, 
Berlin, 1850-51), Zur Erklärung und Abhülfe der heutigen Creditnoth des  Grund­
besitzes. I. Die Ursachen der Noth. II. Zur Abhülfe (Jena, 1869); Fr. A. Lange, 
John Stuart Mills Ansichten über die sozialen Frage... (Duisburg, 1865), Die 
Arbeiterfrage... (3rd ed., Winterthur, 1875); A. Schäffle, Bau und Leben  des socialen 
Körpers (Vols. 1-4, Tübingen, 1875-78). p. 531 
606 The note mentioned by Marx is to be found in his A Contribution to the Critique 
of Political Economy (see present edition, Vol. 29, p. 270). p. 545 
607 Vegetable ivory (Phytelephas)—species of an anomalous genus of palms from 
tropical South America. The seed or nuts, as they are usually called when fully 
ripe and hard, are used by the American Indians for making small ornamental 
articles and toys. They are imported into Britain in considerable quantities, 
frequently under the name of corozo nuts. p. 555 
608 The reference is to the change in the social and economic position of Germany 
as a result of the  5,000  million francs it received from France after the 
Franco-Prussian war of 1870-71 (see Note 144). p. 557 
609 St. Peter's Money (St. Peter's Penny or Pence)—annual contributions from 
Catholics to the Papacy (originally, a silver penny from each family on the 
feast day of St. Peter). It continues to be an important source of revenue for the 
Pope's curia. p. 559 
610 Getting ready to travel to Karlsbad for medical treatment in August 1874, 
Marx applied to become naturalised in Britain. This was a precaution against 
possible reprisals by the Austrian authorities. Marx left for Karlsbad on August 
15, having failed to receive a reply to his application. 
This document is an official blank on which information about Marx (in 
italics in the text) has been entered in a clerk's hand. Only the signature is 
Marx's. The special report by W. Reimers and J. Williams was written on a sepa­
rate blank. 
Appended to the application are the statements made by Marx's referees 
written on special blanks, as well as the letter of Morris R. Willis, Marx's lawyer, 
to the Secretary of State for the Home Department of August 29, 1874, 
requesting to know the reasons for the refusal to grant a Certificate of 
Naturalisation. p. 563 
611 Apart from Marx and Engels, former Communards and other participants in 
the meeting spoke at the celebration held by the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London (see Note 123). Friedrich Lessner, a veteran of the German 
and international workers' movement, sent a greeting. 

=====第697页=====
Notes 667 
An account of the meeting was featured by the Neue Social-Demokrat of 
Berlin, No. 20, February 18, 1876. The report published in this volume was 
drawn up on February 12 by Carl Scharr and printed by Der Volksstaat, No. 24, 
February 27, 1876, in the section "Aus England". Besides his own speech, Engels 
translated into German Walery Wrôblewski's speech, indicating the milestones of 
his career. Wrôblewski's speech was also included by the editorial board into the 
report on Engels' speech. Serious factual errors were made in the account of 
Marx's and Engels' speeches. 
A report of the meeting was also carried by the Russian periodical Nabat 
published in Geneva, No. 4, 1876. It differed substantially from the text in Der 
Volksstaat, and also contained a great number of factual errors. p. 565 
612 See Note 378. p. 565 
613 The reference is to the second congress of the Communist League held on 
November 29-December 8, 1847 (see Note 220). A number of its members also 
belonged to the German Workers' Educational Society in London. p. 565 
614 As is clear from the correspondence of the members of the London District of 
the Communist League with the League's Central Authority (see letters of 
March 15 and June 18, 1848 in Der Bund der Kommunisten, Dokumente und 
Materialien, Vol. I, Berlin, 1970, pp. 726-28 and 804-07), in early March 1848 
the owner of the pub where the members of the Educational Society used to 
assemble cancelled the lease, and the meetings could no longer be held there. 
The author of the letter of March 15 stressed that in future the Society's 
meetings would be held only, under police surveillance, and that the British 
government had established strict supervision over the connections between 
foreign revolutionaries and the Chartists (see Note 368). p. 565 
615 An inaccuracy in the text: the reference is to the dissolution of the Communist 
League in November 1852. p. 565 
616 See Note 14. P- 566 
617 See Note 26. p. 566 
616 Marx's interview with the correspondent of The Chicago Tribune took place in 
the first half of December 1878. Despite the several inaccuracies of the 
correspondent, this document has some biographical interest. 
The German translation of the text of the interview was published, slightly 
abridged, in the New Yorker Volkszeitung, No. 10, January 10, 1879 and 
reprinted by Der Vorbote, No. 2, January 11, 1879. The Socialist of Chicago 
(No.  18, January 11) reprinted the last part of the interview. The publication in 
Der Vorbote was used for the Danish translation, which appeared in the 
Social-Demokraten, Copenhagen, Nos. 84 and 85, April 9 and 10, 1879. 
p. 568 
619 Marx left for Paris late in October 1843. p. 568 
620 The reference is to the report of the American Ambassador to Berlin 
J. Ch. Bancroft Davis dispatched to the US Secretary of State Hamilton Fish on 
February 10, 1877. The part of the report referring to the socialist movement 
in Germany was printed in the official publication: United States. State 
Department. Papers Relating to Foreign Relations of the United States, Washington, 
1877,  pp. 175-80. p. 571 
621 This refers to the programme of the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany 
adopted by the unity congress in Gotha in May 1875. p. 571 

=====第698页=====
668 Notes 
622 The first national trade union in the USA—the National Typographical 
Union—was founded in 1850. By die 1860s the country had a whole network 
of local trade union organisations. In August 1866 the National Labor Union 
was formed in Baltimore, and in December 1869 the Noble Order of Knights 
of Labor in Philadelphia, which on January 1, 1878 became a legal body. Both 
organisations, while experiencing a strong petty-bourgeois influence, neverthe­
less advocated social reforms, including the eight-hour working day, women's 
rights,  and higher wages. The economic crisis of 1873 and the prolonged 
slump which followed were the causes for vigorous strike action of American 
workers, with its peak being the miners' strike in Pennsylvania (the Long Strike) 
of 1874-75 and the national railway strike of 1877. p. 573 
623 See Note 96. p. 574 
624 See Note 110. p. 575 
625 See Note 268. p. 575 
626 The reference is to the Anti-Socialist Law promulgated on October 19, 1878 
(see Note 289) and the introduction of a minor state of siege in Berlin (see 
Note 418). p. 578 
627 On July 12, 1870 the Paris members of the International published in the 
Réveil an anti-war manifesto addressed to the workers of all nations, which was 
reprinted by Der Volksstaat, No. 57, July 17, 1870. A number of similar 
addresses were issued in France at that time. On July 16 a workers' meeting in 
Brunswick convened by the leaders of the German Social-Democratic Party 
issued an address in protest against the war preparations made by the ruling 
classes, and for solidarity with the manifesto of the International's Paris 
members. Workers' meetings in Chemnitz and Munich also adopted similar 
manifestos and resolutions. p. 578 
628 Marx quotes from memory his "First Address of the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association on the Franco-Prussian War" written 
between July 19 and 23, 1870, and issued by the General Council as a leaflet at 
the outset of the war (see present edition, Vol. 22, pp. 3-8). p. 578 
629 On September 5, 1870, after the defeat of the French army at Sedan, the 
Committee of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party with its headquarters 
in Brunswick issued a manifesto (Manifest des Ausschusses der  social-demokratischen 
Arbeiterpartei. An Alle  deutschen  Arbeiter!) urging German workers to organise mass 
meetings of protest against the expansionist plans of the Prussian government. 
The Manifesto included parts of Marx's and Engels' "Letter to the Committee of 
the Social-Democratic Workers' Party" of August 22 and 30, 1870 (see present 
edition, Vol. 22, pp. 260-62). On September 9, members of the Brunswick 
Committee, Bracke, Bornhorst, Spier, Kühn and Gralle, as well as a printer, 
Sievers, were arrested for publishing the Manifesto and in November 1871 
brought to trial on the fabricated charge of disturbing public order. 
p. 578 
630 On November 26, 1870, when the German Reichstag discussed the question of 
credits for the war against France, Bebel and Liebknecht demanded that credits be 
refused and peace with the French Republic promptly concluded without 
annexations. The entire Social-Democratic group in the Reichstag together 
with Bebel and Liebknecht voted against the granting of credits on November 
28. After the Reichstag session closed on December 17, Bebel, Liebknecht and 
Hepner were arrested and charged with high treason. p. 578 

=====第699页=====
Notes 669 
631 On November 28, 1878 a minor state of siege was declared in Berlin (see Note 
418).  The next day 67 members of the Social-Democratic Party, including their 
leaders Auer and Fritzsche, received deportation orders. p. 578 
632 In this letter, addressed to Victoria Adelaide Mary Louisa, the eldest daughter 
of Queen Victoria and wife of the Prussian Crown Prince, the future German 
Emperor Frederick III, the British politician Mountstuart Elphinstone Grant 
Duff gives an account of his talk with Marx, which took place on January 31, 
1879 at the Devonshire Club. The author first published excerpts from the 
letter in his Notes from a Diary, 1873-1881, London, 1898, pp. 103-06. Grant 
Duff took pains not to disclose the name of his addressee. 
Despite the fact that the author did not always faithfully reproduce Marx's 
ideas,  the letter is undoubtedly of interest as additional material throwing light 
on Marx's views of the revolutionary future of Russia and Germany, and also as 
evidence of the fear provoked in ruling quarters by the growth of the 
working-class movement and the prestige of its leader, Karl Marx. The letter 
was published in full for the first time in an article by Andrew Rothstein "A 
Meeting with Karl Marx" (The Times. Literary Supplement, July 15, 1949, 
p. 464). p. 580 
633 See Note 90. p. 581 
634 The  protracted economic crisis began in 1873 after the period known in history 
as Gründertum (see Note 84). p. 581 
635 The reference is to the Glorious Revolution of 1688 (the overthrow of the 
Stuart dynasty and the enthronement of William III of Orange in 1689), after 
which constitutional monarchy was consolidated in England on the basis of a 
compromise between the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie. p. 581 
636 Marx's interview with John Swinton, at that time editor of the progressive New 
York newspaper The Sun, took place in August 1880. Following the publication 
of an account of the interview Marx wrote to Swinton on November 4, 1880: "I 
have at the same time to thank you for your friendly article in The Sun" (see 
present edition, Vol. 46). After the interview, Marx kept in touch with Swinton for 
some time and sent him, at the latter's request, the French translation of 
Capital. 
Marx's interview with Swinton was reprinted in the collection: John 
Swinton, Current Views and Notes of  Forty  Days in France and England, New York, 
1880,  pp. 41-45. 
Swinton used this interview in his speech at the meeting organised by New 
York workers on March 19, 1883 on the occasion of Marx's death. See Der 
Sozialdemokrat, No. 15, April 5, 1883, and Truth (San Francisco), April 7, 1883. 
p. 583 
637 Marx and his family took a rest at Ramsgate between early August and 
September 13, 1880. p. 583 
638 Marx probably referred to Karl Daniel Adolph Douai's proposal to have 
Capital translated into English. As is clear from Sorge's letter to Marx of July 
19, 1878, this plan had not been carried through. The English translation of 
Volume One of Capital appeared after Marx's death, in 1887. It was prepared 
by Engels, Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling. p. 584 
639 Originally, while working on his economic manuscripts, Marx had planned to 
write six books: on capital, on landed property, on wage labour, on the state, 
on international trade and on the world market (see Marx's letters to Lassalle 

=====第700页=====
670 Notes 
of February 22, 1858, to Engels of April 2, 1858, and to Weydemeyer of 
February 1, 1859, present edition, Vol. 40). The plan was not realised. 
Questions of ground rent and credit were dealt with, at some length, in 
Volume Three of Capital p. 584 
640 The reference is to the authorised French translation of Volume One of 
Capital (see Note 108). Marx made substantial changes and additions in the 
manuscript of the translation. He believed that the French edition had an 
independent scientific value. On its basis, changes were introduced into the 
subsequent editions of Volume One in German, Russian and other languages. 
p. 584 
641 This statement, written before February 26, 1883 probably by a staff member 
of L'Egalité (perhaps by Paul Lafargue) in view of the closure of the newspaper 
of the French Workers' Party, was sent by Engels to the Sozialdemokrat editorial 
board. It was enclosed with the letter of February 27-March 1, 1883 to the 
editor, Eduard Bernstein. "L'Egalité has gone phut again," wrote Engels, "and 
I would ask you to publish the following facts (see enclosed slip of paper) in the 
Sozialdemokrat" (see present edition, Vol. 46). The translation of this statement 
into German was probably made by Engels. 
The facts cited relate to the fourth and fifth series of L'Égalité, whose 
publication was terminated and resumed several times since its foundation in 
1877.  The fourth series appeared from October 24, 1882 and throughout 1883. 
The fifth series was published between February 15 and 26, 1883. 
The statement appeared in Der Sozialdemokrat,  No. 11, March 8, 1883, and was 
prefaced by the editorial note: "After a brief existence L'Egalité was unfortunately 
forced to close. The following has been written to us in this connection." 
p. 586 

=====第701页=====
671 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Albert (1828-1902)—King of Saxony 
(1873-1902).—172 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Emperor of 
Russia (1801-25).—488, 511-12 
Alexander II (1818-1881)—Emperor of 
Russia (1855-81), assassinated by 
members of the Narodnaya Volya 
(People's Will) group in March 
1881.—5-6, 8-9, 31, 103-04, 226, 228, 
239, 357, 374, 496, 511 
Alexander III (1845-1894)—Emperor 
of Russia (1881-94).—426 
Anaxagoras (c. 500-428 B.C.)—Greek 
materialist philosopher from Cla-
zomenae (Asia Minor).—285 
Anne (1665-1714)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1702-14).— 
437 
Applegarth, Robert (1833-1925)— 
cabinet-maker, a trade union leader; 
General Secretary of the Amalga­
mated Society of Carpenters and 
Joiners (1862-71), member of the 
London Trades Council; member of 
the General Council of the First 
International (1865, 1868-72); dele­
gate to the Basle Congress of the 
International (1869); one of the Re­
form League leaders; subsequently 
left the working-class movement.— 
571 
Arakcheyev, Alexei Andreyevich (1769-1834)—Russian statesman; favourite 
of Paul I and Alexander I.—512 
Arch,  Joseph (1826-1919) — British 
politician, founder of the National 
Agricultural Labourers' Union in 
1872 and its president, Liberal M.P. 
(1885-86, 1892-1900).—179, 181-82 
Aristotle (384-322 B.C.)—Greek phi­
losopher.—298, 535 
Arnims —family of margraves in Prus­
sia, first mentioned in 1204.—144 
Atia—mother of Roman Emperor Au­
gustus.—429 
Alter, Ignat (1846-1907)—one of the 
leaders of the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party of Germany, reform­
ist; saddler; for many years deputy 
to the Reichstag.—77, 209, 578 
Augustus, Gaius Julius Caesar Octavianus 
(63 B.C.-A.D. 14)—Roman Emperor 
(27 B.C.-A.D. 14).—429 
Aurelle de Paladines, Louis Jean Bap­
tiste d' (1804-1877)—French gen­
eral; commanded the Army of the 
Loire during the Franco-Prussian war; 
Commander of the Paris National 
Guard (March 1871); deputy to the 
National Assembly (1871).—528-30 
B 
Babeuf,  François Noël {Gracchus) (1760-
1797)—French revolutionary, advo-

=====第702页=====
672 Name Index 
cate of Utopian egalitarian commu­
nism, organiser of the "conspiracy of 
equals".—287 
Bacon, Francis, Baron Verulam, Viscount 
St. Albans (1561-1626)—English phi­
losopher, naturalist, historian and 
statesman.—299, 569 
Badinguet—see Napoleon III 
Bakunin, Mikhail Alexandrovich (1814-
1876)—Russian democrat, journalist, 
participant in the 1848-49 revolution 
in Germany; an ideologist of Narod-
ism (populism) and anarchism in 
later years; opposed Marxism in the 
First International, was expelled 
from it at the Hague Congress (1872) 
for his splitting activities.—23, 26-28, 
34, 37, 45, 72, 77, 174-77, 205, 
213-14, 236, 425, 478, 487-526, 584 
Balfour, Arthur James Balfour, 1st Earl of 
(1848-1930)—British statesman and 
philosopher, M.P. from 1874.—389 
Batbie, Anselme-Polycarpe (1828-1887)— 
French politician, Orleanist, deputy 
to the National Assembly (1871); 
Senator (1876-79).—204 
Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882)—German 
idealist philosopher, Young Hegelian; 
author of works on the history of 
Christianity; radical; National Liberal 
after 1866.—427-28, 430, 431, 514 
Bauer, Edgar (1820-1886)—German 
philosopher and journalist, Young 
Hegelian; emigrated to England after 
the 1848-49 revolution; editor of the 
London Neue Zeit (1859); Prussian 
official after the 1861 amnesty; 
Bruno Bauer's brother and as­
sociate.—514 
Baumann, August—German Social-
Democrat; compositor; took part in 
socialist publications; at the time of 
the Anti-Socialist Law was deported 
from Germany; emigrated to the 
USA.—578 
Beaconsfield—see Disraeli, Benjamin, 
Earl of Beaconsfield 
Bebel, August (1840-1913)—prominent 
figure in the German and interna­tional working-class movement; 
turner; member of the First Interna­
tional; deputy to the North German 
(1867-70) and the German Reichstag 
(1871-81 and from 1883); a founder 
and leader of German Social-
Democracy; friend and associate of 
Marx and Engels.— 67, 71-73,  77, 
214, 240-42, 244, 249, 253-54, 258, 
408-09,  500, 523, 525 
Becker, Bernhard (1826-1891)—German 
journalist and historian; follower of 
Lassalle; President of the General 
Association of German Workers 
(1864-65); subsequendy joined the 
Eisenachers; delegate to the Hague 
Congress of the First International 
(1872).—78 
Becker, Hermann Heinrich ("Red 
Becker") (1820-1885) —German law­
yer and journalist; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution; member of the 
Communist League from 1850; one 
of the accused in the Cologne Com­
munist trial (1852), sentenced to five 
years'  imprisonment; member of the 
Party of Progress in the 1860s; later 
National Liberal.—138 
Becker, Johann Philipp (1809-1886)— 
prominent figure in the international 
working-class movement; brush-
maker; took part in the German and 
Swiss democratic movement in the 
1830s and 1840s and in the 1848-49 
revolution; prominent figure in the 
First International in the 1860s, dele­
gate to all its congresses; editor of 
Der Vorbote (1866-71); friend and 
associate of Marx and Engels. —231 
Becker, Oskar (1839-1868)—student of 
Leipzig University; in 1861 made 
an attempt on William I"s life; sen­
tenced to 20 years' imprisonment; 
amnestied in 1866.—244 
Beckx, Pierre Jean (1795-1887)—Belgian 
clergyman; head of the Order of 
Jesuits (1853-84).—575 
Benoiston de Châteauneuf,  Louis François 
(1776-1856)—French economist and 

=====第703页=====
Name Index 673 
statistician; member of the editorial 
board of the Journal des Économistes.— 
326 
Berezowski, Antoni (1847-c. 1916)—Pol­
ish revolutionary, took part in the 
1863-64 uprising; emigrated after its 
suppression; in 1867 made an at­
tempt on Alexander II's life in Paris; 
sentenced to 20 years of hard labour 
by a French court.—5 
Bernstein, Eduard (1850-1932)— 
German Social-Democrat from 1872; 
editor of Der Sozialdemokrat  (1881-
90); after Engels' death came out 
with the revision of Marxism.—254, 
257-66,  269 
Bervi, Vasily Vasilyevich (pseudonym 
N. Flerovsky) (1829-1918)—Russian 
economist and sociologist; enlight-
ener and democrat; author of The 
Condition of the Working Class in 
Russia.—44 
Bessemer, Sir Henry (1813-1898)— 
British inventor of a new economical 
way of converting pig-iron into 
steel.—276, 556 
Bignami, Enrico (1844-1921)—Italian 
journalist; took part in the national 
liberation struggle in Italy headed by 
Garibaldi; member of the First Inter­
national; founder and editor of La 
Plebe (1868-83).—172-73 
Binz, Karl (1832-1913)—German 
physician and pharmacologist; pro­
fessor at Bonn University where he 
founded the Institute of Pharmacolo­
gy in 1869.—115 
Bismarck (or Bismarck-Schönhausen), 
Otto,  Prince von (1815-1898)— 
statesman of Prussia and Germany, 
diplomat; Prime Minister of Prussia 
(1862-71) and Chancellor of the Ger­
man Empire (1871-90); author of the 
Anti-Socialist Law (1878).—10, 16, 
22, 53, 59, 66, 73, 89-90, 125, 133, 
203, 211, 230-32, 238, 240, 246, 
248, 250-52, 260-62, 265, 272, 
274-77,  280, 318, 391, 404, 407-09, 
447-48,  488, 493, 496, 500, 505-06, 508-13,  515, 522-23, 526, 574, 575, 
578-79 
Blanc, Jean Joseph Charles Louis  (1811-
1882)—French petty-bourgeois so­
cialist, historian; member of the 
Provisional Government and Presi­
dent of the Luxembourg Commission 
in 1848; pursued a policy of concilia­
tion with the bourgeoisie; emigrated 
to England in August 1848; a leader 
of petty-bourgeois refugees in Lon­
don; deputy to the National Assem­
bly of 1871; opposed the Paris Com­
mune.—514 
Blanqui, Jerome Adolphe (1798-1854)— 
French political economist; brother 
of Louis Auguste Blanqui.—326 
Blanqui, Louis Auguste (1805-1881)— 
French revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist; organised several secret 
societies and plots; active participant 
in the revolutions of 1830 and 1848; 
leader of the proletarian movement 
in France; sentenced to imprison­
ment several times; in 1871, was 
elected member of the Paris Com­
mune in his absence while in pris­
on.—13-14, 58, 336 
Bleichröder, Gerson von (1822-1893)— 
German financier; head of a big 
banking house in Berlin; Bismarck's 
private banker and unofficial adviser 
on financial questions.—274, 277 
Blind,  Karl (1826-1907)—German 
democratic journalist; active partici­
pant in the revolutionary movement 
in Baden in 1848-49; a leader of 
the German petty-bourgeois refugees 
in London in the 1850s; National 
Liberal in the 1860s.—244, 270-71 
Bios, Wilhelm (1849-1927)—German 
journalist and politician; member of 
the Social-Democratic Party (from 
1872);  deputy to the Reichstag (1877-
1918,  with short intervals); Minister-
President of the Württemberg gov­
ernment (1918-20).—209 
Blume, Karl Wilhelm Hermann von 
(1835-1919)—Prussian general and 
military writer; took part in the 
45-1317 

=====第704页=====
674 Name Index 
Franco-Prussian war of  1870-71.— 
530 
Böckh, Philipp August (1785-1867)— 
German philologist and historian of 
antiquity; professor and for a 
number of years rector of Berlin 
University.—556 
Bonaparte, Louis—see Napoleon HI 
Bonaparte, Napoleon Eugène Louis Jean 
Joseph (1856-1879)—son of Napo­
leon III, got the title of Imperial 
Prince at his birth.—222 
Bonaparte, Prince Napoléon Joseph Charles 
Paul (1822-1891)—son of Jérôme 
Bonaparte, cousin of Napoleon III; 
known under the nicknames of Plon-
Plon and Red Prince.—189, 270 
Boon,  Martin James—British mechanic; 
prominent figure in the British work­
ing-class movement; follower of the 
social-reformist views of the Chartist 
James Bronterre O'Brien; member of 
the General Council of the First 
International (1869-72); Secretary of 
the Land and Labour League; 
member of the British Federal Coun­
cil (1872).—571 
Borchardt, Louis (1820-1883)—German 
physician, liberal; sentenced to im­
prisonment for his participation in 
the 1848-49 revolution; being re­
leased he emigrated to Bradford, 
then to Manchester; private doctor of 
Wilhelm  Wolff;  Engels' acquain­
tance.—170-71 
Bornstedt, Adalbert von (1808-1851)— 
German journalist; founder and 
editor of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung (1847-48); member of the 
Communist League, expelled from it 
in March 1848; as it turned out later 
he had contacts with the Prussian 
police.—336 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in France 
(1589-1792, 1814-15, 1815-30), in 
Spain (1700-1808, 1814-68, 1874-
1931 and since 1975) and in a 
number of Italian states.—488, 512 
Bracke, Wilhelm (1842-1880)—German Social-Democrat; publisher of social­
ist literature in Brunswick; a foun­
der (1869) and leader of the So­
cial-Democratic Workers' Party 
(Eisenachers); member of the Social-
Democratic group in the Reichstag 
(1877-79).—20, 69, 73, 77-78, 174, 
209, 253, 269 
Bradnick, Frederick—member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional (1870-72); delegate to the Lon­
don Conference (1871); following the 
Hague Congress (1872) joined the 
reformist wing of the British Federal 
Council; expelled from the Interna­
tional by the General Council's deci­
sion of May 30, 1873.—571 
Brandenburg, Friedrich Wilhelm, Count 
von (1792-1850)—Prussian general 
and statesman, head of the counter­
revolutionary ministry (from Novem­
ber 1848 to November 1850).— 
161 
Bright, John (1811-1889) — British 
manufacturer and politician, one of 
the Free Trade leaders and founders 
of the Anti-Corn Law League; M.P. 
(from 1843); leader of the Left wing 
of the Liberal Party from the early 
1860s; held several ministerial 
posts.—179, 403, 412 
Brutus (Marcus Junius Brutus) (c. 85-42 
B.C.)—Roman politician, republican; 
an initiator of the conspiracy against 
Julius Caesar.—14-15 
Bucher, Lothar (1817-1892)—Prussian 
official and journalist; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848 and then a refugee 
in London; subsequendy National 
Liberal and supporter of Bismarck.— 
230-33 
Bûchez, Philippe Joseph Benjamin (1796-
1865)—French politician, historian, 
Christian Socialist.—69, 93 
Büchner, Georg (1813-1837)—German 
dramatist and writer; revolutionary 
democrat; in 1834, an organiser of 
the secret revolutionary Gesellschaft 
der Menschenrechte (Society of 

=====第705页=====
Name Index 675 
Human Rights) in Hesse; author of 
the address to the Hessian peasants 
bearing the motto: "Peace to the 
cabin; war to the palace".—513 
Bückler, Johann (1777-1803)—German 
robber, nicknamed Schinderhannes 
(Hans the skin-flint).—48 
Biilow-Cummerow, Ernst Gottfried Georg 
von (1775-1851)—German journalist 
and politician; expressed the interests 
of big landowners.—144 
Burns, Lydia (Lizzy, Lizzie) (1827-
1878)—Irish working woman; Fred­
erick Engels' second wife.—567 
Busch, Moritz (1821-1899)—German 
publicist.—580 
Buss, Franz Joseph von (1803-1878)— 
German lawyer and politician; main 
representative of political Catholi­
cism; deputy to the National Assem­
bly in Frankfurt am Main (extreme 
Right wing) and in 1874-76 deputy to 
the German Reichstag (Centre).—166 
Buttery, G. H.—member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1871-72).—571 
C 
Caesar (Gaius Julius Caesar) (c. 100-44 
B.C.)—Roman general, statesman 
and writer, author of Commentarii de 
hello Gallico.— 350, 365, 429, 442-43 
Camphausen, Ludolf (1803-1890)— 
banker in Cologne; a leader of the 
Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prime 
Minister of Prussia (March-June 
1848).—107, 183 
Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881)—British 
writer, historian and philosopher; 
supported the Tories; preached views 
bordering on feudal socialism up to 
1848;  later a relentless opponent of 
the working-class movement.—288, 
412 
Castelar y Ripoll, Emilio (1832-1899)— 
Spanish politician, historian and writ­
er; leader of the Right-wing Repub­licans;  President of the Republic 
(September 1873-January 1874); dep­
uty to the Cortes after the restora­
tion of monarchy in 1874.—513, 523 
Catherine II (1729-1796)—Empress of 
Russia (1762-96).—49, 360, 488 
Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de (1547-
1616)—Spanish writer.—458 
Chambord, Henri Charles Ferdinand 
Marie Dieudonné, comte de (1820-
1883)—last representative of the 
elder line of the Bourbons, grandson 
of Charles X, pretender to the 
French throne under the name of 
Henry V.—222 
Charlemagne (Charles the Great) (c. 742-
814)—King of the Franks (768-800) 
and Roman Emperor (800-14).—448, 
450 
Charles II (1630-1685)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1660-85).—436 
Chernyshevsky, Nikolai Gavrilovich (1828-
1889)—Russian revolutionary demo­
crat, materialist philosopher, writer 
and literary critic.—23, 199 
Cherval, Julien (real name Joseph 
Cramer)—Prussian police spy who 
had gained entry into the Communist 
League and led one of the Paris 
communities belonging to the sec­
tarian Willich-Schapper group; ac­
cused of complicity in the so-called 
Franco-German plot in Paris in Feb­
ruary 1852; escaped from prison 
with the connivance of the police; 
agent provocateur in Switzerland 
under the name of Nugent  (1853-
54).—51 
Clowes, Norris A.—American journalist; 
in the early 1880s, the New-York Star 
correspondent in Ireland; acquain­
tance of Theodor Friedrich Cuno. — 
410 
Cluseret, Gustave Paul (1823-1900)— 
French politician, general; joined 
Garibaldi's volunteers in Italy (1860); 
fought in the US Civil War; member 
of the First International; Bakuninist; 
the General Council's correspondent 
45* 

=====第706页=====
676 Name Index 
in the USA in the spring of 1870; 
took part in revolutionary uprisings 
in Lyons and Marseilles (1870); 
member of the Paris Commune 
(1871);  emigrated after its defeat.— 
237 
Cobbett, William (c. 1762-1835) — 
British politician and journalist; 
from 1802 published Cobbett's Weekly 
Political Register.—32 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865)—British 
manufacturer and politician; one of 
the Free Trade leaders and founders 
of the Anti-Corn Law League; M.P. 
(1841-65).—400-03, 412 
Cohen, Ferdinand (c. 1842-1866)— 
German student, Karl Blind's step­
son; made an unsuccessful attempt 
on Bismarck's life on May 7, 1866.— 
244 
Constantine I (called " The Great") 
(c. 285-337)—Roman Emperor (306-
37).—428 
Cook, Flavius Josephus (Joseph) (1838-
1901)—American theologian and 
preacher; his Boston Monday lec­
tures enjoyed great popularity in the 
1870s.—576 
Correggio (Antonio Allegri) (c. 1489-
1534)—I talian painter.—119 
Count of Paris—see Louis Philippe Albert 
d'Orleans, Count of 
Cournot, Antoine Augustin  (1801-
1877)—French mathematician, 
philosopher and economist; forerun­
ner of the mathematical school of 
political economy; in his Recherches 
sur les principes mathématiques de la 
théorie des richesses tried to study 
economic phenomena with the help 
of mathematical methods.—559 
Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658)—leader 
of the English Revolution, Lord Pro­
tector of England, Scotland and Ire­
land from 1653.—578 
Cross, Richard Assheton, first Viscount 
Cross (1823-1914)—British states­
man, Conservative; Home Secretary 
(1874-80 and 1885-86).—563 Cuff,  Christ R—English court offi­
cial.—563 
D 
Dante, Alighieri (1265-1321)—Italian 
poet.—183 
Darwin, Charles Robert (1809-1882)— 
English naturalist, founder of the 
theory of natural selection of 
species.—301,  313, 435, 458, 463, 
467 
Davis, John Chandler Bancroft (1822-
1907)—American lawyer and dip­
lomat; the London Times correspon­
dent (1854-61); Under-Secretary of 
State (1869, 1871 and 1873-74); Am­
bassador to Germany (1874-77).— 
571-72 
Delahaye, Victor Alfred (1838-1897)— 
French mechanic; Proudhonist; 
member of the First International 
from 1865; took part in the Paris 
Commune (1871); emigrated to En­
gland after the suppression of the 
Commune; member of the General 
Council of the International and the 
British Federal Council (1871-72), 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1871);  returned to France in 1879.— 
571 
Delbrück, Martin Friedrich Rudolf von 
(1817-1903)—Prussian and German 
statesman; supporter of Free Trade; 
one of Bismarck's close advis­
ers up to 1876; deputy to the 
Reichstag (1878-81).—122, 124 
Demmler, Georg Adolf (1804-1886)— 
German Social-Democrat, deputy to 
the Reichstag (1877-78).—209 
Demosthenes (c. 384-322 B.C.) —Greek 
orator and politician; champion of 
democracy in slave-owning society.— 
548 
Demuth, Helene (1820-1890)— 
housemaid and friend of the Marx 
family.—476, 568 
Deprez, Marcel (1843-1918)—French 

=====第707页=====
Name Index 677 
physicist and electrician; worked on 
the problem of electric energy trans­
mission.—468 
Descartes, René (in Latin: Renatus Car-
tesius) (1596-1650)—French philos­
opher, mathematician and natu­
ralist.—298 
Deville, Gabriel Pierre (1854-1940)— 
French socialist, active member of the 
French Workers' Party, journalist; 
staff member of L'Égalité; author of 
a popular exposition of Marx's Capi­
tal; left the working-class movement 
at the beginning of the 20th cen­
tury.—586 
Dickens, Charles John Huff am (1812-
1870)—English novelist.—569 
Diderot, Denis (1713-1784)—French 
philosopher of the Enlightenment, 
atheist, leader of the Encyclopaed­
ists.—298 
Dilke, Sir Charles Wentworth, Baronet 
(1843-1911)—British politician and 
writer; a leader of the Radical wing 
of the Liberal Party; Under-Secretary 
for Foreign Affairs (1880-82) and 
President of the local government 
board (1882-85).—389 
Dillon, John (1851-1927)—Irish politi­
cian; a leader of the Irish National 
Land League; M.P. in 1880; in the 
1880s was arrested several times and 
imprisoned.—408 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Earl of Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881)—British statesman and 
author, a Tory leader; Chancellor of 
the Exchequer (1852, 1858-59 and 
1866-68) and Prime Minister (1868 
and 1874-80).—180, 386 
Dobrolyubov, Nikolai Alexandrovich 
(1836-1861)—Russian revolutionary 
democrat; literary critic and journal­
ist; materialist philosopher; one of 
the predecessors of Russian Social-
Democracy .—23 
Dolleschall, Laurenz (b. 1790)—police 
•official in Cologne (1819-47), censor 
of the Rheinische Zeitung.— 183 Don Francisco de Asis de Borbon— 
husband of Isabella II from 
1846.—21 
Donkin, Horatio Bryan—English physi­
cian, doctor of Marx and his family 
in 1881-83.—476 
Dörenberg, E. —German journalist, So­
cial-Democrat; staff member of the 
Berliner Freie  Presse,  Berlin correspon­
dent of La Plebe (1877).—172 
Dourlen, Gustave —French physician in 
Argenteuil, doctor of Marx and his 
family in 1881-82.—475 
Du Barry, Marie Jeanne Bêcu, comtesse 
(1743-1793)—favourite of Louis XV, 
King of France.—21 
Duchàtel, Charles Marie Tanneguy, comte 
de (1803-1867)—French statesman, 
Orleanist, Minister of Trade (1834-
36), Minister of the Interior (1839, 
1840-February 1848);^ staff member 
of the Journal des Économistes; fol­
lower of Malthus.—326 
Ducrot, Auguste Alexandre (1817-
1882)—French general; deputy to 
the National Assembly from 1871; as 
Commander of the 8th Corps (1872-
78) took part in monarchist plots 
against the Republic.—204 
Dühring, Eugen Karl (1833-1921)— 
German eclectic philosopher and 
economist, petty-bourgeois socialist; 
lecturer at Berlin University  (1863-
77).—119,  339, 457 
Duméril, Edelestand Pontas  (1801-
1871)—French philologist and 
palaeographer; staff member of the 
Journal des Économistes.— 326 
Duncker, Franz Gustav (1822-1888)— 
German politician and publisher, 
prominent figure in the Party of 
Progress; in 1868, together with Max 
Hirsch, founded reformist trade 
unions, known as Hirsch-Duncker 
unions; which existed until  1933.— 
189 
Dunoyer, Barthélémy Charles Pierre Joseph 
(1786-1862)—French economist and 
politician.—326 

=====第708页=====
678 Name Index 
Dupont, Eugène (c. 1837-1881)— 
prominent figure in the French and 
international working-class move­
ment; musical instrument maker; took 
part in the June 1848 uprising in 
Paris;  from 1862 on, lived in London; 
member of the General Council of the 
First International (November 1864 to 
1872);  Corresponding Secretary for 
France (1865-71); participant in all the 
congresses (except for the Basle Con­
gress of 1869) and conferences of the 
International; member of the British 
Federal Council of the International in 
1872;  associate of Marx and Engels; 
moved to the USA in 1874.—571 
Dusan—see Stephen Dushan 
E 
Eccarius, Johann Georg (1818-1889)— 
German tailor and journalist; promi­
nent figure in the German and inter­
national working-class movement; 
member of the League of the Just 
and later of the Communist League; 
a leader of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International (1864-72); 
the Council's General Secretary 
(1867-71); Corresponding Secretary 
for America (1870-72); delegate to 
all the International's congresses and 
conferences; associate of Marx 
up to 1871, subsequently joined the 
leaders of the British trade unions.— 
571 
Eichhorn, Johann Albrecht Friedrich 
(1779-1856)—Prussian statesman, 
Minister of Religious Worship, Edu­
cation and Medicine (1840-48).—151 
Engel, Ernst (1821-1896)—German 
statistician, head of the Royal Prus­
sian Statistical Bureau in Berlin 
(1860-82).—413 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—32, 34, 
50, 55, 57, 77, 100, 105-07, 131, 133, 
140-41,  165,  170-71,  174, 181-82, 184, 187, 203, 252, 257-60, 262, 268, 
269, 312, 318, 326, 335-36, 345, 372, 
374, 379, 382, 400, 404, 410, 419-20, 
422, 431, 437-38, 457-59, 467, 472-
81, 487, 500, 565-67 
Epicurus (341-270 B.C.) —Greek ato­
mistic philosopher.—430, 434 
Erlach, Franz von (1819-1889)—Swiss 
army officer and military writer; 
during the Franco-Prussian war of 
1870-71 was an observer at the Ger­
man General Headquarters.—529 
Eulenburg, Botho, Count of  (1831-
1912)—Prussian statesman, Minister 
of the Interior (1878-81 and 1892-94); 
Prime Minister (1892-94); took part in 
the working out of the Anti-Socialist 
Law and in the persecution of Social-
Democrats.—242-49 
Eulenburg, Friedrich Albrecht, Count of 
(1815-1881)—Prussian statesman and 
diplomat; Minister of the Interior 
(1862-78).—566 
Ewald,  Georg Heinrich August von 
(1803-1875)—German orientalist; re­
searcher and critic of the Bible.—430 
Eynern, Ernst von (1838-1906)—Ger­
man politician and businessman; 
from 1879 member of the Prussian 
Chamber of Deputies; National Lib­
eral; opposed Social-Democracy.— 
458 
F 
Fallmerayer, Jakob Philipp (1790-1861)— 
German historian and traveller.—432 
Faucher, Léonard (Léon) Joseph  (1803-
1854)—French writer and politician, 
Malthusian economist, Orleanist; 
staff member of the Journal des 
Économistes; Minister of the Interior 
(December 1848-May 1849, 1851); 
later Bonapartist.—326 
Favre, Jules Claude Gabriel (1809-
1880)—French lawyer and politician; 
a leader of the bourgeois republican 
opposition from the late 1850s; 

=====第709页=====
Name Index 679 
Foreign Minister (1870-71), together 
with Thiers headed the struggle 
against the Paris Commune; among 
others, inspired the struggle against 
the First International; Senator from 
1876.—237, 527 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas (1804-
1872)—German materialist philos­
opher.—513 
Feugier—French physician in Enghien, 
Marx's doctor from June to August 
1882.—475 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814)— 
German philosopher.—459, 511 
Flerovsky, N.—see Bervi, Vasily Vasi-
lyevich 
Flocon, Ferdinand (1800-1866)—French 
politician, journalist, democrat, an 
editor of La Réforme (1845); member 
of the Provisional Government 
(1848).—187 
Flourens, Gustave Paul (1838-1871)— 
French naturalist and revolutionary, 
follower of Blanqui; contributed to 
La Marseillaise; one of the leaders of 
the Paris uprisings on October 31, 
1870 and January 22, 1871; member 
of the Paris Commune and its Mili­
tary Commission; on April 3, 1871 
was killed by the Versaillists.—461 
Forckenbeck, Maximilian (Max) Franz Au­
gust von (1821-1892)—German 
politician, a founder of the Party of 
Progress (1861) and National-Liberal 
Party (1867); Chairman of the 
Reichstag (1874-79).—240 
Forster, William Edward (1818-1886)— 
British manufacturer and statesman, 
Liberal M.P.; Chief Secretary for 
Ireland (1880-82); pursued a policy 
of brutal suppression of the national 
liberation movement.—407, 409 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867)—French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist; Minister of 
Finance (1849-52, 1861-67); Minister 
of the Imperial Court (1852-60).— 
274 Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837)—French Utopian socialist.— 
287, 289, 292-93, 313, 316, 459, 508 
Francis II (1768-1835)—Holy Roman 
Emperor (1792-1806); Emperor of 
Austria as Francis I (1804-35).—9 
Francis Joseph I (1830-1916) — Emperor 
of Austria (1848-1916).—9, 239 
Frankel, Leo (1844-1896)—prominent 
figure in the Hungarian and the 
international working-class move­
ment; jeweller; member of the Paris 
Commune; Corresponding Secretary 
of the General Council of the First 
International for Austria and Hun­
gary (1871-72); delegate to the Lon­
don Conference (1871) and the 
Hague Congress (1872) of the Inter­
national; a founder of the General 
Workers' Party of Hungary; associate 
of Marx and Engels. —105, 571 
Frederick II (the Great) (1712-1786)— 
King of Prussia (1740-86).—488 
Frederick William (1831-1888) — 
Prussian Crown Prince; married Vic­
toria Adelaide Mary Louisa in 1858; 
German Emperor and King of Prus­
sia under the name of Frederick III 
(March-June 1888).—582 
Frederick William II (1744-1797)—King 
of Prussia (1786-97).—8 
Frederick William III (1770-1840)— 
King of Prussia (1797-1840).—183, 
318, 343, 511 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861)— 
King of Prussia (1840-61).—9, 107, 
143, 151, 188, 515 
Fribourg, Ernest Edouard —prominent 
figure in the French working-class 
movement; engraver, later business­
man; Proudhonist; participant in the 
inaugural meeting of the First Inter­
national held on September 28, 1864 
at St. Martin's Hall; a leader of the 
Paris section of the International; 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1865) and the Geneva Congress 
(1866) of the International; in 1871 

=====第710页=====
680 Name Index 
published a book, L'Association inter­
nationale des travailleurs, hostile to the 
International and the Paris Com­
mune.—235 
Fritzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm (1825-
1905)—a reformist leader of the 
German Social-Democratic and trade 
union movement; tobacco-worker; 
took part in the 1848-49 revolution; 
one of the founders (1863) and 
leaders of the General Association of 
German Workers; follower of Las­
salle;  joined the Eisenachers in 1869; 
deputy to the North German and the 
German Reichstag (1868-71 and 1877-
81).—209,  578 
G 
Gambetta, Léon (1838-1882)—French 
statesman, bourgeois republican; 
member of the Government of Na­
tional Defence (1870-71); Prime 
Minister and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs (1881-82).—493, 513, 523, 
528-30 
Gartman, Lev Nikolayevich (1850-
1908)—Russian revolutionary, 
Narodnik (populist); in 1879 took 
part in an act of terrorism of the 
People's Will group against Alexan­
der II, following which emigrated to 
France; representative of the People's 
Will group abroad; left London 
for the USA at the end of  1881.— 
372 
Geib,  August (1842-1879)—German 
bookseller in Hamburg; Social-
Democrat; member of the General 
Association of German Workers; par­
ticipant in the Eisenach Congress 
(1869);  treasurer of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party (1872-78); 
deputy to the Reichstag (1874-77).— 
77, 214 
Geleff,  Poul Johansen (1842-1928)— 
participant in the Danish socialist and 
working-class movement; a founder 
of the Danish section of the First 
International (1871); one of the founders (1876) and leaders of the 
Social-Democratic Party of Denmark; 
emigrated to the USA in 1877.— 
219 
George I (1660-1727)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1714-27).—437 
Gerlach, Carl Johann Heinrich Eduard 
von (1792-1863)—Prussian politician; 
chief of the police in Berlin up to 
1839;  Regierungspräsident in Cologne 
(1839-45).—184 
Gif fen, Sir Robert (1837-1910)—English 
economist and statistician; head of 
the Statistics Department in the Board 
of Trade (1876-97); author of works 
on economics and statistics.—323 
Gladstone, Robertson (c. 1806-1875)— 
British trader; a founder (1848) and 
for a long time President of the 
Liverpool Financial Reform Associa­
tion, brother of William Ewart Glad­
stone.—96 
Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898)— 
British statesman, Tory, later Peelite; 
leader of the Liberal Party in the 
latter half of the nineteenth century; 
Chancellor of the Exchequer (1852-
55 and 1859-66), Prime Minister 
(1868-74, 1880-85, 1886, 1892-94).— 
96, 124, 389, 409, 460 
Goegg, Amand (1820-1897)—German 
journalist, democrat; member of the 
Baden Provisional Government in 
1849;  emigrated after the revolution; 
member of the League of Peace and 
Freedom, and its Vice-President in 
1870;  member of the Central Com­
mittee of the German Workers' Edu­
cational Society in Switzerland; 
member of the German-language sec­
tion of the First International (1868); 
delegate to the Basle Congress (1869) 
of the International; member of the 
Central Committee of the People's 
Party; member of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party of Ger­
many.—70, 524 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-

=====第711页=====
Name Index 681 
1832)—German  poet.—91,  306, 547, 
569 
Goltz, Theodor Alexander Georg Ludwig, 
Freiherr von der (1836-1905)— 
German scientist, agronomist; author 
of works on agriculture.—121 
Gorchakov (Gorchakoff), Alexander 
Mikhailovich, Prince (1798-1883)— 
Russian statesman and diplomat; 
envoy to Vienna (1854-56); Foreign 
Minister (1856-82).—507, 508, 
511 
Grant  Duff,  Sir Mountstuart Elphinstone 
(1829-1906)—British liberal politi­
cian and author, M.P. (1857-81); 
Under-Secretary of State for India 
(1868-74); Governor of Madras 
(1881-86).—580-81 
Greiff (Greif), Friedrich Wilhelm (born 
c. 1819)—one of the chiefs of the 
Prussian secret service in London in 
the early 1850s.—51 
Grillenberger, Karl (Carl) (1848-1897)— 
German publisher and editor of So­
cial-Democratic newspapers; member 
of the German Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party (from 1869); deputy 
to the German Reichstag (1881-97).— 
259 
Guillaume, James (1844-1916)—Swiss 
teacher, anarchist; follower of Baku-
nin; an organiser of the Alliance of 
Socialist Democracy; member of the 
Swiss organisations of the First Inter­
national from 1868; expelled from 
it at the Hague Congress (1872) 
for his splitting activities.—176, 
177 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874)—French historian and states­
man, Orleanist; Foreign Minister 
(1840-48), Prime Minister (1847-
48); virtually determined the home 
and foreign policy of France from 
1840 to the February 1848 revo­
lution; expressed the interests of 
the big financial bourgeoisie.— 
184 H 
Hackenberger, Rudolph—an editor of the 
Freie Volksstimme in Saarbrücken, So­
cial-Democrat.—210 
Hales, William—member of the Gener­
al Council of the First International 
(1867,  1869-72).—571 
Hales, W. K.—publisher of the London 
Daily News (1878-81).^230-31, 374 
Hannecken, Karl August Bernhard Her­
mann von (1810-1886)—Prussian of­
ficer and military writer.—528 
Hansemann, David Justus Ludwig (1790-
1864)—-German capitalist, a leader of 
the Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Prus­
sian Finance Minister (March-
September 1848).—183, 274 
Hûrcourt, Sir William George Granville 
Venables Vernon (1827-1904)— 
British statesman, Liberal M.P. 
(1868-80); Home Secretary (1880-
85); leader of the Liberal Party 
(1894-98).—375 
Harris, George—active in the British 
working-class movement; follower of 
the social-reformist views of the 
Chartist James Bronterre O'Brien; 
member of the National Reform 
League; member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1869-72); Financial Secretary of the 
Council (1870-71).—571 
Hartmann, Georg Wilhelm —German 
worker; member of the General 
Association of German Workers; 
from 1875, one of the two Chairmen 
of the Executive Committee of the 
Socialist Workers' Party of Germany; 
deputy to the Reichstag (1878-81).— 
408 
Hasenclever, Wilhelm (1837-1889)— 
German Social-Democrat, follower of 
Lassalle; leather-dresser, journalist; 
Secretary (from 1866) and President 
(1871-75) of the General Association 
of German Workers; one of the two 
Chairmen of the Executive Commit­
tee of the Socialist Workers' Party of 

=====第712页=====
682 Name Index 
Germany (1875-76); member of its 
leadership (from 1878); deputy to 
the North German and the German 
Reichstag  (1869-71,  1874-78, 1879-
88).—209,  214, 408 
Hasselmann, Wilhelm (1844-1916)—one 
of the leaders of the Lassallean Gen­
eral Association of German Workers; 
editor of Der Social-Demokrat (1867-
71) and Neuer Social-Demokrat  (1871-
76); member of the Socialist Workers' 
Party of Germany from 1875; deputy 
to the German Reichstag (1874-76 
and 1878-80); expelled from the 
party as an anarchist in 1880.—67, 72, 
214, 578 
Haxthausen, August Franz Ludwig Maria, 
Freiherr von (1792-1866)—Prussian 
official and writer; author of works 
on the agrarian system and the peas­
ant commune in Russia.—45, 196 
Hebert, Jacques René (1757-1794) — 
prominent figure in the French 
Revolution; leader of the Left wing of 
the Jacobins, publisher of Le Père 
Duchesne (1790-94).—14 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.—285-
86, 293, 298, 302-04, 427, 458-59, 
514, 583 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856)—German 
revolutionary poet.—14, 33, 175, 
249, 429 
Helldorf-Bedra, Otto Heinrich von  (1833-
1908)—German politician, member 
of the Reichstag (1871-74, 1877-81 
and 1884-93); a leader of the Ger­
man Conservative Party.—250 
Henry IV (1533-1610)—King of France 
(1589-1610).—237 
Heraclitus (c. 540-c. 480 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher; one of the founders of 
dialectics.—299 
Herman, Alfred—active in the Belgian 
working-class movement; sculptor; 
a founder of sections of the First 
International in Belgium; member of 
the General Council and Correspond­
ing Secretary for Belgium (1871-72); delegate to the Brussels Congress 
(1868),  the London Conference (1871) 
and the Hague Congress (1872) of the 
International; at the Hague Congress 
joined the anarchist minority.—571 
Herodotus (c. 484-c. 424 B.C.)—Greek 
historian.—548 
Herzen, Alexander Ivanovich (1812-
1870)—Russian revolutionary demo­
crat; materialist philosopher and 
writer; left Russia in 1847, from 1852 
lived in England where he established 
the Free Russian Press and published 
the periodical Polyarnaya Zvezda (Polar 
Star) (1855-62, 1869) and the news­
paper Kolokol (The Bell) (1857-67).— 
43, 45, 196 
Hesekiel, Georg Ludwig (1819-1874)— 
German journalist and man of let­
ters.—580 
Hess, Moses (1812-1875)—German rad­
ical writer; a "true socialist" in the 
mid-1840s; member of the Commu­
nist League; sided with the separatist 
Willich-Schapper group; Lassallean 
in the 1860s; delegate to the Brussels 
(1868) and Basle (1869) congresses of 
the First International.—51, 514 
Hinckeldey, Karl Ludwig Friedrich von 
(1805-1856)—Prussian official; Chief 
Commissioner of Berlin police from 
1848,  President of the Police Depart­
ment in the Ministry of the Interior 
from 1853.—51-53 
Hirsch, Carl (Karl) (1841-1900)— 
German Social-Democrat, journalist, 
editor of a number of Social-
Democratic newspapers; while in 
Paris in the summer of 1879 he 
propagated ideas of scientific social­
ism.—253-54, 257-61 
Hirsch, Wilhelm —Hamburg shop assis­
tant, Prussian police agent in London 
in the early 1850s.—51 
Höchberg, Karl (pseudonym Dr. Ludwig 
Richter) (1853-1885)—German social-
reformer; son of a rich merchant; in 

=====第713页=====
Name Index 683 
1876 joined the Socialist Workers' 
Party of Germany; organised and 
financed a number of newspapers 
and journals.—253-54, 257-60, 262-
67, 269 
Hödel (Hoedel), Emil Heinrich Max 
(1857-1878)—tinner from Leipzig; on 
May 11, 1878 made an attempt on the 
life of William  I.—231,  237, 243, 
245-46,  575 
Hohenzollerns—dynasty of Brandenburg 
Electors (1415-1701), Prussian Kings 
(1701-1918) and German Emperors 
(1871-1918).—9 
Homer—semi-legendary epic poet of 
Ancient Greece, author of the Iliad 
and the Odyssey.—24, 34 
Howell, George (1833-1910)—reformist 
leader of the British trade unions; 
mason; former Chartist; Secretary of 
the London Trades Council  (1861-
62); participant in the inaugural 
meeting of the First International 
held on September 28, 1864 at St. 
Martin's Hall, London; member of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (October 1864 to 1869); par­
ticipant in the London Conference of 
the International (1865); Secretary of 
the Reform League (1864-67) and 
the Parliamentary Committee of the 
British Congress of Trade Unions 
(1871-75); opposed revolutionary tac­
tics; Liberal M.P. (1885-95).—234-39 
Hubbard,  Nicolas Gustave (1828-1888)— 
French economist and writer.—291 
Hugo, Victor Marie (1802-1885)— 
French writer and statesman.—585 
Humboldt, Alexander (Friedrich Heinrich 
Alexander),  Baron von (1769-1859)— 
German naturalist, traveller and 
statesman; between 1830 and 1848 
he was frequently sent on diplomatic 
missions to the court of Louis Phi­
lippe.—184, 419, 422 
Hurliman—member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1871-72); delegate from the Swiss 
Society in London.—571 I 
Illingworth, A.—M.P. in 1881.—389 
Isabella II (1830-1904)—Queen of 
Spain (1833-68).—21-22 
J 
Jacoby, Johann (1805-1877)—German 
radical writer and politician; a leader 
of the Left wing in the Prussian 
National Assembly (1848); in the 
1870s, was close to the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party of Ger­
many.—492, 525 
James II (1633-1701)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1685-88).— 
436 
Jhering, Rudolf von (1818-1892)— 
German jurist; taught Roman law at 
several universities; headed the 
"positive" and "practically-dogmatic" 
trend of the bourgeois school of 
law.—554, 556 
Johannard,  Jules Paul (1843-1892)— 
prominent figure in the French 
working-class movement; lithog­
rapher; member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1868-69, 1871-72) and Correspond­
ing Secretary for Italy (1868-69); 
member of the Paris Commune 
(1871);  was close to the Blanquists; 
emigrated to London after the sup­
pression of the Commune; delegate to 
the Hague Congress (1872) of the 
International.—571 
Johann Nepomuk Maria Joseph (pen-
name Philalethes) (1801-1873)— 
Prince of Saxony, King of Saxony 
(1854-73), translator of Dante.—183 
John (Johann) (1782-1859)—Archduke 
of Austria, field marshal, fought 
against Napoleon; Imperial Regent 
from June 1848 to December 1849.— 
138, 167-68, 188 
Jottrand,  Lucien Leopold (1804-1877)— 
Belgian lawyer and writer, democrat, 

=====第714页=====
684 Name Index 
President of the Democratic Associa­
tion in Brussels (1847).—136-37 
Jung, Hermann (1830-1901)—promi­
nent figure in the international 
and Swiss working-class movement; 
watchmaker; member of the General 
Council of the First International and 
Corresponding Secretary for Switzer­
land (November 1864 to 1872); par­
ticipant in the London Conference 
(1865),  Chairman of the Geneva 
(1866),  Brussels (1868) and Basle 
(1869) congresses and of the London 
Conference (1871) of the Interna­
tional; member of the British Federal 
Council; supported Marx before the 
Hague Congress of 1872; later joined 
the reformist leaders of the British 
trade unions; left the working-class 
movement in the late 1870s.—571 
K 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804)—German 
philosopher.—293, 301-02, 458-59 
Kapell, August (b. 1844)—a founder of 
the General Association of German 
Carpenters; deputy to the German 
Reichstag (1877).—209 
Kardorff,  Wilhelm von (1828-1907)— 
German politician, deputy to the 
Reichstag (1868-1906); a founder of 
the party of "free Conservatives" 
("Imperial party"); protectionist; 
supported Bismarck's foreign and 
home policy.—Ill, 119-20, 122, 
124-25 
Kaulitz, Harry—an editor of the Freie 
Volksstimme in Saarbrücken; Social-
Democrat.—210 
Kayser, Max (1853-1888)—German 
journalist; member of the Social-
Democratic Workers' Party of Ger­
many; member of the Reichstag 
(1878-87), belonged to the right wing 
of the Social-Democratic group.— 
258-61 
Kératry, Emile, comte de (1832-1905)— 
French reactionary politician; Prefect of the Paris police (September-
October 1870); later supervised the 
formation of territorial armed forces 
in Brittany; Prefect of the Haute 
Garonne Department (1871); in April 
1871,  suppressed the Commune in 
Toulouse.—461,  529 
Khmelnitsky, Bogdan (Zinovy) (c. 1595-
1657)—Ukrainian statesman and 
general, Hetman of the Ukraine; 
headed the liberation struggle of the 
Ukrainian people against Polish 
domination (1648-54); initiator of the 
reunion of the Ukraine with Russia 
and advocate of her political au­
tonomy (1654).—502 
Kosciuszko, Tadeusz Andrzej Bonawentura 
(1746-1817)—prominent figure in 
the Polish national liberation move­
ment in the 1790s; took part in the 
struggle for the independence of the 
North American colonies (1776-83); 
leader of the Polish uprising of 
1794.—7,  343 
Krengel—mayor of the village of Nessin 
(Eastern Prussia) in the 1840s.—143 
Krüger, Daniel Christian Friedrich (1819-
1896)—German lawyer and dip­
lomat; represented Lübeck (from 
1868) and Hamburg and Bremen 
(from 1873) in the Federal Council.— 
122-23 
Krupp, Alfred (1812-1887)—big Ger­
man steel and ordnance manufac­
turer, supplying many European 
states with guns and other 
weapons.—2 75-76 
Krynski (Krynski), Jan (1811-1890)— 
Polish revolutionary; participant in 
the Polish uprising of 1863-64;  ref­
ugee in London; member of the 
General Council (1865-67); Secretary 
of the society called "The Polish 
People".—5 
Kullmann, Eduard (1853-1892)— 
German cooper, member of a Catholic 
trade union; on July 13, 1874 made an 
attempt on Bismarck's life in protest 
against his policy of restricting the 
rights of the Catholic Church in 

=====第715页=====
Name Index 685 
Germany (Kulturkampf); died in 
prison.—244 
L 
Ladenberg, Adalbert von (1798-1855)— 
Prussian official; Minister of Reli­
gious Worship, Education and 
Medicine (November 1848-December 
1850).—151 
Laforgue, Charles Etienne (1868-1872)— 
son of Laura and Paul Lafargue.— 
460-61 
Lafargue, Laura ( 1845-1911 )—Karl 
Marx's second daughter; prominent 
figure in the French working-class 
movement; translated many works of 
Marx and Engels into French; mar­
ried Paul Lafargue in 1868.—460-61, 
585 
Lafargue, Paul (1842-1911)— 
prominent figure in the French and 
international working-class move­
ment; member of the General Coun­
cil of the First International (from 
1866);  Corresponding Secretary for 
Spain (1866-69); helped to organise 
the First International's sections in 
France (1869-70), Spain and Portugal 
(1871-72); delegate to the Hague 
Congress (1872); a founder of the 
French Workers' Party; follower and 
associate of Marx and Engels; husband 
of Laura, Karl Marx's daughter, from 
1868.—23,  26-27, 335-36, 345, 457, 
460-61,  471, 585 
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de 
(1790-1869)—French poet, historian 
and politician; one of the leaders of 
the moderate republicans in the 
1840s; Minister of Foreign Affairs 
and virtual head of the Provisional 
Government in 1848.—107, 187, 480 
Lange, Friedrich Albert (1828-1875)— 
German philosopher and economist; 
from 1870 professor in Zurich and, 
from 1872, in Marburg; Neo-
Kantian.—91,  531 Lankester, Sir Edwin Ray (1847-1929)— 
English scientist, professor of biology 
(from 1874).—471 
Laplace, Pierre Simon, marquis de (1749-
1827)—French astronomer, mathe­
matician and physicist; independ­
ently of Kant, worked out and mathe­
matically substantiated the hypothe­
sis that the solar system developed 
from gaseous nebula.—302, 458 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864) — 
German writer and lawyer; partici­
pant in the democratic movement in 
the Rhine Province (1848-49); found­
er of the General Association of 
German Workers (1863); an initiator 
of an opportunist trend within the 
German working-class movement.— 
69-70,  72, 78, 83-84,  88-93,  230, 263, 
273, 326, 457, 492, 515-16, 522-23, 
572, 574, 584 
Lavrov, Pyotr (Peter) Lavrovich  (1823-
1900) — Russian philosopher, socio­
logist and journalist; an ideologist 
of revolutionary Narodism (popul­
ism);  emigrated in 1870; member of 
the First International; took part in 
the Paris Commune; editor of the 
journal Vperyod! (Forward!)  (1873-
76); adherent to the subjective method 
in sociology.—19-29, 32-34, 36, 469, 
473, 477 
Law, Harriet (1832-1897)—a leading 
figure in the atheist movement in 
England; member of the General 
Council (June 1867-72) and the Man­
chester Section of the First Interna­
tional (1872); publisher of The Secu­
lar Chronicle (1876-79).—571 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874)—French journalist and politi­
cian; a leader of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats; editor of La Réforme; 
Minister of the Interior in the Provi­
sional Government (1848); deputy to 
the Constituent and Legislative As­
semblies, where he headed the Mon­
tagne party; emigrated to England 
after the demonstration of June 13, 
1849,  and lived there until 1870; 

=====第716页=====
686 Name Index 
deputy to the National Assembly 
(1871).—270 
Lelewel, Joachim (1786-1861)—Polish 
historian and revolutionary; partici­
pant in the Polish insurrection of 
1830-31;  a leader of the democratic 
wing of the Polish refugees in France 
and, from 1833, in Brussels.—344 
Lemke, Gottlieb (c. 1844-1885)— 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London.—467 
Le Moussu, Benjamin Constant (b. 
1846)—prominent figure in the 
French working-class movement; en­
graver; took part in the Paris Com­
mune; emigrated to London after the 
suppression of the Commune; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International and Corre­
sponding Secretary for the French-
language sections in the USA  (1871-
72) and, from May 1872, for all 
sections of the International there; 
delegate to the Hague Congress 
(1872);  supported Marx and Engels 
in their struggle against the Bakunin-
ists.—571 
Leonhardt, Gerhard Adolf Wilhelm (1815-
1880)—German lawyer and states­
man; Minister of Justice in Hanover 
(1865-66) and Prussia (1867-79).— 
448 
Leopold I (1790-1865)—King of Bel­
gium (1831-65).—136-37 
Lépine, Jules—Secretary of the Paris 
branch of the French Workers' 
Party.—470 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (1729-1781)— 
German dramatist, critic and 
philosopher of the Enlightenment.— 
23 
Lessner, Friedrich (1825-1910)— 
member of the Communist League; 
tailor; participant in the 1848-49 
revolution; defendant at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852); refugee in 
London from 1856; member of the 
German Workers' Educational Socie­
ty in London; member of the Gener­al Council of the First International 
(November 1864-72); member of the 
British Federal Council (1872-73); 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 105,  345, 471, 571 
Le Tailleur, A. —publisher of L'Éga­
lité.— 586 
Levy, Joseph Moses (1812-1888)— 
English journalist; one of the found­
ers and publisher of The Daily Tele­
graph from 1855.—51 
Lewal, Jules Louis (1823-1908)—French 
general and military theoretician; 
War Minister of France (1885).—66 
Lichnowski, Felix Maria, Prince von 
(1814-1848) —Silesian landowner, 
Prussian army officer; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Right 
wing);  killed during the September 
1848 uprising in Frankfurt.—144 
Liebknecht, Wilhelm (1826-1900)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment; took part in the 1848-49 rev­
olution; member of the Communist 
League and of the First Internation­
al; deputy to the North German 
(1867-70) and the German Reichstag 
from 1874 (with intervals); one of the 
founders and leaders of the German 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party; 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 67, 72-73,  77, 209, 214, 
253-57,  408, 470, 492, 500, 521, 
525 
Lincoln, Abraham (1809-1865)— 
American statesman; a leader of the 
Republican Party; President of the 
United States (1861-65); during the 
Civil War, under pressure from the 
masses, carried out a number of 
important bourgeois-democratic re­
forms,  thus making possible the 
adoption of revolutionary methods of 
warfare; assassinated by a slave­
holders' agent in April 1865.—236 
Linné, Carl von (1707-1778)—Swedish 
naturalist; was the first to devise the 

=====第717页=====
Name Index 687 
classification systems for plants and 
animals.—303 
Lissagaray, Prosper Olivier (1838-
1901)—French journalist; took part 
in the Paris Commune, emigrated to 
Great Britain after its defeat; author 
of Histoire de la Commune de 1871 
(1876);  on returning to France 
(1880),  published the newspaper La 
Bataille (1882-83, 1888-93), which 
opposed the leaders of the French 
Workers' Party, Jules Guesde and 
Paul Lafargue.—527 
Lochner, Georg (born c. 1824)—active 
member of the working-class move­
ment; joiner; member of the Com­
munist League and of the German 
Workers' Educational Society in Lon­
don; member of the General Council 
of the First International (November 
1864-67 and 1871-72); delegate to 
the London conferences of the Inter­
national (1865 and 1871); friend and 
associate of Marx and Engels. —471, 
571 
Locke, John (1632-1704)—English dual­
ist philosopher and economist.—299 
Longuet, Charles (1839-1903)—prom­
inent figure in the French working-
class movement; journalist; Pro-
udhonist; member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1866-67, 1871-72), Corresponding 
Secretary for Belgium (1866); dele­
gate to the Lausanne (1867), Brussels 
(1868) and the Hague (1872) con­
gresses and the London Conference 
(1871);  member of the Paris Com­
mune (1871); later joined the Pos-
sibilists; in the 1880s-90s was elected 
to the Paris Municipal Council; in 
1872 married Karl Marx's daughter 
Jenny.—330, 460, 469, 571, 585 
Longuet, Edgar (1879-1950)—Marx's 
grandson, son of Jenny and Charles 
Longuet. —585 
Longuet, Henri (1878-1883)—Marx's 
grandson, son of Jenny and Charles 
Longuet. —585 Longuet, Jean, Frédéric, Laurent (1876-
1938)—Marx's grandson, son of 
Jenny and Charles Longuet. —585 
Longuet, Jenny (1844-1883)—Marx's el­
dest daughter; prominent figure in 
the international working-class move­
ment; wife of Charles Longuet (from 
1872).—460-61,  475, 585 
Loria, Achille (1857-1943)—Italian 
sociologist and economist.—479-80 
Louis XIV (1638-1715)—King of 
France (1643-1715).—559 
Louis XV (1710-1774)—King of France 
(1715-74).—21 
Louis Bonaparte—see Napoleon III 
Louis Napoleon—see Napoleon III 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850)—Duke of 
Orleans, King of the French (1830-
48).—13,  93, 96, 419, 488 
Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans, Count of 
Paris (1838-1894)—Louis Philippe's 
grandson; pretender to the French 
throne.—222 
Lucraft, Benjamin (1809-1897)—one of 
the reformist leaders of the British 
trade unions; furniture-maker; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International (1864-71); in 
1871 refused to sign the General 
Council's address The Civil War in 
France and left the General 
Council.—237 
Luther, Martin (1483-1546)—German 
theologian and writer, a leader of the 
Reformation, founder of Protestant­
ism (Lutheranism) in Germany, 
ideologist of the German burghers.— 
247 
M 
Mably, Gabriel Bonnot de (1709-1785)— 
French sociologist, proponent of Uto­
pian egalitarian communism.—287 
McDonnell (MacDonnell), Joseph Pat­
rick (1847-1906) — active member of 

=====第718页=====
688 Name Index 
the Irish working-class movement; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International and Corre­
sponding Secretary for Ireland  (1871-
72); delegate to the London Confer­
ence (1871) and the Hague Congress 
(1872) of the International; in 1872 
emigrated to the USA where he took 
part in the American working-class 
movement.—571 
Maclver, D.—British M.P. from Bir­
kenhead (1881).—389 
MacMahon, Marie Edmé Patrice Maurice, 
comte de, duc de Magenta (1808-
1893)—French military figure and 
politician, marshal, Bonapartist; an 
organiser of the suppression of the 
Paris Commune (1871), President 
of the Third Republic (1873-79).— 
577 
Maine, Sir Henry James Sumner (1822-
1888)—English comparative jurist 
and historian; as a member of the 
Governor General's Council for India 
(1862-69) took an active part in 
working out local English laws and in 
the colonial oppression of India.— 
359, 365 
Malon, Benoît (1841-1893)—French 
socialist, member of the First Interna­
tional; took part in the formation of 
the Bakuninist Alliance of Socialist 
Democracy (1868); delegate to the 
Geneva Congress of the International 
(1866);  deputy to the National As­
sembly (1871); member of the Paris 
Commune; after its suppression 
emigrated to Italy and then to Swit­
zerland; later, a leader and ideologist 
of the Possibilists.—12 
Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834)— 
English clergyman and economist, 
author of a theory of population.— 
69, 91 
Manteuffel, Edwin Hans Karl, Baron von 
(1809-1885)—German general, gen­
eral field-marshal from 1873; dur­
ing the Franco-Prussian war com­
manded the First Corps, then the 
First (from October 1870) and South (from January 1871) armies; Com­
mander-in-Chief of the German oc­
cupational troops in France  (1871-
73).—530 
Manteuffel, Otto Theodor, Baron von 
(1805-1882)—Prussian statesman, 
Minister of the Interior (November 
1848-November 1850); Prime Minis­
ter and Minister of Foreign Affairs 
(1850-58).—140-41,  161, 516 
Manteuffels—aristocratic family from 
Pomerania, first mentioned in docu­
ments in 1287; in the 14th century 
setded in Saxony, Sweden and the 
Baltic area.—144 
Marat, Jean Paul (1743-1793)—leading 
figure in the French Revolution, 
prominent Jacobin.—582 
Maria Alexandrovna, the Grand Duchess 
(1853-1920)—Alexander II's daugh­
ter; wife of Alfred Ernest Albert, 
Duke of Edinburgh, from January 
1874.—5 
Martin, Bon Louis Henri (1810-1883)— 
French historian, Republican; deputy 
to the National Assembly (1871); 
Senator (from 1876).—235 
Martin, Constant (1839-1906)—French 
employee, Blanquist; member of the 
Paris Federal Council of the First 
International; member of the Paris 
Commune; after its defeat emigrated 
to London, member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1871-72); Secretary of the Lon­
don Conference (1871); after the am­
nesty in 1880 returned to France.— 
571 
Marx, Edgar (Musch) (1847-1855)—Karl 
Marx's son.—420, 423 
Marx, Eleanor (Tussy) (1855-1898)— 
Karl Marx's youngest daughter, 
prominent figure in the British and 
international working-class move­
ment; married Edward Aveling in 
1884.—460-61,  473, 476 
Marx, Franziska (1851-1852)—Karl 
Marx's daughter.—420, 423 

=====第719页=====
Name Index 689 
Marx, Heinrich Guido (1849-1850)— 
Karl Marx's son.—420, 423 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881)—Karl Marx's wife from June 
1843.—184, 419-24, 463, 467, 474, 
583, 585 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).—32, 37-38, 
51-55,  57,  69-73,  77-78, 81, 87-92, 
107, 131, 137, 165,  170-71,  183-84, 
187-96,  230-37, 246-47, 249, 253, 
268, 269, 305, 307, 308, 315, 326, 
327, 332, 335, 336, 345-46, 352-54, 
355, 358, 360, 361-62, 364-66, 370-
72, 374, 419-20, 422-23, 460-64, 467-
80, 487, 492-93, 495, 500, 520-23, 
532-37,  549-51,  557, 563-65, 568-85 
Massard,  Nicolas Emile (1857-1932)— 
French socialist, journalist; member 
of the French Workers' Party; staff 
member of L'Egalité in the early 
1880s.—586 
Maurer, Georg Ludwig (1790-1872)— 
German historian, studied the social 
system of ancient and medieval Ger­
many.—46, 350, 366 
Mayo,  Henry—participant in the British 
working-class movement, member of 
the General Council of the First 
International (1871-72) and the Brit­
ish Federal Council (1872); in the 
latter he joined the reformist wing; 
opposed the decisions of the Hague 
Congress of the International; ex­
pelled from the International by the 
General Council's decision of 
May 30, 1873.—571 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872)—leader 
of the national liberation movement 
in Italy; headed the Provisional Gov­
ernment of the Roman Republic 
(1849);  an organiser of the Central 
Committee of European Democracy 
in London (1850); when the Interna­
tional was founded in 1864 he tried 
to bring it under his influence; in 
1871 opposed the Paris Commune 
and the International; hindered the 
development of the independent 
working-class movement in Italy.— 
217, 583 Merovingians—the first dynasty of 
Frankish kings that ruled from 457 to 
751.—450 
Mesa y Leompart, José (1840-1904)— 
participant in the Spanish working-
class and socialist movement; printer; 
an organiser of the First Internation­
al's sections in Spain, member of the 
Spanish Federal Council (1871-72) 
and the New Madrid Federation 
(1872-73); fought anarchism; one of 
the first propagandists of Marxism in 
Spain and a founder of the Spanish 
Socialist Workers' Party (1879); trans­
lated works by Marx and Engels into 
Spanish.—105, 470 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Prince von (1773-1859)— 
Austrian statesman and diplomat; 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1809-21) 
and Chancellor  ( 1821 -48)  ; an organiser 
of the Holy Alliance.—488, 512 
Meyer, Rudolph Hermann (1839-1899) — 
German bourgeois economist and 
journalist, conservative.—550 
Mezentsov, Nikolai Vladimirovich (1827-
1878)—Russian statesman; from 
1864,  chief of staff of the political 
police corps; in 1876-78, chief of 
the political police.—245 
Mickiewicz, Adam (1798-1855)—Polish 
poet and leader of the national liber­
ation movement; emigrated in 1829; 
studied literature, culture and history 
of the Slav peoples.—497 
Mieroslawski, Ludwik (1814-1878)— 
leader of the Polish national libera­
tion movement, took part in the 
1830-31 uprising; helped to organise 
the uprising in Posen in 1846, was 
arrested; headed the 1848 uprising 
in Posen; in 1849, commanded the 
Baden-Palatinate revolutionary ar­
my.—58 
Mikhailovsky, Nikolai Konstantinovich 
(1842-1904)—Russian sociologist, 
journalist and literary critic; an 
ideologist of Narodism (populism); 
46-1317 

=====第720页=====
690 Name Index 
an editor of Otechestvenniye Zapiski 
(Fatherland's Notes) (1868-84) and 
Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth) 
(1892-1904).—196, 199-200 
Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873)—British 
economist and positivist philos­
opher.—181 
Milner, George—participant in the Brit­
ish working-class movement; Irish by 
birth; tailor; follower of the social-
reformist views of the Chartist James 
Bronterre O'Brien; member of the 
National Reform League, the Land 
and Labour League, the First Inter­
national's General Council (1868-72), 
and the British Federal Council (au­
tumn 1872 to 1873); in the latter 
opposed the reformist wing; delegate 
to the London Conference (1871) of 
the International.—571 
Miquel, Johannes (1828-1901)—German 
lawyer, politician and banker; 
member of the Communist League 
up to 1852, later a National Liberal; 
deputy to the North German and the 
German Reichstag (1867-77 and 
1887-90), Finance Minister (1890-
1901).—266 
Mires, Jules Isaac (1809-1871)—French 
banker, owner of several news­
papers.—277 
Molière (real name Jean Baptiste Po-
quelin) (1622-1673)—French dram­
atist.—569 
Moll, Joseph (1812-1849)—prominent 
figure in the German and interna­
tional working-class movement; 
watchmaker; a leader of the League 
of the Just, member of the Central 
Authority of the Communist League, 
President of the Cologne Workers' 
Association (from July to September 
1848),  member of the Rhenish District 
Committee of Democrats; took part in 
the Baden-Palatinate uprising of 1849, 
was killed in the battle of the Murg.— 
138, 566 
Moltke, Helmuth Karl Bernhard, Count 
von (1800-1891)—military writer and strategist, ideologist of Prussian 
militarism, field marshal-general 
from 1871; Chief of Prussian (1857-
71) and Imperial (1871-88) General 
Staff;  virtually commander-in-chief 
during the Franco-Prussian war.— 
528-30 
Monk, Charles (b. 1824)—British states­
man, Liberal Unionist M.P. (1859, 
1865-85).—389 
Montaigne, Michel de (1533-1592)— 
French skeptical philosopher.—569 
Moore, Samuel ( 1838-1911 )—English 
lawyer, member of the First Interna­
tional; translated into English Vol­
ume One of Marx's Capital (in col­
laboration with Edward Aveling) and 
the Manifesto of the Communist Party; 
friend of Marx and Engels. —480 
Morago Gonzalez, Tomas —Bakuninist, 
delegate to the Ghent Congress of 
Socialists (September 1877).—216 
Morelly (18th cent.)—French advocate 
of Utopian egalitarian communism.— 
287 
Morgan, Lewis Henry (1818-1881)— 
American ethnographer, archaeolo­
gist and historian of primitive so­
ciety.—350 
Most, Johann Joseph (1846-1906)— 
German anarchist, joined the work­
ing-class movement in the 1860s; 
deputy to the German Reichstag 
(1874-78); after the promulgation of 
the Anti-Socialist Law (1878) emi­
grated to England; founder (1879) 
and editor of the Freiheit; expelled 
from the German Socialist Workers' 
Party as an anarchist (in 1880); in 
1882 emigrated to the USA and 
continued anarchist propaganda.— 
210,  214, 374, 410, 478-79 
Motteler, Julius (1838-1907)—German 
Social-Democrat, a founder of the 
Social-Democratic Workers' Party 
(1869),  deputy to the Reichstag 
(1874-78,  1903-07).—209, 214 
Mottershead, Thomas G. (c. 1826-1884)— 

=====第721页=====
Name Index 691 
English weaver, a Chartist; member 
of the General Council of the First 
International (1869-72), Correspond­
ing Secretary for Denmark (1871-72), 
delegate to the London Conference 
(1871) and the Hague Congress 
(1872);  member of the British Feder­
al Council; opposed Marx's line in 
the General Council and the British 
Federal Council; expelled from the 
International by decision of the Gen­
eral Council of May 30, 1873.—571 
Müller, Wilhelm (1820-1892)— 
historian, professor in Tübingen. — 
511 
Münzer, Thomas (c. 1490-1525)—leader 
of the urban plebeians and poor 
peasants during the Reformation and 
the Peasant War in Germany (1525); 
advocated egalitarian Utopian com­
munism.—287 
Muravyov-Apostol, Sergei Ivanovich 
(1796-1826)—one of the leaders of 
the Decembrist movement in Russia, 
republican and opponent of serfdom; 
executed by Nicholas I together with 
the other four leaders of the Decem­
brist uprising of 1825.—501 
Muravyov, Mikhail Nikolayevich (1796-
1866)—Russian statesman, Minister 
of State Property (1857-63), opposed 
the Peasant Reform, Governor Gen­
eral of the North-Western Territory 
(1863-65); for the brutal suppression 
of the Polish uprising (1863-64) he 
was called "hangman".—503 
Murray, Charles Joseph—active partici­
pant in the British workers' move­
ment; shoemaker; follower of the 
social-reformist views of the Chartist 
James Bronterre O'Brien, member of 
the National Reform League and the 
Land and Labour League; member 
of the General Council of the First 
International (1870-72) and of the 
British Federal Council (1872-73); 
follower of Marx and Engels; an 
active member of the Social-
Democratic Federation in the 
1880s.—571 N 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)— 
French statesman and general, first 
Consul of the French Republic (1799-
1804);  Emperor of the French (1804-
14 and 1815).—9, 62, 103, 224, 288, 
318, 390, 454, 494, 497, 504, 511, 
528, 577 
Napoleon III (Charles Louis Napoleon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—nephew of 
Napoleon I; President of the Second 
Republic (December 1848 to 1851), 
Emperor of the French (1852-70).— 
9, 56, 96, 167, 188-89, 221, 224, 271, 
412,  504, 511, 525, 578 
Napoleon, Prince (Plon-Plon)—see 
Bonaparte, Prince Napoleon Joseph 
Charles Paul 
Nechayev (Netschajeff), Sergei Gen-
nadyevich (1847-1882)—Russian rev­
olutionary, conspirator, representa­
tive of the extreme adventurist trend 
of anarchism; as a refugee in Switzer­
land in 1869-71 he was connected 
with Bakunin; in August 1869, hav­
ing returned to Russia for a short 
time,  he formed a secret organisa­
tion, Narodnaya rasprava (People's 
Judgement), in Moscow; used methods 
impermissible for a revolutionary and 
did serious harm to the Russian 
revolutionary movement; in 1872 was 
extradited by the Swiss authorities to 
the Russian government and was 
sentenced to twenty years' imprison­
ment; died in the SS. Peter and Paul 
fortress in St. Petersburg.—22, 25-
27, 37, 246 
Nero (Nero Claudius Caesar Augustus 
Germanicus) (A. D. 37-68)—Roman 
Emperor (54-68).—432-33 
Newton, Sir Isaac (1642-1727)—English 
physicist, astronomer and mathemati­
cian, founder of classical me­
chanics.—301,  303 
Nicholas I (1796-1855)—Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—9, 103, 107-08, 
228, 343, 426, 488, 501-03, 512, 
515-16 
46* 

=====第722页=====
692 Name Index 
Niebelschütz, Edwin von—German offi­
cial, editor of the Neue Preußische 
Zeitung in 1876-81.—241 
Nobiling, Karl Eduard (1848-1878)— 
German anarchist; on May 11, 1878 
made an attempt on William Fs 
life.—231,  238, 241-46 
Noble, John (1827-1892)—British politi­
cian, Free Trader, advocate of the 
Anti-Corn Law League; author of 
works on finances.—400-03 
O 
Odger, George (1820-1877)—one of the 
leaders of the British trade unions; 
shoemaker; took part in founding 
the London Trades Council and was 
its Secretary from 1862 to 1872; 
member of the British National 
League for the Independence of 
Poland, the Land and Labour League 
and the Labour Representation 
League; member of the Executive 
Committee of the Reform League; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International (1864-71), its 
President (1864-67), took part in the 
London Conference (1865) and the 
Geneva Congress (1866), opposed 
revolutionary tactics; in 1871 refused 
to sign the General Council's address 
The Civil War in France and left the 
Council.—237 
O'Donovan Rossa, Jeremiah  (1831-
1915)—a leader of the Fenian move­
ment; publisher of The Irish People 
(1863-65); in 1865 was arrested and 
sentenced to life imprisonment; am­
nestied in 1870, emigrated to the 
USA where he headed the Fenian 
organisation; retired from political 
life in the 1880s.—460 
Orleans—a branch of the royal 
dynasty in France (1830-48).— 
586 
Orsini, Felice (1819-1858)—Italian 
democrat, republican; prominent fig­ure in the struggle for Italy's national 
liberation and unification, executed 
for his attempt on the life of 
Napoleon III.—577 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858)—British 
Utopian socialist.—287, 289, 294-96, 
335, 459 
P 
Paine, Thomas (1737-1809)—English-
born American author, Republican, 
participant in the American War 
of Independence (1775-83) and 
the French Revolution (1789-94).— 
569 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Vis­
count (1784-1865)—British states­
man, Tory at the beginning of his 
career, Whig from 1830 onwards; 
Foreign Secretary  (1830-41,  1846-51), 
Home Secretary (1852-55) and Prime 
Minister (1855-58, 1859-65).—56, 
138, 189 
Pavia y Albuquerque, Manuel (1827-
1895)—Spanish general and politi­
cian; in 1873 commanded the Repub­
lic's troops against the Carlists and 
suppressed the cantonalist upris­
ing in Andalusia; Captain-General of 
New Castile (1873-74); carried out 
a monarchist coup d'état (January 
2-3, 1874) which brought Serrano 
to power; Senator from 1880.— 
49 
Péreire, Isaac (1806-1880)—French 
banker, Bonapartist, deputy to the 
Corps  législatif;  in 1852, together 
with his brother Emile Péreire, 
founded the joint-stock bank Crédit 
mobilier, which went bankrupt 
in 1867 and was liquidated in 
1871;  author of works on credit.— 
274, 277 
Péreire, Jacob Emile (1800-1875)— 
French banker, adhered to the Saint-
Simonists (1825-31); later a Bona­
partist; a founder (1852) and direc­
tor of the Crédit mobilier.— 274, 
277 

=====第723页=====
Name Index 693 
Persius (Aulus Persius Flaccus) (A.D. 34-
62)—Roman satirist, follower of Stoic 
philosophy.—433 
Pestel, Pavel Ivanovich (1793-1826)— 
a leader of the Decembrist movement 
in Russia, founder and leader of the 
Southern Society.—501 
Peter I (the Great) (1672-1725) —Tsar of 
Russia (1682-1721); Emperor of Rus­
sia (1721-25).—8, 42, 488, 508 
Peter III (1728-1762)—Emperor of 
Russia (1761-62).—49 
Petronius (Gaius Petronius Arbiter) (d. 
A.D.  66)—Roman satirist, the reput­
ed author of Satyricon showing 
moral degradation of Roman society 
during Nero's reign.—431 
Pfander (Pfänder), Karl (Carl) (c. 1818-
1876)— participant in the German 
and international working-class 
movement, painter; from 1845, a 
refugee in London; a leader of the 
League of the Just; member of the 
German Workers' Educational Socie­
ty in London, of the Communist 
League's Central Authority and of 
the General Council of the First 
International (1864-67 and 1870-72); 
friend and associate of Marx and 
Engels.— 571 
Pfuel, Ernst Heinrich Adolf von (1779-
1866)—Prussian general; Prime 
Minister and War Minister (Sep­
tember-October 1848).— 138 
Philalethes—see Johann Nepomuk Maria 
Joseph 
Philo (Philo Judaeus) (21 or 28 B.C.— 
A.D.  41 or 49)—main representative 
of the Judaic religious philosophy of 
Alexandria; greatly influenced the 
formation of Christian theology.— 
428-30 
Pinder, Julius Hermann (b. 1805) — 
Prussian official, moderate liberal; 
Oberpräsident of Silesia; deputy to the 
Prussian National Assembly (Right 
wing) in 1848.—148 Pio, Louis Albert François (1841-1894)— 
publisher of the workers' weekly 
Socialisten; actual founder of the In­
ternational's sections in Denmark 
(1871);  a founder of the Danish 
Social-Democratic Party (1876); fled 
to the USA in 1877.—219 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
(1792-1878)—Pope (1846-78).—10, 
238 
Pi y Margall, Francisco (1824-1901)— 
Spanish politician, leader of the Left 
Republicans, Utopian socialist; lawyer 
and writer; took part in the revolu­
tions (1854-56 and 1868-74); Minister 
of the Interior (February 13-June 11, 
1873);  President pro tern of the repub­
lican government (June 11-July 18, 
1873).—513 
Plato (428 or 427-348 or 347 B.C.)— 
Greek philosopher.—548 
Pliny the Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus) 
(A.D.  23 or 24-79)—Roman scholar, 
author of Natural History in 37 vol­
umes.—548 
Pogodin, Mikhail Petrovich (1800-
1875)—Russian historian, writer and 
journalist.—6-7 
Pompadour, Jeanne Antoinette Poisson le 
Normant d'Étiolés, marquise de (1721-
1764)—mistress of Louis XV of 
France.—21 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865)— 
French writer, petty-bourgeois social­
ist, economist and sociologist; a 
founder of anarchism.—71, 184, 296, 
326-27,  479, 514, 520-21 
Puchta, Georg Friedrich (1798-1846)— 
German lawyer; representative of the 
historical school of law.— 554 
Pugachov, Yemelyan Ivanovich (c. 1742-
1775)—leader of an anti-feudal peas­
ant and Cossack uprising in Russia 
(1773-75).—49 
R 
Racine, Jean (1639-1699)—French 
dramatist.—569 

=====第724页=====
694 Name Index 
Rackow, Heinrich —German Social-
Democrat; from 1879 a refugee in 
London; owner of a tobacco shop; 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London.— 
578 
Rau, Karl Heinrich (1792-1870)— 
German political economist.—532, 
537, 540, 543 
Reh, Theodor (1801-1868)—German 
lawyer; in 1848-49, deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
Centre), its last President (1849).— 
167 
Reichensperger, August (1808-1895)— 
Prussian politician and writer on art; 
deputy to the Second Chamber 
(1850-63) and to the North German 
and German Reichstag (1867-92); a 
leader of the Roman Catholic 
(Centre) Party.—250 
Reimer, O.—follower of Lassalle; depu­
ty to the Reichstag (1874).—214 
Reimers,  W. —sergeant  of the English 
police (1874).—564 
Renan, Ernest (1823-1892)—French his­
torian of religion, Semitist, ideal­
ist philosopher.—238, 427 
Renard,  Andreas, Count (1795-1874)— 
Silesian landowner; deputy to the 
Second Chamber (Right wing) in 
1849.—151 
Reuleaux, Franz (1829-1905)—German 
scientist, founder of the German 
school of machine theory; member of 
the juries of the world exhibitions in 
Paris (1867), Vienna (1873) and 
Philadelphia (1876).—275 
Reuß (Reuss), Heinrich  XXII,  Prince von 
(1846-1902).—172 
Reuter, Heinrich Ludwig Christian Fritz 
(1810-1874)—German humorist writ­
er; for participation in the student 
movement was sentenced to death 
(1833) which was commuted to thirty 
years'  imprisonment; amnestied in 
1840;  began his literary activity in 
1852.—133 Ricardo, David (1772-1823)—English 
economist.—69, 382, 534, 551 
Richter, Ludwig —see Höchberg, Karl 
Rittinghausen, Moritz (1814-1890)— 
prominent figure in the German 
working-class movement; staff 
member of the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung in 1848-49; deputy to the 
German Reichstag (1877-78 and 
1881-84).—209 
Roach, Thomas John—member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional (1871-72), delegate to the 
Hague Congress (1872); Correspond­
ing Secretary for the British Federal 
Council, belonged to its reformist 
wing (1872); expelled from the Inter­
national by the General Council's 
decision of May 30, 1873.—571 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794)—leader of 
the Jacobins in the French Revo­
lution; head of the revolutionary 
government (1793-94).—18, 176, 
514 
Rochat, Charles Michel (b. 1844)— 
member of the Paris Federal Council, 
took part in the Paris Commune; 
Corresponding Secretary of the In­
ternational's General Council for 
Holland (1871-72); delegate to the 
London Conference (1871); in 1872 
emigrated to Belgium.—571 
Rochefort, Henri, marquis de Rochefort-
Luçay (c. 1831-1913)—French jour­
nalist and politician, Left-wing repub­
lican; publisher of the journal La 
Lanterne (1868-69) and the news­
paper La Marseillaise (1869-70); after 
the revolution of September 4, 1870 
until October 31, member of the 
Government of National Defence; 
after the suppression of the Paris 
Commune was exiled to New 
Caledonia; monarchist from the end 
of the 1880s.—460, 584 
Rodbertus (Rodbertus-Jagetzow), Johann 
Karl (1805-1875)—German econom­
ist; leader of the Left Centre in the 

=====第725页=====
Name Index 695 
Prussian National Assembly in 1848; 
subsequently theoretician of "state 
socialism".—531,  544-47, 549-51 
Rost, Valentin Christian Friedrich (1790-
1862)—German philologist.—548 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-1778)— 
French philosopher and writer of 
the Enlightenment.—82, 286, 288, 
298 
Rubichon, Maurice (1766-1849)— 
French economist, royalist, con­
tributed to the Journal des 
Économistes.— 326 
Rüge, Arnold (1802-1880)—German 
radical journalist and philosopher, 
Young Hegelian; published, jointly 
with Marx, the Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher; Marx's ideological oppo­
nent after 1844; deputy to the Frank­
furt National Assembly (Left wing) in 
1848;  leader of the German petty-
bourgeois refugees in England in the 
1850s; National Liberal after 1866.— 
184, 335 
Rühl, J.—German worker, member of 
the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London and of the Gener­
al Council of the First International 
(1870-72).—571 
Rutenberg, Adolf (1808-1869)—German 
journalist, Young Hegelian; member 
of the editorial board of the 
Rheinische Zeitung (1842); National 
Liberal after 1866.—233 
S 
Sadler, Michael Thomas—participant in 
the British working-class movement; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International (1871-72).— 
571 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte de (1760-1825)—French Uto­
pian socialist.—287, 289-92, 302, 
459,  514, 521 
Saltykov (Saltykov-Shchedrin), Mikhail 
Yevgrafovich (pseudonym N.  Shched-rin) (1826-1889)—Russian satirical 
writer; in the 1840s took a great 
interest in the ideas of Saint-Simon 
and Fourier and was exiled to Vyatka 
"for harmful thoughts" (1848); Vice-
Governor of Ryazan, then of Tver 
(1858-62); member of the editorial 
board of Sovremennik (1862-64); co-
editor and shareholder of 
Otechestvenniye Zapiski (1868-84). 
Thanks to him these journals became 
the main tribune of the Russian 
democrats.—196 
Schaf fie, Albert Eberhard Friedrich  (1831-
1903)—German economist and 
sociologist; propagated abstention 
from the class struggle.—531, 533, 
536-37,  547, 553 
Schapper, Karl (c. 1812-1870)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment; a leader of the League of the 
Just, member of the Communist 
League's Central Authority; took part 
in the 1848-49 revolution; a leader of 
the separatist group that split away 
from the Communist League (1850); 
again drew close to Marx in 1856; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International (1865), par­
ticipant in the London Conference of 
1865.—52, 336, 565 
Scheele, Alfred—head of the imperial 
railway office (1873-74).—278 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, dramat­
ist, historian and philosopher.—14, 
18, 127 
Schinderhannes —see Bückler, Johann 
Schneider, Adam—German carpenter, 
took part in an attempt on the life of 
Prince William (subsequently Wil­
liam I) on June 12, 1849.—244 
Schorlemmer, Carl (1834-1892)— 
German organic chemist, dialectical 
materialist, professor in Manchester; 
member of the First International 
and of the German Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party; member of seien-

=====第726页=====
696 Name Index 
tific societies in Great Britain, USA 
and Germany; friend of Marx and 
Engels. —471 
Schouvaloff—see Shuvalov, Pyotr An-
dreyevich 
Schramm, Carl (Karl) August (1830-
1905)—German Social-Democrat; re­
formist; an editor of the Jahrbuch für 
Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik  ; 
criticised Marxism in the second half 
of the 1870s; withdrew from the 
working-class movement in the 
1880s.—257-59, 262-67, 269 
Schulze, Ernst—German philologist, 
author of the Gothisches Glossar. — 
548 
Schwarzenberg, Felix, Prince zu (1800-
1852)—Austrian conservative states­
man and diplomat; after the suppres­
sion of the Vienna uprising in Oc­
tober 1848 Prime Minister and Minis­
ter of Foreign Affairs (November 
1848-52).—516 
Schweitzer, Johann Baptist von  (1833-
1875)—German journalist, follower 
of Lassalle, editor of Der Social-
Demokrat (1864-67); President of the 
General Association of German 
Workers (1867-71); supported Bis­
marck's policy of unification of Ger­
many under Prussia's supremacy; 
fought against the Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party; was expelled from 
the General Association for his con­
tacts with the Prussian authorities 
(1872).—263 
Sefeloge, Maximilian Joseph (1820-
1859)—Prussian retired non­
commissioned officer; made an at­
tempt on the life of Frederick Wil­
liam IV on May 22, 1850; died in a 
lunatic asylum.—244 
Seneca, Lucius Annaeus (c. 4 B.C.—A.D. 
65)—Roman stoic philosopher, 
writer and statesman.—429-33 
Serraillier, Auguste (1840-1878)— 
prominent figure in the French and 
international working-class move­ment; shoemaker; member of the 
First International (from 1864) and 
of its General Council (1869-72), 
Corresponding Secretary for Bel­
gium, Holland and Spain (1870) and 
France (1871-72); member of the 
Paris Commune; delegate to the Lon­
don Conference (1871) and the 
Hague Congress of the International 
(1872);  member of the International's 
British Federal Council (1873-74); 
supporter of Marx and Engels. — 
571 
Serrano y Dominguez, Francisco, conde de 
San Antonio, duque de la Torre (1810-
1885)—Spanish general and states­
man, War Minister (1843); took part 
in the coup  d'état  of 1856; Foreign 
Minister (1862-63), head of the Pro­
visional Government (1868-69), Re­
gent of the Kingdom (1869-71), 
Prime Minister (1871 and 1872), 
President (1874), Ambassador to 
France (1883-84).—22 
Seton—English house-owner.—564 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616)— 
English poet and dramatist.—72, 
237, 569 
Shuvalov (Schouvaloff),  Pyotr  Audreyevich, 
Count (1827-1889)—Russian general 
and diplomat; chief of gendarmes and 
head of the Third Department of the 
Imperial Office (1866-74); Ambas­
sador to Great Britain (1874-79).— 
239 
Sieber, Nikolai Ivanovich (1844-1888)— 
Russian economist, one of the first 
popularisers and supporters of 
Marx's economic theories in Russia.— 
534 
Singer, Paul ( 1844-1911)—prominent 
leader of the German working-class 
movement and the Social-Democratic 
group of the Reichstag, member of the 
German Social-Democratic Workers' 
Party (from 1869), deputy to the 
Reichstag (1884-1911).—254, 257 
Skaldin—see Yelenev, Fyodor Pavlovich 
Slagg, J.—member of the British Parlia­
ment from Manchester (1881).—389 

=====第727页=====
Name Index 697 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790)—Scottish 
economist.—534 
Socrates (c. 470-399 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher.—583 
Sorge, Friedrich Adolph (Adolf) (1828-
1906)—German teacher, took part in 
the 1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
emigrated to the USA (1852), organ­
ised the First International's sections 
there; Secretary of the General Coun­
cil, delegate to the Hague Congress 
(1872),  General Secretary of the Gen­
eral Council in New York (1872-74); 
took part in organising the So­
cialist Workers' Party of North 
America (1876-77); friend and as­
sociate of Marx and Engels. —472, 
478 
Soriano, Trinidad—Bakuninist, delegate 
to the Ghent Congress of the Social­
ists (September 1877).—216 
Spartacus (d. 71 B.C.)—leader of the 
greatest slave revolt in Ancient Rome 
(73-71 B.C.).—432 
Speyer, Karl (b. 1845)—Secretary of the 
German Workers' Educational Socie­
ty in London in the 1860s; carpenter; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International in London 
from 1870 and then in New York.— 
105 
Spinoza, Baruch (or Benedictus) de (1632-
1677)—Dutch philosopher.—298 
Stenzel, Gustav Adolph Harald (1792-
1854)—German historian; deputy to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly 
(Left wing, later Right Centre) in 
1848.—164 
Stephen Dushan (c. 1308-1355)—King 
of Serbia (from 1331), Tsar (from 
1346);  after long wars with Byzan­
tium, annexed Macedonia (1345), Al­
bania, Epir and Fessalia (1348) to 
Serbia and created a vast Greco-
Serbian kingdom.—497, 500 
Stepney, Cowell William Frederick (1820-
1872)—participant in the British working-class movement, member of 
the Reform League, member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional (1866-72) and its Treasurer 
(1868-70); delegate to the Brussels 
(1868) and Basle (1869) congresses 
and the London Conference (1871) 
of the First International; member of 
the British Federal Council (1872).— 
571 
Stieber, Wilhelm (1818-1882)—chief of 
the Prussian political police (1850-
60), an organiser of and chief witness 
for the prosecution at the Cologne 
Communist trial (1852); together 
with Wermuth wrote the book 
Die Communisten-V er schwörungen des 
neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. —51, 53, 
135 
Stirner, Max (real name Schmidt, Jo­
hann Caspar) (1806-1856)—German 
Young Hegelian philosopher, an 
ideologist of individualism and 
anarchism.—514, 521 
Stolberg-Wernigerode, Otto, Graf zu 
(from 1890 Fürst zu) (1837-1896)— 
German statesman and politician, 
deputy to the Reichstag (1871-78), 
Vice-Chancellor of the German 
Empire (1878-81); Conservative.— 
240, 250 
Stosch, Albrecht von (1818-1896)— 
German general; during the Franco-
Prussian war, Chief of the Commis­
sariat of the German armies and later 
Chief of Staff of German occupation­
al troops in France (1871); Navy 
Minister (1872-83).—242 
Strauss, David Friedrich (1808-1874)— 
German Young Hegelian philosopher 
and writer; author of Das Leben 
Jesu; National Liberal after 1866.— 
428 
Strousberg, Bethel Henry (real name 
Baruch Hirsch Strausberg)  (1823-
1884)—British railway industrialist, 
German by birth; went bankrupt in 
1875.—266 
Swinton, John (1830-1901)—Scottish-

=====第728页=====
698 Name Index 
born American journalist, editor of 
several influential New York news­
papers, The Sun (1875-83) included; 
founder and editor of John Swinton's 
Paper (1883-87).—583-85 
Sybel, Heinrich von (1817-1895)— 
German historian and politician, rep­
resentative of the "Prussian school" 
of German historians; member of the 
North German Reichstag (1867); Na­
tional Liberal; director of the Prus­
sian State Archives (1875-95).—458 
T 
Tacitus, Cornelius (c. 55-120)—Roman 
historian, orator and politician.— 
350, 365, 432, 443-44 
Tamerlane (or Timur) (1336-1405)— 
Gentral Asian soldier and conqueror, 
Emir (1370-1405), founder of a vast 
state in Asia with its capital in Samar­
kand.—510 
Taylor, Alfred—British worker; member 
of the General Council of the Inter­
national (1871-72) and the British 
Federal Council (1872-73).—571 
Tessendorff,  Hermann Ernst Christian 
(1831-1895)—Prussian public pros­
ecutor, member of the Berlin 
Municipal Court (1873-79); from 
1885 President of the Criminal Sen­
ate of the Supreme Court in Berlin; 
organised persecutions of Social-
Democrats.—173, 566 
Thackeray, William Makepeace  (1811-
1863)—English writer.—569 
Thadden-Trieglaff,  Adolf von (1796-
1882)—Prussian landowner in 
Pomerania, reactionary; member 
of the first United Diet (1847).— 
144 
Thaler, Karl von (b. 1836)—Austrian 
writer and journalist; opposed the 
First International; editor of and 
contributor to the Neue Freie Presse 
(1865-70 and 1873).—20-21, 26 
Thiers, Louis Adolph (1797-1877)— French historian and statesman, 
Prime Minister (1836 and 1840); 
head of the Orleanists after 1848; 
Chairman of the Council of Ministers 
(1871);  suppressed the Paris Com­
mune (1871); President of the Re­
public (1871-73).—222, 224, 492-93, 
527 
Thompson, Thomas Perronet  (1783-
1869)—British politician and 
economist, Free Trader.—403 
Tiberius (Tiberius Claudius Nero Caesar) 
(42 B.C.—A.D. 37)—Roman Em­
peror (14-37).—432 
Tkachov (Tkatschoff), Pyotr (Peter) 
Nikitich (1844-1886) —Russian rev­
olutionary, journalist, ideologist of 
the Blanquist trend in the Narodnik 
movement; in the 1860s was several 
times arrested for participation in 
student unrest and revolutionary 
propaganda among students; fled ab­
road from exile (1873); contributed to 
Lavrov's journal Vperyod! in Zurich; 
after break with him (1874) worked 
in the Blanquist newspaper Ni 
Dieu, ni Maître (1880).—21-43, 45-49, 
100 
Tolain, Henri Louis (1828-1897)— 
prominent figure in the French 
working-class movement; engraver; 
Proudhonist; member of the First 
Paris Bureau and Paris section of the 
First International, delegate to all 
congresses and conferences of the 
International in 1865-69; deputy to 
the National Assembly (1871); during 
the Paris Commune went over to the 
side of the Versaillists and was ex­
pelled from the International (1871); 
Senator during the Third Re­
public—235 
Tooke, Thomas (1774-1858)—English 
economist, adherent of the classi­
cal school in political economy, criti­
cised Ricardo's theory of money.— 
556 
Townshend, William—British worker; 
member of the General Council of 
the First International (1869-72), 

=====第729页=====
Name Index 699 
took part in the socialist movement in 
the 1880s.—571 
Treitschke, Heinrich von (1834-1896)— 
German historian and journalist, 
editor of the Preußische Jahrbücher 
(1866-69); deputy to the German 
Reichstag (1871-88) where he first 
joined the Right wing of the Natio­
nal Liberals and from the late 
1870s supported conservatives.— 54, 
458 
Trochu, Louis Jules (1815-1896)— 
French general and politician, Or-
leanist; took part in the conquest of 
Algeria (1830s-40s); head of the Gov­
ernment of National Defence; Com­
mander-in-Chief of the armed forces 
of Paris (September 1870-January 
1871);  sabotaged the city's defence; 
deputy to the National Assembly 
(1871).—527, 530 
Tschech, Heinrich Ludwig (1789-1844)— 
Prussian official, democrat, bur­
gomaster of Storkow in  1832-41, 
executed for an attempt on the life 
of Frederick William IV.—244 
Tussy—see Marx, Eleanor (Tussy) 
U 
Uhland,  Johann Ludwig (1787-1862)— 
German romantic poet; deputy to the 
Frankfurt National Assembly (Left 
Centre) in 1848-49.—168 
Urquhart, David (1805-1877)—British 
diplomat, writer and politician, Tur-
cophile, went on diplomatic missions 
to Turkey in the 1830s; Tory M. P. 
(1847-52), exposed the foreign policy 
of Palmerston and the Whigs; found­
er and editor of The Free Press 
(1855-77), which appeared under the 
heading Diplomatic Review from 
1866.—230 
V 
Vahlteich, Carl Julius (1839-1915) — German shoemaker and editor; a 
founder of the General Association 
of German Workers (1863), set up 
the Dresden section of the First 
International (1867),one of the found­
ers of the German Social-Democratic 
Workers' Party (1869); deputy to the 
German Reichstag (1874-76 and 1878-
81); emigrated to the USA (1881).— 
214 
Vaillant, Marie Edouard (1840-1915)— 
French engineer, naturalist and 
physician, Blanquist; delegate to the 
Lausanne Congress (1867) and the 
London Conference (1871) of the 
First International; member of the 
Paris Commune, of the National 
Guard's Central Committee and of 
the General Council of the Interna­
tional (1871-72); after the Hague 
Congress (1872) withdrew from the 
International.—18, 571 
Van Patten, Philipp —American 
bourgeois, joined the socialist move­
ment; National Secretary of the 
Labor Party of the USA (from 1876) 
and of the Socialist Labor Party of the 
USA (from 1877 to 1883); later 
became a government official.— 
477 
Vermersch, Eugene Marie Joseph (1845-
1878)—French petty-bourgeois jour­
nalist, participant in the republican 
movement; during the Paris Com­
mune (1871) published the news­
paper Le Père Duchêne; after the 
suppression of the Commune emi­
grated to England where he published 
Vermersch-Journal and Qui Vive? at­
tacking the International and the 
General Council.—14-15 
Victor Emmanuel (Vittorio Emanuele) II 
(1820-1878)—King of Piedmont 
(1849-61), King of Italy (1861-78).— 
271 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
295, 563 
Victoria Adelaide Mary Louisa (1840-
1901)—Queen Victoria's elder 

=====第730页=====
700 Name Index 
daughter; from 1858 wife of the 
Prussian Crown Prince Frederick 
William.—580-82 
Viereck, Louis (1851-1921)—German 
publisher and journalist; during the 
Anti-Socialist Law a leader of the 
Right wing of the Socialist Workers' 
Party of Germany; member of the 
Reichstag (1884-87); discharged from 
all responsible party posts by decision 
of the St. Gallen Congress (1887); in 
1896 emigrated to the USA and 
withdrew from the socialist move­
ment.—254, 257, 260-62 
Vinas, José Garcia—Bakuninist, dele­
gate to the Ghent Congress of the 
Socialists (September 1877).—216 
Vogt, Auguste —Karl Vogt's younger 
sister.—168 
Vogt, Karl (1817-1895)—German 
naturalist, petty-bourgeois democrat; 
deputy to the Frankfurt National 
Assembly (Left wing) in 1848-49; one 
of the five Imperial regents (June 
1849);  emigrated to Switzerland in 
1849;  received subsidies from 
Napoleon III in the 1850s and 
1860s, slandered proletarian rev­
olutionaries; exposed by Marx in 
his pamphlet Herr Vogt.— 167-68, 
189 
Voigts-Rhetz, Julius von (1822-1904)— 
Prussian general, participant in the 
Franco-Prussian war (1870-71), major 
general and Director of the General 
War Department (1873); later Gener­
al Inspector of Artillery.—64 
Voltaire (François Marie Arouet) (1694-
1778) — French philosopher, writer 
and historian of the Enlighten­
ment.—433,  569 
W 
Wagner, Adolph (1835-1917)—German 
bourgeois economist and politician, 
professor of political economy and 
finance; a founder of the socio-legal school in political economy; academic 
(Katheder) socialist.—531-59 
Washington, George (1732-1799)— 
American statesman, Commander-in-
Chief of the North American Army 
in the War of Independence (1775-
83), First President of the USA 
(1789-97).—343 
Weitling, Wilhelm (1808-1871)—one of 
the early leaders of the working-class 
movement in Germany; tailor; 
member of the League of the Just; a 
theoretician of Utopian egalitarian 
communism; emigrated to the USA 
in 1849.—297, 565 
Wenceslas IV (1361-1419)—King of 
Bohemia (1378-1419), Holy Roman 
Emperor (1378-1400).—500 
Wermuth, Carl Georg Ludwig (c. 1803-
1867)—chief of police in Hanover, 
an organiser of and witness for the 
prosecution at the Cologne Commu­
nist trial (1852); together with Stieber 
wrote the book Die Communisten-
Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahr­
hunderts. —135 
Weston, John—prominent figure in the 
British working-class movement; car­
penter, follower of Owen; member of 
the General Council of the First 
International (1864-72), delegate to 
the London Conference (1865); 
member of the Executive Committee 
of the Reform League; a leader of 
the Land and Labour League; 
member of the British Federal 
Council.—571 
Westphalen, Johann Ludwig von (1770-
1842)—Jenny Marx's father, Privy 
Councillor in Trier.—419, 422 
Wilke, Christian Gottlob (1786-1854)— 
German theologian, first Protestant, 
then Catholic; engaged in the 
philological-historical studies of the 
Bible.—428 
William I (1797-1888)—Prince of Prus­
sia, King of Prussia (1861-88), 

=====第731页=====
Name Index 701 
Emperor  of  Germany (1871-88).— 
172, 212, 239, 241, 372,  408-09, 
577 
William  III  (1650-1702)—Prince  of 
Orange, Stadtholder  of the  Nether­
lands (1672-1702), King  of Great 
Britain  and  Ireland (1689-1702).— 
436 
William  IV  (1765-1837)—King  of 
Great Britain  and  Ireland (1830-
37).-563 
Williams, J.—sergeant  of the  British 
police (1874).—564 
Willich, Johann August Ernst (1810-
1878)—Prussian officer, retired from 
the army  on account  of his  political 
views;  member  of the  Communist 
League, participant  in the  Baden-
Palatinate uprising  of 1849; a  leader 
of the  separatist group that split away 
from  the  Communist League  in 
1850;  emigrated  to the USA in 1853, 
took part  in the US  Civil  War on 
the side  of the  Northerners.—52, 
336 
Wolff,  Bernhard (1811-1879)—Ger­
man journalist, owner  of the  Ber­
lin newspaper National-Zeitung from 
1848;  founder  of the  first telegraphic 
agency  in Germany (1849).—241 
Wolff,  Johanna Christiane  (d.  1846)— 
younger sister  of Wilhelm  Wolff.— 
132 
Wolff,  Johann Friedrich  (d.  1835)— 
Wilhelm Wolff's father.—132 
Wolff,  Marie Rosine—Wilhelm Wolff's 
mother.—132 
Wolff,  Wilhelm (Lupus) (1809-1864)— 
German teacher, proletarian rev­
olutionary;  the son of a  Silesian serf 
peasant; participant  in the  student 
movement;  was  imprisoned  in Prussia 
(1834-39); from  1846  member  of the 
Brussels Communist Correspondence 
Committee; from March  1848 
member  of the  Central Authority  of 
the Communist League; took  an ac­
tive part  in the  1848-49 revolution  in Germany;  an  editor  of the  Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung;  in 1849  deputy  to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly  (ex­
treme Left wing); emigrated  to Swit­
zerland  in  summer  1849 and to 
England  in 1851;  friend  and as­
sociate  of Marx  and  Engels. —129-71 
Woodhull, Victoria Claflin (1838-
1927)—U.S. feminist, headed Section 
No. 12 which included bourgeois 
and petty-bourgeois members;  was 
expelled from  the  International 
(1872).—575 
Wrangel, Friedrich Heinrich Ernst, Count 
von (1784-1877)—Prussian general; 
took part  in the  counter­
revolutionary coup d'état  in Berlin 
and in dispersing  the  Prussian  Na­
tional Assembly  in November  1848; 
from  1856,  field marshal-general.— 
138 
Wrôbleuiski, Walery (1836-1908)—Polish 
revolutionary democrat,  a leader  of 
the Polish liberation uprising  of 
1863-64; general  of the  Paris Com­
mune, after  its defeat emigrated  to 
London; sentenced  to death  in his 
absence; member  of the  General 
Council  of the  First International  and 
Corresponding Secretary  for  Poland 
(1871-72); delegate  to the  Hague 
Congress (1872); fought Bakuninists; 
headed  the  Polish People revolutio­
nary society  in London (1872); propa­
gated  the  idea  of a  Russian-Polish 
revolutionary alliance; after  am­
nesty returned  to France; maintained 
contacts with Marx  and  Engels. —5, 
571 
Würth, Carl Otto (1803-1884)—lawyer, 
petty-bourgeois democrat, deputy  to 
the Frankfurt National Assembly  (ex­
treme Left wing).—168 
Y 
Yelenev, Fyodor Pavlovich (pseudonym 
Skaldin) (1827-1902)—Russian writ-

=====第732页=====
702 Name Index 
er, journalist, liberal; Secretary of 
the Editorial Commissions for the 
Preparation of the Peasant Reform of 
1861 (1859-61); author of essays In 
the Backwoods and in the Capital; in 
1868-96 member of the Council for 
the Press Affairs and simultaneously, 
from 1890, member of the Council of 
the Ministry of the Interior; from 
the 1870s took a reactionary stand.— 
47 
Z 
Zasulich, Vera Ivanovna (1849-1919)— 
participant in the Narodnik (from 
1868) and later in the Social-
Democratic movement in Russia; a 
Achilles (Gr. Myth.)—a Greek warrior 
during the Trojan War, a character 
in Homer's Illiad and Shakespeare's 
tragedy Troilus and Cressida.—24, 33, 
119 
Apollo—Greek god of the arts.—429 
Christ, Jesus (Bib.).—428, 431 
Don Quixote—the tide character in Cer­
vantes' novel.—458 
Eckart —hero of German medieval 
legends, loyal guard. In the Tann­
häuser legend he guards the moun­
tain of Venus, warning those who 
approach it of the danger of Venus' 
charms.—25 
Falstaff,  Sir John—a fat, merry, ribald 
and boastful knight in Shakespeare's 
The Merry Wives of Windsor and King 
Henry IV—237— 
Faust or Faustus—hero of a medieval 
German legend, the tide character in 
Goethe's tragedy and Marlowe's play 
The Tragical History of Doctor Faus­
tus.—  306,  550 
Hamlet—the title character in Shakes­
peare's tragedy.—14 founder (1883) and active member of 
the Emancipation of Labour group.— 
245, 346, 361, 364, 370-71 
Zévy, Maurice—member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1866-72), Corresponding Secretary 
for Hungary (1870-71); tailor.—571 
Zhukovsky, Yuly Galaktionovich  (1833-
1907)—Russian economist, journal­
ist, sociologist, eclectic; manager of 
the State Bank, senator; author of 
the article "Karl Marx and His Book 
on Capital", which slandered 
Marxism.—196 
Ziemann, Adolf (1807-1842)—German 
philologist, author of works on the 
history of the German language.— 
548 
Jacob (Bib.)—traditional ancestor of the 
people of Israel.—430, 514 
Jahveh (Jehovah) (Bib.).—430 
John,  Saint (the Apostle)—according to 
the New Testament, one of the 
twelve apostles of Christ, author of 
one of the Gospels and the Revela­
tion of John (Apocalypse).—430, 
434 
Karlchen Mießnick —a half-taught per­
son and mother's darling in the 
books of German humorist David 
Kalisch.—18, 24, 29, 33, 35 
Lazarus (Bib.).—433 
Mammon—wealth or the idol of wealth 
among some ancient peoples; in 
Christian ecclesiastical texts evil spirit, 
idol, personifying money-loving and 
money-grubbing.—417 
Mary (Bib.).—15 
Moros —character in Schiller's ballad 
Bürgschaft. —14 
Nemesis (Gr. Myth.)—goddess of re­
tributive justice.—26 
Paul, the Apostle (Bib.).—238 INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第733页=====
Name Index 703 
Peter, the Apostle (Bib.).—559 
Prometheus (Gr. Myth.)—a Titan who 
stole fire from the gods and gave it 
to men; was chained by Zeus to a 
rock.—315 
Sancho Panza (Pansa) —a character in Cervantes' Don Quixote.—458 
Vulcan—the Roman god of fire, the 
deity of smiths.—315 
Zeus (Gr. Myth.)—the supreme god in 
classical times.—432 

=====第734页=====
704 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
Arrests (present edition, Vol. 7) 
—Verhaftungen. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 34, 4. Juli 1848.—188 
Arrests (present edition, Vol. 7) 
—Verhaftungen. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Nr. 35, 5. Juli 1848.—188 
Capital. A Critique of Political Economy, Volume I, Book One: The Process of 
Production of Capital (present edition, Vol. 35) 
—Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band, Buch I: Der 
Produktionsprocess des Kapitals, Hamburg, 1867.—69, 190, 195-96, 249, 
308, 314, 326, 470, 473, 477, 479, 516, 534-35, 545, 550, 569, 583-84 
— KanHTaAi>.  KpHTHKa noAHTHiecKOH  SKOHOMM.  CoHHHeHie KapAa Mapnca. 
riepeB04i>  CT> HeMeijKaro.  TOMT>  nepBWH. Kmira I. ripoiieccb npoH3B04CTBa 
KanHTaAa, C.-neTep6ypn>, 1872.—469, 584 
—Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Band 1. Buch 1. Der 
Produktionsprocess des Kapitals. Zweite verbesserte Auflage, Hamburg, 
1872.—190, 196, 199, 249, 544-45, 549, 553 
—Le Capital. Traduction de M. J. Roy, entièrement revisée par l'auteur 
[Vol. 1], Paris, éditeurs Maurice Lachâtre et C ie [1872-1875].—200, 346, 360, 
364-65,  370-71,  584 
—Capital: A Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production. By Karl Marx. 
Translated from the third German edition by Samuel Moore and Edward 
Aveling and edited by Frederick Engels. Vol. 1. [Part 1-2], London, Swan 
Sonnenschein, Lowrey & Co., 1887.—314-15 
The Civil War in France. Address of the General Council of  thie  International Working 
Men's Association, London, 1871 (present edition, Vol. 22).—190, 237 
Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction (present edition, 
Vol. 3) 
—Zur Kritik der Hegeischen Rechtsphilosophie. Einleitung. In: Deutsch-
Französische Jahrbücher, hrsg. von Arnold Rüge und Karl Marx, 1-ste und 2-te 
Lieferung, Paris, 1844.—184 
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Part One (present edition, 
Vol. 29) 

=====第735页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 705 
—Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Erstes Heft, Berlin, 1859.—189, 
534-35,  545 
Critical Marginal Notes on the Article "The King of Prussia and Social Reform. By a 
Prussian" (present edition, Vol. 3) 
—Kritische Randglossen zu dem Artikel "Der König von Preußen und die 
Socialreform. Von einem Preußen". In: Vorwärts!, Nr. 63-64, 7., 10. August, 
Paris,  1844.—184 
77»« Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (present edition, Vol. 11) 
—Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Napoleon. In: Die Revolution. Eine Zeitschrift in 
zwanglosen Heften. Erstes Heft, New York, 1852.—188 
—Der achtzehnte Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte. 2. Ausg., Hamburg, 
1869.—188 
[First Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association on 
the Franco-Prussian War.] To the Members of the International Working Men's 
Association in Europe and the United States. In: The Pall Mall Gazette, No. 1702, 
July 28, 1870 (present edition, Vol. 22).—279-80 
[General Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's 
Association] (present edition, Vol. 23).—570-71 
Herr Bucher. To the Editor of "The Daily News". London, June 12, 1878. In: The 
Daily News, No. 10030, June 13, 1878 (this volume).—232-33 
— 'Sir,— Nach einem Telegramm von Reuter's Bureau...' In: Berliner Freie  Presse, 
Nr. 138, 16. Juni 1878.—232 
— 'Sir,— Nach einem Telegramm von Reuter's Bureau...' In: Vossische Zeitung, 
Nr. 139, 16. Juni 1878.—232 
Herr Vogt (present edition, Vol. 17) 
—Herr Vogt, London, I860.—51-52, 189 
Hirsch's Confessions (present edition, Vol. 12) 
—Hirsch's Selbstbekenntnisse. In: Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Crimi-
nal-Zeitung, Nr. 8, 5. Mai 1853.—51 
Inaugural Address of the Working Men's International Association Established Sep­
tember 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting Held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, London 
(present edition, Vol. 20) 
—Address. In: Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International 
Association Established September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting held at St. Martin's 
Hall, Long Acre, London. [London,] 1864.—53-54, 57, 190, 234-35, 516, 525, 
572 
Lord Palmerston (present edition, Vol. 12) 
—I. Palmerston. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3902, October 19, 1853.—189 
—II.  Palmerston and Russia. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3916, 
November 4, 1853.—189 
—III.  A Chapter of Modern History. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 3930, 
November 21, 1853.—189 
—IV. England and Russia. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No.  3973,  January 11, 
1854.—189 
On Proudhon [Letter to J. B. Schweitzer] (present edition, Vol. 20) 
—Über P.-J. Proudhon. In: Der Social-Demokrat, Nr. 16-18, 1., 3., 5. Februar 
1865.—327 
47-1317 

=====第736页=====
706 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M. Proudhon 
(present edition, Vol. 6) 
—Misère de la philosophic Réponse à la philosophie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon, Paris-Bruxelles,  1847.—71,  184, 326, 327, 520-21 
(anon.) Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly. First Article. Debates on 
Freedom of the Press and Publication of the Proceedings of the Assembly of the Estates 
(present edition, Vol. 1) 
—Die Verhandlungen des 6. rheinischen Landtags. Von einem Rheinländer. 
Erster Artikel. Debatten über Preßfreiheit und Publikation der Landständi­
schen Verhandlungen. In: Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe, 
Nr. 125, 128, 130, 132, 135, 139, Beiblätter, 5., 8., 10., 12., 15., 19. Mai 
1842.—183 
(anon.) Proceedings of the Sixth Rhine Province Assembly. Third Article. Debates on the 
Law on Thefts of Wood (present edition, Vol. 1) 
—Die Verhandlungen des 6. rheinischen Landtags. Von einem Rheinländer. 
Dritter Artikel. Debatten über das Holzdiebstahls-Gesetz. In: Rheinische 
Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe, Nr. 298, 300, 303, 305, 307, 
Beiblätter, 25., 27., 30. Oktober, 1., 3. November 1842.—183 
Provisional Rules of the Association (present edition, Vol. 20) 
— In: Address and Provisional Rules of the Working Men's International Association 
Established September 28, 1864, at a Public Meeting Held at St. Martin's Hall, 
Long Acre, London. [London], 1864.—178, 234, 269 
Report of the General Council to the Fourth Annual Congress of  the International Working 
Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 21). In: Report of the Fourth Annual 
Congress of the International Working Men's Association, held at Basle, in Switzerland, 
from the 6th to the 11th September 1869. London, 1869.—238 
Resolutions on the Split in the United States' Federation  Passed  by the General Council of  the 
I.W.A.  in Its Sittings of 5th and 12th March, 1872 (present edition, Vol. 23)—575 
Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne (present edition, Vol. 11) 
—(anon.) Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozeß zu Köln, Basel, 
1853.—51-52, 54, 189 
—(anon.) Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozeß zu Köln, Boston, Mass., 
1853.—52, 189 
—Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozeß zu Köln. Von Karl Marx. 1853 
(Unveränderter Abdruck). In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 126, 127, 129, 130, 132, 
133, 135, 137, 138, 140, 141, 144, 147; 28., 30. Oktober, 4., 6., IL, 13., 18., 
25., 27. November, 2., 4., IL, 18. Dezember 1847.—52 
—Enthüllungen über den Kommunisten-Prozeß zu Köln. Neuer Abdruck, 
Leipzig, 1875.—52, 78, 189 
Rules [and Administrative Regulations] of the International Working Men's Association, 
[London 1867] (present edition, Vol. 20).—569-70 
Second Address of  the General Council of  the International Working Men's Association on the 
Franco-Prussian War. London, 1870 (present edition, Vol. 22).—10 

=====第737页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 707 
Speech on the Question of Free Trade (present edition, Vol. 6) 
—Discours sur la question du libre échange, prononcé à l'Association 
Démocratique de Bruxelles, Dans la Séance Publique du 9 janvier 1848 
[Bruxelles, 1848].—184 
To Abraham Lincoln, President of the United States of America (present edition, 
Vol. 20). In: The Daily News, No. 5813, December 23, 1864 (under the title 
Working Men's Address to President Lincoln).—236 
To the Editorial Boards of  the "Volksstaat"  and the  "Zukunft"  (present edition, Vol. 22) 
—An die Redaktion der "Zukunft". London, 23. März 1871. In: Die Zukunft, 
Nr. 73, 26. März 1871.—577 
—An die Redaktion des "Volksstaat". London, 23. März 1871. In: Der 
Volksstaat, Nr. 26, 29. März 1871.—577 
[To the Editor of "De Werker"] (present edition, Vol. 22)— "London, 31 Maart 
1871.  Burger!" In: De Werker, No. 23, 8 apr. 1871.—577 
To the Editor of "The Daily News", June 26 (present edition, Vol. 22). In: The Daily 
News, No. 7850, June 27, 1871, and in The Eastern Post, No. 144, July 1, 
187 L—237 
Engels, Frederick 
Anti-Diihring. Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science (present edition, Vol. 25) 
—Herrn Eugen Dühring's Umwälzung der Philosophie. Herrn Eugen Dühring's 
Umwälzung der politischen Oekonomie. Herrn Eugen Dühring's Umwäl­
zung des Sozialismus. In: Vorwärts!, 3. Januar 1877-7. Juli 1878.—339 
—Herrn Eugen Dühring's Umwälzung der Wissenschaft. Philosophie. Politische 
Oekonomie. Sozialismus, Leipzig, 1878.—335, 339, 457 
The Bakuninists at Work. An Account of the Spanish Revolt in the Summer of 1873 
(present edition, Vol. 23) 
—Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit. Denkschrift über den letzten Aufstand in 
Spanien. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 105, 106, 107; 31. Oktober, 2., 5. November 
1873.—49, 339 
—Die Bakunisten an der Arbeit. Denkschrift über den letzten Aufstand in 
Spanien (Separat-Abdruck aus dem Volksstaat) [Leipzig, 1873].—339 
Bismarck and the German Working Men's Party (this volume). In: The Labour Standard, 
No. 12, July 23, 1881.—404 
British Agricultural Labourers Want to Participate in the Political Life of Their Country 
(this volume) 
— I contadini inglesi vogliono partecipare alla lotte politiche del loro Paese. 
Londra, 5 giugno. In: La Plebe, No. 18, 8 giugno, 1877.—181 
The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution (present edition, Vol. 10) 
—Die deutsche Reichsverfassungs-Campagne. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. 
Politisch-ökonomische Revue, Nr. 1, 2, 3, Januar, Februar, März 1850.—165 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England. From Personal Observation and 
Authentic Sources (present edition, Vol. 4) 
—Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England. Nach eigner Anschauung und 
authentischen Quellen, Leipzig, 1845.—314, 335, 473 
47* 

=====第738页=====
708 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— The Condition of the Working-Class in England in 1844. With Preface 
written in 1892. Translated by Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky. London, 
1892.—314 
Cotton and Iron (this volume). In: The Labour Standard, No. 13, July 30, 1881.—418 
Draft of a Speech at the Graveside of Karl Marx (this volume) 
—Discours de Frédéric Engels. In: La Justice, No. 27, 20 mars 1883.—467-71 
Engels to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, 14 March 1883 (present edition, Vol. 46) 
— "London, 14. März 1883. Karl Marx ist heute Nachmittag gestorben..." In: 
New Yorker Volkszeitung, Nr. 64, 15. März 1883.—472 
A Fair Day's Wages for a Fair Day's Work (this volume). In: The Labour Standard, 
No. 1, May 7, 1881.-379 
The French Commercial Treaty (this volume). In: The Labour Standard, No. 7, June 
18, 1881.—400 
The Housing Question (present edition, Vol. 23) 
—Zur Wohnungsfrage. Hefte 1-3. 
1. Heft: Wie Proudhon die Wohnungsfrage löst. Separatabdruck aus dem 
Volksstaat, Leipzig, Verlag der Expedition des Volksstaat [Leipzig, Druck von 
Fr. Thiele], 1872.—339 
2. Heft: Wie die Bourgeoisie die Wohnungsfrage löst. Sonderabdruck aus dem 
Volksstaat, Leipzig, Verlag der Genossenschaftsbuchdruckerei,  1872.—  339 
3. Heft: Nachtrag über Proudhon und die Wohnungsfrage. Sonderabdruck aus 
dem Volksstaat [Leipzig, Genossenschaftsbuchdruckerei,  1873].—  339 
The Mark (this volume) 
—Die Mark. In: Engels, F. Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur 
Wissenschaft, Hottingen-Zürich, 1882.— 312 
—Der deutsche Bauer. Was war er? Was ist er? Was könnte er sein? 
["Volksbuchhandlung und Expedition des Sozialdemokrat", Hottingen-Zürich, 
1883].—456 
On Social Relations in Russia (this volume) 
—Soziales aus Rußland, Leipzig, Druck und Verlag der Genos­
senschaftsbuchdruckerei, 1875.— 339 
Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie. In: Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher, hrsg. von Arnold Rüge und Karl Marx, 1-ste und 2-te Lieferung, 
Paris,  1844.—335 
The Peasant War in Germany (present edition, Vol. 10) 
—Der deutsche Bauernkrieg. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische 
Revue, Nr. 5-6, Mai bis Oktober 1850.—336 
—Der deutsche Bauernkrieg. Zweiter, mit einer versehener Abdruck, Leipzig, 
1870.—336 
— Der deutsche Bauernkrieg. Dritter Abdruck, Leipzig,  1875.—  336 
Prussian Schnapps in the German Reichstag (this volume) 
—Preußischer Schnaps im Deutschen Reichstag (Separatabdruck aus dem 
Volksstaat, 1876, Nr. 23, 24 u. 25 [Leipzig, Genossenschaftsbuchdruckerei], 
1876.—339 

=====第739页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 709 
Refugee Literature (this volume) 
— Flüchdings-Literatur. HI. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 117, 118, 6., 8. Oktober 
1874.—29-35,  37, 100 
— Flüchtlings-Literatur. IV. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 36, 37, 28. März, 2. April 
1875.—100 
— Flüchtlings-Literatur. V. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 43, 44, 45, 16., 18., 21. April 
1875.—100 
Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (this volume) 
—Le socialisme utopique et le socialisme scientifique. I-III. In: La Revue 
socialiste, Nos. 3-5, 20 mars, 20 avril, 5 mai 1880.—335, 457 
—Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique, Paris, 1880.—335, 339, 457 
—Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft. Hottingen-
Zürich, 1882.—457-59 
—Socyjalizm utopijny a naukowy, Genève, 1882.—457 
—Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft. 2. 
unveränd. Aufl., Hottingen-Zürich, 1883.—457-59 
—Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus von der Utopie zur Wissenschaft. 3. 
unveränd. Aufl., Hottingen-Zürich, 1883.—457-59 
To the "New Yorker Volkszeitung" (this volume) 
— "London, 16. März, Der Tod Karl Marx..." In: New Yorker Volkszeitung, 
Nr. 66, 17. März 1883.—472 
The Wages System (this volume). In: The Labour Standard, No. 3, May 21, 
1881.-382 
The Workingmen of Europe in 1877 (this volume) 
—Ibid. Part I. In: The Labour Standard, No. 43, March 3, 1878.—221 
—Ibid. Part II. In: The Labour Standard, No. 44, March 10, 1878.—216, 221 
— Ibid. Part III. In: The Labour Standard, No. 45, March 17, 1878.—221 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick 
The Alliance of Socialist Democracy and the International Working Men's Association. 
Report and Documents Published by Decision of the Hague Congress of the 
International (present edition, Vol. 23) 
—L'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste et l'Association Internationale des 
Travailleurs. Rapport et documents publiés par ordre du Congrès Interna­
tional de la Haye, Londres-Hambourg, 1873.—246 
—Ein Complot gegen die Internationale Arbeiter-Association. Im Auftrage des 
Haager Congresses verfaßter Bericht über das Treiben Bakunin's und der 
Allianz der socialistischen Demokratie. Deutsche Ausgabe von "L'alliance de 
la démocratie socialiste et l'association internationale des travailleurs". 
Uebersetzt von S. Kokosky. Braunschweig, 1874.—20-23, 27, 37, 174-75 
Fictitious Splits in the International. Private Circular from the General Council of the 
International Working Men's Association (present edition, Vol. 23) 
—Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale. Circulaire privée du Conseil 
Général de l'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, Genève, 1872.—236 
The German Ideology. Critique of Modem German Philosophy According to its 
Representatives Feuerbach, Bruno Bauer and Stirner, and of German Socialism 
According to its Various Prophets (present edition, Vol. 5) 

=====第740页=====
710 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
—Die deutsche Ideologic Kritik der neuesten deutschen Philosophie, in ihren 
Repräsentanten, Feuerbach, B. Bauer und Stirner, und des deutschen 
Sozialismus in seinen verschiedenen Propheten. —131, 477 
The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Company 
(present edition, Vol. 4) 
—Die heilige Familie, oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik. Gegen Bruno Bauer 
und Konsorten. Frankfurt a. M., 1845.—184 
Manifesto of the Communist Party (present edition, Vol. 6) 
—Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei, London, 1848.—16-17, 53, 71, 88-89, 
182, 249, 268, 326, 336, 344, 425-26, 458-59, 516, 521, 565 
—MaHH<j>ecn> KOMMyHHCTHHecKofi napTÎH [HCeHeBa, 1869].—425 
MaHH^eCTB KOMMVHHCTHHeCKOH napTÎH. riepeBOAb C HeMeiJKarO  H343H1H 
1872.  CT>  npe4HCAOBieM aBTopoBi», JKeHeBa, 1882.—425 
The Milliard (present edition, Vol. 9) 
—Die Milliarde. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, Nr. 247, 
16. März 1849.—144 
Resolutions of the General Congress Held at The Hague from the 2nd to the 7th September, 
1872.  I-X (present edition, Vol. 23) 
—Résolutions du congrès général tenu à la Haye, du 2 au 7 septembre 1872. 
Association Internationale des Travailleurs, Londres, 1872.—20, 191 
To the Editor of "The Times" (present edition, Vol. 22). In: The Times, No. 27017, 
March 22, 1871 (under the tide The International Society).—577 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Arch, J. The County Franchise. In: The Daily News, No. 9694, May 17, 1877.—179 
[Bakunin, M.] [Letter to Francisco Mora in Madrid,Locarno, April 5, 1872. Written in 
French.] (present edition, Vol. 23, pp. 578-80.) In: Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels. 
Ein Complot gegen die Internationale Arbeiter-Association. Im Auftrage des Haager 
Congresses verfaßter Bericht über das Treiben Bakunin's und der Allianz der 
socialistischen Demokratie. Deutsche Ausgabe von "L'alliance de la démocratie 
socialiste et l'association internationale des travailleurs". Uebersetzt von 
S. Kokosky. Braunschweig, 1874.—174 
—[EaKyHHHi», M.]  TocydapcmeeHHOcmti  u anapxin [JKeHeBa],  1873.—  72, 77, 
485-526 
Balfour, A. J. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 9, 1881.] In: The Times, 
No. 30217, June 10, 1881.—389 
Bauer, B. Die  Apostelgeschichte.  Eine Ausgleichung des Paulinismus und des Judenthums 
innerhalb der christlichen Kirche, Berlin, 1850.—428 
— Christus und die Caesaren. Der Ursprung des Christenthums aus dem römischen 
Griechenthum, Berlin, 1877.—429, 430 
— Kritik der Evangelien und Geschichte ihres Ursprungs. Bde. 1-4, Berlin, 
1850-1852.—427-28 
— Kritik der evangelischen  Geschichte  der Synoptiker.  Bde. 1-2, Leipzig, 1841.—428 
— Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker und des  Johannes.  Dritter und 
letzter Band, Braunschweig, 1842.—428 
— Kritik der paulinischen Briefe. Abth. 1-3, Berlin, 1850-1852.—428 

=====第741页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 711 
— Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte des  Johannes,  Bremen, 1840.—428 
— Philo,  Strauß und Renan und das Urchristenthum. Berlin, 1874.—428, 431 
Bebel, A. Unsere Ziele. Eine Streitschrift gegen die "Demokratische Korrespondenz". 
Vierte Auflage. Leipzig, 1874.—249 
Bible 
The Old Testament— 430, 580 
Genesis. —550 
Ezekiel.— 99 
Psalms.— 135 
The New Testament— 428, 430 
Luke.— 433 
Matthew.— 300 
Binz, C. [Speech on the intoxicating effect of alcoholic beverages.] In: Berliner 
klinische Wochenschrift, Nr. 4, 24. Januar 1876 (in the section Niederrheinische 
Gesellschaft in Bonn. Sitzung vom 3. Juni 1875).—115 
Bismarck, O. von. [Speech at the 94th session of the Budget Commission of the 
Prussian Chamber of Deputies on September 30, 1862.] In: Berliner Allgemeine 
Zeitung Nr. 458, 2. Oktober 1862. Morgens.— 248, 579 
—[Speech in the Reichstag on the Anti-Socialist Law on September 17, 1878.] 
In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. 
Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—246, 272 
— [Speech in the Reichstag on the Anti-Socialist Law on October 9, 1878.] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. 
Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—272 
Blind, K. Prince Napoleon and European  Democracy.  In: Fraser's  Magazine. New Series, 
Vol. 20. From July to December 1879, pp.  504-21,  London, 1879.—270-71 
Blume, W. Die Operationen der  deutschen  Heere von der  Schlacht  bei Sedan bis zum Ende 
des Krieges nach den Operations-Akten des Großen Hauptquartiers dargestellt Zweite 
unveränderte Auflage, Berlin, 1872.—530 
Böckh, A. Die Staatshaushaltung der Athener, vier Bücher. Erster Band, Berlin, 
1817.—556 
Bracke, W. Der Lassalle'sche Vorschlag. Ein Wort an den 4. Congreß der social-
demokratischen Arbeiterpartei (Einberufen auf den 23. August 1873 nach Eisenach), 
Braunschweig, 1873.—70 
— [Speech in the Reichstag on September 17, 1878.] In: Stenographische Berichte 
über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 
1878.  Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—245 
Bucher, A. L. [Declaration concerning Karl Marx's letter in The Daily News.] Berlin, 
den 20. Juni. In: Norddeutsche-Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 145, 21. Juni 1878.—232-
33 
Busch, M. Graf Bismarck und seine Leute während des Kriegs mit  Frankreich.  Bde. 1-2, 
Leipzig, 1878.—580 
Caesar, Gaius Julius. Commentarii de bello Gallico. In: Die  Geschichtschreiber  der 
deutschen Vorzeit in  deutscher  Bearbeitung. Bd. 1. Die Urzeit Hrsg. v. G. H. Pertz, 
J. Grimm u. a., Berlin, 1847-1849.—442-43 
Campanella, F. Th. Realis philosophiae epilogisticae (Civitas solis), Francofurti, 
1623.—287 

=====第742页=====
712 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Carlyle, Th. Latter-Day Pamphlets. No. I. February 1850. The Present Time. London, 
1850.—412 
— Past  and Present, London, 1843.—288, 412 
Cervantes Saavedra, M. de. Don Quixote.—458 
[Chernyshevsky] HepHuiueBCKHH, H. TIucwAa 6e3h adpeca, LJiopHxi., 1874.—199 
Cobden, R. [Speech in the House of Commons on February 24, 1842.] In: 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates: Third Series, Vol. 60, London, 1842.—401 
—[Speech in the House of Commons on February 27, 1846.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates: Third Series. Vol. 84, London, 1846.—400 
The Commercial Treaty with France (Negotiations)—The New French General  Tariff. 
Resolution. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates: Third Series. Vol. 262, London, 
1881.—389 
Cook, J. Boston Monday Lectures. Vol. 2, London, 1893.—576 
Cournot, A. Recherches  sur les principes mathématiques de la théorie des  richesses,  Paris, 
1838—559 
Dante Alighieri. Goettliche Comoedie. Metrisch übertragen und mit kritischen und 
historischen Erläuterungen versehen von Philalethes. Th. 1-3, Dresden und 
Leipzig, 1833-1849.— 183 
Darwin, Ch. On the Origin of  Species  by Means of Natural Selection, or the Preservation 
of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life. London, 1859.—301, 463, 467 
Davis,  J. Ch. B. [Report to the Foreign Secretary.] Berlin, February 10, 1877. In: 
Papers relating to foreign relations of the United States, transmitted to  congress,  with 
the annual message of the President, December 3, 1877, Washington, 1877.— 
571-72 
Delbrück, M. F. R. von. [Speech in the German Reichstag on February 4, 1876.] In: 
Kölnische Zeitung, Nr. 36, 5. Februar 1876 (in the section Verhandlungen des 
Deutschen Reichstages). —122 
Diderot. Le neveu de Rameau, Dialogue, Paris, 1821.—298 
Dilke, Ch. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 9, 1881.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates: Third Series, Vol. 262, London, 1881.—389 
Dühring, E. Cursus der National- und Socialökonomie einschliesslich  der Hauptpunkte der 
Finanzpolitik, Berlin, 1873.—119 
Engel, E. Das Zeitalter des Dampfes in technisch-statistischer Beleuchtung. 2. Aufl., 
Berlin, 1881.—413 
Erlach, F. von. Aus dem  französisch-deutschen  Kriege 1870-1871. Beobachtungen und 
Betrachtungen eines Schweizer-Wehrmanns, Leipzig und Bern, 1874.—529 
Eulenburg, B. W. A. [Speech in the Reichstag on September 6, 1878.] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. 
Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—242-250 
—[Speech on the Anti-Socialist Bill made on May 23, 1878.] In: Stenographische 
Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 3. Legislaturperiode. 
II. Session 1878. Zweiter Band, Berlin, 1878.—243 
Ewald, H. Geschichte des Volkes Israel bis Christus. 2. Ausg. Bd. 4. Göttingen, 
1852.—430 

=====第743页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 713 
Fallmerayer, J. Ph. Geschichte der Halbinsel Morea während des Mittelalters. Ein 
historischer Versuch. Th. 1, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 1830.—432 
Fichte, J. G. Reden an die deutsche Nation, Berlin, 1808.—511 
[Flerovsky] OAepoBCKifi, H. YlonooKenie paöouazo  KJiacca  es Pocciu. Haojiwdenin u 
usaihdoeanvi, C.-rieTep6ypri>, 1869.—44 
Fourier, Ch. Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire, ou invention du procédé 
d'industrie attrayante et naturelle distribuée en séries passionnées. In: Fourier, Ch. 
Oeuvres complètes, T. 6, Paris, 1845.—293, 313, 316 
— Théorie de l'unité universelle. T. 1. In: Fourier, Ch. Oeuvres complètes, T. 1. 
Paris,  1843.—293 
— Théorie de l'unité universelle. T. 4. Ebendort, T. 5, Paris, 1841.—293 
— Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées générales. Prospectus et annonce de la 
découverte, Leipzig, 1808.—289 
— Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées générales. In: Oeuvres complètes, 
T. 1, Paris, 1841.—293 
Giffen, R. Recent Accumulations of Capital in the United Kingdom. In: Journal of the 
Statistical Society. March 1878. Vol. XLI. Part 1, London, 1878.—323 
Goethe, J. W. von. Faust—  306,  547 
— Das Göttliche. In: Vermischte Gedichte.— 91 
Goltz, Th. von der. Beitrag zur Geschichte der Entwicklung ländlicher Arbeiterverhältnis­
se im nordöstlichen Deutschland bis zur Gegenwart, Berlin, 1864.—121 
— Die Lage der ländlichen Arbeiter im Deutschen Reich, Berlin, 1875.—121 
— Die ländliche Arbeiterfrage und ihre Lösung, Danzig, 1872.—121 
— Die soziale Bedeutung des Gesindewesens, Danzig, 1873.—121 
Goltz, Th. von der und Kinzel, W. Ländliche Arbeiterwohnungen, Königsberg und 
Tilsit, 1865.—121 
[Hannecken, H. von.] Militärische Gedanken und Betrachtungen über den deutsch­
französischen Krieg der Jahre 1870 und 1871 vom Verfasser des "Krieges um Metz", 
Mainz, 1871.—528 
Hanssen, G. Die Gehöferschaften (Erbgenossenschaften) im Regierungsbezirk Trier. Aus 
den Abhandlungen der Königl. Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin 1863, 
Berlin, 1863.—444 
Haxthausen, A. von. Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und insbesondere 
die ländlichen Einrichtungen Rußlands. Th. 1-2, Hannover, 1847. Th. 3, Berlin, 
1852.—45,  196 
Hegel, G. W. F. Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte. In: Werke. Vollst. 
Ausg. durch einen Verein von Freunden des Verewigten. Bd. IX. 2. Aufl., 
Berlin, 1840.—285-86, 302-03, 427 
Heine, H. Der Apollogott. In: Romanzero. Erstes Buch. Historien. —429 
— Disputation. In: Romanzero. Drittes Buch. Hebräische Melodien. —14 
— Ein Jungling liebt ein Mädchen... In: Heine, H. Buch der Lieder, Hamburg, 
1839.—249 
— Kobes  I.—33 
—Lieder. VIII. In: Buch der Lieder. Junge Leiden. 1817-1821.— \7b 
48-1317 

=====第744页=====
714 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Helldorff-Bedra, [O. H.] von. [Speech at the Reichstag sitting of September 16, 
1878.] In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 
4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—250 
Heraclitus. Fragmente. —229 
Hesekiel, G. Das Buch vom Grafen Bismark Dritte, unveränderte Auflage, Bielefeld 
und Leipzig, 1869.—580 
[Hess,  M.] Rother Kathechismus für das deutsche Volk, New York and Boston [1849 or 
1850].—51 
Hirsch, W. Die Opfer der Moucharderie. Rechtfertigungsschrift. In: Belletristisches 
Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung, Nr. 3-6, 1., 8., 15., 22. April 
1853.—51 
Homer. Iliad.—24, 34 
Howell, G. The History of the International Association. In: The Nineteenth Century, 
No. XVII, July, 1878. In: The Nineteenth Century. A Monthly Review. Edited by 
James Knowles. Vol. IV. July-December 1878. London.—234-39 
Hubbard, [Nicolas-] G[ustave]. Saint-Simon, sa vie et  ses travaux. Suivi de fragments des 
plus célèbres écrits de Saint-Simon, Paris, 1857.—289, 291-92 
Ulingworth, A. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 9, 1881.] In: The Times, 
No. 30217, June 10, 1881.—389 
Jhering, R. von. Geist des römischen Rechts auf den verschiedenen Stufen seiner 
Entwicklung. Zweiter Theil. Erste Abtheilung. Dritte verbesserte Auflage, 
Leipzig, 1874.—554, 556 
Kant, I. Allgemeine Naturgeschichte und Theorie des Himmels, oder Versuch von der 
Verfassung und dem mechanischen Ursprünge des ganzen Weltgebäudes nach 
Newtonischen Grundsätzen abgehandelt, Königsberg und Leipzig, 1755.—301-02 
Kardorff,  W. von. [Inquiry made to the Imperial Government on February 4, 
1876.] In: Kölnische Zeitung, Nr. 36, 5. Februar 1876 (in the section Ver­
handlungen des Deutschen Reichstages). —111, 119, 124-25 
Kamexu3ucb peeojmuioHepa, JKeHeBa [1869].— 37 
Kayser. [Speech on the protective tariffs made on May 17, 1879.] In: Steno­
graphische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. Legislatur­
periode. II. Session 1879. Zweiter Band, Berlin, 1879.—259-61 
Krüger, D. Ch. F. [Speech in the German Reichstag on February 4, 1876.] In: 
Kölnische Zeitung, Nr. 36, 5. Februar 1876 (in the section Verhandlungen des 
Deutschen Reichstages). —122 
Lange, F. A. Die Arbeiterfrage in ihrer Bedeutung für Gegenwart und Zukunft, 
Duisburg,  1865.—91,  531 
— Die Arbeiterfrage. Ihre Bedeutung für Gegenwart und Zukunft 3. Aufl., 
Winterthur, 1875.—531 
—John Stuart Mills Ansichten über die soziale Frage und die angebliche Umwälzung 
der Socialwissenschaft durch Carey, Duisburg, 1865.—531 
Laplace, P. S. Exposition du système du monde. T. 2. Paris, l'an IV de la République 
Française [1796].—302 

=====第745页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 715 
Lassalle, F. Arbeiterlesebuch. Rede Lassalle's zu Frankfurt am Main am 17. und 19. Mai 
1863. 5. Aufl., Leipzig [1863].—69-70 
— Herr Bastiat-Schulze von Delitzsch der  ökonomische  Julian, oder: Capital und Arbeit, 
Berlin, 1864.—516 
— Offnes Antwortschreiben an das Central-Comité zur Berufung eines Allgemeinen 
Deutschen Arbeitercongresses zu Leipzig, Zürich, 1863.—69, 91-93, 574-75 
[Lavrov, P. L.] Alfmonucb paôouazo deuxenin. In: Bnepedz>!  HenepioduuecKoe  o6o3ptuie. 
TOMT.  II, LJiopHXT,, 1874.—20-23, 29 
— PyccKoû co%iajvbHO-peeojoov,ioHHoû  MOJiodeotcu.  no noeody ôpowwpw: 3adanu 
peeojitouioHHou  nponazandta  e?> Pocciu,  AOHAOHT>,  1874.—25-26, 29, 36 
— Bnepedz>!  Hauia  npozpoMMa.  In:  Bnepedz>!  HenepioduuecKoe  o6o3p7>Hie.  TOMT>  I, 
UiopHXT,, 1873.—23 
Linnaei Caroli. Systema naturae, Lipsiae, 1735.—303 
Lissagaray. Histoire de la Commune de 1871, Bruxelles, 1876.—521 
Loria, A. Karl Marx. In: Nuova Antologia di scienze, lettere ed arti, ser. 2, vol. 38, 
fascicolo 7, Roma, 1883.—479-80 
— La rendita fondiaria e la sua elisione naturale, Milano, 1880.—479 
— La teoria del valore negli economisti italiani, Bologna, 1882.—479 
Mably, [G.-B.] de. De la législation, ou principes des loix, Amsterdam, 1776.—287 
Mac Iver, D. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 9, 1881.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates: Third Series, Vol. 262, London, 1881.—389 
Maine, H. S. Village-Communities in the East and West, London, 1871.—359 
Martin, H. L'Association Internationale des Travailleurs In: Le Siècle, No. 11171, 
14 octobre 1865.—235 
Marx, J. [Articles by Jenny Marx on the Irish Question.] In: La Marseillaise, 
Nos. 71, 79, 89, 91, 99; 1, 9, 19, 21 et 29 mars. Nos. 113, 118, 125; 12, 17 et 
24 avril 1870 (see present edition, Vol. 21).—460 
Maurer, G. L. von. Einleitung zur Geschichte der Mark-, Hof-,  Dorf-  und Stadt-
Verfassung und der öffentlichen Gewalt, München, 1854.—46, 350, 441 
— Geschichte  der Dorfverfassung in Deutschland. Bde. I-II, Erlangen, 1865.—46, 
441 
— Geschichte  der Fronhöfe, der Bauernhöfe und der Hofverfassung in Deutschland. 
Bde. I-IV, Erlangen, 1862-1863.—46, 441 
— Geschichte  der Markenverfassung in Deutschland, Erlangen, 1856.—46, 441 
— Geschichte  der Städteverfassung in Deutschland. Bde. I-IV, Erlangen, 1869-
1871.—46 
Meyer, R. Briefe und Socialpolitische Aufsaetze von Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow. 
Herausgegeben von Dr. Rudolph Meyer. Bde. 1-2, Berlin [1881].—550 
[Mikhailovsky] M[HxaÖAOBCKHH,] H. [K.] Kapjit, Mapxab nepedh  cydoMü  z. K). JKyxoe-
CKOZO.  In: OmeHecmeeHHvui  3anucxu, Ms 10, oKTHÖpb 1877,  CoepeMennoe  o6o3pinie, 
c 321-56.—196, 199 
Mill, J. S. Principles of Political Economy with Some of Their Applications to Social 
Philosophy. Vols. 1-2, London, 1848.—181 
Monk, Ch. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 9, 1881.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates: Third Series, Vol. 262, London, 1881.—389 
Morelly. Code de la nature, Paris, 1841.—287 
48* 

=====第746页=====
716 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Morgan, L. H. Ancient Society or Researches in the Lines of Human Progress from 
Savagery, through Barbarism to Civilisation, London, 1877.—350 
Morus, Th. Utopia.—287 
[Most, J.] Endlich! In: Freiheit, Nr. 12, 19. März 1881.—375 
— England. In: Freiheit, Nr. 12, 19. März 1881.—374 
Most, J. Kapital und Arbeit. Ein populärer Auszug aus "Das Kapital" von Karl Marx, 
Chemnitz [1873].—479 
— Kapital und Arbeit. Ein populärer Auszug aus "Das Kapital" von Karl Marx. 
Zweite verbesserte Auflage, Chemnitz [1876].—478 
Müller, W. Geschichte der Neuesten Zeit 1816-1866 mit besonderer Berücksichtigung 
Deutschlands, Stuttgart, 1867.—511 
[Nechayev] [HenaeBT., C. T. A leading article.] In: Oèuçuna, N° 1, ceHTflôp« lro, 
1870 To4a.— 25 
Newton, J. S. Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica, Londini, 1687.—303 
Noble, J. The Anti-Corn Law League and Wages. In: The Labour Standard, No. 10, 
July 9, 1881 (in the section Correspondence).—400-02 
Owen, R. The Book of the New Moral  World,  Containing the Rational System of Society, 
Founded on Demonstrable Facts, Developing the Constitution and Laws of Human 
Nature and of Society. Parts 1-7, London, 1842-1844.—296 
— Report of the Proceedings at the Several Public Meetings, held in Dublin... on the 
18th March, 12th April, 19th April and 3rd May, Dublin, 1823.—296 
— The Revolution in the Mind and Practice of the Human Race; or, the Coming 
Change from Irrationality to Rationality, London, 1849.—295 
Persius, Flaccus. Satirae.—433 
Petronius Arbiter. Satyricon.—431 
Philo.  Legum allegoriae.—429 
— Quaestiones in Exodum.—429 
— Quaestiones in Genesin.—429 
[Pogodin] Iloro4HHT>, M. n. J7oyit>cxoü sonpoct. Cotpauie  pascyMcbeniü,  3anucoKb u 
30MbuaHiu. 1831-1867, MocKBa, 1867.—6-7 
Proudhon, P. J. Systeme des contradictions économiques, ou philosophie de la misère. 
T. 1-2, Paris, 1846.—184, 326 
Puchta, F. G. Pandekten, Leipzig, 1877.—554 
Rau, K. H. Grundsätze der Volkswirthschaftslehre. Fünfte vermehrte und verbesserte 
Ausgabe, Heidelberg, 1847.—532 
— Grundsätze der Volkswirthschaftslehre. Erste Abtheilung. Achte vermehrte und 
verbesserte Ausgabe, Leipzig und Heidelberg, 1868. In: Rau, K. H. Lehrbuch 
der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band. Volkswirthschaftslehre. Erste Abtheilung. 
Achte vermehrte und verbesserte Ausgabe, Leipzig und Heidelberg, 1868.— 
537, 540, 543 
Reichensperger, A. [Speech at the Reichstag sitting of September 16, 1878.] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 
4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—250 

=====第747页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 717 
Renan, E. Histoire des Origines du christianisme. T. 1-8, Paris, 1863-1883.—238, 427 
Reuleaux, F. Briefe aus Philadelphia, Braunschweig, 1877.—275 
Reuter, F. Ut mine Festungstid. In: Reuters Werke, 4. Band, Leipzig und Wien.— 133 
Ricardo, D. On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, London, 1817.—382 
Ritson, J. A Select Collection of English Songs, in three volumes, 2nd ed., Vol. II, 
London, 1813.—437 
Rodbertus. Sociale Briefe an von Kirchmann. Erster  Brief:  Die sociale Bedeutung der 
StaatswirthschafL Zweiter  Brief:  Kirchmann's sociale Theorie und die meinige. 
Dritter  Brief:  Widerlegung der Ricardo'schen Lehre von der Grundrente und 
Begründung einer neuen Rententheorie, Berlin, 1850-51.—531 
Rodbertus-Jagetzow. Zur Erkenntniss unsrer staatswirthschaftlichen Zustände. Erstes 
Heft: Fünf Theoreme, Neubrandenburg und Friedland, 1842.—531 
— Zur Erklärung und Abhülfe der heutigen Creditnoth des Grundbesitzes. I. Die 
Ursachen der Noth. II. Zur Abhülfe, Jena, 1869.—531 
Rost, V. Ch. Fr. Deutsch-Griechisches Wörterbuch. Zweite Abtheilung. M-Z, Göttingen, 
1829.—548 
Rouget de Lisle, C. J. Chant de guerre de l'armée du Rhin [Marseillaise]. —136 
Rousseau, J. J. Du contrat social; ou, Principes du droit politique, Amsterdam, 
1762.—286 
— Discours sur l'origine et les fondemens de l'inégalité parmi les hommes, Amsterdam, 
1755.—286, 298 
[Saint-Simon, Cl. H. de] Lettres d'un habitant de Genève à ses contemporains. Paris 
[1803].—289, 291 
— L'industrie, ou Discussions politiques, morales et philosophiques, dans l'intérêt de tous 
les hommes livrés à des travaux utiles et indépendant T. 2, Paris, 1817.—292 
— Nouveau christianisme. Dialogues entre un conservateur et un novateur. Premier 
dialogue, Paris, 1825.—291 
Saint-Simon, M. Le Comte de, et Thierry, A. De la réorganisation de la société 
européenne, ou de la nécessité et des moyens de rassembler les peuples de l'Europe en un 
seul corps politique, en conservant à chacun son indépendance nationale, Paris, 
1814.—292 
Schaffte, A. E. Fr. Bau und Leben des socialen Körpers. Bde. 1-4, Tübingen, 
1875-1878.—536, 552 
— Kapitalismus und Socialismus mit besonderer Rücksicht auf Geschäfts- und 
Vermögensformen, Tübingen, 1870.—536-37 
— Die Quintessenz des Socialismus. Von einem Volkswirth, Gotha, 1875.—536-37 
Schiller, J. Ch. Fr. von. Die Bürgschaft (Damon und Phintias). In: Gedichte der dritten 
Periode. —14 
— Don Carlos. —18 
— Die Götter Griechenlands. —127 
Schulze, E. Gothisches Glossar, Magdeburg, 1847.—548 
Secchi, P. A. Die Sonne, Braunschweig, 1872.—301-02 
Shakespeare, W. King Henry IV.—231 
— The Merchant of Venice.—72 

=====第748页=====
718 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Sieber] 3H6epi>, H. Teopin ubwHocmu u Kanumana /J,. PuKapdo ez> cei&u ct> 
no3dHbüiuuMu  donojiHeninMU  u pcubRCHeHifiMU.  Onumz,  KpumuKo-aKOHOMUuecKazo 
U3CJibdo&aHia,  KieBt>,  1871.—  534 
[Skaldin] CKaviHHT>. B»  3axoJiycmbu  u et cmojiuuh. CamcrneTepoyprb, 1870.—47-48 
Slagg, I. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 9, 1881.] In: The Times, 
No. 30217, June 10, 1881.—389 
Stolberg-Wernigerode, O. zu. [Speech in the Reichstag on September 9, 1878,] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 
4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band, Berlin, 1878.—240 
—[Speech in the Reichstag on September 16, 1878.] In: Stenographische Berichte 
über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstags 4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 
1878.  Erster Band. Berlin, 1878.—240 
Strauss, D. Fr. Das Leben Jesu. Kritisch bearbeitet Bd. 1-2, Tübingen, 1835-1836.— 
428 
Tacitus, Publius Cornelius. Germania. In: Die Geschichtschreiber der deutschen Vorzeit 
in deutscher Bearbeitung. Bd. 1. Die Urzeit Hrsg. v. G. H. Pertz, J. Grimm u. a., 
Berlin, 1847-1849.—443 
Thaler, K. von. Rothe Jesuiten. In: Neue Freie  Presse,  Morgenblatt, Nr. 3284, 3285, 
14., 15. Oktober 1873 (in the section Feuilleton).— 20-21, 26 
Tkatschoff, P. Offener Brief an Herrn Friedrich Engels. Verfasser der Artikel 
"Flüchtlings-Literatur" in Nr. 117 und 118 des "Volksstaat", Jg. 1874, Zürich, 
1874.—29-32, 34, 35, 38-40,  42-43,  45-46, 49, 100 
— [Proclamation to the Russian peasants.] In: AaBpoB, II. A., Pycacou 
coU/iaJibHo-peeoMotiioHHou  MOJiodewu.  Flo noeody öpouiwpbi: 3adauu  peeoJiwu,ioHHoü 
nponaeandu eb Pocciu, A0H40H, 1874.—36 
— 3adanu  peeoAwtiioHHOu  nponazandbi eb Pocciu.  TIucbMO  Kb pedaxmopy jKypuaiia 
"Bnepedb!" [A0H40H], AnptAb 1874.—24-26, 29, 33-35, 37, 47 
Tooke, Th. and Newmarch, W. A History of Prices,  and of the State of the Circulation, 
during the Nine Years 1848-1856. In two volumes; forming the fifth and sixth 
volumes of the History of Prices from 1792 to the Present Time, London, 
1857.—556 
Verdi, G. Rigoletto. Opera. Libretto by Piave (Victor Hugo's Le roi s'amuse). —37 
Vermersch, E. Les partageux. Poème [Londres, 12 mai 1874].—14 
— Un mot au public, Londres. Avril, 1874.—14 
Vogt. [Protest against Wolffs speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on 
May 26, 1849.] In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der deutschen 
constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main. Hrsg. von Franz 
Wigard. Neunter Band. Nr. 229, 28. Mai 1849, Frankfurt am Main, 1849.— 
167-68 
Voigts-Rhetz, von. [Speech in the German Reichstag on January 11, 1875.] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen Reichstages. 2. 
Legislatur-Periode. IL Session 1874-75. Zweiter Band. Berlin, 1875.—64 
Wagner, A. Allgemeine oder theoretische Volkswirthschaftslehre. Erster Theil.  Grund­
legung. In: Wagner, A. und Nasse, E. Lehrbuch der politischen Oekonomie. Erster 
Band, Leipzig u. Heidelberg, 1879.—531-59 

=====第749页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 719 
— Einiges von und über Rodbertus-Jagetzow. In: Zeitschrift für die gesammte 
Staatswissenschaft Vierunddreissigster Jahrgang. Erstes u. zweites Heft, 
Tübingen, 1878.—544, 549-51 
Weitling, W. Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit, Vivis, 1842.—565-66 
Wermuth/Stieber. Die Communisten-Verschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts. 
Zweiter Theil, Berlin, 1854.—135 
Wilke, Ch. G. Der Urevangelist oder exegetisch kritische Untersuchung über das 
Verwandtschaftsverhältniß der drei ersten Evangelien. Dresden und Leipzig, 1838.— 
428 
[Wolff,  W.] [Concerning Manteuffel's Statement against the abolition of feudal 
duties.] In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, Nr. 171, 17. De­
zember 1848 (in the section Deutschland. Köln). —142 
—Aus dem Reich. In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, Nr. 125, 
25. Oktober; Nr. 126, 26. Oktober; Nr. 127, 27. Oktober; Nr. 134, 
4. November; Nr. 181, 29. Dezember; Beilage zu Nr. 182, 30. Dezember 
1848;  Nr. 184, 1. Januar; Nr. 185, 3. Januar; Beilage zu Nr. 187, 5. Januar; 
Nr. 192, 11. Januar; Nr. 197, 17. Januar; Nr. 198, 18. Januar; Nr. 243, 
11. März, 2. Ausgabe; Nr. 268, 9. April 1849.—137-38 
— Gesangbuch.  In: Schlesische Provinzial-Blätter, Breslau. Bd. 112. Juli bis De­
zember 1840.—134 
—(Das königl. Patent an die Bauern.) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der 
Demokratie, Nr. 200, 20. Januar 1849 (in the section Deutschland. Köln). —143 
— [Decree on the Abolition of feudal duties without compensation in Silesia.] In: 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, Nr. 181, 29. Dezember 1848 (in 
the section Deutschland. Köln). —142, 147 
— Die oberschlesischen  Wilddiebe und das preußische Militär. Breslau. In: Freikugeln, 
Nr. 27, 13. Februar 1845.—131, 135 
—(Die preußische Milliarde.) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, 
Nr. 248, 17. März 1849.—144-46 
—(Die schlesische Milliarde.) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, 
Köln, 1849. Nr. 252, 22. März; Nr. 255, 25. März; Nr. 256, 27. März; 
Nr. 258, 29. März; Nr. 264, 5. April; Nr. 270, 12. April; Nr. 271, 13. April; 
Nr. 272, 14. April; Nr. 281, 25. April.— 141, 146-52, 155-64 
—(Zur schlesischen Milliarde.) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, 
Nr. 258, 29. März 1849.—146, 151-52 
— (Zur schlesischen Milliarde. [Die "Rezesse".]) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ 
der Demokratie, Nr. 264, 5. April 1849.—146, 156 
— (Zur schlesischen  Milliarde. [Das Schutzgeld.]) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ 
der Demokratie, Nr. 270, 12. April 1849.—146, 156-57 
—(Zur schlesischen Milliarde.) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, 
Nr. 272, 14. April 1849.—146, 158-59 
— (Zur "schlesischen  Milliarde".) In: Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Demokratie, 
Nr. 281, 25. April 1849.—146, 159-61 
Wolff.  [Speech in the Frankfurt National Assembly on May 26, 1849.] In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden 
Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt am Main Hrsg. von Franz Wigard. Neunter 
Band. Nr. 229, 28. Mai 1849, Frankfurt am Main, 1849.—166-68 
Wroblewski, W. [Speech at the meeting held to celebrate the 36th anniversary of 
the German Workers' Educational Society in London, February 7, 1876. 

=====第750页=====
720 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Translated from the French into German by Engels.] In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 24, 
27. Februar 1876 (in the section Aus England. London, 12. Februar).— 566 
Ziemann, A. Mittelhochdeutsches Wörterbuch zum Handgebrauch, Quedlinburg und 
Leipzig, 1838.—548 
DOCUMENTS OF THE INTERNATIONAL 
WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION  a 
An alle Sectionen und Mitglieder der IAA, New York, 16. Mai 1875.—105-06 
Die Arbeiter Wien's an die französischen und englischen Arbeiter. Wien, den 10. Juli 
1868.  In: Der Vorbote, Nr. 8, August 1868.—492 
Manifest an alle Völker Europa's zur Protestation gegen den französisch-preußischen Krieg. 
In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 60, 27. Juli 1870.—578 
Manifest des Generalraths der Internationalen Arbeiterassoziation. In: Der Volksstaat, 
Nr. 63, 7. August 1870.—578 
[Manifesto addressed to the workers of all nations against the Franco-Prussian war.] In: Der 
Volksstaat, Nr. 57, 17. Juli 1870.—578 
DOCUMENTS 
Address of the Manchester League. In: The Times, No. 18069, August 23, 1842.—400 
Address of the Polish Refugees to the English People. London, May 3, 1874.—6-11 
Address of the Polish Refugees to the English people. The Polish people. In: Reynolds's 
Newspaper, No. 1240, May 17, 1874.—5 
An Act further to amend the Laws relating to the Representation of the People in England 
and Wales [15th August, 1867]. In: The Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and  Ireland.  Vol. 28, London, 1868.—416 
An Act to Alter Certain Duties of  Customs,  June 26, 1846. In: The Statutes of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and  Ireland,  1846. London, 1846.—391,  400-01,  416 
An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation of Corn, June 26, 1846. In: The 
Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and  Ireland,  1846. London, 
1846.—391,  400-01,  416 
An Act to amend the Representation of the People in England and Wales [7th June, 
1832].  In: The Statutes of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland 
Vol. 12, London, 1832.—416 
An Act to make further Provisions for the Regulation of Cotton Mills and  Factories,  and for 
the better Preservation of the Health of young Persons employed therein [1819].—296 
An Act to prevent unlawful Combinations of Workmen [12th July, 1799]. In: The 
Statutes at Large, From the Thirty-ninth Year of the Reign of King George the  Third, 
To the End of the Fifth and Concluding Session of the Eighteenth and last Parliament 
of Great Britain, held in the Forty-first Year of the Reign of King George the  Third, 
London, 1800.—376 
a Documents written by Marx see in the section "Works by Karl Marx and 
Frederick Engels; Marx, Karl". 

=====第751页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 721 
An Act to repeal an Act of the present Session of Parliament, intituled 'An Act for the more 
effectual Abolition of Oaths and Affirmations taken and made in various Departments 
of the State, and to substitute Declarations in lieu  thereof,  and for the more entire 
Suppression of voluntary and extrajudicial Oaths and Affidavits; and to make other 
provisions for the Abolition of unnecessary Oaths'.—563 
An Act to repeal the Laws relative to the Combination of Workmen  ; and for other Purposes 
therein mentioned [21st June, 1824]. In: The Statutes of the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and  Ireland.  Volume the Ninth, London, 1824.—376, 384 
[Alexander IL] [Manifesto on the Abolition of Serfdom.] In: CaHKmnemepôypzcKin 
BbdoMocmu, JV° 52, 6 MapTa 1861.—5, 112 
Allgemeines Landrecht für die Preussischen Staaten, Th. 1-2, Berlin, 1794.—135 
Aux Communeux, Londres, juin, 1874.—12-18 
Begründung, Beantwortung und Besprechung der Interpellation des Abgeordneten Mosle, 
betreffend den Zusammenstoß der Panzerschichte "König Wilhelm" und "Großer 
Kurfürst". In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlung des Deutschen 
Reichstags. 4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster Band. 3. Sitzung am 
Freitag, den 13. September 1878. Berlin, 1878.—242 
Bülow-Cummerow, E. G. G. von. Die Grundsteuer und Vorschläge zu ihrer 
Ausgleichung, Berlin, 1849.—144-45 
Centralny Narodowy Komitet jako tymczasowy Rzqd Narodowy. Dan w Warszawie 
22 Stycznia 1863 r.—7, 56, 235 
[Circular of the Ministry of Home Affairs of Spain.] In: Gaceta de  Madrid,  No. 17, 
Enero 17, 1872 (in the section Ministerio de la Gobernacion. Circular).—238 
Code civil—see Code Napoleon 
Code Napoléon, Paris, Leipzig, 1804.—454 
Congresso Socialista di Milano. In: La Plebe, No. 7, 26 febbraio 1877.—177-78 
Constitution. Décrétée par  l'assemblée  constituante. 3 septembre 1791. Déclaration des droits 
de l'Homme et du Citoyen. In: Collection des constitutions, chartes et lois fondamentales 
des peuples de l'Europe et des deux Amériques, T. 1, Paris et Rouen, 1823.—55 
Constitution. Décrétée par l'assemblée constituante. 3 septembre 1791. In: Collection des 
constitutions, chartes et lois fondamentales des peuples de l'Europe et des deux 
Amériques; avec des précis Offrant de l'Histoire des Libertés et des Institutions 
politiques chez les nations modernes; et une Table alphabétique raisonnée des matières, 
T. 1, Paris et Rouen, 1823.—55 
[Declaration of the Prussian ministry regarding "Entwurf eines Gesetzes betreffend 
die unentgeltliche Aufhebung verschiedener Lasten und Abgaben vom 10. Juli 
1848"].  In: Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, Nr. 223, 13. Dezember 1848 (in the 
section Nichtamtlicher TheiL Deutschland. Preußen). —141 
Die deutsche Nationalversammlung an das deutsche Volk. In: Stenographische Berichte über 
die Verhandlungen der deutschen constituirenden Nationalversammlung zu Frankfurt 
am Main. Hrsg. von Franz Wigard. Neunter Band. Nr. 228, 26. Mai 1849, 
Frankfurt am Main, 1849.—166, 168 
/foKJiaàb evicouaüuie  yupeJKdeuHoü KOMUcciu  dan U3CJibdoeaHin  utAHbuiwizo  nonootcenifi 
ceMtCKozo xo3HÜcmea  u cen-bCKoü npoiueodumeAKHocmu  es Pocciu. /fomiadh. TKypuanvi 
KoMucciu. npHAOJKeHHH I, II-V, VI, VII. C.-rieTep6yprB, 1873.—47 

=====第752页=====
722 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Edikt den erleichterten Besitz und den freien Gebrauch des Grund-Eigenthums, so wie die 
persönlichen Verhältnisse der Land-Bewohner betreffend Vom 9. Oktober 1807. In: 
Sammlung der für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten erschienenen Gesetze und 
Verordnungen von 1806 bis zum  27 sten Oktober 1810, Berlin, 1822, Nr. 16.—132 
Edikt die Regulirung der gutsherrlichen und bäuerlichen Verhältnisse  betreffend,  vom 14. 
September 1811. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, 
Berlin, 1811, Nr. 21.—113 
Edikt über die Einführung einer allgemeinen  Gewerbe-Steuer.  Vom 28. Oktober 1810. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1810, Nr. 4.— 
155 
Edikt über die Finanzen des Staats und die neuen Einrichtungen wegen der Abgaben  u.s.w. 
vom 27. Oktober 1810. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen 
Staaten, Berlin, 1810, Nr. 2.—145 
Die Encyclica seiner Heiligkeit des Papstes Pius I. vom 8. Dezember 1864 und der 
Syllabus, Köln, 1865.—238 
Enquête parlementaire sur l'insurrection du 18 mars. T. I-III, Versailles, 1872.—237 
Entwurf eines Gesetzes betreffend die unentgeltliche Aufhebung verschiedener Lasten und 
Abgaben vom 10. Juli 1848. In: Stenographische  Berichte über die Verhandlungen der 
zur Vereinbarung der preußischen Staats- Verfassung berufenen Versammlung. Bd. 2, 
Berlin, 1848.—141 
Erste Berathung des Gesetzentwurfs gegen die gemeingefährlichen Bestrebungen der 
Sozialdemokratie [September  16-17].  In: Stenographische Berichte über die Ver­
handlungen des Deutschen Reichstags. 4. Legislaturperiode. I. Session 1878. Erster 
Band, Berlin, 1878.—240-50 
Friedrich Wilhelm IV. An mein Volk und die deutsche Nation. Berlin, den 21. März 
1848.  In: Reden, Proklamationen, Botschaften, Erlasse und Ordres. Vom  Schlüsse  des 
Vereinigten ständischen  Ausschusses,  am 6. März 1848, bis zur Enthüllungs-Feier des 
Denkmals Friedrich des Großen, am 31. Mai 1851, Berlin, 1851.—127 
Gesetz, betreffend den Forstdiebstahl Vom 15. April 1878 (Nr. 8566). In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, Nr. 20, Berlin, 1878.—447 
Gesetz, betreffend den Zolltarif des Deutschen Zollgebiets und den Ertrag der Zölle und der 
Tabacksteuer. Vom 15. Juli 1879 (Nr. 1320). In: Reichs-Gesetzblatt, Nr. 27, 
Berlin, 1879.—272-75, 391 
Gesetz, betreffend die Dienstvergehen der Richter und die unfreiwillige Versetzung  derselben 
auf eine andere Stelle oder in den Ruhestand Vom 7. Mai 1851 (Nr. 3385). In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, Nr. 13, Berlin, 
1851.—52 
Gesetz gegen die gemeingefährlichen Bestrebungen der Sozialdemokratie [Entwurf]. In: 
Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen des Deutschen  Reichstags.  4. Legis­
laturperiode. I. Session 1878. Zweiter Band, Berlin, 1878.—240-52, 260-62, 
265, 267, 272 
Gesetz gegen die gemeingefährlichen Bestrebungen der  Sozialdemokratie.  Vom 21. Oktober 
1878. In: Deutscher Reichs-Anzeiger und Königlich Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, 
Nr. 249. 22. Oktober 1878. Abends.— 260-62, 265, 267, 272, 407-08 

=====第753页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 723 
Das Gesetz über die Cadres in  Frankreich.  In: Kölnische Zeitung, Nr. 90, 91, 92, 94; 1., 
2., 3., 5. April 1875.—59-60 
Gesetz über den Landsturm. Vom 12. Februar 1875 (Nr. 1048). In: Reichs-Gesetzblatt, 
Nr. 7, Berlin, 1875.—59 
Gesinde-Ordnung für sämmtliche Provinzen der  Preußischen  Monarchie. Vom 8. November 
1810. Nr. 13. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, Nr. 5, 
Berlin, 1810.—163 
Handelsvertrag zwischen dem Deutschen Zollverein und dem Königreich Italien vom 31. 
Dezember 1865.—124 
[An Inquiry from the Electors of Nessin to Frederick William IV.] Berlin, 12. 
Januar. In: Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, Nr. 14, 14. Januar 1849 (in the section 
Nichtamtlicher Theil Deutschland. In: Friedrich Wilhelm IV an den Schulzen 
Krengel, den Tagelöhner Gräber und die übrigen Urwähler in Nessin bei Kolberg). — 
143 
Internationale et révolution. A propos du congrès de la Haye par des réfugiés de la 
Commune, Ex-membres du Conseil Général de l'Internationale, Londres, 1872.—14 
Das Keyserrecht  nach der Handschrift von 1372 in Vergleichung mit andern Handschriften 
und mit erläuternden Anmerkungen  herausgegeben  von Dr. H. JE. Endemann, Cassel, 
1846.—443 
Kreisordnung für die Provinzen Preußen, Brandenburg, Pommern, Posen, Schlesien und 
Sachsen. Vom 13. Dezember 1872 (Nr. 8080). In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die 
Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, Nr. 41, Berlin, 1872.—121, 156, 162 
Lex Ribuaria. —445 
Manifest der sozialistischen Partei in Brabant (Belgien). In: Vorwärts, Nr. 10 und 11, 
25. und 17. Januar 1878.—218 
Manifest des Ausschusses der sozial-demokratischen Arbeiterpartei In: Der Volksstaat, 
Nr. 73, 11. September 1870.—211, 578 
Manifest Rzqdu Narodowego Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej do narodu  polskiego.  W Krakowie, 
dnia 22 Lutego 1846 roku.— 7-8, 344 
Manifest Towarzystwa  Demokratycznego  Polskiego.  Poitiers, d. 4 grudnia 1836 r. [Paris, 
1836].—7-8 
Motive [zum Reichsmilitärgesetz]. In: Stenographische Berichte über die Verhandlungen 
des Deutschen Reichstages. 2. Legislatur-Periode. I. Session 1874. Dritter Band. 
Anlagen zu den Verhandlungen des Reichstages, Berlin, 1874.—66 
06u{ee  nonoDtcenie  o Kpecmt>RHaxt>,  eviwedwuxb  U3t>  KpbnocmHoü 3aeucuMocmu. In: 
CaHKmnemepôypecxiR  BbdoMocmu,  JNQ 53, 54, 7 H 8 MapTa 1861.—41 
Papiers et correspondance de la famille impériale. Édition collationnée sur le texte de 
l'imprimerie nationale. Tome second, Paris, 1871.—167, 189 
The Premier and Factory  Operatives. In: The Times, No. 28883, March 7, 1877.—180 
Programm der  deutschen  Arbeiterpartei In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 27, 7. März 1875.—67-
100 

=====第754页=====
724 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Programm der sozialistischen Arbeiterpartei Deutschlands. In: Der Volksstaat, Nr. 59, 28. 
Mai 1875.—77-100, 260, 266, 571-72 
Programme electoral des travailleurs  socialistes.  In: L'Égalité, No. 24, 30 juin 1880, 2 nd 
série. —340 
Programm und Statuten der sozial-demokratischen Arbeiter-Partei In: Demokratisches 
Wochenblatt, Nr. 33, 14. August 1869.—67, 69, 72, 78,  500-01,  523-24 
Projet de loi relatif à la constitution des cadres et des effectifs de l'armée active et de l'armée 
territoriale. In: Annales de l'Assemblée Nationale. Annexes. T. 37, Paris, 1875.— 
59-60. 
Protokoll des Vereinigungs-Congresses der Sozialdemokraten Deutschlands abgehalten zu 
Gotha, vom 22. bis 27. Mai 1875, Leipzig, 1875.—571 
Reichs-Militärgesetz. Vom 2. Mai 1874 (Nr. 1002). In: Reichs-Gesetzblatt, Nr. 15, 
Berlin, 1874.—60, 63, 66 
[Resolution of the Congress of the Jura Federation...]. In: L'Avant-Garde. Organe 
Collectiviste et Anarchiste, No. 33, 26 août, 1878.—246 
Rückblicke auf die sozialistische Bewegung in Deutschland. Kritische. Aphorismen von***. 
In: Jahrbuch für Socialwissenschaft und Socialpolitik. Herausgegeben von Dr. 
Ludwig Richter. Erster Jahrgang. Erste Hälfte, Zürich-Oberstrass, 1879, 
S. 75-96.-262-67, 269 
C6opHUKj>  uamepiajioe o6h apmejwxh 6& Pocciu. Madame C. neTepöyprcKaro 
oT4t>AeHKH KoMHTeTa o ceAbCKHxi., ccy4oc6eperaTeAbHMxi> H npoMwuiAeHHux-b 
TOBapHinecTBax-b. Bbinycicb I, C.-neTep6ypn>, 1873.—43 
Tracts of the Liverpool Financial Reform Association, Liverpool, 1851.—96 
Traité de paix entre Sa Majesté l'Impératrice de Hongrie et de Bohème, et Sa Majesté le 
Roi de Prusse, conclu et signé à Teschen le treize mai 1779, avec un article séparé et les 
conventions, garanties et actes annexés. —8 
Ustawa Rzqdowa. Prawo Uchwalone. Dnia 3. Maia, Roku 1791, Warszawa, 1791.—7 
Verfassungs-Urkunde für den preußischen Staat Vom 31. Januar 1850. In: Gesetz-
Sammlung für die Königlichen Preußischen Staaten, Nr. 3, Berlin, 1850.—97 
Verordnung, betreffend die interimistische Regulirung der gutsherrlich-bäuerlichen Ver­
hältnisse in der Provinz Schlesien. In: Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger, Nr. 231, 21. 
Dezember 1848.—142, 147-48 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS PUBLISHED 
IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Berliner Freie Presse, Nr. 195, 23. August 1878: Das Henkerbeil —246 
Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne de l'Association internationale des travailleurs, 
No. 51, 17 décembre 1876: Nouvelles de l'extérieur. Italie. —177 
The Daily News, No. 10906, March 31, 1881: Prosecution of the "Freiheit" 
Journal—374 
—No.  10981,  June 27, 1881: News from Berlin.—407 

=====第755页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 725 
—No.  10983, June 29, 1881: Socialism in Saxony. In the section Latest 
Telegrams.—407 
—No.  10994, July 12, 1881: The Social Democrats in Germany. In the section 
Latest Telegrams.—407 
—No.  10997, July 15, 1881: News from Berlin. In the section Latest Telegrams.— 
407 
Kölnische Zeitung, Nr. 358, 27. Dezember 1874: Die Steigerung der deutschen 
Kriegsstärke im Jahre 1874 und die Vergleichstellung  derselben  zu der Wehrmacht der 
andern europäischen Mächte. In the section Militärische Mittheilungen. Deutschland — 
65 
—Nr. 39, 8. Februar 1876: Vermischte Nachrichten. —123 
Die Laterne, Nr. 23, 8. Juni 1879: Aus Breslau schreibt man der "Laterne". —258, 
260-61 
—Nr. 21, 25. Mai 1879: Die Zolldebatte.— 258, 260-61 
—Nr. 23, 8. Juni 1879: Zur Kaiser'schen Rede und Abstimmung. —258, 260-61 
Neue Preußische Zeitung, Nr. 126, 4. Juni 1878: Die Frevelthat vom 2. Juni. —241, 
243-44 
Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung, Nr. 12, 15. Januar 1875: Aus Paris wird heute 
gemeldet.... In the section Politischer Tagesbericht. —65-66 
—Nr. 67, 20. März 1875: Politischer Tagesbericht.— 90 
—Nr. 229, 30. September; Nr. 234, 5. Oktober; Nr. 251, 24. Oktober; 
Nr. 259, 2. November 1877: Politischer Tagesbericht.— 575 
La Plebe, No. 3, 21 gennaio 1877: Quattro piccole righe.... —177 
—No.  7, 26 febbraio 1877: Abbiamo ricevuto.... —177 
Der Sozialdemokrat, Nr. 17, 19. April 1883: Aus Odessa (Südrußland).... —473 
The Times, No. 29279, June 12, 1878: We have received the following telegrams through 
Reuter's Agency:—Eastern Affairs. Berlin, June 11. In the section Latest Intelli­
gence.—230 
—No.  30145, March 18, 1881: Nihilists in London. In the section Parliamentary 
Intelligence. House of Commons, Thursday, March 17.—375 
—No.  30217, June 10, 1881: The French Commercial  Tariff.  In the section 
Parliamentary Intelligence. House of Commons, Thursday, June 9.—389 
Der Vorbote, Nr. 9, September 1867; Nr. 10, Oktober 1871: Empfangsbescheini­
gungen der für die Zentralkasse von Außen eingegangenen Beträge. —230 
Vorwärts, Nr. 57, 17. Mai 1878: Das Attentat— 245 
[Vperyod!] Bnepedh!HenepioduuecKoeo6o3pbuie.  TOM  II. OT4LAT>  2. LtropHXT», 1874: H3b 
HpKymcKa. B pa3,4eAe: Hmo dhjiaemai ua Podunb? —23 

=====第756页=====
726 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
L'Atelier, organe spécial de la classe laborieuse, rédigé par des ouvriers exclusivement —a 
monthly of the French artisans and workers who were influenced by the ideas 
of Christian socialism, published in Paris from 1840 to 1850.—93 
Belletristisches Journal und New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung—a weekly published by 
German petty-bourgeois refugees in New York from 1852 to 1911. In 1853 the 
paper printed articles libelling Marx and other proletarian revolutionaries 
associated with him.—51 
Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne de l'Association internationale des travailleurs — 
organ of the Swiss anarchists, published in French under the editorship of 
James Guillaume in 1872-78, at first twice a month, and from July 1873, 
weekly.— 176 
The Chicago Tribune—a newspaper founded in 1847, a Republican organ in 
1855-99.—568 
The Commonwealth—a weekly of the General Council of the International published 
in London from February 1866 to July 1867 as the successor of The Workman's 
Advocate; Eccarius was its editor in February and March 1866; Marx was on the 
Board of Directors till June 1866; because of the growing influence of the trade 
unionists on the board, from June 1866 the newspaper virtually became an 
organ of bourgeois radicals.—236 
The Daily News—a liberal daily of the British industrial bourgeoisie published in 
London from 1846 to 1930.—230-33, 237, 374, 407, 473 
Deutsche-Brùsseler-Zeitung—a newspaper founded by the German refugees in 
Brussels and published from January 1847 to February 1848 twice a week. 
From September 1847 Marx and Engels regularly contributed to the newspaper 
and under their influence it became an organ of revolutionary communist 
propaganda.—136, 187, 336, 468 
Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher —a German-language yearly published in Paris under 
the editorship of Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge; only the first issue, a double 
one,  appeared in February 1844. It carried a number of works by Marx and 
Engels.— 184, 335 

=====第757页=====
Index of Periodicals 727 
L'Égalité —a French socialist paper founded in 1877 by Jules Guesde; from 1880 to 
1883 it was published in Paris as the organ of the French Workers' Party. It 
appeared in six series. The first three series were published weekly (113 issues), 
the fourth and fifth—daily (56 issues). Of the sixth series only one issue 
appeared, in 1886. The series differed by subtides.—326, 340, 586 
Le Figaro—a French conservative newspaper published in Paris since 1854; from 
1866 it appeared daily; was connected with the government of the Second 
Empire.—577 
Forward—see Bnepedh! 
Frankfurter Zeitung und Handelsblatt —a German democratic daily published in 
Frankfurt am Main from 1856 (under this title from 1866) to 1943.—68 
Freie Presse —see Neue Freie Presse 
Freiheit —a German weekly, organ of the anarchist group of Johann Most and 
Wilhelm Hasselmann; published in London (1879-82) and in New York 
(1882-1908).—258, 374, 410, 478 
Jahrbuch für Socialxvissenschaft und Socialpolitik —a German-language journal of the 
social-reformist trend, published in Zurich from 1879 to 1881 by Karl 
Höchberg (pseudonym Dr. Ludwig Richter); three volumes appeared.—253, 
262-66,  269 
Journal des Economistes. Revue mensuelle de l'économie politique et des questions agricoles, 
manufacturières et commerciales —a liberal monthly published in Paris from 
December 1841 to 1943.—326 
La Justice—a French daily, organ of the Radical Party published in Paris from 1880 
to 1930. In 1880-96, under the leadership of its founder Georges Clemenceau, 
the paper was the organ of the Left-wing radicals, advocating a programme of 
democratic and social reforms and expressing the interests of the petty and 
middle bourgeoisie. In 1880 Charles Longuet entered the editorial board of the 
paper.—460, 464 
Kölnische Zeitung —a German daily, organ of the liberal bourgeoisie, published in 
Cologne from 1802 to 1945.—65, 111, 123, 183 
KoAOKOJiz»  (The Bell)—a revolutionary-democratic newspaper; it was published by 
Alexander Herzen and Nikolai Ogaryov from 1857 to 1867 in Russian and in 
1868-69 in French under the title Kolokol (La Cloche) with supplements in 
Russian; until 1865, it was published in London, then in Geneva.—425 
Königlich-Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger —a daily newspaper of the Prussian government 
published in Berlin under this title from 1851 to 1871.—142, 230, 232, 233 
Kreuz-Zeitung —see Neue Preußische Zeitung 
The Labour Standard. An Organ of Industry—a weekly organ of the trade unions 
published in London from 1881 to 1885. In 1881 Frederick Engels contributed 
to it.— 378, 382, 394, 400, 418 
Die Laterne —a Social-Democratic satirical weekly; published in Brussels from 
December 1878 to June 1879 under the editorship of Carl Hirsch.— 254, 259, 
262 

=====第758页=====
728 Index of Periodicals 
La Marseillaise—a daily newspaper, organ of the Left republicans, published in 
Paris from December 1869 to September 1870; the paper carried material on 
the activity of the International and the working-class movement.—460 
Hapodna eoba (People's Will) — a democratic paper published in Smederevo 
(Serbia) from December 1875 to June 1876.—219 
National-Zeitung—a German daily published in Berlin from 1848 to 1915; it voiced 
liberal views in the 1850s.— 230 
Neue Freie Presse —a liberal daily which appeared in Vienna from 1864 to 
1939.—20-21,  26, 578 
Die Neue Gesellschaft. Monatsschrift für Socialwissenschaft —a reformist newspaper 
published in Zurich from October 1877 to March 1880.—268 
Neue Preußische Zeitung —a conservative daily published in Berlin from June 1848 
to 1939; organ of the Prussian Junkers and Court circles; it was also known as 
the Kreuz-Zeitung because the heading contained a cross bearing the slogan 
"Forward with God for King and Fatherland!"—188, 241 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Organ der Demokratie —a daily published in Cologne under 
the editorship of Marx from June 1, 1848 to May 19, 1849 (with an interval 
between September 27 and October 12, 1848); organ of the revolutionary-
proletarian wing of the democrats during the 1848-49 revolution in Germany. 
Engels was among its editors.—103, 107, 137, 139-64, 168, 187-88, 336, 468 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue —a journal published by Marx 
and Engels from December 1849 to November 1850, theoretical organ of the 
Communist League.—336 
The New Moral World—see The New Moral  World;  and Gazette of the Rational Society 
The New Moral  World;  and Gazette of the Rational Society—English weekly founded 
by Robert Owen, published from 1834 to 1846, first in Leeds, then in London; 
Engels contributed to it from November 1843 to May 1845.—335 
New-York Daily Tribune—a newspaper founded by Horace Greeley in 1841 and 
published until 1924; organ of the Left wing of the American Whigs until the 
mid-1850s and later of the Republican Party. It voiced progressive views and 
opposed Negro slavery in the 1840s and 1850s. Marx and Engels contributed to 
it from August 1851 to March 1862.—189, 468, 583 
New-Yorker Volkszeitung. Den Interessen des arbeitenden Volkes gewidmet —a German-
language socialist daily published from 1878 to 1932.—462, 472 
The New-York Star.—410 
The Nineteenth Century. A Monthly Review—an English liberal review published 
under this title in London from 1877 to 1900.—234-39 
Norddeutsche Allgemeine Zeitung —a conservative daily published in Berlin from 1861 
to 1918, an official organ of the Bismarck government in the 1860s-80s.—65-
66, 90, 232, 245 
Norddeutsche Zeitung —see Zeitung für Norddeutschland 
The Northern Star— an English weekly, central organ of the Chartists, published 
from 1837 to 1852, first in Leeds, from November 1844 in London. Its founder 
and editor was Feargus O'Connor, George Harney being one of its co-editors. 
Engels contributed to the paper from 1843 to 1850.—335 

=====第759页=====
Index of Periodicals 729 
Nuova Antologia di scienze, lettere ed arti—an Italian liberal magazine; published in 
Florence from 1866 to 1878 once a month, and in Rome from 1878 to 1943 
twice monthly.—479 
Otechestvenniye Zapiski (Fatherland's Notes)—a literary and socio-political monthly 
published in St. Petersburg from 1868 to 1884 under the editorship of 
N. A. Nekrasov (till 1877), M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin, G. Z. Yeliseyev and 
N. K. Mikhailovsky (after 1877). It was the literary mouthpiece of the Russian 
democrats and, in essence, an illegal organ of the underground revolutionaries; 
it was closed down by the government in 1884.—196 
Le Père Duchêne —a French daily published in Paris by Eugène Vermersch from 
March 6 to May 22, 1871; was close in its trend to the Blanquist press.—14 
Le Père Duchesne—a newspaper published in Paris from 1790 to 1794 by Jacques 
Hébert; it expressed the views of the urban semi-proletarian masses during the 
French Revolution.—14 
La Plebe—an Italian monthly published under the editorship of Enrico Bignami in 
1868-75 now in Lodi, now in Milan; from 1875 to 1883—irregularly, only in 
Milan; up to the early 1870s it was a bourgeois-democratic organ, then an 
organ of the socialist working-class movement. Engels contributed to it from 
late 1871. In 1872-74, as an organ of the Italian section of the International 
Working Men's Association, La Plebe pursued the line of the General Council, 
published articles by Marx and Engels, and the documents of the Internation­
al.—106,  176-78 
O Protesto—a Portuguese socialist weekly published in Lisbon from 1875 to January 
1878.—217 
La Revue socialiste —a French monthly founded by Benoît Malon as a republican-
socialist organ, then it became a syndicalist and co-operative organ; it was 
published from 1880 in Lyons and Paris, from 1885 to 1914 in Paris. In the 
1880s Marx and Engels contributed to the magazine.—335, 457 
Reynolds's Newspaper. A Weekly Journal of Politics, History, Literature and General 
Intelligence—a radical weekly published by George Reynolds in London from 
1850;  it was connected with the labour movement; in 1871 it came out in 
defence of the Paris Commune.—5 
Rheinische Zeitung —see Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a German daily founded on 
January 1, 1842, as an organ of the Rhenish bourgeois opposition, and 
published in Cologne till March 31, 1843. When edited by Marx (from 
October 15, 1842 to March 17, 1843), the paper became a mouthpiece of 
revolutionary-democratic ideas, which led to its suppression. Engels was one of 
its contributors.—183-84, 419, 422, 468 
Le Siècle —a daily published in Paris from 1836 to 1939. In the 1840s it was an 
oppositional organ which demanded electoral and other reforms; moderate 
republican in the 1850s.—235 
Der Social-Demokrat. Organ des Allgemeinen Deutschen Arbeitervereins —a German 
Lassallean newspaper published under this tide in Berlin from December 15, 
1864 to 1871 (in 1864 weekly and from 1865 three times a week). Johann 
Baptist Schweitzer was its editor in 1864-67. Under the tide Neuer Social-
49-1317 

=====第760页=====
730 Index of Periodicals 
Demokrat it was published from 1871 to 1876. Marx and Engels contributed to 
the paper for a short time but ceased to do so in February 1865, since they 
disagreed with the political line of the editors.—327 
Der Sozialdemokrat. Organ der Sozialdemokratie deutscher Zunge —a German weekly, 
central organ of the Socialist Workers' Party of Germany; published in Zurich 
from September 1879 to September 1888 and in London from October 1888 to 
September 27, 1890. In 1879-80 the paper was edited by Georg von Vollmar, 
and from 1881 to 1890 by Eduard Bernstein; Marx and Engels contributed to 
it.— 457,  467, 473-74, 481 
Staats-Anzeiger —see Königlich-Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger 
The Sun—an American progressive bourgeois-democratic paper published in New 
York from 1833 to 1950.—583 
Die Tagwacht —a German-language Social-Democratic paper published in Zurich 
from 1869 to 1880; in 1869-73, an organ of the German sections of the 
International in Switzerland, later, of the Swiss Workers' Union and of the 
Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland.—29 
The Times—a daily founded in London in 1785 under the title of Daily Universal 
Register; appears as The Times since 1788.—577 
Voice of the People—a weekly of the Socialist Workers' Party of North America 
published in New York from early 1883.—479 
Das Volk —a German-language weekly published in London from May 7 to 
August 20, 1859; it was founded as the official organ of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; Marx took part in its publications beginning 
with issue No. 2, and in early July he virtually became its editor and 
manager.— 189 
Der Volksstaat —central organ of the German Social-Democratic Workers' Party pub­
lished in Leipzig from October 2, 1869 to September 29, 1876 first twice a week 
and from July 1873, three times a week.—29-32, 68, 78, 100, 336, 524-25, 565 
Der Vorbote. Organ der Internationalen Arbeiterassoziation —a monthly of the German 
sections of the International in Switzerland published in Geneva from 1866 to 
1871 under the editorship of Johann Philipp Becker; on the whole, it upheld 
the line pursued by Marx and the General Council of the International by 
regularly publishing documents of the International and information about its 
activity in various countries.—230-31 
Vorwärts. Central-Organ der Socialdemokratie Deutschlands —a newspaper published in 
Leipzig from October 1876 to October 1878. It appeared as a result of the 
merger of Neuer Sozialdemokrat and the Volksstaat. Marx and Engels constandy 
helped its editorial board. The publication was stopped, when the Anti-Socialist 
Law was issued.—241, 245, 261, 336, 339 
Vorwärts/ Pariser Deutsche Zeitschrift —a German-language newspaper published in 
Paris twice a week from January to December 1844; at first it was the organ of 
the moderate section of German emigrants and from May 1844 of their radical 
and democratic section. Marx and Engels, who collaborated in the production 
of this paper, strengthened its revolutionary tendencies. When Marx and 
several other contributors were expelled from France by the Guizot Govern­
ment the paper ceased publication.—468 

=====第761页=====
Index of Periodicals 731 
Bnepeàb! Henepiodunecxoe o6o3pÉnie (Vperyod —Forward)—a Russian magazine pub­
lished from 1873 to 1877 first in Zurich, then in London; only five issues 
appeared; from 1873 to 1876 its publisher was Pyotr Lavrov. It published a lot 
of material concerning the working-class movement in the West and the 
activities of the International.—19-29, 32-34, 36, 100 
Zeitschrift für die gesammte Staatswissenschaft —a liberal politico-economic review 
published, with intervals, in Tübingen in 1844-48.—544, 549 
Zeitung für Norddeutschland —a liberal newspaper published in Hanover from 1848 
to 1872.—575 
Die Zukunft. Socialistische Revue—a socio-reformist magazine published in Berlin 
from October 1877 to November 1878.—268 

=====第762页=====
732 
SUBJECT INDEX 
Academic, armchair (Katheder) socialism— 
203, 479, 480, 558 
Agriculture—  308,  310-11,  350-52, 355-
58, 368, 398-99, 443-44, 449, 554-55 
Anabaptists—287 
Anarchism, anarchists—71, 176-77, 209, 
213-15,  217-19, 246, 247, 321, 
477-79 
See also Bakuninism, Bakuninists 
Ancient Orient—434, 435 
Ancient Rome—201, 358-59, 428, 430-
34, 445, 554 
Anti-Corn Law League (Britain, the 
1840s)—390, 400-02 
Antiquity—  201,  367, 431-33, 451 
See also Ancient Rome 
Anti-Socialist Law—240-51 
272, 277, 286, 372, 404, 
Argentina—399 
Aristocracy—10, 415 
—British—162-63,  180, 
397-98,  415-16 
—French—144, 290-92 
Army—  96, 112, 120, 126-27, 432, 477 
—French—223-24 
— Prussian—120-21 
—Russian—204 
Artel—  43-45,  356, 364 
Asia—  441,  449 
Atheism—15-16, 97, 236, 285-86, 427-
28, 430-31 
Austria—7,  9-10, 56, 57, 103, 117, 344, 
497 
See also Peasantry—Austrian; Revolu­
tion of 1848-49 in Europe—in Austria 260, 262, 
407-09 
182, 390, Austria-Hungary (from 1867)—219, 
495-96 
Austro-Italian war, 1848-49—57-58, 344 
Austro-Italo-French war, 1859—6, 9, 189 
Austro-Prussian war, 1866—9, 61, 121 
B 
Bakuninism, Bakuninists 
— a variety of petty-bourgeois social­
ism—45,  175 
— anarchist trend—176-78, 214-15, 
217, 478, 487 
— social roots of—175, 178, 217, 
487 
— general description of the 
Bakuninists' theoretical views— 
174-76,  178, 213, 215, 478 
— views on the state—176, 321, 478, 
492-506, 510-13, 515, 518-22, 526 
— rejection of the political struggle 
of the proletariat—173, 175-76, 
213-15 
— on revolution and revolu­
tionaries—19-20, 24-25, 32-33, 
36, 49, 174, 175, 213, 218-19, 
487, 493-95, 497-98, 500, 506-07, 
510, 511, 512-15, 517-18, 522, 
526 
— ideas of future society—498, 507-
08, 512, 518 
— disorganising activities in the 
working-class movement—20, 22-
23, 26-31,  37, 100, 105-06, 174-
78, 190-91,  209, 213-15, 246-47, 
478;  see also International Alliance 
of Socialist Democracy 

=====第763页=====
Subject Index 733 
— in Belgium—105, 213, 214, 495 
— in Italy—105-06, 174, 176-78, 
213, 214, 217, 495 
— in the Netherlands — 495 
— in Russia—22-23,  26-31,  37, 100, 
526 
— in Spain—15, 49-50, 174, 213, 
214, 495 
— in Switzerland—12, 176-77, 213-
15, 219, 236, 495 
Basis and superstructure—84, 87, 304, 
306, 321-22, 367, 467-68, 517, 518, 
521 
Belgium—136-37, 187, 214-15, 221, 
405,  419, 422 
See also Working-class and socialist 
movement—in Belgium 
Bible— 427-35 
Blanquism, Blanquists—12-18, 336 
Bohemia— 496-98 
Bonapartism—189, 224, 279-80 
Bourgeoisie—  90, 141, 379, 415-18 
— origin and development  of—191-
92, 199, 285-87 
— petty bourgeoisie—68, 88, 267-69 
— struggle against the feudal nobili­
ty—88,  141, 191-92, 285-86, 290, 
307, 386, 415 
— its role in the development of the 
productive forces—39, 40 
— its economic domination—194-95, 
381, 415 
— and state (political) power—179-
80, 192-93, 290, 307, 317, 380, 
415,  416 
— hindrance to historical develop­
ment—193,  319, 322-23, 325, 
412-13,  416-18 
— British—179-80, 386, 400-02, 
416, 574 
— French—118, 192, 288-92 
— German—11, 103-04, 141, 574 
— Italian—175, 178, 217 
— Russian—42, 44, 50 
Burghers—192, 286, 288, 499 
C 
Capital 
— definition of—316-17, 377-78, 
380 
— origin and development of—305, 309-11,  316-17, 324-25, 346, 379-
80, 533 
— control as its function—317-19, 
412-14, 416 
Capitalism (socio-economic forma­
tion)—362, 368, 463, 546-47 
Capitalist mode of production—308-13, 
316-20, 323-25, 468, 535-40 
— origin and development of—199-
201, 286-87, 294, 305, 307-13, 
316-19,  322, 324-25, 346, 360-65, 
367-68,  370, 464 
— its distinctive features—92, 193, 
195, 305, 316-22, 324-25, 535-
36 
— as the basis of bourgeois society— 
195, 289, 292, 308, 311, 317-25, 
346,  370-71,  415-17, 464 
— its historically transitory nature— 
200, 289, 304-05, 316-25, 350, 
353-54, 357 
Chartism, the Chartist movement—304, 
344, 376, 385-86, 402, 406 
China—116 
Christianity—  238,  427-35 
See also Anabaptists; Bible; Reforma­
tion 
Church—97, 435, 450, 452 
Civilisation—  21, 95, 293, 391 
Class(es)—43,  70-71,  83, 86, 88-89, 
92, 174, 191-93, 195, 221-22, 268, 
273, 285,  290-91,  293-94, 304-07, 
312, 314-15, 320-25, 340, 379, 385-
86, 404, 415-16, 431-34, 463, 477-78, 
517, 519, 521 
See also Aristocracy; Bourgeoisie; No­
bility; Peasantry; Working class 
Class struggle—  89, 193, 215, 263, 265, 
267, 304-05, 336, 380, 385-86, 418, 
458-59,  519-21 
Clergy—  290,  449-52 
Commerce—192, 383-84, 553, 558 
Commodity—  86, 308-09, 311-12, 531, 
533-34, 537-38, 544-48, 550-51 
Commodity production—308-12, 318, 
319-24, 545-46, 552-53, 557-58 
Commune—  45-46,  365-66, 446, 519, 
535 
— emergence and development of— 
350-51,  353-54, 362-63, 365-68, 
426 
— primitive, archaic—349-51, 356, 
358-59,  362-63, 365-67, 550 

=====第764页=====
734 Subject Index 
— rural or peasant—192, 199, 349-
60, 362-64, 366, 368 
— agricultural—350-54, 365-68 
— Greek and Roman—432, 445 
— the mark-association of the ancient 
Germans and in Germany—46, 
312,  350-51,  365-66, 442-52, 455, 
456 
— Indian—46, 47, 351, 359, 365, 
368, 535 
Commune, community in Russia—40-41, 
43, 45-48, 349, 352-65, 368, 371, 426, 
519 
— and the possibility of transition to 
socialism by-passing capitalism— 
48, 199, 349, 352-60, 362-64, 367-
68, 371 
Communism (socio-economic formation) 
— general features of communist 
society—83-88, 95, 319-25, 573 
— as the future of humanity—17, 
200, 287, 289, 304-05, 321, 
517-19 
— as the goal of the revolutionary 
working-class movement—17, 70, 
215, 229, 340, 387, 569 
— prerequisites for the communist 
transformation of society—39-40, 
43, 48, 83, 193, 200, 289, 295, 
305-25,  340, 356-58, 367-68, 
517-18 
— necessity of proletarian revolu­
tion—39-40, 92, 95, 265, 267-69, 
289, 320, 325, 353, 357, 478, 518 
— period of transition from capital­
ism to communism (socialism)— 
68, 70, 106, 320, 321, 325 
— stages of communist society—84-
88 
— abolition of private property, pub­
lic ownership of the means of 
production—17, 85-86, 88, 181-
82, 193, 318-23, 325, 340,  349-51, 
353, 355-57, 362, 399, 426, 517-
18, 520, 572 
— production—39-40, 70, 83-88, 93-
94, 193, 200, 292, 317-25, 349, 
351, 353, 355-58, 362 
— agriculture—17, 47-48, 70, 356, 
456, 517-18 
— social relations—11, 17, 39-40, 
43, 44,  70-71,  86-87, 92, 193, 261, 287, 290, 292-93, 296, 320-22, 
325, 456, 517,  519-21,  570 
— communist transformation of soci­
ety and the State—70-71, 92-95, 
193, 292,  320-21,  325, 477-78, 
517-22 
— social consciousness—86, 319-25, 
340, 576 
— communist transformation of soci­
ety and the individual—84-88, 
96-98,  193, 200, 292, 294-95, 
319-25 
— criticism of Utopian views on fu­
ture society—88, 164, 261, 287, 
290,  297, 305, 321, 520 
Communism (socialism), scientific—39-
40, 47, 183, 189-90, 285, 297, 304-
07, 325, 326, 335-39, 458, 520-21 
Communism, Utopian—  287,  294-97, 326, 
565-66 
Communist League—51-53, 136, 141, 
184-89,  336, 344, 565 
Communist trial in Cologne—51-54 
Competition—  307,  311-19, 324-25, 376-
78, 383, 392, 398, 402, 412-14 
"Corn Laws" (in Britain)—390-91, 400-
01, 416, 557 
Corvée (statute labour)—113, 132, 141, 
450-55 
Crafts, craftsmen—  89, 192, 293-94, 
307-12 
Crédit mobilier—  273, 277 
Crimean war, 1853-56—9, 56, 504, 509 
D 
Darwinism—  301,  313, 435, 458-59, 
463,  467 
Despotism—  46-47,  50, 227-29, 252, 288, 
353, 363 
Dialectical materialism—298-300, 458-59 
Dictatorship of the proletariat—13, 71, 95, 
320-21,  325, 340, 386, 405, 414, 418, 
477-78,  521-22 
Distribution—  83-88,  193, 306, 310-15, 
379, 381, 386 
Division of labour—  87, 96, 308-09, 322, 
519, 553, 557 
E 
Economic crises—193, 274, 315-20, 322, 
323, 325, 350, 353-54, 357, 361-62, 
383-84, 397, 398, 401, 411-12 

=====第765页=====
Subject Index 735 
Economic laws—  69, 126-27, 194-95, 
200,  311-17, 319-20, 322-25, 359, 
379-84, 401-03, 468, 537, 557-58 
Economy and politics—40, 42, 46, 96, 
192-93,  292, 304, 306, 321, 322, 325, 
467-68,  507 
Education—  85, 96-98, 294-95, 322 
Emigration—12-14, 19-28, 52, 131, 169, 
187, 262, 343, 344, 415, 425 
England (Great Britain)—179, 390, 498 
— history—247, 287, 401, 441, 488, 
577 
— economy—119, 162-63, 289, 293-
94, 384, 385, 390-93, 397-98, 401, 
411-14, 416, 425-26 
— political system, political rela­
tions—179-80, 248, 394, 396 
— electoral system, electoral re­
forms—179-80, 182, 386, 394, 
396, 405, 406, 416 
— colonial and foreign policies— 
389-93,  398, 405, 416 
See also Aristocracy—British; Bour­
geoisie—British; Peasantry—English; 
Working-class and socialist movement— 
in Great Britain; Working class— 
British; Trade unions, trade union 
movement—in Great Britain 
Enlightenment, Enlighteners—285-86, 
292, 294, 427 
Exchange—  85-86,  192, 306, 308, 311-
12, 316, 319, 324, 325, 535-36, 553-
54, 557 
Exploitation—17, 44, 156, 161, 193, 
195, 305, 318-22 
Expropriation—181,  182, 199-201, 346, 
354,  359-61,  364, 370 
F 
Feudalism—  88, 132, 141, 162-63, 192, 
195, 199, 286-88, 293, 307-13, 321, 
324, 415, 446, 448-54 
First International—see International 
Working Men's Association 
France—18, 221-25, 292 
— history—16, 48, 188, 189, 224, 
288-91,  344, 441, 527, 530, 577 
— economy—118, 224, 273, 274, 
279, 289, 291, 390-92 
— social and political system—6, 
203-04, 221-25, 289-90, 292 — foreign policy—58, 103, 118, 189, 
343, 454-55, 488 
See also Aristocracy—French; Army— 
French; Bourgeoisie—French; Peasant­
ry—French; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Europe—in France; Working-class and 
socialist movement—in France; Working 
class—French 
Franco-Prussian war, 1870-71—6, 9, 62, 
68-69,  125, 271, 273, 279-80, 504, 
527-30, 578 
Frankish state—  441-46,  448-50 
French Revolution of the 18th century—7, 
18, 55, 57-58, 141, 192, 224, 248, 
285, 288-92, 343, 454, 576 
French Workers' Party—  340,  405 
G 
German People's Party (1865)—68, 77, 
95 
Germans (ancient)—43, 46,  350-51, 
441-52 
German Workers' Educational Society in 
London (1840-1919)—105, 135, 467, 
565-66 
German Workers' Society in Brussels 
(from 1847)—136, 184, 335-36 
German Social-Democrats—21, 69, 184-
87, 211-12, 214, 239, 247, 574 
— Social-Democratic Workers' Party, 
Eisenachers (1869-75)—10, 13-16, 
21, 27-28, 53, 55, 58, 67-72, 
77-78,  87-89, 94, 95, 103, 211, 
239, 572, 578 
— Gotha Congress (1875), criticism 
of the Gotha programme by Marx 
and Engels— 67-73, 77-99, 106, 
175, 219, 260, 572 
— Socialist Workers' Party—172-73, 
202,  209-14, 218, 239, 251, 
253-69,  404-05, 407-09, 477, 
478,  574 
— participation in the electoral 
struggle and parliamentary ac­
tivities—172-73,  175-76, 209-14, 
250, 251,  260-61,  264, 396, 404-
05, 407-09, 423, 574 
Germany, German Empire (after 1871) 
— 9, 31, 56, 90, 95-96, 121, 252, 279, 
441, 455, 574 

=====第766页=====
736 Subject Index 
— history—153, 247, 452-54, 458, 
578 
— survivals of feudalism and the 
process of their elimination—96, 
121, 127, 162-63, 172, 454-55 
— economic development—163, 
273,  453, 458 
— industry—161, 162, 164, 272-77, 
390-92,  414, 508 
— agriculture, agrarian relations— 
46, 162-63, 275, 441-44, 447, 
453-57 
— commerce—90, 117, 119, 124, 
272-75,  390-92 
— economic crises—204, 274, 277, 
323 
— social development—141, 268-69, 
448-49 
— political development, political 
system—9, 93-98, 141, 251, 458, 
578 
— home policy, home situation—56, 
203, 210, 231, 248, 251-52, 372, 
407-09,  447 
— liberal and democratic move­
ments—53,  68, 72-73, 97-98, 
107, 183, 188, 211-12, 232, 267, 
423 
— prospects of revolution—54, 66, 
251-52 
— foreign policy—9-11, 56, 103-04, 
112, 125, 229 
See also Anti-Socialist Law; Bour­
geoisie—German; Nobility, aristocracy 
in Germany; Peasantry—German; 
Prussia; Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Europe—in Germany; Working-class 
and socialist movement—in Germany; 
Working class—German 
Grûndertum —59, 266 
H 
Hegel, Hegelianism—293, 298, 301-04, 
427,  458-59 
Historical materialism, materialist concep­
tion of history—191-93, 195, 303-06, 
458-59,  463, 467-68 
History 
— as a class struggle—191-93, 269, 
303-05 
— as people's activities—323-24 — historical development—9-10, 16-
17, 94, 193, 199, 301-02, 304-05, 
426,  468 
History (as a science)—21-22, 52, 191-
93, 304-05, 428-29, 441, 467-68 
Holy Alliance—125, 343-44, 488 
Humanity—191-93, 286-87, 297, 298, 
301-03,  313, 428, 463, 467 
Hungary—219 
See also Revolution of 1848-49 in 
Europe—in Hungary; Working-class 
and socialist movement—in Hungary 
I 
Idealism—184, 302-04, 326-27, 431 
India—  349,  351, 359, 368 
Industrial reserve army—314, 316, 319, 
325, 377, 383-84 
Industrial revolution—  273,  293, 307, 
324, 390 
International Alliance of Socialist Democ­
racy—  12, 22, 37, 105, 106, 174-76, 
236, 495, 506-07, 524-25 
Internationalism, proletarian—57, 68-69, 
89-90,  187, 190, 215, 239, 266, 344, 
464, 570 
International Working Men's Association 
(First International)—90,  190-91,  220, 
269, 420, 464, 468, 569-72, 575 
— foundation of—190-91, 234, 269, 
344, 464 
— congresses and conferences—20, 
215, 234-36, 478 
— role of Marx and Engels in the 
foundation and activities of—105-
06, 190-91,  234, 269, 339, 420, 
464, 468, 478, 564 
— in Belgium—105, 213 
— in Denmark—106 
— in France—106, 237, 239, 470 
— in Germany—68-69, 106, 239 
— in Great Britain—106, 236 
— in Italy—105-06, 213 
— in Spain—106, 213, 216, 238 
— in Switzerland—213-15, 230-31 
— in the USA—576 
— cessation of activities, reasons for 
it—90,  215, 220, 372, 464, 576 

=====第767页=====
Subject Index 737 
Inventions—192, 390, 392 
Ireland—  57, 159, 162-63, 391, 405, 
407,  408 
Islam—434 
Italy—175,  178, 189, 217, 271, 480, 
577 
See also Bourgeoisie—Italian; Peasan­
try—Italian; Working-class and socialist 
movement—in Italy; Working class— 
Italian 
J 
Jacobin dictatorship, Jacobins—18, 288, 
289, 291 
Jews—126,  429-31,  434 
Joint-stock companies—273-79, 317-19, 
325, 353, 416-17 
Judaism—  430,  434, 435 
June 1848 insurrection of the Paris pro­
letariat—9, 138, 141, 221, 344 
K 
Kant, Kantianism—295, 301-02, 458-59 
Katheder socialism— see Academic, 
armchair (Katheder) socialism 
L 
Labour—  81-88,  98-99, 192-94, 201, 
309-10, 314, 356, 383, 392, 467-68, 
531, 545, 549, 551-53, 557-58 
See also Division of labour 
Landed property—  45-48,  162-64, 182, 
200-01,  224-25, 288, 346-63, 365-69, 
398-99,  425-26, 441-56 
Language—10, 27, 46, 219, 430, 538-
39, 547-49 
Lassalleanism, Lassalleans—67-70, 72, 
83-91,  93-97, 105, 263-64, 273, 326, 
500, 516-17, 520, 572, 574-75 
Law, right 
— as superstructure—84, 86-87, 
304, 467-68, 553 
— kinds of—86, 87, 304, 322-24, 
425-26,  431-33, 441-42, 445-47, 
449,  451, 452, 517-18 
Law-courts, judicial system—42, 52, 97, 
156-57,  322, 447-48 League of Peace and Freedom (1867)— 
68-69,  90, 95 
League of the Just—184-87, 336, 565 
Legislation—  95, 217, 219, 386, 409, 
444 
Levellers—287 
Liberal Party (Great Britain)—386-87, 
404 
Lyons insurrection of  workers,  1831—304 
M 
Machinery (machine production)—293-
94, 313-15, 324-25, 349, 353, 362, 
377-81,  383, 390, 392 
Man 
— and animal—82, 301, 313, 323, 
538 
— and nature—81, 301, 319-20, 
323-25,  538, 550-53 
— and society—85-86, 321, 323-24. 
351, 366-67, 538, 547, 549, 
552-53 
— development of—87-200, 292-95, 
301, 313, 323-24, 351, 366-67 
Manchester School— 389-90, 392, 414 
Manufacture—192, 293, 307-09, 313, 
318, 324 
Marxism (general points)—189-95, 285, 
298-307, 325, 326, 335-39, 420, 423, 
458-59,  463-68 
Marxist philosophy—298-305, 458-59 
Marxist political economy—189-90, 194-
95, 305, 463-68 
Materialism—15-16, 87-88, 287, 294, 
298-305,  326-27, 429-30 
Means of production—17, 84-85, 194, 
199, 200, 274,  308-11,  316-25, 340, 
346, 351, 364, 370, 379-80, 555 
Metaphysics—  298-301,  303-05 
Middle Ages, medieval society—191, 307-
09, 312, 324, 366, 441, 449-51 
Mode of production—  39-40,  84, 87-88, 
194, 201, 289, 294, 305-10, 312-
13, 315-17, 319-22, 325, 468, 535, 
556 
See also Productive forces; Relations of 
production 
Money—  316,  546, 553-54 
Monopolies—  276-79,  317-19, 325 
Morals—  53, 85-86, 172-73, 292, 315, 
334, 376-78, 395-96, 430, 432-35 

=====第768页=====
738 Subject Index 
N 
Napoleonic wars—9, 288, 390, 454-55 
Narodnik (populist)  movement,  Narodniks 
in Russia—  252,  372, 426 
—criticism of their views—19-50 
Natural science—  293,  299-303, 305, 
458-59,  468, 470 
Nature—  298-303,  319-20, 323-24, 463, 
467 
—and man, society—81, 298-99, 
302-03,  319-20, 323-25, 538-39, 
550-53 
Needs (wants)—85, 87, 112, 193, 215, 
274, 308, 312, 315-16, 320, 449, 451, 
468,  538-43, 545 
Netherlands, the—  392,  499 
See also Working-class and socialist 
movement—in the Netherlands 
Nobility—192, 286-87, 290, 449-52 
Nobility, aristocracy in Germany—449-50, 
452-55 
Nobility, landowners in Russia—40-41, 
47, 49, 104, 126, 204, 205, 226-27 
North American War of Independence, 
1775-83—55, 57 
P 
Panslavism—6, 9 
Paris Commune, 1871—10, 12, 17-18, 
58, 68, 71, 90, 190, 222-23, 266-67, 
344, 372-73, 461, 478, 577 
Party, proletarian 
—its character, tasks and vanguard 
role—178,  340, 386, 405-06 
—programme, aims of its struggle— 
71-72,  78, 81, 94, 215, 340, 378, 
399, 456 
—struggle against reformism and op­
portunism—67-73, 251, 262-69 
Peasantry 
—in ancient Rome—200, 354, 432 
—in feudal society—192, 308, 312, 
449-54 
—in bourgeois, bourgeois-democratic 
revolutions—50, 141, 454-55 
—expropriation of—199-201, 346, 
354,  360-61,  364, 370 
—and the working-class, the work­
ing-class movement—89, 224-25, 
456,  517-19 —Austrian—162 
—English—179-82, 346, 360, 364, 
517 
—French—148, 204, 224-25, 288 
—German—93,  113, 120, 126-27, 
132, 140-41,  146, 148, 151-53, 
160-64, 172, 263, 441, 444, 449-56 
—Italian—175 
—Polish—8,  10, 41, 58 
—Prussian—113,  120, 126-27, 132, 
148, 162, 163, 453-55 
—Russian—40-43,  46-50, 56, 104, 
153-54, 204, 226-27, 346-49, 352, 
354-56,  361, 363-65 
Peasant war in Germany, 1524-25—287, 
451, 452 
Philosophy—24, 183, 193,  200-01,  286, 
293, 298-306, 427-35, 458-59 
—English—298, 299 
—French—285-89, 298, 302, 305 
—German—184, 268, 298, 301-03, 
428-31,  458-59 
—in ancient Greece—285-86, 298, 
429-30, 433-34 
—in ancient Rome—429-34 
See also Marxist philosophy 
Poland 
—history—6-11,  55-58, 103, 107, 
343-44 
—economy—46, 117 
—social relations—10, 56, 58, 103 
—nationalities question, national 
movement—7, 10, 55-58, 103-04, 
344 
—insurrection of 1863-64—7, 10, 
55-58,  103, 190, 228, 344 
—policies of European powers in 
relation to Poland—6-11, 41, 55-
57, 102-03, 107-08, 227 
See also Peasantry—Polish; Working-
class and socialist movement—in Polish 
lands 
Political economy—194, 376, 544-45 
—bourgeois—81,  88, 91-92, 304, 
326-27,  376-79, 468, 534-53 
See also Marxist political economy 
Private property—17, 81-89, 181-82, 
200, 286, 288, 308, 340, 346, 350-52, 
354, 358,  360-61,  363, 365-67, 370-
71, 379-81,  384, 396, 425-26 
Production 
—and nature—538, 552-53 

=====第769页=====
Subject Index 739 
—and society—273, 304, 306, 311-
12, 416, 467-68, 538-39, 549 
—and man, the individual—193, 
311-12,  323-24, 538-39, 552-53 
—and property—87-88, 200, 307-14, 
319-21,  324, 354-56, 362 
—conditions of—87-88, 93-94, 192 
—process of—292, 321, 535, 539, 
549, 552-53 
—forms of—200, 308, 311-12, 325, 
449,  456 
—and exchange, distribution, con­
sumption—87-88, 192, 193, 306, 
308, 311-12, 315-16, 319, 324-
25 
— social production, social nature 
of production—308-14, 316-20, 
323-27,  415-18, 535, 538, 549, 
553 
—development of—84, 193, 308-09, 
313, 315-17, 320-23, 325-27, 332-
33, 415-18, 549, 557-58 
Productive forces—  39-40,  87, 92, 193, 
200, 289 
Property 
—and appropriation—309-11, 320, 
322-24, 351-52, 355-56, 366-67 
—and production—85, 87-88, 194, 
199, 200,  309-11,  313, 317-25, 340, 
346, 354-56, 359, 362, 379-80 
—and the social system, the State— 
317-21,  325, 351-52, 366 
—development, historical forms— 
200,  286, 533 
See also Communism—abolition of 
private property, public ownership of 
the means of production; Private 
property 
Proudhonism—  218,  326-27, 520-21 
Prussia—112-13,  119-21,  126-27, 132, 
343-44 
—history—113,  121, 126-27, 132, 
145-46,  152-55, 161-63, 454-55 
—economy—111-27, 140-56, 161-63, 
318 
—social and political system—52-53, 
97-98,  120-21,  127, 162, 279, 
454-55 
—foreign policy and diplomacy—6, 
8-11,  56, 57, 107-08, 121, 126-27, 
229, 578 
See also Army—Prussian; Peasantry— 
Prussian R 
Reformation—  247,  287, 291, 453, 
499 
Relations of production—  304,  306, 307, 
311, 313, 317-19, 324, 552-53 
Religion—15-16, 70, 97, 192-93, 285, 
304, 427-30, 433-35, 467-68, 571, 
576 
See also Christianity; Church; Clergy; 
Islam 
Revolution, bourgeois, bourgeois-demo­
cratic—  50, 56, 103, 141,221,289, 291, 
454-55 
Revolution of 1848-49 in Europe—107-
08, 136, 141, 187-88, 267-68, 344, 
426,  455 
—in Austria—107-08, 138 
—in France—58, 107-08, 118, 136, 
141, 165, 187-88, 221, 224,  270-71, 
455 
—in Germany—58, 107-08, 121, 
137-48,  158-59, 161, 162, 164-69, 
188, 231, 265, 270, 272-73, 336, 
344, 455, 566, 575 
—in Hungary—107-08, 164-65, 344 
See also June 1848 insurrection of the 
Paris proletariat 
Revolution, proletarian, socialist 
—essence, tasks, and goals of—39-
40, 43, 325, 340, 478 
—historical necessity of—92-95, 193, 
265, 289, 340, 426 
—prerequisites for—39-40, 83, 180, 
193, 200, 289, 304-08, 311, 313, 
316-25,  361-62 
—as the highest form of the pro­
letarian class struggle against the 
bourgeoisie—96, 265, 269 
—peaceful and violent ways of its 
accomplishment—95-96, 248-50, 
405, 406, 576 
Russia—  40-50,  103-04, 204-05, 226 
—history—40-43,  47, 49, 50, 100, 
104 
—economy—11,  40-43, 46-47, 50, 
125-26,  199, 200, 204-05, 227, 252, 
346-49,  352-53, 355, 361, 362, 
425-26 
—social and political system—11, 24-
26, 29-33, 36-37, 42-43, 46, 50, 
56-57,  227-28 

=====第770页=====
740 Subject Index 
—science, literature, culture—24, 27-
28, 46, 227, 229 
—revolutionary movement, prospects 
of revolution—9, 11, 23, 27-28, 
30-31,  43, 50, 56, 103, 104, 196, 
199, 205, 226, 227, 229, 239, 252, 
372, 425-26 
—contacts of Marx and Engels with 
Russian revolutionaries—19-28, 
361, 370-71,  469 
—foreign and colonial policies—6-
11, 41-42, 56-57, 103-04, 107-08, 
125, 138, 227-29, 252, 488, 508-09, 
515-16 
See also Army—Russian; Bourgeoi­
sie—Russian; Commune, community in 
Russia; Narodnik (populist) movement, 
Narodniks in Russia; Nobility, landow­
ners in Russia; Peasantry—Russian; 
Working class—Russian 
Russo-Turkish war, 1877-78—204, 
228-29 
S 
Science—116, 291-93, 322, 325, 349-50, 
353-54, 398, 428, 449, 455, 463-68, 
547, 571 
—scientific cognition—191-95, 303-
05, 463, 467-68, 536 
—historical development of—70, 91, 
97, 133-34, 183, 191, 299, 322, 
325, 335, 449, 463-71 
Scotland—163,  415 
Serfdom—132, 141, 152-53,  320-21, 
367, 415, 450-55 
Slavery—  320,  354, 367, 415, 535 
Socialism (first stage of communist so­
ciety)—83-88 
Socialism (theories and trends)—71-72, 
89, 99, 194, 281, 285, 297, 304-05, 
335, 451, 457 
Socialism, Utopian—281, 287-90, 297, 
304-05,  326, 520, 574 
Social relations—  46, 193, 286, 311, 321, 
323, 325, 351, 366 
Société des saisons (Paris, 1837)—12-13, 
336 
Society 
—basis of—304, 306 
—laws of—200, 218, 376, 378, 379, 
463,  467-68 —and nature—313, 319-20, 323-24, 
325 
—and production—273, 304, 306, 
311, 320-22, 416, 468, 538-39, 549 
—and classes—39-40, 43, 285, 293, 
306, 320-22, 379, 415-16, 463 
—and the State—40, 53, 68, 71, 82, 
93-96,  318-22, 477-78 
— and the individual—85-86, 320, 
323, 351, 367, 538-39, 546-47, 549, 
552-53 
—development,progress of—46, 53, 
82-83,  85-87, 94-95, 293, 306, 321-
22, 326-27, 349, 362, 463, 467-68, 
551 
Society, bourgeois—  94-95,  195, 277-78, 
288, 291-307, 349-50, 353-54, 368, 
379, 385-86, 415, 458-59, 468, 521 
—emergence of—289, 293, 307, 324 
—bourgeois social system—267, 290, 
292, 293, 296, 307, 395-96 
— classes,  social strata—285, 385-86, 
415,  463 
—and the State—17, 68, 94-96, 
318-19 
—historically inevitable downfall of— 
40, 83, 85-86, 350, 353-54, 361-62, 
458-59 
Society, feudal—192, 287, 307-13, 324, 
367, 386 
Society, primitive—39, 304, 358-59, 362, 
366-67,  426, 441-42 
Society, slave-owning—358-59, 367, 
431-32 
Spain—  21-22,  118-19, 216, 350 
State, the 
—as superstructure—40, 46-47, 94, 
321, 467-68 
—and society—40, 53-54, 68, 71, 82, 
94-96,  317-22, 477-78 
—as an economic power—126, 349, 
354-55,  363 
—and law—431-32, 467-68 
—and religion—97, 429 
—and classes, the class struggle—96, 
320-22,  477 
—and revolution—71, 141, 320 
— withering away of under commu­
nism—70-71,  292,  320-21,  325, 
477-78,  519-22 
—criticism of anarchist and Lassal-
lean views on—67-71, 93-94, 97, 

=====第771页=====
Subject Index 741 
263,  321, 477-78, 499 
See also Dictatorship of the proletariat 
State, bourgeois—17, 68, 94-96, 141, 
150, 317-21,  333, 475, 546 
State, feudal—320-21 
State, slave-owning—  320-21,  429-31 
Surplus value—  92, 194-95, 305, 324, 
463, 535, 557-58 
Sweden—442 
Switzerland—  44, 70, 94-97, 141, 169, 
218-19 
See also Working-class and socialist 
movement—in Switzerland 
T 
Taxes, taxation— 41  -42, 96, 431, 572 
Theology—  236,  429-30 
Theory and practice—19, 34, 86, 268, 
285-87,  290, 304, 325, 428, 463-64, 
468,  538 
Thinking—  238,  239, 285-86, 290, 297-
303, 307 
Thirty Years' War, 1618-48— 453-54 
Trade unions, trade union movement—70, 
210-11,  379-88, 403 
—in Germany—70, 210-11 
—in Great Britain—296, 376, 379-
82, 384-88, 403 
Tribe(s)—  441-42 
Tribal  system—  350,  365, 366, 441-43 
"True" socialism—268, 458 
U 
United States of America, the 
—history—248, 577 
—economy—97, 390, 392, 397-99, 
413-14, 425-26, 456 
—social and political system—95-97, 
248 
—immigration, its role—398, 425 
See also Working class—US;  Working-
class and socialist movement—in the 
USA; 
Usury—  41-42,  44, 47, 50, 364, 392, 
431, 455 
V 
Value—  85-86,  194-95, 533-49, 550-52 —exchange value—533, 536, 544-45, 
549, 550, 551 
—use value—81, 82, 533-34, 544-49, 
554 
—law of value—537, 558 
See also Surplus value 
W 
Wage  labour—  70, 91-92, 194, 305, 309-
11, 346, 365, 379-80, 415 
Wages—  69, 92, 181, 314, 376-85, 
402-03 
War(s)—  69, 228-29, 313, 450 
—influence on socio-economic de­
velopment—9, 103-04, 450, 451, 
557 
—and revolution, revolutionary 
movement—9, 50, 103, 228-29 
Wars of the First French Republic (late 
18th-early 19th centuries)—390, 528 
Working class—  40, 88-89, 193-94, 199, 
311, 324, 376-77, 379, 385-86, 415, 
519 
— origin and formation of—89, 
273, 289, 293, 313-14,  320-21, 
324 
—as a revolutionary class—13, 88-
89, 193,  320-21,  325, 340, 519, 
569-70 
—development of its class conscious­
ness—211,  215, 468 
—and the peasantry—89, 224-25, 
456, 517-18 
—British—180, 248, 384-88, 392-93, 
396, 404-06, 517, 573 
—French—93,  141, 221-25, 289-90, 
573 
—German—89, 93, 98, 114-16, 120-
21, 141, 163, 172, 211-12, 221, 
263, 273, 441, 458, 573 
—Italian—174-76, 178, 217, 221 
—Portuguese—216-17 
—Russian—36, 43-45, 226 
—US—248,  405, 573 
Working-class and socialist movement— 
67-70,  89-91,  184-91, 209-11,  213-15, 
219-20, 229, 247, 372-73, 380, 387-
88, 403-04, 464, 575-76 
—in Austria—203, 218, 219 
—in Belgium—176-77, 214, 216-18, 
239, 405 

=====第772页=====
742 Subject Index 
—in Denmark—218, 219, 239 
—in Great Britain—175, 179-82, 
297,  304, 335, 344, 376, 385-88, 
404-06, 572 
—in France—13, 16-18, 70, 87, 93, 
203-04,  222, 237, 297, 304, 340, 
344 
—in Germany—10, 18, 31, 52-53, 
68-69,  175, 184, 210-12, 251, 267-
69, 273, 408, 423, 458-59, 572; see 
also Anti-Socialist Law 
—in Hungary—203, 218, 219 —in Italy—174-78, 182, 214, 217, 
218, 239, 405 
—in the Netherlands—239, 405 
—in Polish lands—239, 344-45 
—in Portugal—216-18, 239 
—in Russia—20, 23-24, 36-37, 226, 
229, 425, 572 
—in Spain—216, 572 
—in Switzerland—176-77, 203, 214, 
216, 218-19, 239 
—in the USA—203, 239, 405, 
572-76 

=====第773页=====
743 
GLOSSARY OF GEOGRAPHICAL NAMES* 
Barmen-Elberfeld Wuppertal 
Breslau  Wroclaw 
Constantinople Istanbul 
Crakau Krakow 
Danzig Gdansk 
Düppel  Dybböl 
Dürkheim Bad Dürkheim 
Elberfeld Wuppertal 
Elberf eld-Barmen Wuppertal 
Frankenstein Zabkowice 
Sla.skie 
Karlsbad Karlovy Vary 
Kolberg Kolobrzeg 
(Kolobrzeg) 
Königsberg Kaliningrad 
Laurahütte  Laura Huta 
Lower Silesia Dolny Slask 
Moravia Morava 
(Moravskoslezskâ 
zemë) 
Maina Mani Nessin Niezyn 
Nimwegen Nijmegen 
Olmütz  Olomouc 
Peloponnes Peloponnesus, 
also Morea, 
Peloponnesos, 
Péloponnèse 
Persia Iran 
Posen Poznan 
Reval Tallinn 
St. Petersburg Leningrad 
Silesia élask, Siezsko 
Schweidnitz Swidnica 
Silberberg Srebrna Géra 
Stettin Szczecin 
Upper Silesia Görny Slask 
Tarnau Tarnôw 
Wilna Vilnius 
* This glossary includes geographical names occurring in Marx's and Engels' 
works in the form customary in the press of the time but differing from the 
national names or from those given on modern maps. The left column gives 
geographical names as used in the original (when they differ from the national 
names of the time, the latter are given in brackets); the right column gives 
corresponding names as used on modern maps and in modern literature.— Ed. 

=====第774页=====
