MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 19
Marx and Engels 1861-64    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_19.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:33]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
19 
Marx and Engels 1861-64
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me19.htm [09/12/2010 15:09:07]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-963-1 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
V 
Contents 
Preface XI-XXVIII 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
January 1861-June 1864 
1. F. Engels. German Movements 3 
2. K. Marx. The American Question in England 7 
3. K. Marx. The British Cotton Trade 17 
4. K. Marx. The London Times and Lord Palmerston 21 
5. K. Marx. The London Times on the Orleans Princes in America 27 
6. K. Marx. The North American Civil War 32 
7. K. Marx. The Civil War in the United States 43 
8. K. Marx. The Crisis in England 53 
9. K. Marx. British Commerce 57 
10. K. Marx. Economic Notes 62 
11. K. Marx. Intervention in Mexico 66 
12. K. Marx. The Intervention in Mexico 71 
13. K. Marx. Monsieur Fould 79 
14. K. Marx. France's Financial Situation 82 
15. K. Marx. The Dismissal of Fremont 86 
16. K. Marx. The Trent Case 89 
17. K. Marx. The Anglo-American Conflict 92 
18. K. Marx. The News and Its Effect in London 95 
19. K. Marx. The Principal Actors in the Trent Drama 101 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
20. K. Marx. Controversy over the Trent Case 105 
21. K. Marx. Progress of Feeling in England 110 
22. K. Marx. The Crisis over the Slavery Issue  1  15 
23. K. Marx. American Matters ! 117 
24. K. Marx. A Slander Trial 120 
25. K. Marx. The Washington Cabinet and the Western Powers 124 
26. K. Marx. The Opinion of the Newspapers and the Opinion of 
the People 127 
27. K. Marx. French News Humbug.— Economic Consequences of 
War 131 
28. K. Marx. A Pro-America Meeting 134 
29. K. Marx. English Public Opinion 137 
30. K. Marx. More on Seward's Suppressed Dispatch 143 
31. K. Marx. A Coup d'État by Lord John Russell 145 
32. K. Marx. Statistical Observations on the Railway System 149 
33. K. Marx. A London Workers' Meeting 153 
34. K. Marx. Anti-Intervention Feeling 157 
35. K. Marx. On the Cotton Crisis 160 
36. K. Marx. English 163 
37. K. Marx. The Parliamentary Debate on the Address 167 
38. K. Marx. The Mexican Imbroglio 172 
39. K. Marx. American Affairs 178 
40. K. Marx. The Secessionists' Friends in the Lower House.— 
Recognition of the American Blockade 182 
41. K. Marx and F. Engels. The American Civil War 186 
I 186 
II 191 
42. K. Marx. An International Affaire Mirés  196 
43. K. Marx. The English Press and the Fall of New Orleans 199 
44. K. Marx. A Treaty Against the Slave Trade 202 
45. K. Marx and F. Engels. The Situation in the American Theatre 
of War 204 
46. K. Marx. English Humanity and America 209 
47. F. Engels. The American Civil War and the Ironclads and 
Rams '. 213 
48. K. Marx. Chinese Affairs 216 
49. K. Marx. A Scandal 219 
50. K. Marx. A Suppressed Debate on Mexico and the Alliance with 
France 223 
51. K. Marx. A Criticism of American Affairs 226 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
52. K. Marx. Russell's Protest Against American Rudeness.— The 
Rise in the Price of Grain. —On the Situation in Italy 230 
53. K. Marx. Abolitionist Demonstrations in America  233 
54. K. Marx. A Meeting for Garibaldi 236 
55. K. Marx. Workers' Distress in England 239 
56. K. Marx. A Note on the Amnesty 243 
57. K. Marx. Garibaldi Meetings.—The Distressed Condition of 
Cotton Workers 245 
58. K. Marx. Comments on the North American Events 248 
59. K. Marx. Bread Manufacture 252 
60. K. Marx. The Situation in North America 256 
61. K. Marx. Symptoms of Disintegration in the Southern Confed­
eracy 260 
62. K. Marx. The Election Results in the Northern States 263 
63. K. Marx. The Dismissal of McClellan 266 
64. K. Marx. English Neutrality.—The Situation in the Southern 
States 270 
65. K. Marx. Letter to the Editors of the Berliner Reform 273 
66. F. Engels. Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 274 
I 275 
[II] 278 
III 281 
67. F. Engels. Artillery News from America 289 
I 289 
II 293 
68. K. Marx. Proclamation on Poland by the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London 296 
69. F. Engels. The English Army 298 
I 301 
II 303 
III 309 
70. F. Engels. The Strength of the Armies in Schleswig 317 
71. K. Marx and F. Engels. Obituary 320 
72. F. Engels. England's Fighting Forces as against Germany 321 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
73. K. Marx. Ground Rent 329 
74. K. Marx. Biographical Notes on Wilhelm Wolff 335 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
APPENDICES 
75. Application by Marx for Restoration of His Prussian Citizen­
ship 339 
76. Marx's Statement on the Restoration of His Prussian Citizen­
ship 341 
77. Marx's Statement on the Rejection of His Application for 
Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship 345 
78. Answer to Marx's Application for Restoration of His Prussian 
Citizenship 353 
79. Marx's Application for Naturalisation and Right of Domicile in 
Berlin 355 
80. Letter from Marx to Police President von Zedlitz 357 
81. Power of Attorney Given by Marx to Ferdinand Lassalle for the 
Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship 359 
82. F. Engels. To the Directorate of the Schiller Institute 360 
83. Power of Attorney Issued by Marx to Engels to Take Over 
Wilhelm Wolff's Estate 363 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 365 
Name Index 406 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 430 
Index of Periodicals 445 
Subject Index 450 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
United States of America on the eve of the Civil War of 1861-65 (map) 32-33 
The course of military operations in the USA in 1861-1862 (map) 256-57 
First page of Engels's manuscript of "The English Army" 299 
Beginning of Marx's notes for a lecture on ground rent 331 

=====第7页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
RODNEY LIVINGSTONE: Items 56, 73 
HENRY MINS: Items 13, 14, 23, 24, 32, 36, 47-49, 52, 54, 
55, 57, 59, 61, 62, 65, 66, 68, 69, 72, 75-80 
PETER and BETTY ROSS: Items 81, 82 
SALO RYAZANSKAYA: Items 22, 58 
VICTOR SCHNITTKE: Items 71, 74 
BARRIE SELMAN: Item 67 

=====第8页=====

=====第9页=====
XI 
Preface 
Volume 19 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels contains 
articles, letters and documents written between the end of January 
1861 and the beginning of June 1864, except for Engels' articles 
for The Volunteer Journal, for Lancashire and Cheshire, which are 
published in Volume 18 with other works of his on military 
subjects. 
The first half of the 1860s saw the continued rise of the 
bourgeois-democratic and national liberation movements that 
began in Europe and America after the world economic crisis of 
1857.  In Germany and Italy, which had yet to complete their 
bourgeois revolutions, the movement for national unity gained 
fresh impetus; in Russia peasant unrest continued, and revolu­
tionary ideas spread in progressive circles after the abolition of 
serfdom in February 1861; in the USA civil war broke out 
between North and South (1861-65); there was growing opposition 
to the régime of the Second Empire in France; centrifugal 
tendencies intensified in the Austrian monarchy; in Mexico the 
bourgeois revolution triumphed; in China the Taiping peasant 
uprising entered its closing stage. 
The industrial revolution in the economically advanced coun­
tries led to a great increase in the numerical strength of the 
proletariat and far-reaching changes in its composition and class-

=====第10页=====
XII Preface 
consciousness. The world economic crisis of 1857, the first of such 
magnitude in the history of capitalism, and the strikes 
that followed, vividly demonstrated the opposing economic and 
political interests of proletariat and bourgeoisie. The working-class 
movement began to pursue an independent struggle and this 
created conditions for its liberation from the ideological influence 
of the bourgeoisie. In the first half of the 1860s this showed itself 
in the growth of the British trade-union movement and the 
awakening of political activity of the British proletariat, in 
particular its demonstrations in defence of the national liberation 
movements and its opposition to the attempts by the British and 
French ruling classes to intervene in the US Civil War on behalf 
of the slave-owning Southern states. This process of working-class 
emancipation from bourgeois ideology was also expressed in the 
awakening of class consciousness among the French proletariat; in 
the attempts by the German workers to shake off the influence of 
the liberal bourgeoisie, and the foundation in 1863 of the General 
Association of German Workers; and in the active support by 
workers of various nationalities of the struggle for greater 
freedom and democracy in the USA (against the South in the Civil 
War) and of Garibaldi in Italy. The workers' realisation that their 
interests were in opposition to those of the ruling classes, an 
increased sense of proletarian solidarity, and the strengthening of 
international contacts, finally led to the foundation of the 
International Working Men's Association (the First International) 
on September 28, 1864. 
Marx's and Engels' theoretical work and political activities 
during these years were many-sided. As before, Marx's main 
concern was political economy. From August 1861 to July 1863 he 
wrote A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy; from 
the end of July or beginning of August 1863, to the summer of 
1864,  he worked on Book I of Capital—"The Process of 
Capitalist Production". Meanwhile, Engels continued with the 
theoretical development of the proletarian party's military strategy 
and tactics. At the same time they both pursued their interests in 
problems of philosophy and world history. 
At the end of the 1850s, Marx and Engels began their attempts 
to restore old contacts—and to establish new ones—with 
German, French, Polish and Italian revolutionary democratic 
emigrants in London, and above all with the working-class and 
democratic movements in Britain, Germany, France, Austria 
and the USA. These efforts, both to consolidate the forces 
of the working class and to establish contacts with progressive 

=====第11页=====
Preface XIII 
democratic circles, were dictated by the general revolutionary 
upsurge. 
Marx and Engels were above all guided by the objective interests 
of the proletariat: the bourgeois-democratic transformation of 
the countries of Europe and America, and the creation of legal 
conditions for the development of the working-class and democrat­
ic movement. The revolution of 1848-1849 had shown that in the 
more economically developed capitalist countries of Europe, the 
liberal bourgeoisie did not want, while the democratic and radical 
petty bourgeoisie proved unfit, to carry the bourgeois revolution 
through to the end. So in the 1860s the fulfilment of this historic 
task was becoming more and more the cause of the working class. 
Marx and Engels favoured the unification by revolutionary means 
of Germany and Italy, and the transition to revolutionary methods 
of conducting the US Civil War. They attached particular im­
portance to the revolutionary movement in France and Russia, 
regarding Bonapartism and tsarism as the chief obstacles to the 
national liberation of the oppressed peoples of Europe. 
The many-sided activity by Marx and Engels during this period 
is partly reflected in this volume. Their journalistic work is 
represented most fully. Until March 1862 Marx continued writing 
for the progressive American bourgeois newspaper, the New York 
Tribune; from October 1861 to December 1862 he contributed to 
the Viennese liberal newspaper Die Presse. Engels helped Marx in 
his work as correspondent for these newspapers; furthermore, as 
has been mentioned above, Engels wrote a great deal about 
military matters for the English magazine The Volunteer Journal, for 
Lancashire and Cheshire, and for the German newspaper Allgemeine 
Mi li tär-Zei tung. 
A theme central to the journalistic writings of Marx and Engels 
during these years was the US Civil War, which they saw as a 
crucial turning-point in the history of the USA, and of overall 
progressive significance. Their articles provided the first systematic 
account of its history, its political and social ramifications, its 
economic consequences, and the diplomatic struggles that resulted 
not only in America, but in Europe and especially in Britain. 
Most of the works on this subject were written by Marx and 
published in Die Presse and the New-York Daily Tribune in 
1861-62. 
For the American paper, Marx wrote mainly about the impact 
of the Civil War on Great Britain's economy, foreign policy and 
public opinion. Die  Presse,  which was read not only in Austria, but 
in Germany, carried articles mainly about the Civil War  itself,  its 

=====第12页=====
XIV Preface 
character, motive forces and historical significance. Marx en­
deavoured to give the European reader more exact information, 
based on American sources. He wrote to Engels on April 28, 1862 
about the need to "disseminate correct views on this important 
matter in the land of the Teutons" (this edition, Vol. 41). 
In the very first articles for European readers—"The North 
American Civil War" and "The Civil War in the United 
States" — and in his article for the Tribune, "The American 
Question in England", Marx demonstrated the groundlessness of 
the claims by the British bourgeois press (The Times and other 
newspapers) that the war between North and South w7as not a war 
over slavery, but over tariffs, the political rivalry of North and South 
for supremacy in the Union and the like. For Marx the conflict 
between the Northern and Southern states was the struggle between 
"two social systems"—slavery and wage labour (p. 50). He regarded 
the Civil War as an inevitable consequence of the long struggle of the 
industrial North and the slave-owning South, a struggle which "was 
the moving power of its [America's] history for half a century" 
(p. 11). Marx saw7 this war as a form of bourgeois-democratic 
revolution, the inevitability of which was conditioned by economic 
and political factors and, above all, by the "growth of the 
North-West, the immense strides its population has made from 1850 
to 1860" (p. 10). 
Analysis in depth of social-political relations in the United States 
throughout the first half of the 19th century enabled Marx to 
reveal in his articles the contradictory essence of American 
plantation slavery. A pre-capitalist form of exploitation, slavery 
was also closely linked with the world capitalist market; cotton 
produced by slave labour became one of the "monstrous pivots" 
of British industry (p. 19). 
Studying the conditions under which plantation slavery and its 
primitive technology could exist, Marx wrote: "The cultivation of 
the Southern export articles, cotton, tobacco, sugar, etc., carried 
on by slaves, is only remunerative a« long as it is conducted with 
large gangs of slaves, on a mass sc.° and on wide expanses of a 
naturally fertile soil, which requirer only simple labour" (p. 39). 
Given the extensive nature of a plantation economy based on slave 
labour, unlimited reserves of free land were necessary, which 
resulted in the "continual expansion of territory and continual 
spread of slavery beyond its old limits" (p. 39). 
Analysis of the economic structure of the plantation economy 
and the conditions for its survival enabled Marx to expose the 
groundlessness of the claims by the bourgeois press about the 

=====第13页=====
Preface XV 
peaceful nature of the Secession (the withdrawal of the Southern 
states from the Union), and to rebuff attempts to portray the 
slave-owners of the South as defending the rights of individual 
states from the encroachments of the Federal Government. Marx 
stressed that it was the Southern Confederacy that "assumed the 
offensive in the Civil War" (p. 43). He repeatedly noted that the 
Secession was a form of aggression by the slave-owning planters 
against the lawful government, that the "wat of the Southern 
Confederacy is in the true sense of the word a war of conquest for 
the spread and perpetuation of slavery" (p. 49). He warned against 
the real danger of slavery spreading all over the Republic: "The 
slave system would infect the whole Union" (p. 50). 
Marx showed that the perpetuation and further spread of 
slavery would have fatal social consequences. "In the Northern 
States, where Negro slavery is in practice unworkable, the white 
working class would gradually be forced down to the level of 
helotry" (p. 50). In the Southern states, he pointed out, the 
numerically small slave-owning oligarchy was opposed by the 
disadvantaged "poor whites", whose numbers "have been constantly 
growing through concentration of landed property" (p. 40). These 
déclassé groups of the population, corrupted by the slave-owning 
ideology, could only be kept in subjection by flattery of their own 
hopes of obtaining new territory and by "the prospect of one day 
becoming slaveholders themselves" (41). 
Marx and Engels repeatedly emphasised that the existence of 
slavery was retarding the development of the American working-
class movement, was serving as a foundation for the intensified 
exploitation of the free workers of the North, and was a threat to 
the constitutional rights of the American workers. 
Marx showed that although slavery partially facilitated the 
development of capitalism in the USA—as some of the 
bourgeoisie in the North were living off the trade in 
cotton and other products of slave labour—it was becoming more 
and more incompatible with the capitalist development of the 
Northern states. It was the problem of slavery, as Marx 
emphasised, that was at the root of the US Civil War: "The 
whole movement was and is based ... on the slave question. Not in 
the sense of whether the slaves within the existing slave states 
should be emancipated outright or not, but ... whether the vast 
Territories of the republic should be nurseries for free states or 
for slavery" (p. 42). 
Using a wealth of factual material, Marx was already pointing 
out in his first articles on the US Civil War that the more 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
advanced social system, namely, that of the Northern States, must 
win. While noting the progressive nature of the war as fought by 
the North, he also condemned the indecision and vacillation 
shown in the war by Union bourgeois circles in proclaiming the 
abolition of slavery. In his articles "The Dismissal of Fremont", "A 
Criticism of American Affairs" and others, Marx showed the 
reluctance of the bourgeois Republican Government to make it a 
popular and revolutionary war. This, in his opinion, showed up 
the limitations of American bourgeois democracy. The Lincoln 
government "fights shy of every step that could mislead the 'loyal' 
slaveholders of the border states" (p. 87), as a result of which the war 
as a struggle against slavery was being blunted (p. 227). It was this 
policy of the Northern government during the initial stages of the 
war that Marx saw as the main reason for the military failures of 
the Unionists, in spite of their superiority in economic potential 
and in manpower reserves. 
In a series of articles written in 1862, Marx indicated the 
process of differentiation in the ruling Republican Party under the 
influence of the growth and consolidation of the forces favouring 
the immediate abolition of slavery ("Abolitionist Demonstrations in 
America", "The Election Results in the Northern States"). He 
noted changes in the balance of forces within the Republican 
Party, forced under pressure from the general public to take a 
more decisive stand over the emancipation of the slaves. After 
analysing the results of the voting in the states, Marx demon­
strated that the failure of the Republicans at the elections was 
caused above all by the discontent of the farmers in the North 
with the former methods of conducting the war and by a shift to 
the left of the masses who followed the Republicans: "They came 
out emphatically for immediate emancipation, whether for its own 
sake or as a means of ending the rebellion" (p. 264). Summing up 
the first stage of the war, Marx wrote: "So far, we have only 
witnessed the first act of the Civil War—the constitutional waging of 
war. The second act, the revolutionary waging of war, is at hand" 
(p. 228). 
Marx and Engels followed the increasingly revolutionary nature 
of the Civil War closely and noted the revolutionary-democratic 
measures to which the Lincoln government was compelled to 
resort and which ultimately led to the victory of the North. Marx 
attached special importance to two social measures: the Homestead 
Act, which gave a great many American farmers the chance of 
acquiring land, and the Proclamation that the black slaves of the 
rebellious planters were free. Marx valued the latter as "the most 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
important document in American history since the establishment of 
the Union", pointing out that it was "tantamount to the tearing up of 
the old American constitution" (p. 250). 
In the initial period of the war, Marx criticised Lincoln for 
vacillation and indecision, and for the bourgeois limitations of 
certain of his measures and legal enactments (see, e.g., p. 87). Items 
in the volume show, however, that the Lincoln government's 
revolutionary measures gradually changed the attitude of Marx and 
Engels to the President  himself.  In October 1862, Marx gave high 
praise to Lincoln's activity, declaring that "Lincoln's place in the 
history of the United States and of mankind will ... be next to that of 
Washington" (p. 250). 
In their New-York Daily Tribune and Die Presse articles, the 
leaders of the proletariat tried to help the struggle of the 
revolutionary-democratic forces for a fuller and more consistent 
solution to the pressing historical tasks during the war. The 
consolidation of the forces of revolutionary democracy, which was 
pushing the bourgeois to the left, was regarded by Marx and 
Engels as an important task for the American working class. The 
farming and working-class population of the North played a 
major role in the struggle against slavery. Marx wrote: "New 
England and the Northwest, which have provided the main body of 
the army, are determined to force on the government a 
revolutionary kind of warfare and to inscribe the battle-slogan of 
'Abolition of Slavery' on the star-spangled banner" (p. 228). Marx 
noted that although the consolidation of "the parties of the North 
which are consistent in point of principle", i.e. confirmed 
Abolitionists, takes place very slowly, they all nevertheless "are being 
pushed ... into the foreground by events" (p. 233). 
Marx and Engels set great store by the participation of the Black 
masses in the liberation struggle and severely criticised the policy 
of the Northern states over the "Negro question". Fearing 
revolutionary disturbances, the American government could not at 
first make up its mind whether or not to admit Blacks into the 
army. The recruitment of Blacks into the army of the North 
would, in Marx's opinion, have had a tremendous influence on the 
course of the war; it would have considerably increased the 
North's chances by weakening the rear of the South. A single 
Black regiment, he wrote on August 7, 1862, "would have a 
remarkable effect on Southern nerves" (this edition, Vol. 41). 
Marx had a high estimation of the new officers brought into being 
in the course of the Civil War, since they were the ones actually 
solving the problem of abolition, declaring the slaves free and 
2—1134 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
demanding that they be armed (see this volume, pp. 115-16). 
Even early in the Civil War, Marx perceived the social-economic 
factors that subsequently, after the victory of the Republicans 
and the abolition of slavery, favoured the preservation of 
racial discrimination and of national and social oppression in 
the USA. Marx stressed the direct interest of the commercial and 
finance bourgeoisie in preserving the remnants of slave ownership. 
In his article, "The Election Results in the Northern States", he 
wrote that it was New York, "the seat of the American money 
market and full of holders of mortgages on Southern plantations", 
a city "actively engaged in the slave trade until recently", that had 
been, immediately before and during the Civil War, the main 
bulwark of the Democratic party (p. 263). 
Much space in Marx's and Engels' articles on the Civil War is 
taken up by its military aspects. Engels pointed out the decisive 
role of the masses and the interrelation of economic, political and 
moral factors in the military operations. "The American Civil 
War," he wrote, "given the inventive spirit of the nation and the 
high technical level of engineering in America, would lead to great 
advances ... in the technical side of warfare..." (p. 289). At the 
same time, while acknowledging the role of war in technical 
development, Marx and Engels condemned the social role of 
the "human slaughter industry" (see letters from Marx to Engels, 
July 7, 1866, and Engels to Marx, July 12, 1866, this edition, 
Vol. 42). 
In his article, "Artillery News from America", after analysing, 
on the evidence of individual operations, the forms and methods 
of conducting the war, Engels demonstrated the natural 
tendency of military equipment to become obsolete very quickly 
and the necessity for its continual improvement. Study of the Civil 
War enabled Engels to plot the main trends in the development of 
artillery, in the art of fortification and especially in the develop­
ment of the navy, and to specify and elaborate certain points made 
in his earlier articles in The New American Cyclopaedia (see this 
edition, Vol. 18). Fundamentally significant, in particular, was 
Engels' forecast of the predominance in future naval armed forces 
of armoured vessels with gun turrets (p. 291). 
In their jointly written articles, "The American Civil War", 
"The Situation in the American Theatre of War" and others, 
Marx and Engels developed the idea, important for military 
science, of the influence exerted by the character of a war on the 
methods by which it is conducted. Marx and Engels pointed out 
the negative role of the cadre officers under McClellan who were 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
sympathetic to the South. Marx wrote that there was a strong esprit 
de corps among them and that they were more or less closely 
connected with their old comrades in the enemy camp. "In their 
view, the war must be waged in a strictly businesslike fashion, with 
constant regard to the restoration of the Union on its old basis, 
and therefore must above all be kept free from revolutionary 
tendencies and tendencies affecting matters of principle" (p. 179). 
Marx and Engels considered that the dismissal from the Northern 
army of reactionary officers sympathetic to the South was a military 
measure of the utmost priority. They also demonstrated that the 
strategic plan of the McClellan command (the North's "Anaconda 
Plan" envisaged a slowly contracting ring of troops round the 
rebellious slave-owning states) was not only intended to avoid a true 
revolutionary war of the people, but was untenable in military terms 
(pp. 193-95). 
In the article "The American Civil War", Marx and Engels put 
forward their own strategic plan, taking into consideration the 
class content, the political and social aims of the war, and demanding 
revolutionary methods of conducting it. This consisted of a decisive 
blow by concentrated forces against the vitally important enemy 
centres and envisaged first and foremost the occupation of Georgia, 
as a result of which the territory of the Confederation would be cut 
into two parts (pp. 194-95). The subsequent course of the war 
showed that this plan was the only right one. A turning point in 
military operations occurred and the North achieved final victory in 
1865,  but only after the Northern command had carried out a 
similar plan (General Sherman's "march to the sea") in the second 
half of 1864 and had taken revolutionary measures the necessity of 
which Marx and Engels had been indicating all through 1861 and 
1862. 
The denunciation of bourgeois diplomacy and the reactionary 
designs of the ruling classes against the revolutionary democratic 
and national liberation movements were regarded by Marx and 
Engels as one of the most important tasks of the proletarian 
revolutionaries. The events of the US Civil War gave Marx the 
opportunity to denounce in his articles the foreign policy of the 
British ruling oligarchy which, in spite of Britain's declared 
neutrality, was secretly supporting the Southern rebels and was 
preparing an armed intervention to help the slave-owners. In 
connection with the seizure in November 1861 by an American 
warship of the British packet boat Trent with emissaries of the 
Confederacy on board, there was a real threat of armed conflict 
between Britain and the United States. In his articles "The 
2» 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
Anglo-American Conflict", "Controversy over the Trent Case", 
"The Washington Cabinet and the Western Powers" and others, 
Marx irrefutably demonstrated the groundlessness of the argu­
ments put forward by British ruling circles and their allies on the 
continent, who were trying to use this incident as a pretext for 
unleashing a war on the side of the slave-owners. 
Marx and Engels considered that the attitude of the European 
and American proletariat to the US Civil War should be 
determined by the prospects of the revolutionary movement in 
Europe and America and that the war against slavery in the USA 
would increase the political activity of the working class. Regarding 
an active influence on the foreign policy of the ruling classes as one 
of the most important tasks of the revolutionary proletariat, and as 
part of its general struggle for the liberation of the working people, 
Marx and Engels set great store by the demonstrations of the English 
workers against their government's intention to create a coalition of 
reactionary European states to provide armed help to the South. 
These demonstrations, in Marx's opinion, played a large part in 
educating the proletarian masses in the spirit of international 
solidarity and as a counterweight to the chauvinistic propaganda of 
the ruling classes, and, above all, of the Palmerston press. Marx 
demonstrated that the masses in Britain, France, Germany and, 
indeed, all Europe, considered the defence of the North as their 
cause, the cause of freedom "now to be defended sword in hand, 
from the sordid grasp of the slaveholder" (p. 29). 
Marx's articles "The Opinion of the Newspapers and the Opinion 
of the People", "English Public Opinion", "A London Workers' 
Meeting", "Anti-Intervention Feeling" and others, taught the 
workers how to work out their own revolutionary line and stand up 
for it in international conflicts. Marx was particularly delighted by 
the actions of the British proletariat; he considered that "the English 
working class has won immortal historical honour for  itself",  having 
by means of mass protest meetings foiled the attempts of the ruling 
classes to organise an intervention on behalf of the South, although 
the continuation of the US Civil War and also the crisis in the cotton 
industry connected with it subjected "a million English workers to 
the most fearful sufferings and privations" (p. 297). 
Marx described the appalling poverty of the Lancashire weavers 
left unemployed by the closure of many cotton mills. He 
denounced the attempts by the ruling classes (the articles "On the 
Cotton Crisis", "Workers' Distress in England", etc.) to attribute the 
stagnation in the British cotton industry exclusively to the cessation 
of the import of cotton from the USA as a result of the Civil War, to 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
the protectionist measures of the North and to its blockade of the 
secessionist South. Marx showed that the disastrous plight of this 
industry was first and foremost caused by a crisis of overproduction 
(pp. 160-62, 239). He condemned the pathetic system of social 
charity in Britain (pp. 241-42). Marx wrote with indignation about 
the inhuman selfishness of the ruling classes, of the "strange 
dispute" between the landed and industrial aristocracy "as to which 
of them grinds the working class down the most, and which of them 
is least obliged to do something about the workers' distress" 
(p. 241). 
The position of the British workers during the US Civil War, 
their demonstrations in defence of the Italian national liberation 
movement and their stand on other issues, enabled Marx to 
conclude that in the political life of Britain the actions of the 
working class were acquiring national significance for the first time 
since the defeat of Chartism. In his article, "Garibaldi Meetings.— 
The Distressed Condition of Cotton Workers", Marx wrote: 
"Anyone who has the slightest knowledge of English conditions and 
the attitude prevailing here knows, in addition, that any interference 
on the part of the present cabinet with the popular demonstrations 
can only end in the fall of the government" (p. 246). 
Marx also noted that in its political demonstrations the working 
class was beginning to play an increasingly independent role, 
pursuing its aims and not acting simply as members of "the 
chorus" (p. 153). The demonstrations of the British proletariat in 
connection with international conflicts enabled Marx and Engels 
further to develop the theory of class struggle, to substantiate the 
position of the proletariat in problems of foreign policy and to 
define the strategic and tactical tasks of the proletarian party. 
Marx became still more convinced of his conclusion that even 
before the winning of political power, the working class, by 
influencing the foreign policy of the government of its own 
country, could compel it to renounce an aggressive course aimed 
at the enslavement of other peoples. As is known, this conclusion 
found expression in one of the first programme documents of the 
International, the Inaugural Address of the Working Men's 
International Association, written by Marx in October 1864 (see 
this edition, Vol. 20). 
The problems of international relations and the colonial policy 
of the European powers are discussed in a group of articles about 
the beginning of the Anglo-French-Spanish intervention in Mexico 
in 1861. ("The Intervention in Mexico", "The Parliamentary 
Debate on the Address" and others). Marx disclosed the true 
aims of the participants in the "Mexican Expedition" and 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
denounced its colonial character. Describing the intervention in 
Mexico as "one of the most monstrous enterprises ever chronicled in 
the annals of international history" (p. 71), Marx stressed that the 
real purpose of the intervention was to render assistance to 
the Mexican reactionaries in the struggle against the progressive 
Juarez government, to consolidate the anti-popular party of 
the clericals with the aid of French and Spanish bayonets, and 
once again to provoke a civil war. In articles filled with deep sym­
pathy for the Mexican people and its liberation struggle, Marx 
sternly condemned the actions of the interventionists, who had per­
fidiously started a war against a peace-loving country under 
the false pretence of a struggle against anarchy. The articles on the 
intervention in Mexico are a vivid manifestation of the 
irreconcilable struggle waged by Marx and Engels against 
colonialism and national oppression, against exploitation and 
the enslavement of economically backward and dependent 
countries by European states more developed in the capitalist 
sense. 
Interference by the "European armed Areopagus" in the internal 
affairs of American countries was seen by Marx as an attempt at the 
"transplantation of the Holy Alliance to the other side of the 
Atlantic" (p. 77). 
Marx also pointed out another danger associated with the 
Anglo-French-Spanish intervention. For Palmerston and Napoleon 
III, the Mexican intervention was a means of provoking an armed 
conflict with the United States. In his articles "Progress of Feeling 
in England", "The Mexican Imbroglio" and others, Marx 
denounced the efforts of the British ruling circles to use the 
events in Mexico as a pretext, and the territory of Mexico as a 
base of operations, for the interference of Britain and France in 
the US Civil War on the side of the Southern slave-owning states. 
"Decembrist France, bankrupt, paralysed at home, beset with 
difficulty abroad, pounces upon an Anglo-American War as a real 
godsend and, in order to buy English support in Europe, will 
strain all her power to support 'Perfidious Albion' on the other 
side of the Atlantic" (p. 111). 
In his articles "The London Times and Lord Palmerston", "The 
Intervention in Mexico" and others, Marx strips the mask off 
British diplomacy. Marx and Engels noted during this period an 
undoubted intensification of the counter-revolutionary role which 
bourgeois-aristocratic Britain had long played in international 
affairs. Britain's conversion in the 19th century into the "work­
shop of the world", and her efforts to preserve her industrial and 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
colonial monopoly, inevitably made her ruling classes a bulwark of 
reaction not only in Europe but all over the world. 
Exposing the aggressive foreign policy of the European pow­
ers—  Britain, Austria and France—directed at the suppression of 
national liberation movements and the enslavement of other 
peoples, Marx demonstrated the grave consequences of the 
Palmerston government's colonial expansion for the peoples of 
China, India, Persia, Afghanistan and other countries (pp. 18-20, 23, 
78, 209, 216). 
Marx also paid attention to the social and political movements in 
these countries, especially in his article "Chinese Affairs", in which 
he discussed the causes and the contradictory nature of the 
Taiping movement. In this, Marx noted a combination of 
revolutionary tendencies—the striving for the overthrow of the 
reactionary system and the domination of the alien Manchurian 
dynasty—with conservative tendencies, the latter becoming especial­
ly pronounced in the last years of the Taiping state, within which a 
bureaucratic top layer had grown. Marx associated the conservative 
features of the movement with religious fanaticism, cruel customs 
inculcated in the army, the aggrandisement and even deification 
of the leaders, and "destruction without any nucleus of new 
construction" (p. 216). 
A large part of the volume is made up of newspaper articles 
which Marx and Engels wrote on European problems. The articles 
about the economic position of Britain and France show that in 
analysing the internal and foreign policy of the European powers 
(and also of the USA), Marx and Engels were invariably guided by 
the principles of historical materialism. 
In analysing the state of industry in Britain and its prospects of 
further development and influence on the world market, Marx 
took into account the situation that had developed in the cotton 
industry as a result of the blockade of the Southern states, the 
stopping of shipments of American cotton, and also the internal 
laws of capitalist production ("The Crisis in England", "British 
Commerce", "Economic Notes", "On the Cotton Crisis" and 
others). Marx noted the growth of economic contradictions 
between the metropolitan country and its colonies, the attempts of 
the latter to resort for the defence of their economy to 
protectionism, which they "find ... better suited to their interests" 
(p. 162). 
Examining the condition of the'British working class, Marx not 
only disclosed the horrors of unemployment among the cotton 
workers, but also described the ruthless capitalist exploitation of 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
the workers, including children, in other branches of industry, and 
the inhuman working conditions in the baking industry (p. 254). 
He showed how in Britain, the country of machines and steam, there 
were branches of industry that had hardly experienced the influence 
of large-scale industry and in which obsolete techniques and heavy 
manual labour still predominated. Touching on the contradictory 
nature of technical progress under capitalism, Marx stressed 
that one of its positive sides was the supplanting of archaic, semi-
artisan forms of production organisation. "The triumph of machine-
made bread," he wrote, "will mark a turning point in the 
history of large-scale industry, the point at which it will storm the 
hitherto doggedly defended last ditch of medieval artisanship" 
(p. 255). 
Marx drew on various examples to illustrate the disgraceful 
relics of domination by the landed aristocracy in the social life of 
England (his article "A Scandal"), and the true essence of bourgeois 
democracy. In his article "A Suppressed Debate on Mexico and 
the Alliance with France", he disclosed the voting procedure in 
the House of Commons, which allowed it not to put to the vote 
any motion that was "equally irksome to both oligarchical factions, 
the Ins and the Outs (those in office and those in opposition)..." 
(P- 223). 
In his articles, "Economic Notes", "France's Financial Situation" 
and others, Marx analysed France's economic plight, revealing the 
causes of the financial, commercial and agricultural crisis and the 
growth of corruption; he demonstrated that the Bonapartist regime, 
with its predatory interference in the economy, was the cause of 
disruption in French finance and economy (pp. 83-84). In the 
autumn of 1861 Marx forecast that Napoleon III would seek away 
out of his internal difficulties in foreign policy escapades (pp.  62-63, 
83-84);  the very next year, France took an active part in the punitive 
expedition against the Mexican Republic. In April 1861, in his article 
"An International Affaire Mirés", Marx explained the participation 
of France in the military intervention as a necessity for sup­
porting "the gambling operations of certain rouge-et-noir 
politicians" (p. 198), i.e. the direct interest of the financial circles 
of the Second Empire, to extricate themselves by means of 
the Mexican escapade from the increasingly critical 
situation. 
During the period covered by this volume, Marx and Engels 
wrote a number of articles about the struggle for national unity in 
Germany and in Italy ("German Movements", "A Meeting for 
Garibaldi", "Garibaldi Meetings.—The Distressed Condition of 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
Cotton Workers" and others), advocating its pursuit by revolutio­
nary-democratic means. The struggle for unification in Germany 
and Italy by revolutionary means came up against resistance from 
reactionary forces in Germany  itself,  especially in Prussia and 
Austria, and also against countermeasures by the governments of 
other European powers, particularly Bonapartist France, which was 
endeavouring to keep Germany disunited and was actively 
obstructing the final unification of Italy. In his articles 
"The Strength of the Armies in Schleswig", • "Artillery 
News from America", "England's Fighting Forces as against 
Germany", written in connection with the exacerbation of the 
conflict between Denmark and the German Confederation in 
1863-1864, Engels analysed the military aspects of the country's 
unification from the viewpoint of the revolutionary camp's 
interests. 
Marx and Engels also regarded the Polish national liberation 
movement as closely associated with that in Germany. Written in 
connection with the Polish national liberation uprising of 1863-64, 
the "Proclamation on Poland by the German Workers' Educational 
Society in London" disclosed the significance of the uprising for 
the future of Germany. 
Marx's work on the theory of political economy is only indirectly 
represented in this volume in the articles on the economic position 
of Britain, France and the USA, and also in the manuscript, 
"Ground Rent". This is evidently a draft plan for one of the lectures 
on political economy that Marx delivered to the London German 
Workers' Educational Society at the end of the 1850s and the 
beginning of the 1860s. In it, Marx treated ground rent as the excess 
of the market price of the agricultural product over the cost of 
production. This definition echoes the corresponding formulations 
of the Theories of Surplus-Value (part of the above-mentioned 
manuscript of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy on 
which Marx worked from August 1861 to July 1863) and 
Volume III of Capital, which he began writing at the end of 
summer, 1864. 
In addition to the above-mentioned articles on military matters 
by Engels, the present volume contains his unfinished manuscript 
"Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma". He attacks the nationalistic 
tendencies and prejudices typical of bourgeois military histo­
riography, expressed in the exaggerated portrayal of the 
armed forces of one's own country and in minimising the fighting 
qualities of the armies of other states. Engels debunked the myth, 
created by British military writers, about the invincibility of the 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Pre i act-
British troops during the Crimean War. The ultimate aim of 
Kinglake's book, writes Engels, was the "glorification, carried to 
absurdity, of the English army", for the sake of which he filled 
his work with "embellishments, rodomontades and conjectures" 
(p. 274). 
In his manuscript "The English Army", Engels, discussing the 
organisation, recruitment and training of the British armed forces, 
highlighted the conservative features of the British military system. 
He noted, in particular, the caste spirit prevalent in the officers' 
corps,  the pernicious practice of selling commissions, the archaic 
forms of recruitment and the barbaric use of corporal punishment 
for breaches of discipline by the soldiers. Engels concluded that 
the customs of the British army were typical of the obsolescent 
régime of a bourgeois-aristocratic oligarchy and testified to the 
necessity for profound reforms, including radical military changes, 
in the country's social and political system. 
The Appendices to this volume include applications by Marx for 
the restoration of his Prussian citizenship after the 1861 Amnesty. 
These steps were taken by him in connection with the rise of the 
working-class movement and the approaching revolutionary crisis 
in Germany, so that he could return at the necessary moment to 
active political work in his homeland. The Berlin Police President 
rejected Marx's applications (p. 353). 
* * * 
The volume contains 82 works by Marx and Engels, of which 52 
were printed in Die Presse and 11 in the New-York Daily Tribune. 
Engels' article "England's Fighting Forces as against Germany" was 
published in the German Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, and three more 
works by Engels, "Artillery News from America", "Kinglake on the 
Battle of the Alma" and "The English Army", also included in this 
volume, were intended for the same newspaper. Twenty-eight items 
are being published in English for the first time. Two items, 
"German Movements" and "British Commerce", have never been 
reproduced in English since their publication by the New-York Daily 
Tribune. English publications of individual articles by Marx and 
Engels in various editions, especially in the collection The Civil War 
in the United States, London, 1937 and New York, 1937, are 
mentioned in the notes. 
Most of the articles in this volume were published unsigned in 
the New-York Daily Tribune; the articles in Die Presse were also 

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
published anonymously but, as a rule, with a special note 
"Orig.-Corr.", "Von unserem Londoner Correspondenten". The 
authorship of the unsigned articles is confirmed by the correspon­
dence between Marx and Engels, by cross references and also by 
other documents. 
When the articles were in preparation, the dates were checked 
and most of the sources used by the authors were identified. The 
results of this work will be found at the end of each article and in 
the editorial notes. Headings given by the editors of the volume 
are in square brackets. 
Obvious errors discovered in the text, in personal and geo­
graphical names, figures, dates and so on, have been silently 
corrected, by reference to sources used by Marx and Engels. The 
personal and geographical names in the English texts are 
reproduced as spelled in the originals, which were checked with 
19th-century reference books; in translated articles, the modern 
spelling is given. The use of English words in the German text is 
indicated in the footnotes. In quoting from newspapers and other 
sources, Marx sometimes gives a free rendering rather than the exact 
words. In this edition quotations are given in the form in which they 
occur in Marx's text. 
The volume was compiled, the greater part of the texts 
prepared and the preface and notes written by Yevgenia Dakhina. 
The articles from the New-York Daily Tribune were prepared and 
notes to them written by Alexander Zubkov. The volume was 
edited by Valentina Smirnova except the articles "Kinglake on the 
Battle of the Alma", "The English Army" and "England's Fighting 
Forces as against Germany" which were prepared by Tatyana 
Vasilyeva and edited by Lev Golman. The name index and the index 
of periodicals were prepared by Tatyana Nikolayeva; the index of 
quoted and mentioned literature by Alexander Zubkov and the 
subject index by Marien Arzumanov (Institute of Marxism-Leninism 
of the CG CPSU). 
The translations were made by Henry Mins (International 
Publishers), Rodney Livingstone, Peter and Betty Ross and Barrie 
Selman (Lawrence Sc Wishart) and Salo Ryazanskaya and Victor 
Schnittke (Progress Publishers). Items 8, 10, 11, 19, 25-28, 30, 31, 
33-35,  37, 40, 42, 46, 50 and 64 were reproduced from the 
collection The Civil War in the United States, International 
Publishers, N. Y., 1937. Items 6, 7, 15-17, 20, 39, 41, 43-45, 51, 
53, 60 and 63 were reproduced from the collection Marx and 
Engels on the United States, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1979. The 
translations, including those from the two collections, were 

=====第26页=====
XXVIII Preface 
checked with the German and edited for the present edition by 
James S. Allen (International Publishers), Nicholas Jacobs (Law­
rence & Wishart) and Richard Dixon, Glenys Ann Kozlov, 
Tatiana Grishina and Victor Schnittke (Progress Publishers) and 
Norire Ter-Akopyan, scientific editor (USSR Academy of Sciences). 
The volume was prepared for the press by editors Nadezhda 
Rudenko, Anna Vladimirova, and assistant editor Tatyana Ban-
nikova. 

=====第27页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
January 1861 -June 1864 

=====第28页=====

=====第29页=====
Voi.. xx N° 6.173. NEW-YORK, TUESDAY. FEBRUARY 12. 1861. PRICE TWO CENTS. 
Frederick Engels 
GERMAN MOVEMENTS 1 
The year 1861, it appears, has not yet troubles enough to bear. 
We have our Secessionist Revolution in America; there is the 
Rebellion in China2 ; the advance of Russia in Eastern and Central 
Asia; the Eastern question, with its corollaries of the French 
occupation of Syria and the Suez Canal; the breaking up of 
Austria, with Hungary in almost open insurrection; the siege of 
Gaëta, 3 and Garibaldi's promise of liberating Venice on the first of 
March; and last, but not least, the attempt to restore Marshal 
MacMahon to his ancestral throne of Ireland. 4 But all this is not 
enough. We are now promised, besides, a fourth Schleswig-
Holstein campaign. 5 
The King of Denmark,3  in 1851, voluntarily entered into certain 
obligations to Prussia and Austria with regard to Schleswig. 11 He 
promised that the Duchy should not be incorporated with 
Denmark; that its Representative Assembly should remain distinct 
from that of Denmark; and that both the German and Danish 
nationalities in Schleswig should receive equal protection. Beside 
this, so far as regards Holstein, the rights of its Representative 
Assembly were expressly guaranteed. Upon these conditions, the 
federal troops which had occupied Holstein were withdrawn. 
The Danish Government executed its promises in a most evasive 
way. In Schleswig, the southern half is exclusively German; in the 
northern  half,  all the towns are German, while the country people 
a Frederick VII.— Ed. 
b Frederik R., Proclamation du roi de Danemark relative à l'organisation de la 
monarchie danoise y compris les Duchés de Schleswig, de Holstein et de Lauenbourg, signée 
le 28 janvier 1852.— Ed. 

=====第30页=====
4 Frederick Engels 
speak ä corrupted Danish dialect, and the written language, from 
time immemorial, has almost everywhere been German. By the 
consent of the population, a process of Germanization has been 
going on there for centuries; so much so that, with the exception 
of the most northerly border districts, even that portion of the 
peasantry who speak a Danish dialect (which is, however, so far 
distant from the written Danish as to be easily intelligible to the 
German inhabitants of the South), understand the written High 
German better than the written Danish language. After 1851, the 
Government divided the country into a Danish, a German, and a 
mixed district. In the German district, German; in the Danish 
district, Danish was to be the exclusive official language of the 
Government, the courts of law, the pulpit, and the schools. In the 
mixed districts, both languages were to be equally admissible. 
This looks fair enough, but the truth is that, in establishing the 
Danish district, the written Danish language was forced upon a 
population the great majority of whom did not even understand 
it, and only desired to be governed, tried, educated, christened, 
and married in the German language. However, the Government 
now opened a regular crusade for the weeding out of all traces of 
Germanism from the district, forbidding even private tuition in 
families in any other than the Danish language; and sought at the 
same time, by more indirect means, in the mixed district to give 
the Danish language the preponderance. The opposition created 
by these measures was very violent, and an attempt was made to 
put it down by a series of petty acts of tyranny. In the small town 
of Eckernförde, for instance, about $4,000 fines were at once 
inflicted for the crime of unlawfully petitioning the Representative 
Assembly; and all the parties fined were, as convicts, declared to be 
deprived of their right of voting. Still, the population and the 
Assembly persisted and now persist in their opposition. 
In Holstein, the Danish Government found it impossible to 
make the Representative Assembly vote any taxes unless they 
granted concessions in a political and national sense. This they 
would not do; neither would they do without the revenues of the 
Duchy. In order, therefore, to manufacture some legal ground on 
which to levythem, they convoked a Council of the Kingdom, an 
assembly without any representative character, but supposed to 
represent Denmark proper, Schleswig-Holstein, and Lauenburg. 
Although the Holsteiners refused to attend, this body voted the 
taxes for the whole monarchy, and, based upon this vote, the 
Government assessed the taxes to be paid in Holstein. Thus 
Holstein, which was to be an independent and separate Duchy, 

=====第31页=====
German Movements 5 
was deprived of all political independence, and made subject to an 
Assembly preeminently Danish. 
These are the grounds on which the German press, for five or 
six years past, have called on the German Governments to employ 
coercive measures against Denmark. The grounds, in themselves, 
are certainly good. But the German press—that press which was 
allowed to exist during the reactionary period after 1849—merely 
used Schleswig-Holstein as a means of popularity. It was indeed 
very cheap to hold forth in high indignation against the Danes, 
when the Governments of Germany allowed it—those Govern­
ments which at home tried to emulate Denmark in petty tyranny. 
War against Denmark was the cry when the Crimean war broke 
out. War against Denmark again, when Louis Napoleon invaded 
Austrian Italy. Now, then, they will have it all their own way. The 
"new era" in Prussia, 6 hitherto so coy when called upon by the 
liberal press, in this instance chimes in with it. The new King of 
Prussia proclaims to the world that he must bring this old 
complaint to a settlement;3 the decrepit Diet at Frankfort puts all 
its clumsy machinery in motion for the salvation of German 
nationality,15 and the liberal press—triumphs? No such thing. The 
liberal press, now at once put to the test, eats its words, cries out, 
Caution! discovers that Germany has no fleet wherewith to fight 
the ships of a naval power, and, especially in Prussia, shows all the 
symptoms of cowardice. What a few months ago was an urgent 
patriotic duty, is now all of a sudden an Austrian intrigue, which 
Prussia is warned not to give way to. 
That the German Governments, in their sudden enthusiasm for 
the cause of Schleswig-Holstein, are in the least sincere, is, of 
course, out of the question. As the Danish Dagbladet says: 
"We all know that it is one of the old tricks of the German Governments to take 
up the Schleswig-Holstein question as soon as they feel themselves to be in want of 
a little popularity, and to cover their own manifold sins by drawing bills upon the 
fanaticism against Denmark." 
This has been decidedly the case in Saxony, and to a certain 
extent it is now the case in Prussia. But in Prussia the sudden 
starting of this question also signifies, evidently, an alliance with 
Austria. The Prussian Government behold Austria breaking to 
pieces from within, while she is menaced from without by a war 
a William I [Speech to the Chambers, January 14, 1861], The Times, No. 23832, 
January 17,  1861.—  Ed. 
b A report on the subject appeared under the heading "Frankfort-on-the-Main, 
Thursday", The Times, No. 23833, January 18,  1861.—  Ed. 
3—1134 

=====第32页=====
6 Frederick Engels 
with Italy. It certainly is not the interest of the Prussian 
Government to see Austria annihilated. At the same time, the 
Italian war, to which Louis Napoleon would not long remain an 
impartial spectator, would scarcely again come off without 
touching the territory of the German Confederation, in which case 
Prussia is bound to interfere. Then the war with France on the 
Rhine would certainly be combined with a Danish war on the 
Eider; and while the Prussian Government cannot afford to have 
Austria broken down, why wait till Austria is again defeated? Why 
not engage in the quarrel of Schleswig-Holstein, and thereby 
interest in the war all North Germany which would not fight for 
the defence of Venetia? If this be the reasoning of the Prussian 
Government, it is logical enough, but it was quite as logical in 
1859,  before Austria was weakened by Magenta and Solferino, 7 
and by her internal convulsions. Why was it not then acted upon? 
It is not at all certain that this great war will come off next 
Spring. But if it does come off, although neither party deserves 
any sympathy, it must have this result, that whichsoever be beaten 
in the beginning, there will be a revolution. If Louis Napoleon be 
defeated, his throne is sure to fall; and if the King of Prussia and 
the Emperor of Austria3 be worsted, they will have to give way 
before a German revolution. 
Written on January 23, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6178, February 12, 1861 as 
a leader 
a Francis Joseph.— Ed. 

=====第33页=====
7 
Karl Marx 
THE AMERICAN QUESTION IN ENGLAND 
London, Sept. 18, 1861 
Mrs. Beecher Stowe's letter to Lord Shaftesbury, 8 whatever its 
intrinsic merit may be, has done a great deal of good, by forcing 
the anti-Northern organs of the London press to speak out and 
lay before the general public the ostensible reasons for their 
hostile tone against the North, and their ill-concealed sympathies 
with the South, which looks rather strange on the part of people 
affecting an utter horror of Slavery. Their first and main 
grievance is that the present American war is "not one for the 
abolition of Slavery," and that, therefore, the high-minded 
Britisher, used to undertake wars of his own, and interest himself 
in other people's wars only on the basis of "broad humanitarian 
principles," cannot be expected to feel any sympathy with his 
Northern cousins. 
"In the first place  [•••]>"  says The Economist, "the assumption that the quarrel 
between the North and South is a quarrel between Negro freedom on the one side 
and Negro Slavery on the other, is as impudent as it is untrue."3  "The North," 
says The Saturday Review, "does not proclaim abolition, and never pretended to 
fight for Anti-Slavery. The North has not hoisted for its oriflamme the sacred 
symbol of justice to the Negro; its cri de guerre h is not unconditional abolition." 0 
"If," says The Examiner, "we have been deceived about the real significance of the 
sublime movement, who but the Federalists themselves have to answer for the 
deception?" d 
a "American Complaints against England", The  Economist,  No. 942, September 14, 
1861.—  Ed. 
b War-cry.— Ed. 
c "Mrs. Beecher Stowe's Wounded Feelings", The Saturday Review, No. 307, 
September 14,  1861.—  Ed. 
d "Mrs. Stowe on the American War", The Examiner, No. 2798, September 14, 
1861.—  Ed. 
3* 

=====第34页=====
8 Karl Marx 
Now,  in the  first instance,  the  premiss must  be conceded.  The 
war has not  been undertaken with  a view  to put  down Slavery,  and 
the United States authorities themselves have taken  the  greatest 
pains  to protest against  any  such idea.  But  then,  it ought  to t  ç 
remembered that  it was not the  North,  but the  South, which 
undertook this  war; the  former acting only  on the  defense.  If it be 
true that  the  North, after long hesitations,  and an  exhibition  of 
forbearance unknown  in the  annals  of European history, drew  at 
last the  sword,  not for  crushing Slavery,  but for  saving  the Union, 
the South,  on its  part, inaugurated  the war by  loudly proclaiming 
"the peculiar institution"  as the  only  and  main  end of  „the 
rebellion.  It confessed  to fight  for the  liberty  of enslaving other 
people,  a liberty which, despite  the  Northern protests,  it asserted 
to be put in  danger  by the  victory  of the  Republican party 9 and 
the election  of Mr.  Lincoln  to the  Presidential chair.  The 
Confederate Congress boasted that  its new-fangled constitution,10 
as distinguished from  the  Constitution  of the  Washingtons, 
Jeffersons,  and  Adams's, 11 had  recognized  for the  first time 
Slavery  as a  thing good  in itself, a  bulwark  of civilization,  and a 
divine institution.3  If the  North professed  to fight  but for the 
Union,  the  South gloried  in rebellion  for the  supremacy  of 
Slavery.  If Anti-Slavery  and  idealistic England felt  not  attracted  by 
the profession  of the  North,  how  came  it to  pass that  it was not 
violently repulsed  by the  cynical confessions  of the  South? 
The Saturday Review helps itself  out of  this ugly dilemma  by 
disbelieving  the  declarations  of the  seceders themselves.  It sees 
deeper than this,  and  discovers "that Slavery  had  very little  to do  with 
Secession;  " the  declarations  of Jeff.  Davis  and  company  to the 
contrary being mere "conventionalisms" with "about  as much 
meaning  as the  conventionalisms about violated altars  and 
desecrated hearths, which always occur  in such proclamations." 
The staple  of argument  on the  part  of the  anti-Northern papers 
is very scanty,  and  throughout  all of  them  we find almost  the same 
sentences recurring, like  the  formulas  of a  mathematical series,  at 
certain intervals, with very little  art of  variation  or combination. 
"Why," exclaims  The  Economist,  "it is  only yesterday, when  the  Secession 
movement first gained serious head,  on the  first announcement  of Mr.  Lincoln's 
election, that  the  Northerners offered  to the  South,  if they would remain  in the 
Union, every conceivable security  for the  performance  and  inviolability  of the 
obnoxious institution—that they disavowed  in the  most solemn manner  all 
a Marx  is giving  the burden  of the  speech  A. H.  Stephens, Vice-President  of the 
Confederacy, made  at a  meeting  in Savannah  on March  21,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第35页=====
The American Question in England 9 
intention of interfering with it—that their leaders proposed compromise after 
compromise in Congress, all based upon the concession that Slavery should not be 
meddled with." "How happens it," says The Examiner, "that the North was ready to 
compromise matters by the largest concessions to the South as to Slavery? How was 
it that a certain geographical line was proposed in Congress within which Slavery 
was to be recognized as an essential institution? The Southern States were not 
content with this." 
What The Economist and The Examiner had to ask was not only 
why the Crittenden12 and other compromise measures were 
proposed in Congress, but why they were not passed? They affect to 
consider those compromise proposals as accepted by the North 
and rejected by the South, while, in point of fact, they were 
baffled by the Northern party, that had carried the Lincoln 
election. Proposals never matured into resolutions, but always 
remaining in the embryo state of pia desideria? the South had of 
course never any occasion either of rejecting or acquiescing in. We 
come nearer to the pith of the question by the following remark of • 
The Examiner: 
"Mrs.  Stowe says: 'The Slave party, finding they could no longer use the Union 
for their purposes, resolved to destroy it.' There is here an admission that up to 
that time the Slave party had used the Union for their purposes, and it would have 
been well if Mrs. Stowe could have distincdy shown where it was that the North 
began to make its stand against Slavery." 
One might suppose that The Examiner and the other oracles of 
public opinion in England had made themselves sufficiently 
familiar with the contemporaneous history to not need Mrs. 
Stowe's information on such all-important points. The progressive 
abuse of the Union by the slave power, working through its 
alliance with the Northern Democratic party,13 is, so to say, the 
general formula of the United States history since the beginning 
of this century. The successive compromise measures mark the 
successive degrees of the encroachment by which the Union 
became more and more transformed into the slave of the 
slave-owner. Each of these compromises denotes a new encroach­
ment of the South, a new concession of the North. At the same 
time none of the successive victories of the South was carried but 
after a hot contest with an antagonistic force in the North, 
appearing under different party names with different watchwords 
and under different colors. If the positive and final result of each 
single contest told in favor of the South, the attentive observer of 
history could not but see that every new advance of the slave 
a Pious wishes.— Ed. 

=====第36页=====
10 Karl Marx 
power was a step forward to its ultimate defeat. Even at the times 
of the Missouri Compromise the contending forces were so evenly 
balanced that Jefferson, as we see from his memoirs, 3 apprehended 
the Union to be in danger of splitting on that deadly antagonism.14 
The encroachments of the slaveholding power reached their 
maximum point, when, by the Kansas-Nebraska bill,15 for the first 
time in the history of the United States, as Mr. Douglas himself 
confessed, every legal barrier to the diffusion of Slavery within the 
United States territories was broken down, when, afterward, a 
Northern candidate bought his Presidential nomination by pledg­
ing the Union to conquer or purchase in Cuba a new field of 
dominion for the slaveholder16; when, later on, by the Dred Scott 
decision,17  diffusion of Slavery by the Federal power was 
proclaimed as the law of the American Constitution, and lastly, 
when the African slave-trade was de facto reopened on a larger 
scale than during the times of its legal existence. But, concurrently 
with this climax of Southern encroachments, carried by the 
connivance of the Northern Democratic party, there were unmis­
takable signs of Northern antagonistic agencies having gathered 
such strength as must soon turn the balance of power. The Kansas 
war, 18 the formation of the Republican party, and the large vote 
cast for Mr. Fremont during the Presidential election of 1856,19 
were so many palpable proofs that the North had accumulated 
sufficient energies to rectify the aberrations which United States 
history, under the slaveowners' pressure, had undergone, for half 
a century, and to make it return to the true principles of its 
development. Apart from those political phenomena, there was 
one broad statistical and economical fact indicating that the abuse 
of the Federal Union by the slave interest had approached the 
point from which it would have to recede forcibly, or de bonne 
graced That fact was the growth of the North-West, the immense 
strides its population had made from 1850 to 1860, and the new 
and reinvigorating influence it could not but bear on the destinies 
of the United States. 
Now, was all this a secret chapter of history? Was "the 
admission" of Mrs. Beecher Stowe wanted to reveal to The 
Examiner and the other political illuminati 20 of the London press 
the carefully hidden truth that "up to that time the Slave party 
had used the Union for their purposes?" Is it the fault of the 
a Th. Jefferson, Memoirs, Correspondence, and Private Papers..., Vol. IV, London, 
1829,  p. 333.—  Ed. 
b Of its own accord.— Ed. 

=====第37页=====
The American Question in England 11 
American North that the English pressmen were taken quite 
unawares by the violent clash of the antagonistic forces, the 
friction of which was the moving power of its history for half a 
century? Is it the fault of the Americans that the English press 
mistake for the fanciful crotchet hatched in a single day what was 
in reality the matured result of long years of struggle? The very 
fact that the formation and the progress of the Republican party 
in America have hardly been noticed by the London press, speaks 
volumes as to the hollowness of its Anti-Slavery tirades. Take, for 
instance, the two antipodes of the London press, The London 
Times and Reynolds's Weekly Newspaper, the one the great organ of 
the respectable classes, and the other the only remaining organ of 
the working class. The former, not long before Mr. Buchanan's 
career drew to an end, published an elaborate apology for his 
Administration and a defamatory libel against the Republican 
movement. Reynolds, on his part, was, during Mr. Buchanan's stay 
at London,3 one of his minions, and since that time never missed 
an occasion to write him up and to write his adversaries down. 
How did it come to pass that the Republican party, whose 
platform0 was drawn up on the avowed antagonism to the 
encroachments of the Slaveocracy and the abuse of the Union by 
the slave interest, carried the day in the North? How, in the 
second instance, did it come to pass that the great bulk of the 
Northern Democratic party, flinging aside its old connexions with 
the leaders of Slaveocracy, setting at naught its traditions of half a 
century, sacrificing great commercial interests and greater political 
prejudices, rushed to the support of the present Republican 
Administration and offered it men and money with an unsparing 
hand? 
Instead of answering these questions The Economist exclaims: 
"Can we forget [...] that Abolitionists have habitually been as ferociously 
persecuted and maltreated in the North and West as in the South? Can it be 
denied that the testiness and half-heartedness, not to say insincerity, of the 
Government at Washington, have for years supplied the chief impediment which 
has thwarted our efforts for the effectual suppression of the slave trade on the 
coast of Africa; while a vast proportion of the clippers actually engaged in that 
trade have been built with Northern capital, owned by Northern merchants and 
manned by Northern seamen?" 
This is, in fact, a masterly piece of logic. Anti-Slavery England 
cannot sympathize with the North breaking down the withering 
a As US Minister to London in 1853-56.— Ed. 
b The election platform of the Republicans was published in the article "The 
Platform" in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5950, May 19, I860.— Ed. 

=====第38页=====
12 Karl Marx 
influence of slaveocracy, because she cannot forget that the North, 
while bound by that influence, supported the slave-trade, mobbed 
the Abolitionists, and had its Democratic institutions tainted by the 
slavedriver's prejudices. She cannot sympathize with Mr. Lincoln's 
Administration, because she had to find fault with Mr. Buchanan's 
Administration. She must needs sullenly cavil at the present 
movement of the Northern resurrection, cheer up the Northern 
sympathizers with the slave-trade, branded in the Republican 
platform, and coquet with the Southern slaveocracy, setting up an 
empire of its own, because she cannot forget that the North of 
yesterday was not the North of to-day. The necessity of justifying 
its attitude by such pettifogging Old Bailey21 pleas proves more 
than anything else that the anti-Northern part of the English press 
is instigated by hidden motives, too mean and dastardly to be 
openly avowed. 
As it is one of its pet maneuvers to taunt the present Republican 
Administration with the doings of its Pro-Slavery predecessors, so 
it tries hard to persuade the English people that The N. Y. Herald 
ought to be considered the only authentic expositor of Northern 
opinion. The London Times having given out the cue in this 
direction, the servum pecus3 of the other anti-Northern organs, 
great and small, persist in beating the same bush. So says The 
Economist: 
"In the height of the strife, New-York papers and New-York politicians were 
not wanting who exhorted the combatants, now that they had large armies in the 
field, to employ them, not against each other, but against Great Britain—to 
compromise the internal quarrel, the slave question included, and invade the 
British territory without notice and with overwhelming force." 
The Economist knows perfectly well that The N. Y. Herald's 
efforts, which were eagerly supported by The London Times, at 
embroiling the United States into a war with England,15 only 
intended securing the success of Secession and thwarting the 
movement of Northern regeneration. 
Still there is one concession made by the anti-Northern English 
press.  The Saturday snob tells us: 
"What was at issue in Lincoln's election, and what has precipitated the 
convulsion, was merely the limitation of the institution of Slavery to States where that 
institution already  exists.  " 
And The Economist remarks: 
a Crowd of slaves.— Ed. 
b "Southampton, Friday", The Times, No. 24032, September 7,  1861.-—  Ed. 

=====第39页=====
The American Question in England 13 
"It is true enough that it was the aim of the Republican party which elected Mr. 
Lincoln to prevent Slavery from spreading into the unsettled Territories.... It may 
be true that the success of the North, if complete and unconditional, would enable 
them to confine Slavery within the fifteen States which have already adopted it, 
and might thus lead to its eventual extinction—though this is rather probable than 
certain." 
In 1859, on the occasion of John Brown's Harper's Ferry 
expedition,22 the very same Economist published a series of 
elaborate articles with a view to prove that, by dint of an economical 
law, American Slavery was doomed to gradual extinction from the 
moment it should be deprived of its power of expansion.3 That 
"economical law" was perfectly understood by the Slaveocracy. 
"In 15 years more," said Toombs "without a great increase in Slave territory, 
either the slaves must be permitted to flee from the whites, or the whites must flee 
from the slaves." 
The limitation of Slavery to its constitutional area, as proclaimed 
by the Republicans, was the distinct ground upon which the 
menace of Secession was first uttered in the House of Representa­
tives on December 19, 1859. Mr. Singleton (Mississippi) having 
asked Mr. Curtis (Iowa), "if the Republican party would never let 
the South have another foot of slave territory while it remained in 
the Union," and Mr. Curtis having responded in the affirmative, 
Mr. Singleton said this would dissolve the Union. His advice to 
Mississippi was the sooner it got out of the Union the better— 
"gentlemen should recollect that [...] Jefferson Davis led our 
forces in Mexico, and [...] still he lives, perhaps to lead the 
Southern army."b Quite apart from the economical law which 
makes the diffusion of Slavery a vital condition for its mainte­
nance within its constitutional areas, the leaders of the South had 
never deceived themselves as to its necessity for keeping up their 
political sway over the United States. John Calhoun, in the defense 
of his propositions to the Senate, stated distinctly on Feb. 19, 
1847,  "that the Senate was the only balance of power left to the 
South in the Government," and that the creation of new Slave 
States had become necessary "for the retention of the equipoise of 
power in the Senate."0 Moreover, the Oligarchy of the 300,000 
a "Harper's Ferry", "The Impending Crisis in the Southern States of America", 
"English Sympathy with the Slavery Party in America", The Economist, Nos. 845, 
852, 853, November 5, December 24, 31, 1859.— Ed. 
b O. Singleton [Speech in the House of Representatives on December 19, 1859], 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5822, December 20, 1859.— Ed. 
c J. C. Calhoun [Speech in the Senate on February 19, 1847], Congressional 
Globe: New Series: Containing  Sketches  of the Debates  and Proceedings  of the Second Session  of 
Twenty-Ninth Congress, Washington, 1847.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
14 Karl Marx 
slave-owners could not even maintain their sway at home save by 
constantly throwing out to their white plebeians the bait of 
prospective conquests within and without the frontiers of the 
United States. If, then, according to the oracles of the English 
press,  the North had arrived at the fixed resolution of cir­
cumscribing Slavery within its present limits, and of thus 
extinguishing it in a constitutional way, was this not sufficient to 
enlist the sympathies of Anti-Slavery England? 
But the English Puritans seem indeed not to be contented save 
by an explicit Abolitionist war. 
"This,"  says The Economist "therefore, not being a war for the emancipation of 
the Negro race, [...] on what other ground can we be fairly called upon to sympathize 
so warmly with the Federal cause?" "There was a time," says The Examiner, "when 
our sympathies were with the North, thinking that it was really in earnest in 
making a stand against the encroachments of the Slave States," and in adopting 
"emancipation as a measure of justice to the black race." 
However, in the very same numbers in which these papers tell 
us that they cannot sympathize with the North because its war is 
no Abolitionist war, we are informed that "the desperate 
expedient of proclaiming Negro emancipation and summoning the 
slaves to a general insurrection," is a thing "the mere conception 
of which [...] is repulsive and dreadful," and that "a compromise" 
would be "far preferable to success purchased at such a cost and 
stained by such a crime."* 
Thus the English eagerness for the Abolitionist war is all cant. 
The cloven foot peeps out in the following sentences: 
"Lastly, [...]" says The Economist, "is the Morrill  Tariff,^  a title to our gratitude 
and to our sympathy, or is the certainty that, in case of Northern triumph, that 
Tariff should be extended over the whole Republic, a reason why we ought to be 
clamorously anxious for their success?" "The North Americans," says The 
Examiner, "are in earnest about nothing but a selfish protective  Tariff.  The 
Southern States were tired of being robbed of the fruits of their slave-labor by the 
protective tariff of the North." 
The Examiner and The Economist comment each other. The 
latter is honest enough to confess at last that with him and his 
followers sympathy is a mere question of  tariff,  while the former 
reduces the war between North and South to a tariff war, to a war 
between Protection and Free-Trade. The Examiner is perhaps not 
aware that even the South Carolina Nullifiers of 1832,24 as Gen. 
Jackson testifies, used Protection only as a pretext for secession;b 
a "The Probable Continuance of the American Conflict", The Economist, 
No. 941, September 7,  1861.—  Ed. 
b President Jackson's proclamation against the Nullification Ordinance of South 
Carolina, December 11, 1832.— Ed. 

=====第41页=====
The American Question in England 15 
but even The Examiner ought to know that the present rebellion 
did not wait upon the passing of the Morrill tariff for breaking 
out. In point of fact, the Southerners could not have been tired of 
being robbed of the fruits of their slave labor by the Protective 
tariff of the North, considering that from 1846-1861 a Free-Trade 
tariff had obtained. 
The Spectator characterizes in its last number the secret thought 
of some of the Anti-Northern organs in the following striking 
manner: 
"What, then, do the Anti-Northern organs really profess to think desi­
rable, under the justification of this plea of deferring to the inexorable logic of 
facts?"  They argue that disunion is desirable, just because, as we have said, it is the 
only possible step to a conclusion of this "causeless and fratricidal strife;" and next, 
of course, only as an afterthought, and as an humble apology for Providence and 
"justification of the ways of God to man," now that the inevitable necessity stands 
revealed—for further reasons discovered as beautiful adaptations to the moral 
exigencies of the country, when once the issue is discerned. It is discovered that it 
will be very much for the advantage of the States to be dissolved into rival groups. 
They will mutually check each other's ambition; they will neutralize each other's 
power, and if ever England should get into a dispute with one or more of them, 
more jealousy will bring the antagonistic groups to our aid. This will be, it is urged, 
a very wholesome state of things, for it will relieve us from anxiety and it will 
encourage political 'competition,' that great safeguard of honesty and purity, 
among the States themselves. 
"Such is the case—very gravely urged—of the numerous class of Southern 
sympathizers now springing up among us. Translated into English—and we grieve 
that an English argument on such a subject should be of a nature that requires 
translating—it means that we deplore the present great scale of this "fratricidal" 
war, because it may concentrate in one fearful spasm a series of chronic petty wars 
and passions and jealousies among groups of rival States in times to come. The real 
truth is, and this very un-English feeling distinctly discerns this truth, though it 
cloaks it in decent phrases, that rival groups of American States could not live 
together in peace or harmony. The chronic condition would be one of malignant 
hostility rising out of the very causes which have produced the present contest. It is 
asserted that the different groups of States have different tariff interests. These 
different tariff interests would be the sources of constant petty wars if the States 
were once dissolved, and Slavery, the root of all the strife, would be the spring of 
innumerable animosities, discords and campaigns. No stable equilibrium could ever 
again be established among the rival States. And yet it is maintained that this long 
future of incessant strife is the providential solution of the great question now at 
issue—the only real reason why it is looked upon favorably being this, that whereas 
the present great-scale conflict may issue in a restored and stronger political unity, 
the alternative of infinitely multiplied small-scale quarrels will issue in a weak and 
divided continent, that England cannot fear. 
"Now we do not deny that the Americans themselves sowed the seeds of this 
petty and contemptible state of feeling by the unfriendly and bullying attitude they 
have so often manifested to England, but we do say that the state of feeling on our 
part is petty and contemptible. We see that in a deferred issue there is no hope of 
a deep and enduring tranquillity for America, that it means a decline and fall of 
the American nation into quarrelsome clans and tribes, and yet we hold up our 

=====第42页=====
16 Karl Marx 
hands in horror at the present^ "fratricidal" strife because it holds out hopes of 
finality. We exhort them to look favorably on the indefinite future of small strifes, 
equally fratricidal and probably far more demoralizing, because the latter would 
draw out of our side the thorn of American rivalry." 
Written on September 18, 1861 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No.  6403,  October 11, 1861, 
reprinted in the New-York Semi-Weekly 
Tribune, No. 1710, October 15, 1861 Reproduced from the New-York 
Daily Tribune 

=====第43页=====
17 
Karl Marx 
THE BRITISH COTTON TRADE 
London, Sept. 21, 1861 
The continual rise in the prices of raw cotton begins at last to 
seriously react upon the cotton factories, their consumption of 
cotton being now 25 per cent less than the full consumption. This 
result has been brought about by a daily lessening rate of 
production, many mills working only four or three days per week, 
part of the machinery being stopped, both in those establishments 
where short time has been commenced and in those which are still 
running full time, and some mills being temporarily altogether 
closed. In some places, as at Blackburn, for instance, short time 
has been coupled with a reduction of wages. However, the 
short-time movement is only in its incipient state, and we may 
predict with perfect security that some weeks later the trade will 
have generally resorted to three days working per week, concur­
rently with a large stoppage of machinery in most establishments. 
On the whole, English manufacturers and merchants were 
extremely slow and reluctant in acknowledging the awkward 
position of their cotton supplies. 
"The whole of the last American crop," they said, "has long since been 
forwarded to Europe. The picking of the new crop has barely commenced. Not a 
bale of cotton could have reached us more than has reached us, even if the war 
and the blockade26  had never been heard of. The shipping season does not 
commence till far in November, and it is usually the end of December before any 
large exportations take place. Till then, it is of little consequence whether the 
cotton is retained on the plantations or is forwarded to the ports as fast as it is 
bagged. If the blockade ceases any time before the end of this year, the probability is 
that by March or April we shall have received just as full a supply of cotton as if 
the blockade had never been declared." 3 
a "The Probable Continuance of the American Conflict", The Economist, 
No. 941, September 7,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第44页=====
18 Karl Marx 
In the innermost recesses of the mercantile mind the notion was 
cherished that the whole American crisis, and, consequently, the 
blockade, would have ceased before the end of the year, or that 
Lord Palmerston would forcibly break through the blockade. The 
latter idea has been altogether abandoned, since, beside all other 
circumstances, Manchester became aware that two vast interests, 
the monetary interest having sunk an immense capital in the 
industrial enterprises of Northern America, and the corn trade, 
relying on Northern America as its principal source of supply, 
would combine to check any unprovoked aggression on the part of 
the British Government. The hopes of the blockade being raised 
in due time, for the requirements of Liverpool or Manchester, or 
the American war being wound up by a compromise with the 
Secessionists, have given way before a feature hitherto unknown in 
the English cotton market, viz., American operations in cotton at 
Liverpool, partly on speculation, partly for reshipment to America. 
Consequently, for the last two weeks the Liverpool cotton market 
has been feverishly excited, the speculative investments in cotton 
on the part of the Liverpool merchants being backed by 
speculative investments on the part of the Manchester and other 
manufacturers eager to provide themselves with stocks of raw 
material for the Winter. The extent of the latter transactions is 
sufficiently shown by the fact that a considerable portion of the 
spare warehouse room in Manchester is already occupied by such 
stocks, and that throughout the week beginning with Sept. 15 and 
ending with Sept. 22, Middling Americans had increased 3/8d. 
per lb, and fair ones 5/8d. 
From the outbreak of the American war the prices of cotton 
were steadily rising, but the ruinous disproportion between the 
prices of the raw material and the prices of yarns and cloth was 
not declared until the last weeks of August. Till then, any serious 
decline in the prices of cotton manufactures, which might have 
been anticipated from the considerable decrease of the American 
demand, had been balanced by an accumulation of stocks in first 
hands,  and by speculative consignments to China and India. Those 
Asiatic markets, however, were soon overdone. 
"Stocks," says The Calcutta Price Current of Aug. 7, 1861, "are accumulating, the 
arrivals since our last being no less than 24,000,000 yards of plain cottons. Home 
advices show a continuation of shipments in excess of our requirements, and so 
long as this is the case, improvement cannot be looked for.... The Bombay market, 
also,  has been greatly oversupplied." 
Some other circumstances contributed to contract the Indian 
market. The late famine in the north-western provinces has been 

=====第45页=====
The British Cotton Trade 19 
succeeded by the ravages of the cholera, while throughout Lower 
Bengal an excessive fall of rain, laying the country under water, 
seriously damaged the rice crops. In letters from Calcutta, which 
reached England last week, sales were reported giving a net return 
of Q-Véd. per pound for 40s twist, which cannot be bought at 
Manchester for less than ll 3/8d., while sales of 40-inch shirtings, 
compared with present rates at Manchester, yield losses at llI^A., 
9d., and 12d. per piece. In the China market, prices were also 
forced down by the accumulation of the stocks imported. Under 
these circumstances, the demand for the British cotton manufac­
tures decreasing, their prices can, of course, not keep pace with 
the progressive rise in the price of the raw material; but, on the 
contrary, the spinning, weaving, and printing of cotton must, in 
many instances, cease to pay the costs of production. Take, as an 
example, the following case, stated by one of the greatest 
Manchester manufacturers, in reference to coarse spinning: 
Cost of 
Per lb. Margin. spinning 
per lb 
Sept. 17, 1860. 
Cost of cotton 6 A^d. 4d. 3d. 
16s warp sold for 10V4d. 
Profit, Id. per lb. 
Sept. 17, 1861. 
Cost of cotton 9d. 2d.  3 x/2d. 
16s warp sold for 11 
Loss,  1 Vgd. per lb. 
The consumption of Indian cotton is rapidly growing, and with 
a further rise in prices, the Indian supply will come forward at 
increasing ratios; but still it remains impossible to change, at a few 
months' notice, all the conditions of production and turn the 
current of commerce. England pays now, in fact, the penalty for 
her protracted misrule of that vast Indian empire. The two main 
obstacles she has now to grapple with in her attempts at 
supplanting American cotton by Indian cotton, is the want of 
means of communication and transport throughout India, and the 
miserable state of the Indian peasant, disabling him from 
improving favorable circumstances. Both these difficulties the 
English have themselves to thank for. English modern industry, in 
general, relied upon two pivots equally monstrous. The one was 
the potato as the only means of feeding Ireland and a great part of 

=====第46页=====
X 
20 Karl Marx 
the English working class. This pivot was swept away by the potato 
disease and the subsequent Irish catastrophe.27 A larger basis for 
the reproduction and maintenance of the toiling millions had then 
to be adopted. The second pivot of English industry was the 
slave-grown cotton of the United States. The present American 
crisis forces them to enlarge their field of supply and emancipate 
cotton from slave-breeding and slave-consuming oligarchies. As 
long as the English cotton manufactures depended on slave-grown 
cotton, it could be truthfully asserted that they rested on a twofold 
slavery, the indirect slavery of the white man in England and the 
direct slavery of the black men on the other side of the Atlantic. 
Written on September 21, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6405, October 14, 1861 

=====第47页=====
21 
Karl Marx 
THE LONDON TIMES AND LORD PALMERSTON 
London, Oct. 5, 1861 
"English people participate in the government of their own 
country by reading The Times newspaper." This judgment, passed 
by an eminent English author* on what is called British 
self-government, is only true so far as the foreign policy of the 
Kingdom is concerned. As to measures of domestic reform, they 
were never carried by the support of The Times, but The Times 
never ceased attacking and opposing them until after it had 
become aware of its utter inability to any longer check their 
progress. Take, for instance, the Catholic Emancipation, the 
Reform bill, the abolition of the Corn laws, the Stamp Tax, and 
the Paper Duty.29 When victory had unmistakably declared on the 
side of the Reformers, The Times wheeled round, deserted the 
reactionary camp, and managed to find  itself,  at the decisive 
moment, on the winning side. In all these instances, The Times 
gave not the direction to public opinion, but submitted to it, 
ungraciously, reluctantly, and after protracted, but frustrated, 
attempts at rolling back the surging waves of popular progress. Its 
real influence on the public mind is, therefore, confined to the 
field of foreign policy. In no part of Europe are the mass of the 
people, and especially of the middle-classes, more utterly ignorant 
of the foreign policy of their own country than in England, an 
ignorance springing from two great sources. On the one hand, 
since the glorious Revolution of 1688,30 the aristocracy has always 
monopolized the direction of foreign affairs in England. On the 
a R. Lowe, "The Part of The Times in the Government of the Country", The 
Free Press, No. 8, August 7,  1861.—  Ed. 
4—1134 

=====第48页=====
22 Karl Marx 
other hand, the progressive division of labor has, to a certain 
extent, emasculated the general intellect of the middle-class men 
by the circumscription of all their energies and mental faculties 
within the narrow spheres of their mercantile, industrial and 
professional concerns. Thus it happened that, while the aristocracy 
acted for them, the press thought for them in their foreign or 
international affairs; and both parties, the aristocracy and the 
press,  very soon found out that it would be their mutual interest 
to combine. One has only to open Cobbett's Political Register to 
convince himself that, since the beginning of this century, the 
great London papers have constantly played the part of attorneys 
to the heaven-born managers of English foreign policy. Still, there 
were some intermediate periods to be run through before the 
present state of things had been brought about. The aristocracy, 
that had monopolized the management of foreign affairs, first 
shrunk together into an oligarchy, represented by a secret 
conclave, called the cabinet, and, later on, the cabinet was 
superseded by one single man, Lord Palmerston, who, for the last 
thirty years, has usurped the absolute power of wielding the 
national forces of the British Empire, and determining the line of 
its Foreign Policy. Concurrently with this usurpation, by the law of 
concentration, acting in the field of newspaper-mongering still more 
rapidly than in the field of cotton-spinning, The London Times had 
attained the position of being the national paper of England, that is 
to say, of representing the English mind to Foreign nations. If the 
monopoly of managing the Foreign affairs of the nation had passed 
from the aristocracy to an oligarchic conclave, and from an oligarchic 
conclave to one single man, the Foreign Minister of England, viz: 
Lord Palmerston, the monopoly of thinking and judging for the 
nation, on its own Foreign relations, and representing the public 
mind in regard to these relations, had passed from the press to one 
organ of the press, to The Times. Lord Palmerston, who secretly and 
from motives unknown to the people at large, to Parliament and 
even to -his own colleagues, managed the Foreign affairs of the 
British Empire, must have been very stupid if he had not tried to 
possess himself of the one paper which had usurped the power of 
passing public judgment in the name of the English people on his 
own secret doings. The Times, in whose vocabulary the word virtue 
was never to be found, must, on its side, have boasted more than 
Spartan virtue not to ally itself with the absolute ruler in fact of the 
national power of the Empire. Hence, since the French coup d'état? 
a The reference is to the coup d'état in France on December 2,  1851.—  Ed. 

=====第49页=====
The London Times and Lord Palmerston 23 
when the Government by faction was in England superseded by the 
Government by the coalition of factions,31 and Palmerston, 
therefore, found no longer rivals endangering his usurpation, The 
Times became his mere slave. He had taken care to smuggle some of 
its virtue into the subordinate posts of the cabinet, and to cajole 
others by their admission into his social circle.32 Since that time, the 
whole business of The Times, so far as the foreign affairs of the 
British Empire are concerned, is limited to manufacturing a public 
opinion to conform to Lord Palmerston's Foreign policy. It has to 
prepare the public mind for what he intends doing, and to make it 
acquiesce in what he has done. 
The slavish drudgery which, in fulfilling this work, it has to 
undergo, was best exemplified during the last session of Parlia­
ment. That session proved anything but favorable to Lord 
Palmerston. Some independent members of the H. of C., Liberals 
and Conservatives, rebelled against his usurped dictatorship, and, 
by an exposure of his past misdeeds, tried to awaken the nation to 
a sense of the danger of continuing the same uncontrolled power 
in the same hands. Mr. Dunlop, opening the attack by a motion 
for a Select Committee on the Afghan Papers,3 which Palmerston 
had laid on the table of the House in 1839, proved that 
Palmerston had actually forged these papers.33 The Times, in its 
Parliamentary report, suppressed all the passages of Mr. Dunlop's 
speech which it considered most damaging to its master. Later on, 
Lord Montagu, in a motion for the publication of all papers 
relating- to the Danish Treaty of 1852, accused Palmerston of 
having been the principal in the maneuvers intended to alter the 
Danish succession in the interest of a foreign power,34 and of 
having misled the House of Commons by deliberate misstate­
ments.1' Palmerston, however, had come to a previous understand­
ing with Mr. Disraeli to baffle Lord Montagu's motion by a 
count-out of the House, which in fact put a stop to the whole 
proceeding. Still, Lord Montagu's speech had lasted one hour and 
a half before it was cut off by the count-out. The Times having 
been informed by Palmerston that the count-out was to take place, 
its editor specially charged with the task of mutilating and cooking 
the Parliamentary reports had given himself a holiday, and thus 
a A. M. Dunlop's speech in the House of Commons on March 19, 1861, The 
Times, No. 23885, March 20,  1861.—  Ed. 
b R. Montagu's speech in the House of Commons on June 18, 1861, The Times, 
No. 23963, June 19,  1861.—  Ed. 
4* 

=====第50页=====
24 Karl Marx 
Lord Montagu's speech appeared unmutilated in The Times's 
columns. When, on the following morning, the mistake was 
discovered, a leader was prepared telling John Bull that the 
count-out was an ingenious institution for suppressing bores, that 
Lord Montagu was a regular bore, and that the business of the 
nation could not be carried on if Parliamentary bores were not 
disposed of in the most unceremonious way. a Again Palmerston 
stood on his trial last session, when Mr. Hennessy moved for a 
production of the Foreign office dispatches during the Polish 
revolution of 183l.b Again The Times recurred, as in the case of 
Mr. Dunlop's motion, to the simple process of suppression. Its 
report of Mr. Hennessy's speech is quite an edition in usum 
delphini?5 If one considers how much painstaking it must cause to 
run through the immense Parliamentary reports the same night 
they are forwarded to the newspaper office from the House of 
Commons, and in the same night mutilate, alter, falsify them so as 
not to tell against Palmerston's political purity, one must concede 
that whatever emoluments and advantages The Times may reap 
from its subserviency to the noble Viscount, its task is no pleasant 
one. 
If, then, The Times is able by misstatement and suppression thus 
to falsify public opinion in regard to events that happened but 
yesterday in the British House of Commons, its power of 
misstatement and suppression in regard to events occurring on a 
distant soil, as in the case of the American war, must, of course, be 
unbounded. If in treating of American affairs it has strained all its 
forces to exasperate the mutual feelings of the British and 
Americans, it did not do so from any sympathy with the British 
Cotton Lords nor out of regard for any real or supposed English 
interest. It simply executed the orders of its master. From the 
altered tone of The London Times during the past week, we may, 
therefore, infer that Lord Palmerston is about to recede from the 
extremely hostile attitude he had assumed till now against the 
United States. In one of its to-day leaders, The Times, which for 
months had exalted the aggressive powers of the Secessionists, and 
expatiated upon the inability of the United States to cope with 
them, feels quite sure of the military superiority of the North.c 
That this change of tone is dictated by the master, becomes quite 
a "We are at last enjoying...", The Times, No. 23963, June 19,  1861.—  Ed. 
b J. P. Hennessy's speech in the House of Commons on July 2, 1861, The Times, 
No. 23975, July 3,  1861.—  Ed. 
c "The time is now approaching...", The Times, No. 24056, October 5,  1861.— 
Ed. 

=====第51页=====
The London Times and Lord Palmerston 25 
evident from the circumstance that other influential papers, 
known to be connected with Palmerston, have simultaneously 
veered round. One of them, The Economist, gives rather a broad 
hint to the public-opinion-mongers that the time has come for 
"carefully watching" their pretended "feelings toward the United 
States."3 The passage in The Economist which I allude to, and 
which I think worth quoting as a proof of the new orders received 
by Palmerston's pressmen, runs thus: 
"On one point we frankly avow that the Northerners have a right to complain, 
and on one point also we are bound to be more upon our guard than perhaps we 
have uniformly been. Our leading journals have been too ready to quote and 
resent as embodying the sentiments and representing the position of the United 
States, newspapers notorious at all times for their disreputable character and feeble 
influence, and now more than suspected of being Secessionists at heart, of sailing 
under false colors, and professing extreme Northern opinions while writing in the 
interests and probably the pay of the South. Few Englishmen can, for example, 
with any decent fairness, pretend to regard The N. Y. Herald as representing 
either the character or views of the Northern section of the Republic. Again: we 
ought to be very careful lest our just criticism of the Unionists should degenerate 
by insensible gradation into approval and defense of the Secessionists. The 
tendency in all ordinary minds to partisanship is very strong. [...] Now, however 
warmly we may resent much of the conduct and the language of the North, [...] we 
must never forget that the Secession of the South was forced on with designs and 
inaugurated with proceedings which have our heartiest and most rooted 
disapprobation. We, of course, must condemn the protective tariff of the Union as 
an oppressive and benighted folly. [...] Of course, we reciprocate the wish of the 
South for low duties and unfettered trade. Of course, we are anxious that the 
prosperity of States which produce so much raw material and want so many 
manufactured goods should suffer no interruption or reverse. [...] But, at the same 
time,  it is impossible for us to lose sight of the indisputable fact that the real aim 
and ultimate motive of secession was not to defend their right to hold slaves in 
their own territory (which the Northerners were just as ready to concede as they to 
claim),  but to extend Slavery over a vast, undefined district, hitherto free from that 
curse, but into which the planters fancied they might hereafter wish to spread. This 
object we have always regarded as unwise, unrighteous and abhorrent. The state of 
society introduced in the Southern States by the institution of domestic servitude 
appears to English minds more and more detestable and deplorable the more they 
know of it. And the Southerners should be made aware that no pecuniary or 
commercial advantage which this country might be supposed to derive from the 
extended cultivation of the virgin soils of the planting States, and the new 
Territories which they claim, will ever in the slightest degree modify our views on 
these points, or interfere with the expression of those views, or warp or hamper 
our action whenever action shall become obligatory or fitting. [...]b It is believed 
that they (the Secessionists) still entertain the extraordinary notion that by starving 
France and England—by the loss and suffering anticipated as the consequences of 
a "English Feeling towards America", The Economist, No. 944, September 28, 
1861.—  Ed. 
b Thus far from the article. "English Feeling towards America.".— Ed. 

=====第52页=====
26 Karl Marx 
an entire privation of the American supply—they will compel those Governments 
to interfere on their  behalf,  and force the United States to abandon the blockade.... 
There is not the remotest chance that either Power would feel justified for a 
moment in projecting such an act of decided and unwarrantable hostility against 
the United States.... We are less dependent on the South than the South is upon us, 
as they will ere long begin to discover. [...] a We, therefore, pray them to believe 
that Slavery, so long as it exists, must create more or less of a moral barrier 
between us, and that even tacit approval is as far from our thoughts as the 
impertinence of an open interference: that Lancashire is not England; and, for the 
honor and spirit of our manufacturing population be it said also, that even if it 
were, Cotton would not be King."h 
All I intended to show for the present was that Palmerston, and 
consequently the London press, working to his orders, is 
abandoning his hostile attitude against the United States. The 
causes that have led to this revirement? as the French call it, I shall 
try to explain in a subsequent letter. Before concluding, I may still 
add that Mr. Forster, M.P. for Bradford, delivered last Tuesday, 0 in 
the theater of Bradford Mechanics' Institute,36 a lecture "On the 
Civil War in America," in which he traced the true origin and 
character of that war, and victoriously refuted the misstatements of 
the Palmerstonian press.e 
Written on October 5, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6411, October 21, 1861 
a "The Last Movements of the Northern and the Southern Confederation", The 
Economist, No. 943, September 21, 1861.—Ed. 
b "English Feeling towards America".— Ed. 
c Radical change.— Ed. 
d October 1,  1861.—  Ed. 
e W. E. Forster's lecture "On the Civil War in America" was reported in The Times, 
No. 24054, October 3,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第53页=====
27 
Karl Marx 
THE LONDON TIMES ON THE ORLEANS PRINCES 
IN AMERICA 
London, Oct. 12, 1861 
On the occasion of the King of Prussia's3 visit at Compiegne,37 
The London Times published some racy articles, giving great 
offense on the other side of the Channel.b  The Pays, Journal de 
l'Empire, in its turn, characterized The Times writers as people 
whose heads were poisoned by gin, and whose pens were dipped 
into mud. c Such occasional exchanges of invective are only 
intended to mislead public opinion as to the intimate relations 
connecting Printing-House Square to the Tuileries. 38 There exists 
beyond the French frontiers no greater sycophant of the Man of 
December d than The London Times, and its services are the more 
invaluable, the more that paper now and then assumes the tone 
and the air of a Cato censor toward its Caesar. The Times had for 
months heaped insult upon Prussia. Improving the miserable 
Macdonald affair,39 it had told Prussia that England would feel 
glad to see a transfer of the Rhenish Provinces from the barbarous 
sway of the Hohenzollern to the enlightened despotism of a 
Bonaparte.e It had not only exasperated the Prussian dynasty, but 
the Prussian people. It had written down the idea of an 
Anglo-Prussian alliance in case of a Prussian conflict with France. 
Jjt had strained all its powers to convince Prussia that she had 
a William I.— Ed. 
b Marx refers to the following leading articles: "The popularity of a 
Government...", The Times, No. 24057, October 7, 1861; "The King of Prussia is 
welcomed to Compiegne...", The Times, No. 24058, October 8, 1861; "It is, perhaps, a 
mistake to attribute...", The Times, No. 24059, October 9,  1861.—  Ed. 
c "Paris, Thursday, Oct. 10, 7 A. M.", The Times, No.  24061,  October 11, 
1861.—  Ed. 
d Napoleon III.— Ed. 
e "We trust we have now heard...", The Times, No. 23928, May 9, 1861, leading 
article.— Ed. 

=====第54页=====
28 Karl Marx 
nothing to hope from England, and that the, next best thing she 
could do would be to come to some understanding with France. 3 
When at last the weak and trimming monarch of Prussia resolved 
upon the visit at Compiegne, The Times could proudly exclaim: 
"quorum magna pars fui; " b but now the time had also arrived for 
obliterating from the memory of the British the fact that The 
Times had been the pathfinder of the Prussian monarch. Hence 
the roar of its theatrical thunders. Hence the counter roars of the 
Pays, Journal de l'Empire. 
The Times had now recovered its position of the deadly 
antagonist of Bonapartism, and, therefore, the power of lending 
its aid to the Man of December. An occasion soon offered. Louis 
Bonaparte is, of course, most touchy whenever the renown of rival 
pretenders to the French crown is concerned. He had covered 
himself with ridicule in the affair of the Duke d'Aumale's 
pamphlet40  against Pion Plon, c and, by his proceedings, had done 
more in furtherance of the Orleanist cause than all the Orleanist 
partisans combined. Again, in these latter days, the French people 
were called upon to draw a parallel between Pion Pion and the 
Orleans princes. d When Pion Pion set out for America, there were 
caricatures circulated in the Faubourg St. Antoine representing 
him as a fat man in search of a crown, but professing at the same 
time to be a most inoffensive traveler, with a peculiar aversion to 
the smell of powder. While Pion Pion is returning to France with 
no more laurels than he gathered in the Crimea and in Italy, the 
Princes of Orleans cross the Atlantic to take service in the ranks of 
the National army. Hence a great stir in the Bonapàrtist camp. It 
would not do to give vent to Bonapartist anger through the venal 
press of Paris. The Imperialist fears would thus only be betrayed, 
the pamphlet scandal renewed, and odious comparisons provoked 
between exiled Princes who fight under the republican banner 
against the enslavers of working millions, with another exiled 
Prince, who had himself sworn in as an English special constable 
to share in the glory of putting down an English workingmen's 
movement. 41 
a "The tone in which the outrage on Captain Macdonald...", The Times, 
No. 23926, May 7, 1861, leading article; "We trust we have now heard...", The 
Times, No. 23928, May 9, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 
b "Much of the credit for this belongs to me", Virgil,  Aeneid,  II, 6.— Ed. 
c Joseph Charles Paul Bonaparte, Prince Napoléon. — Ed. 
d François Ferdinand Philippe Louis Marie d'Orléans, Prince de Joinville; 
Robert Philippe Louis Eugène Ferdinand d'Orléans, duc de Chartres; Louis Philippe 
Albert d'Orléans, comte de Paris. — Ed. 

=====第55页=====
The London Times on the Orleans Princes in America 29 
Who should extricate the Man of December out of this 
dilemma? Who but The London Times'? If the same London Times, 
which, on the 6th, 7th, 8th, and 9th of October, 1861, had roused the 
furies of the Pays, Journal de l'Empire, by its rather cynical strictures 
on the visit at Compiegne—if that very same paper should come 
out on the 12th of October, with a merciless onslaught on the 
Orleans Princes, because of their enlistment in the ranks of the 
National Army of the United States, 3 would Louis Bonaparte not 
have proved his case against the Orleans Princes? Would The 
Times article not be done into French, commented upon by the 
Paris papers, sent by the Préfet de Police to all the journals of all 
the departments, and circulated throughout the whole of France, 
as the impartial sentence passed by The London Times, the personal 
foe of Louis Bonaparte, upon the last proceedings of the Orleans 
Princes? Consequently, The Times of to-day has come out with a 
most scurrilous onslaught on these princes. 
Louis Bonaparte is, of course, too much of a business man to 
share the judicial blindness in regard to the American war of the 
official public opinion-mongers. He knows that the true people of 
England, of France, of Germany, of Europe, consider the cause of 
the United States as their own cause, as the cause of liberty, and 
that, despite all paid sophistry, they consider the soil of the United 
States as the free soil of the landless millions of Europe, as their 
land of promise, now to be defended sword in hand, from the 
sordid grasp of the slaveholder. Louis Napoleon knows, 
moreover, that in France the masses connect the fight for the 
maintenance of the Union with the fight of their forefathers for 
the foundation of American independence, and that with them 
every Frenchman drawing his sword for the National Government 
appears only to execute the bequest of Lafayette.42  Bonaparte, 
therefore, knows that if anything be able to win the Orleans 
Princes good opinions from the French people, it will be their 
enlistment in the ranks of the national army of the United States. 
He shudders at this very notion, and consequendy The London 
Times, his censorious sycophant, tells to-day the Orleans princes 
that "they will derive no increase of popularity with the French 
nation from stooping to serve on this ignoble field of action." Louis 
Napoleon knows that all the wars waged in Europe between hostile 
nations since his coup d'état, have been mock wars, groundless, 
wanton, and carried on on false pretenses. The Russian war, and 
a "Perhaps there is no position which an erring mortal...", The Times, No. 24062, 
October 12, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 

=====第56页=====
30 Karl Marx 
the Italian war, not to speak of the piratical expeditions against 
China, Cochin-China,43  and so forth, never enlisted the sympathies 
of the French people, instinctively aware that both wars were 
carried on only with the view to strengthening the chains forged 
by the coup d'état. The first grand war of contemporaneous history 
is the American war. 
The peoples of Europe know that the Southern slaveocracy 
commenced that war with the declaration that the continuance of 
slaveocracy was no longer compatible with the continuance of the 
Union. Consequently, the people of Europe know that a fight for 
the continuance of the Union is a fight against the continuance of 
the slaveocracy—that in this contest the highest form of popular 
self-government till now realized is giving battle to the meanest 
and most shameless form of man's enslaving recorded in the 
annals of history. 
Louis Bonaparte feels, of course, extremely sorry that the 
Orleans Princes should embark in just such a war, so distin­
guished, by the vastness of its dimensions and the grandeur of 
its ends, from the groundless, wanton and diminutive wars Europe 
has passed through since 1849. Consequently, The London Times 
must needs declare: 
"To overlook the difference between a war waged by hostile nations, and this 
most groundless and wanton civil conflict of which history gives us any account, is a 
species of offense against public morals."3 
The Times is, of course, bound to wind up its onslaught on the 
Orleans Princes because of their "stooping to serve on such an 
ignoble field of action." With a deep bow before the victor of 
Sevastopol and Solferino, "it is unwise," says The London Times, 
"to challenge a comparison between such actions as Springfield and 
Manassas,44 and the exploits of Sevastopol and Solferino." 
The next mail will testify to the premeditated use made of The 
Times's article by the Imperialist organs. A friend in times of need 
is proverbially worth a thousand friends in times of prosperity, 
and the secret ally of The London Times is just now very badly off. 
A dearth of cotton, backed by a dearth of grain; a commercial 
crisis coupled with an agricultural distress, and both of them 
combined with a reduction of Custom revenues and a monetary 
embarrassment compelling the Bank of France to screw its rate of 
discount to six per cent, to enter into transactions with Rothschilds 
and Baring for a loan of two millions sterling on the London 
a "Perhaps there is no position..."—Ed. 

=====第57页=====
The London Times on the Orleans Princes in America 31 
market, to pawn abroad French Government stock, and with all 
that to show but a reserve of 12,000,000 against liabilities 
amounting to more than 40,000,000. Such a state of economical 
affairs prepares just the situation for rival pretenders to stake 
double. Already there have been bread-riots in the Faubourg St. 
t Antoine, and this of all times is therefore the most inappropriate 
time for allowing Orleans Princes to catch popularity. Hence the 
fierce forward rush of The London Times. 
Written on October 12, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6426, November 7, 1861 

=====第58页=====
BÜiiMJI  -Pie ?hr#. ®S 
. Karl Marx 
THE NORTH AMERICAN CIVIL WAR45 
London, October 20, 1861 
For months the leading weekly and daily papers of the London 
press have been reiterating the same litany on the American Civil 
War. While they insult the free states of the North, they anxiously 
defend themselves against the suspicion of sympathising with the 
slave states of the South. In fact, they continually write two articles: 
one article, in which they attack the North, and another article, in 
which they excuse their attacks on the North. Qui s'excuse s'accuse. 
In essence the extenuating arguments read: The war between 
the North and South is a tariff war. The war is, further, not for 
any principle, does not touch the question of slavery and in fact 
turns on Northern lust for sovereignty. Finally, even if justice is 
on the side of the North, does it not remain a vain endeavour to 
want to subjugate eight million Anglo-Saxons by force! Would not 
separation of the South release the North from all connection 
with Negro slavery and ensure for it, with its twenty million 
inhabitants and its vast territory, a higher, hitherto scarcely 
dreamt-of,  development? Accordingly, must not the North wel­
come secession as a happy event, instead of wanting to overrule it 
by a bloody and futile civil war? 
Point by point we will probe the plea of the English press. 
The war between North and South—so runs the first excuse— 
is a mere tariff war, a war between a protectionist system and a 
free trade system, and Britain naturally stands on the side of free 
trade. Shall the slave-owner enjoy the fruits of slave labour in 
their entirety or shall he be cheated of a portion of these by the 
protectionists of the North? That is the question which is at issue 
in this war. It was reserved for The Times to make this brilliant 

=====第59页=====
The North American Civil War 33 
discovery. The Economist, The Examiner, The Saturday Review and 
tutti quanti* expounded the theme further. 0 It is characteristic of 
this discovery that it was made, not in Charleston, but in London. 
Naturally, in America everyone knew that from 1846 to 1861 a 
free trade system prevailed, and that Representative Morrill 
carried his protectionist tariff through Congress only in  1861,46 
after the rebellion had already broken out. Secession, therefore, 
did not take place because the Morrill tariff had gone through 
Congress, but, at most, the Morrill tariff went through Congress 
because secession had taken place. When South Carolina had its 
first attack of secession in  1831,47  the protectionist tariff of 1828 
served it, to be sure, as a pretext, but only as a pretext, as is 
known from a statement of General Jackson.0 This time, however, 
the old pretext has in fact not been repeated. In the Secession 
Congress at Montgomery48 all reference to the tariff question was 
avoided, because the cultivation of sugar in Louisiana, one of the 
most influential Southern states, depends entirely on protection. 
But, the London press pleads further, the war of the United 
States is nothing but a war for the forcible maintenance of the 
Union. The Yankees cannot make up their minds to strike fifteen 
stars from their standard.49 They want to cut a colossal figure on 
the world stage. Yes, it would be different if the war was waged 
for the abolition of slavery! The question of slavery, however, as 
The Saturday Review categorically declares among other things, has 
absolutely nothing to do with this war. 
It is above all to be remembered that the war did not originate 
with the North, but with the South. The North finds itself on the 
defensive. For months it had quietly looked on while the 
secessionists appropriated the Union's forts, arsenals, shipyards, 
customs houses, pay offices, ships and supplies of arms, insulted 
its flag and took prisoner bodies of its troops. Finally the 
secessionists resolved to force the Union government out of its 
passive attitude by a blatant act of war, and solely for this reason 
proceeded to the bombardment of Fort Sumter near Charleston. 
On April 11 (1861) their General Beauregard had learnt in a 
a All such.— Ed. 
b Marx means the articles "Few have pretended to give...", The Times, 
No. 24033, September 9, 1861, leading article; "American Complaints against 
England", The Economist, No. 942, September 14, 1861; "Mrs. Stowe on the 
American War", The Examiner, No. 2798, September 14, 1861; "Mrs. Beecher 
Stowe's Wounded Feelings", The Saturday Review, No. 307, September 14, 
1861.—  Ed. 
c President Jackson's proclamation against the Nullification Ordinance of South 
Carolina, December 11, 1832 (see Note 24).— Ed. 

=====第60页=====
34 Karl Marx 
meeting with Major Anderson, the commander of Fort Sumter, 
that the fort was only supplied with provisions for three days more 
and accordingly must be peacefully surrendered after this period. 
In order to forestall this peaceful surrender, the secessionists 
opened the bombardment early on the following morning (April 
12), which brought about the fall of the fort in a few hours. News 
of this had hardly been telegraphed to Montgomery, the seat of 
the Secession Congress, when War Minister Walker publicly 
declared in the name of the new Confederacy: "No man can say 
where the war opened today will end." 3 At the same time he 
prophesied "that before the first of May the flag of the Southern 
Confederacy will wave from the dome of the old Capitol in 
Washington and within a short time perhaps also from the 
Faneuil Hall in Boston".50 Only now ensued the proclamation in 
which Lincoln called for 75,000 men to defend the Union.b The 
bombardment of Fort Sumter cut off the only possible constitu­
tional way out, namely the convocation of a general convention of 
the American people, as Lincoln had proposed in his inaugural 
address.c For Lincoln there now remained only the choice of 
fleeing from Washington, evacuating Maryland and Delaware and 
surrendering Kentucky, Missouri and Virginia, or of answering 
war with war. 
The question of the principle of the American Civil War is 
answered by the battle slogan with which the South broke the 
peace. Stephens, the Vice-President of the Southern Confederacy, 
declared in the Secession Congress that what essentially distin­
guished the Constitution newly hatched at Montgomery from the 
Constitution of the Washingtons and Jeffersons was that now for 
the first time slavery was recognised as an institution good in  itself, 
and as the foundation of the whole state edifice, whereas the 
revolutionary fathers, men steeped in the prejudices of the 
eighteenth century, had treated slavery as an evil imported from 
England and to be eliminated in the course of time. d Another 
matador of the South, Mr. Spratt, cried out: "For us it is a 
question of founding a great slave republic."6 If, therefore, it was 
a Quoted in the report "How the War News Is Received", New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6231, April 15,  1861.—  Ed. 
b A. Lincoln, A Proclamation [April 15, 1861], New-York Daily Tribune, same 
issue.— Ed. 
c A. Lincoln, "The Inaugural Address" [March 4, 1861], New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6196, March 5,  1861.—  Ed. 
d Stephens's speech in Savannah on March 21,  1861.—  Ed. 
e Marx gives the English words "a great slave republic" in brackets after the 
German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
The North American Civil War 35 
indeed only in defence of the Union that the North drew the 
sword, had not the South already declared that the continuance of 
slavery was no longer compatible with the continuance of the 
Union? 
Just as the bombardment of Fort Sumter gave the signal for the 
opening of the war, the election victory of the Republican Party of 
the North, the election of Lincoln as President, gave the signal for 
secession. On November 6, 1860, Lincoln was elected. On 
November 8, 1860, a message telegraphed from South Carolina 
said: "Secession is regarded here as a settled thing"3; on Novem­
ber 10 the legislature of Georgia occupied itself with secession 
plans,  and on November 13 a special session of the legislature 
of Mississippi was convened to consider secession. But Lincoln's 
election was itself only the result of a split in the Democratic camp. 
During the election struggle the Democrats of the North 
concentrated their votes on Douglas, the Democrats of the South 
concentrated their votes on Breckinridge, and to this splitting of 
the Democratic votes the Republican Party owed its victory. 
Whence came, on the one hand, the preponderance of the 
Republican Party in the North? Whence, on the other, the disunion 
within the Democratic Party, whose members, North and South, 
had operated in conjunction for more than half a century? 
Under the presidency of Buchanan the sway that the South had 
gradually usurped over the Union through its alliance with the 
Northern Democrats attained its zenith. The last Continental 
Congress of 1787 and the first Constitutional Congress of 1789-90 
had legally excluded slavery from all Territories of the republic 
northwest of the Ohio.b (Territories, as is known, is the name 
given to the colonies lying within the United States itself which 
have not yet attained the level of population constitutionally 
prescribed for the formation of autonomous states.51) The 
so-called Missouri Compromise (1820), in consequence of which 
Missouri became one of the States of the Union as a slave state, 
excluded slavery from every remaining Territory north of 36°30' 
latitude and west of the Missouri.52 By this compromise the area of 
slavery was advanced several degrees of longitude, whilst, on the 
other hand, a geographical boundary-line to its future spread 
a Quoted in the report "Columbia, S. C. Thursday, Nov. 8, 1860", New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6098, November 9, I860.— Ed. 
b An Ordinance for the government of the territory of the United States, north-west of  the 
River Ohio, adopted by the 1787 Congress, and An Act  to provide for  the government of  the 
territory north-west of the River Ohio, adopted by the 1789-90 Congress.— Ed. 

=====第62页=====
36 Karl Marx 
seemed quite definitely drawn. This geographical barrier, in its 
turn, was thrown down in 1854 by the so-called Kansas-Nebraska 
Bill, the initiator of which was St[ephen] A. Douglas, then leader 
of the Northern Democrats. The Bill, which passed both Houses 
of Congress, repealed the Missouri Compromise, placed slavery 
and freedom on the same footing, commanded the Union 
government to treat them both with equal indifference and left it 
to the sovereignty of the people, that is, the majority of the 
settlers, to decide whether or not slavery was to be introduced in a 
Territory. Thus, for the first time in the history of the United 
States, every geographical and legal limit to the extension of 
slavery in the Territories was removed. Under this new legislation 
the hitherto free Territory of New Mexico, a Territory five times 
as large as the State of New York, was transformed into a slave 
Territory, and the area3 of slavery was extended from the border 
of the Mexican Republic to 38° north latitude. In 1859 New 
Mexico received a slave code that vies with the statute-books of 
Texas and Alabama in barbarity. Nevertheless, as the census of 
1860 proves,b among some 100,000 inhabitants New Mexico 
does not count even half a hundred slaves. It had therefore 
sufficed for the South to send some adventurers with a few slaves 
over the border, and then with the help of the central government 
in Washington and of its officials and contractors in New Mexico 
to drum together a sham popular representation to impose slavery 
and with it the rule of the slaveholders on the Territory. 
However, this convenient method did not prove applicable in 
other Territories. The South accordingly went a step further and 
appealed from Congress to the Supreme Court of the United 
States. This Court, which numbers nine judges, five of whom 
belong to the South, had long been the most willing tool of the 
slaveholders. It decided in 1857, in the notorious Dred Scott 
case, 53 that every American citizen possesses the right to take with 
him into any Territory any property recognised by the Constitu­
tion.0 The Constitution, it maintained, recognises slaves as 
property and obliges the Union government to protect this 
property. Consequently, on the basis of the Constitution, slaves 
could be forced to labour in the Territories by their owners, and 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Its data were cited in a report date-lined "New York, March 26", The Times, 
No. 23903, April 10,  1861.—  Ed. 
c The ruling of the US Supreme Court on the Dred Scott case was quoted in 
the article "The Dred Scott Case Decided", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4955, 
March 7, 1857.— Ed. 

=====第63页=====
The North American Civil War 37 
so every individual slaveholder was entitled to introduce slavery 
into hitherto free Territories against the will of the majority of the 
settlers. The right to exclude slavery was taken from the 
Territorial legislatures and the duty to protect pioneers of the 
slave system was imposed on Congress and the Union govern­
ment. 
If the Missouri Compromise of 1820 had extended the 
geographical boundary-line of slavery in the Territories, if the 
Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 1854 had erased every geographical 
boundary-line and set up a political barrier instead, the will of the 
majority of the settlers, now the Supreme Court of the United 
States, by its decision of 1857, tore down even this political barrier 
and transformed all the Territories of the republic, present and 
future, from nurseries of free states into nurseries of slavery. 
At the same time, under Buchanan's government the severer 
law on the surrendering of fugitive slaves enacted in 1850 was 
ruthlessly carried out in the states of the North.54 To play the part 
of slave-catchers for the Southern slaveholders appeared to be the 
constitutional calling of the North. On the other hand, in order to 
hinder as far as possible the colonisation of the Territories by free 
settlers, the slaveholders' party frustrated all the so-called free-soil3 
measures, i. e., measures which were to secure for the settlers a 
definite amount of uncultivated state land free of charge.55 
In the foreign, as in the domestic, policy of the United States, 
the interests of the slaveholders served as the guiding star: 
Buchanan had in fact obtained the office of President through the 
issue of the Ostend Manifesto, in which the acquisition of Cuba, 
whether by purchase or by force of arms, was proclaimed as the 
great task of national policy.56 Under his government northern 
Mexico was already divided among American land speculators, 
who impatiently awaited the signal to fall on Chihuahua, Coahuila 
and Sonora.57 The unceasing piratical expeditions of the filibusters 
against the states of Central America were directed no less from 
the White House at Washington. In the closest connection with 
this foreign policy, whose manifest purpose was conquest of new 
territory for the spread of slavery and of the slaveholders' rule, 
stood the reopening of the slave trade,58 secretly supported by the 
Union government. St[ephen] A. Douglas himself declared in the 
American Senate on August 20, 1859: During the last year more 
Negroes have been imported from Africa than ever before in any 
single year, even at the time when the slave trade was still legal. 
a Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
5—1134 

=====第64页=====
38 Karl Marx 
The number of slaves imported in the last year totalled fifteen 
thousand.3 
Armed spreading of slavery abroad was the avowed aim of 
national policy; the Union had in fact become the slave of the 
300,000 slaveholders who held sway over the South. A series of 
compromises, which the South owed to its alliance with the 
Northern Democrats, had led to this result. On this alliance all the 
attempts, periodically repeated since 1817, to resist the ever 
increasing encroachments of the slaveholders had hitherto come to 
grief.  At length there came a turning point. 
For hardly had the Kansas-Nebraska Bill gone through, which 
wiped out the geographical boundary-line of slavery and made its 
introduction into new Territories subject to the will of the 
majority of the settlers, when armed emissaries of the slavehold­
ers, border rabble from Missouri and Arkansas, with bowie-knife 
in one hand and revolver in the other, fell upon Kansas and 
sought by the most unheard-of atrocities to dislodge its settlers 
from the Territory colonised by them. These raids were supported 
by the central government in Washington. Hence a tremendous 
reaction. Throughout the North, but particularly in the North­
west,59 a relief organisation was formed to support Kansas with 
men, arms and money.60 Out of this relief organisation arose the 
Republican Party, which therefore owes its origin to the struggle for 
Kansas. After the attempt to transform Kansas into a slave 
Territory by force of arms had failed, the South sought to achieve 
the same result by political intrigues. Buchanan's government, in 
particular, exerted its utmost efforts to have Kansas included in 
the States of the Union as a slave state with a slave constitution 
imposed on it.b Hence renewed struggle, this time mainly 
conducted in Congress at Washington. Even St[ephen] A. Douglas, 
the chief of the Northern Democrats, now (1857-58) entered the 
lists against the government and his allies of the South, because 
imposition of a slave constitution could have been contrary to the 
principle of sovereignty of the settlers passed in the Nebraska Bill 
of 1854. Douglas, Senator for Illinois, a Northwestern state, would 
naturally have lost all his influence if he had wanted to concede to 
the South the right to steal by force of arms or through acts of 
Congress Territories colonised by the North. As the struggle for 
a Douglas's statement, made at a reception in Washington on August 19, 1859, 
was reported in the article "Douglas Sure of the South", New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 5720, August 23, 1859.— Ed. 
b Its basic provisions were set forth in the article "The Great Swindle", 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5171, November 16, 1857.— Ed. 

=====第65页=====
The North American Civil War 39 
Kansas, therefore, called the Republican Party into being, it at the 
same time occasioned the first split within the Democratic Party  itself. 
The Republican Party put forward its first platform for the 
presidential election in 1856. Although its candidate, John 
Fremont, was not victorious, the huge number of votes cast for 
him at any rate proved the rapid growth of the Party, particularly 
in the Northwest. At their second National Convention for the 
presidential elections (May 17, 1860), the Republicans again put 
forward their platform of 1856, only enriched by some additions.3 
Its principal contents were the following: Not a foot of fresh 
territory is further conceded to slavery. The filibustering policy 
abroad must cease. The reopening of the slave trade is stigmat­
ised. Finally, free-soilb laws are to be enacted for the furtherance 
of free colonisation. 
The vitally important point in this platform was that not a foot 
of fresh terrain was conceded to slavery; rather it was to remain 
once and for all confined within the boundaries of the states where it 
already legally existed. Slavery was thus to be formally interned; but 
continual expansion of territory and continual spread of 
slavery beyond its old limits is a law of life for the slave states of the 
Union. 
The cultivation of the southern export articles, cotton, tobacco, 
sugar, etc., carried on by slaves, is only remunerative as long as it 
is conducted with large gangs of slaves, on a mass scale and on 
wide expanses of a naturally fertile soil, which requires only 
simple labour. Intensive cultivation, which depends less on fertility 
of the soil than on investment of capital, intelligence and energy 
of labour, is contrary to the nature of slavery. Hence the rapid 
transformation of states like Maryland and Virginia, which 
formerly employed slaves in the production of export articles, 
into states which raise slaves to export them into the deep South. 
Even in South Carolina, where the slaves form four-sevenths of 
the population, the cultivation of cotton has been almost complete­
ly stationary for years due to the exhaustion of the soil. Indeed, by 
force of circumstances South Carolina has already been trans­
formed in part into a slave-raising state, since it already sells slaves 
to the sum of four million dollars yearly to the states of the 
extreme South and Southwest. As soon as this point is reached, 
the acquisition of new Territories becomes necessary, so that one 
section of the slaveholders with their slaves may occupy new fertile 
a Both platforms were cited in the article "The Platform", New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5950, May 19, I860.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
5* 

=====第66页=====
40 Karl Marx 
lands and that a new market for slave-raising, therefore for the 
sale of slaves, may be created for the remaining section. It is, for 
example, indubitable that without the acquisition of Louisiana, 
Missouri and Arkansas by the United States, slavery in Virginia 
and Maryland would have become extinct long ago. In the 
Secessionist Congress at Montgomery, Senator Toombs, one of the 
spokesmen of the South, strikingly formulated the economic law 
that commands the constant expansion of the territory of slavery. 
"In fifteen years," said he, "without a great increase in slave territory, either 
the slaves must be permitted to flee from the whites, or the whites must flee from 
the slaves." 
As is known, the representation of the individual states in the 
Congress House of Representatives depends on the size of their 
respective populations. As the populations of the free states grow 
far more quickly than those of the slave states, the number of 
Northern Representatives was bound to outstrip that of the 
Southern very rapidly. The real seat of the political power of the 
South is accordingly transferred more and more to the American 
Senate, where every state, whether its population is great or small, 
is represented by two Senators. In order to assert its influence in 
the Senate and, through the Senate, its hegemony over the United 
States, the South therefore required a continual formation of new 
slave states. This, however, was only possible through conquest of 
foreign lands, as in the case of Texas, or through the transforma­
tion of the Territories belonging to the United States first into 
slave Territories and later into slave states, as in the case of 
Missouri, Arkansas, etc. John Calhoun, whom the slaveholders 
admire as their statesman par excellence, stated as early as 
February 19, 1847, in the Senate, that the Senate alone placed a 
balance of power in the hands of the South, that extension of the 
slave territory was necessary to preserve this equilibrium between 
South and North in the Senate, and that the attempts of the South 
at the creation of new slave states by force were accordingly 
justified. 
Finally, the number of actual slaveholders in the South of the 
Union does not amount to more than 300,000, a narrow oligarchy 
that is confronted with many millions of so-called poor whites/ 
whose numbers have been constantly growing through concentra­
tion of landed property and whose condition is only to be 
compared with that of the Roman plebeians in the period of 
a Marx gives the English words "poor whites" in parenthesis after their German 
equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第67页=====
The North American Civil War 41 
Rome's extreme decline. Only by acquisition and the prospect of 
acquisition of new Territories, as well as by filibustering expedi­
tions,  is it possible to square the interests of these "poor whites" 
with those of the slaveholders, to give their restless thirst for 
action a harmless direction and to tame them with the prospect of 
one day becoming slaveholders themselves. 
A strict confinement of slavery within its old terrain, therefore, 
was bound according to economic law to lead to its gradual 
extinction, in the political sphere to annihilate the hegemony that 
the slave states exercised through the Senate, and finally to expose 
the slaveholding oligarchy within its own states to threatening 
perils from the "poor whites". In accordance with the principle 
that any further extension of slave Territories was to be prohibited 
by law, the Republicans therefore attacked the rule of the 
slaveholders at its root. The Republican election victory was 
accordingly bound to lead to open struggle between North and 
South. And this election victory, as already mentioned, was itself 
conditioned by the split in the Democratic camp. 
The Kansas struggle had already caused a split between the 
slaveholders' party and the Democrats of the North allied to it. 
With the presidential election of 1860, the same strife now broke 
out again in a more general form. The Democrats of the North, 
with Douglas as their candidate, made the introduction of slavery 
into Territories dependent on the will of the majority of the 
settlers. The slaveholders' party, with Breckinridge as their 
candidate, maintained that the Constitution of the United States, 
as the Supreme Court had also declared,3 brought slavery legally 
in its train; in and of itself slavery was already legal in all 
Territories and required no special naturalisation. Whilst, there­
fore,  the Republicans prohibited any extension of slave Ter­
ritories, the Southern party laid claim to all Territories of the 
republic as legally warranted domains. What they had attempted 
by way of example with regard to Kansas, to force slavery on a 
Territory through the central government against the will of the 
settlers themselves, they now set up as law for all the Territories of 
the Union. Such a concession lay beyond the power of the 
Democratic leaders and would only have occasioned the desertion 
of their army to the Republican camp. On the other hand, 
Douglas's "settlers' sovereignty" could not satisfy the slaveholders' 
party. What it wanted to effect had to be effected within the next 
four years under the new President, could only be effected by the 
a In its ruling on the Dred Scott case.— Ed. 

=====第68页=====
42 Karl Marx 
resources of the central government and brooked no further 
delay. It did not escape the slaveholders that a new power had 
arisen, the Northwest, whose population, having almost doubled 
between 1850 and 1860, was already pretty well equal to the white 
population of the slave states—a power that was not inclined 
either by tradition, temperament or mode of life to let itself be 
dragged from compromise to compromise in the manner of the 
old Northeastern states. The Union was still of value to the South 
only so far as it handed over Federal power to it as a means of 
carrying out the slave policy. If not, then it was better to make the 
break now than to look on at the development of the Republican 
Party and the upsurge of the Northwest for another four years 
and begin the struggle under more unfavourable conditions. The 
slaveholders' party therefore played va banque] When the Demo­
crats of the North declined to go on playing the part of the "poor 
whites" of the South, the South secured Lincoln's victory by 
splitting the vote, and then took this victory as a pretext for 
drawing the sword from the scabbard. 
The whole movement was and is based, as one sees, on the slave 
question. Not in the sense of whether the slaves within the existing 
slave states should be emancipated outright or not, but whether 
the 20 million free men of the North should submit any longer to 
an oligarchy of 300,000 slaveholders; whether the vast Territories 
of the republic should be nurseries for free states or for slavery; 
finally, whether the national policy of the Union should take 
armed spreading of slavery in Mexico, Central and South America 
as its device. 
In another article we will probe the assertion of the London 
press that the North must sanction secession as the most 
favourable and only possible solution of the conflict. 
Written on October 20, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 293, 
October 25, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第69页=====
43 
Karl Marx 
THE CIVIL WAR IN THE UNITED STATES61 
"Let him go, he is not worth your anger!"3 Again and again 
English statesmanship cries—recently through the mouth of Lord 
John Russellb—to the North of the United States this advice of 
Leporello to Don Juan's deserted love. If the North lets the South 
go, it then frees itself from any association with slavery, from its 
historical original sin, and creates the basis of a new and higher 
development. 
In reality, if North and South formed two independent 
countries, like, for example, England and Hanover, their separa­
tion would be no more difficult than was the separation of 
England and Hanover.62 "The South", however, is neither a 
territory closely sealed off from the North geographically, nor a 
moral unity. It is not a country at all, but a battle slogan. 
The advice of an amicable separation presupposes that the 
Southern Confederacy, although it assumed the offensive in the 
Civil War, at least wages it for defensive purposes. It is believed 
that the issue for the slaveholders' party is merely one of uniting 
the territories it has hitherto dominated into an independent 
group of states and withdrawing them from the supreme authority 
of the Union. Nothing could be more false. " The South needs its 
entire territory. It will and must have it." With this battle-cry the 
secessionists fell upon Kentucky. By their "entire territory" they 
a From Mozart's opera Don Giovanni.—Ed. 
b Russell's speech in Newcastle on October 14, 1861. Reported in The Times, 
No. 24064, October 15,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第70页=====
44 Karl Marx 
understand in the first place all the so-called border states'"— 
Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, Kentucky, Tennes­
see, Missouri and Arkansas. Besides, they lay claim to the entire 
territory south of the line that runs from the nortwest corner 
of Missouri to the Pacific Ocean. What the slaveholders, therefore, 
call the South, embraces more than three-quarters of the territory 
hitherto comprised by the Union. A large part of the territory 
thus claimed is still in the possession of the Union and would first 
have to be conquered from it. None of the so-called border states, 
however, not even those in the possession of the Confederacy, 
were ever actual slave  states.  Rather, they constitute the area of the 
United States in which the system of slavery and the system of free 
labour exist side by side and contend for mastery, the actual field 
of battle between South and North, between slavery and freedom. 
The war of the Southern Confederacy is, therefore, not a war of 
defence, but a war of conquest, a war of conquest for the spread 
and perpetuation of slavery. 
The chain of mountains that begins in Alabama and stretches 
northwards to the Hudson River—the spinal column, as it were, 
of the United States—cuts the so-called South into three parts. 
The mountainous country formed by the Allegheny Mountains 
with their two parallel ranges, the Cumberland Range to the west 
and the Blue Mountains5 to the east, divides wedge-like the 
lowlands along the western coast of the Atlantic Ocean from the 
lowlands in the southern valleys of the Mississippi. The two 
lowlands separated by the mountainous country, with their vast 
rice swamps and far-flung cotton plantations, are the actual area 
of slavery. The long wedge of mountainous country driven into 
the heart of slavery, with its correspondingly clear atmosphere, an 
invigorating climate and a soil rich in coal, salt, limestone, iron 
ore, gold, in short, every raw material necessary for a many-sided 
industrial development, is already for the most part free country. 
In accordance with its physical constitution, the soil here can only 
be cultivated with success by free small farmers. Here the slave 
system vegetates only sporadically and has never struck root. In 
the larger part of the so-called border states, the dwellers of these 
highlands comprise the core of the free population, which sides 
with the North if only for the sake of self-preservation. 
Let us consider the contested territory in detail. 
a Marx gives the English words "border states" in parenthesis after their 
German equivalent.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English names: "Cumberland Range" and "Blue Moun­
tains".—  Ed. 

=====第71页=====
The Civil War in the United States 45 
Delaware, the most northeastern of the border states, is factually 
and morally in the possession of the Union. All the attempts of the 
secessionists at forming even one faction favourable to them have 
since the beginning of the war suffered shipwreck on the 
unanimity of the population. The slave element of this state has 
long been in process of dying out. From 1850 to 1860 alone the 
number of slaves diminished by  half,  so that with a total 
population of 112,218 Delaware now numbers only 1,798 slaves.3 
Nevertheless, Delaware is demanded by the Southern Confederacy 
and would in fact be militarily untenable for the North as soon as 
the South possessed itself of Maryland. 
In Maryland itself the above-mentioned conflict between high­
lands and lowlands takes place. Out of a total population of 
687,034 there are here 87,188 slaves. That the overwhelming 
majority of the population is on the side of the Union has again 
been strikingly proved by the recent general elections to the 
Congress in Washington. The army of 30,000 Union troops which 
holds Maryland at the moment, is intended not only to serve the 
army on the Potomac as a reserve, but, in particular, also to hold 
in check the rebellious slave-owners in the interior of the country. 
For here we observe a phenomenon similar to what we see in 
other border states where the great mass of the people stands for 
the North and a numerically insignificant slaveholders' party for 
the South. What it lacks in numbers, the slaveholders' party makes 
up in the means of power that many years' possession of all state 
offices, hereditary engagement in political intrigue and concentra­
tion of great wealth in few hands have secured for it. 
Virginia now forms the great cantonment where the main army 
of secession and the main army of the Union confront each other. 
In the northwest highlands of Virginia the number of slaves is 
15,000, whilst the twenty times as large free population consists 
mostly of free farmers. The eastern lowlands of Virginia, on the 
other hand, count well-nigh half a million slaves. Raising Negroes 
and the sale of the Negroes to the Southern states form the 
principal source of income of these lowlands. As soon as the 
ringleaders of the lowlands had carried through the secession 
ordinance by intrigues in the state legislature at Richmondb and 
had in all haste opened the gates of Virginia to the Southern 
army, northwest Virginia seceded from the secession, formed a 
a Here and below Marx cites data of the 1860 US census contained in a report 
datelined "New York, March 26", The Times, No. 23903, April 10,  1861.—  Ed. 
b On April 17,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第72页=====
46 Karl Marx 
new state, and under the banner of the Union now defends its 
territory arms in hand against the Southern invaders. 
Tennessee, with  1,109,847  inhabitants, 275,784 of whom are 
slaves, finds itself in the hands of the Southern Confederacy, 
which has placed the whole state under martial law and under a 
system of proscription which recalls the days of the Roman 
Triumvirates. When in the winter of 1861 the slaveholders 
proposed a general convention of the people which was to vote for 
secession or non-secession, the majority of the people rejected any 
convention, in order to remove any pretext for the secession 
movement. Later, when Tennessee was already militarily overrun 
and subjected to a system of terror by the Southern Confederacy, 
more than a third of the voters at the elections still declared 
themselves for the Union. Here, as in most of the border states, 
the mountainous country, east Tennessee, forms the real centre of 
resistance to the slaveholders' party. On June 17, 1861, a General 
Convention of the people of east Tennessee assembled in 
Greeneville, declared itself for the Union, deputed the former 
governor of the state, Andrew Johnson, one of the most ardent 
Unionists, to the Senate in Washington and published a "declara­
tion of grievances",3 which lays bare all the means of deception, 
intrigue and terror by which Tennessee was "voted out" of the 
Union.b Since then the secessionists have held east Tennessee in 
check by force of arms. 
Similar relationships to those in West Virginia and east 
Tennessee are found in the north of Alabama, in northwest 
Georgia and in the north of North Carolina. 
Further west, in the border state of Missouri, with  1,173,317 
inhabitants and 114,965 slaves—the latter mostly concentrated in 
the northwest of the state—the people's convention of August 
1861 decided for the Union.c Jackson, the governor of the state 
and the tool of the slaveholders' party, rebelled against the 
legislature of Missouri, was outlawed and took the lead of the 
armed hordes that fell upon Missouri from Texas, Arkansas and 
Tennessee, in order to bring it to its knees before the Confederacy 
and sever its bond with the Union by the sword. Next to Virginia, 
Missouri is at the present moment the main theatre of the Civil 
War. 
a Marx uses the English expression and gives the German equivalent.— Ed. 
b The resolutions of the Convention were reported by the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6308, July 4, 1861, in the item "The Knoxville (Tenn.) Whig...".— 
Ed. 
c The convention actually adopted this decision on March 9,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第73页=====
The Civil War in the United States 47 
New Mexico—not a state, but merely a Territory, into which 25 
slaves were imported during Buchanan's presidency in order to 
send a slave constitution after them from Washington—had no 
craving for the South, as even the latter concedes. But the South 
has a craving for New Mexico and accordingly spewed an armed 
gang of adventurers from Texas over the border. New Mexico has 
implored the protection of the Union government against these 
liberators. 
It will have been observed that we lay particular emphasis on 
the numerical proportion of slaves to free men in the individual 
border states. This proportion is in fact decisive. It is the 
thermometer with which the vital fire of the slave system must be 
measured. The soul of the whole secession movement is South 
Carolina. It has 402,541 slaves and 301,271 free men. Mississippi, 
which has given the Southern Confederacy its dictator, Jefferson 
Davis,  comes second. It has 436,696 slaves and 354,699 free men. 
Alabama comes third, with 435,132 slaves and 529,164 free men. 
The last of the contested border states, which we have still to 
mention, is Kentucky. Its recent history is particularly characteristic 
of the policy of the Southern Confederacy. Among its  1,135,713 
inhabitants Kentucky has 225,490 slaves. In three successive 
general elections by the people—in the winter of 1861, when 
elections to a congress of the border states were held; in June 
1861,  when elections to the Congress in Washington took place; 
finally, in August 1861, in elections to the legislature of the State 
of Kentucky—an ever increasing majority decided for the Union. 
On the other hand, Magoffin, the Governor of Kentucky, and all 
the high officials of the state are fanatical supporters of the 
slaveholders' party, as is Breckinridge, Kentucky's representative 
in the Senate in Washington, Vice-President of the United States 
under Buchanan and candidate of the slaveholders' party in the 
presidential elections of 1860. Too weak to win over Kentucky for 
secession, the influence of the slaveholders' party was strong 
enough to make this state amenable to a declaration of neutrality 
on the outbreak of war. The Confederacy recognised the 
neutrality as long as it served its purposes, as long as the 
Confederacy itself was engaged in crushing the resistance in east 
Tennessee. Hardly was this end attained when it knocked at the 
gates of Kentucky with the butt of a gun to the cry of: " The South 
needs its entire territory. It will and must have it!" 
From the southwest and southeast its corps of free-booters 
simultaneously invaded the "neutral" state. Kentucky awoke from 
its dream of neutrality, its legislature openly sided with the Union, 

=====第74页=====
48 Karl Marx 
surrounded the traitorous Governor with a committee of public 
safety, called the people to arms, outlawed Breckinridge and 
ordered the secessionists to evacuate the invaded territory 
immediately. This was the signal for war. An army of the 
Southern Confederacy is moving on Louisville, while volunteers 
from Illinois, Indiana and Ohio flock hither to save Kentucky 
from the armed missionaries of slavery. 
The attempts of the Confederacy to annex Missouri and 
Kentucky, for example, against the will of these states, prove the 
hollowness of the pretext that it is fighting for the rights of the 
individual states against the encroachments of the Union. On the 
individual states that it considers to belong to the "South" it 
confers, to be sure, the right to secede from the Union, but by no 
means the right to remain in the Union. 
Even the slave states proper, however much external war, 
internal military dictatorship and slavery give them everywhere for 
the moment a semblance of harmony, are nevertheless not without 
oppositional elements. A striking example is Texas, with 180,388 
slaves out of 601,039 inhabitants. The law of 1845,a by virtue of 
which Texas became a State of the Union as a slave state, entitled 
it to form not merely one, but five states out of its territory. The 
South would thereby have gained ten new votes instead of two in 
the American Senate, and an increase in the number of its votes in 
the Senate was a major object of its policy at that time. From 1845 
to 1860, however, the slaveholders found it impracticable to cut up 
Texas, where the German population plays an important part, into 
even two states without giving the party of free labour the upper 
hand over the party of slavery in the second state.63 This furnishes 
the best proof of the strength of the opposition to the slaveholding 
oligarchy in Texas  itself. 
Georgia is the largest and most populous of the slave states. It 
has 462,230 slaves out of a total of  1,057,327  inhabitants, 
therefore nearly half the population. Nevertheless, the slavehold­
ers' party has not so far succeeded in getting the Constitution 
imposed on the South at Montgomeryb sanctioned by a general 
vote of the people in Georgia. 
In the State Convention of Louisiana, meeting on March 21, 
1861,  at New Orleans, Roselius, the political veteran of the state, 
declared: 
a Joint Resolution for annexing Texas to the United States [1845].— Ed. 
b Constitution of the Confederate States of America (New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6206, March 16, 1861).— Ed. 

=====第75页=====
The Civil War in the United States 49 
"The Montgomery Constitution is not a constitution, but a conspiracy. It does 
not inaugurate a government of the people, but an odious and unmitigated oligarchy. 
The people were not permitted to have any say in this matter. The Convention at 
Montgomery has dug the grave of political liberty, and now we are called upon to 
attend its funeral."3 
Indeed, the oligarchy of three hundred thousand slaveholders 
utilised the Congress of Montgomery not only to proclaim the 
separation of the South from the North. It exploited it at the same 
time to reshape the internal constitutions of the slave states, to 
subjugate completely the section of the white population that had 
still preserved some independence under the protection and the 
democratic Constitution of the Union. Between 1856 and 1860 the 
political spokesmen, jurists, moralists and theologians of the 
slaveholders' party had already sought to prove, not so much that 
Negro slavery is justified, but rather that colour is a matter of 
indifference and the working class is everywhere born to slavery. 
One sees, therefore, that the war of the Southern Confederacy 
is in the true sense of the word a war of conquest for the spread 
and perpetuation of slavery. The greater part of the border states 
and Territories are still in the possession of the Union, whose side 
they have taken first through the ballot-box and then with arms. 
The Confederacy, however, counts them for the "South" and 
seeks to conquer them from the Union. In the border states which 
the Confederacy has occupied for the time being, it is holding the 
relatively free highlands in check by martial law. Within the actual 
slave states themselves it is supplanting the hitherto existing 
democracy by the unrestricted oligarchy of the 300,000 slave­
holders. 
Were it to relinquish its plans of conquest, the Southern 
Confederacy would relinquish its capacity to live and the purpose 
of secession. Secession, indeed, only took place because within the 
Union the transformation of the border states and Territories into 
slave states seemed no longer attainable. On the other hand, were 
it to cede the contested territory peacefully to the Southern 
Confederacy, the North would surrender to the slave republic 
more than three-quarters of the entire territory of the United 
States. The North would lose the whole of the Gulf of Mexico and 
the Atlantic Ocean, except the narrow strip from Penobscot Bay to 
Delaware Bay, and would even cut itself off from the Pacific 
Ocean. Missouri, Kansas, New Mexico, Arkansas and Texas would 
draw California after them.64 Incapable of wresting the mouth of 
a Reported in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6217, March 29,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第76页=====
50 Karl Marx 
the Mississippi from the hands of the strong, hostile slave republic 
in the South, the great agricultural states in the basin between the 
Rocky Mountains and the Alleghenies, in the valleys of the 
Mississippi, the Missouri and the Ohio, would be compelled by 
their economic interests to secede from the North and enter the 
Southern Confederacy. These northwestern states, 65 in their turn, 
would draw after them into the same whirlpool of secession all the 
Northern states lying further east, with perhaps the exception of 
the states of New England.66 
What would in fact take place would be not a dissolution of the 
Union, but a reorganisation of it, a reorganisation on the basis of 
slavery, under the recognised control of the slaveholding oligarchy. 
The plan of such a reorganisation has been openly proclaimed by 
the principal speakers of the South at the Congress of Montgom­
ery and explains the paragraph of the new Constitution which 
leaves it open to every state of the old Union to join the new 
Confederacy. The slave system would infect the whole Union. In 
the Northern states, where Negro slavery is in practice impossible, 
the white working class would gradually be forced down to 
the level of helotry.67 This would fully accord with the loudly 
proclaimed principle that only certain races are capable of 
freedom, and as the actual labour is the lot of the Negro in the 
South, so in the North it is the lot of the German and the 
Irishman, or their direct descendants. 
The present struggle between the South and North is, therefore, 
nothing but a struggle between two social systems, the system of 
slavery and the system of free labour. The struggle has broken out 
because the two systems can no longer live peacefully side by side 
on the North American continent. It can only be ended by the 
victory of one system or the other. 
If the border states, the disputed areas in which the two systems 
have hitherto contended for domination, are a thorn in the flesh 
of the South, there can, on the other hand, be no mistake that, in 
the course of the war up to now, they have constituted the chief 
weakness of the North. One section of the slaveholders in these 
districts simulated loyalty to the North at the bidding of the 
conspirators in the South; another section found that in fact it was 
in accordance with their real interests and traditional ideas to go 
with the Union. The two sections have equally crippled the North. 
Anxiety to keep the "loyal" slaveholders of the border states in 
good humour; fear of throwing them into the arms of secession, 
in a word, tender regard for the interests, prejudices and 
sensibilities of these ambiguous allies, has smitten the Union 

=====第77页=====
The Civil War in the United States 51 
government with incurable weakness since the beginning of the 
war, driven it to half measures, forced it to dissemble away the 
principle of the war, and to spare the foe's most vulnerable spot, the 
root of the evil—slavery  itself. 
When, only recently, Lincoln pusillanimously revoked3 
Fremont's Missouri proclamation on the emancipation of Negroes 
belonging to the rebels,68 this was done solely out of regard for the 
loud protest of the "loyal" slaveholders of Kentucky. However, a 
turning point has already been reached. With Kentucky, the last 
border state has been pushed into the series of battlefields between 
South and North. With the real war for the border states in the 
border states themselves, the question of winning or losing them is 
withdrawn from the sphere of diplomatic negotiations and 
parliamentary discussions. One section of slaveholders will throw off 
the mask of loyalty; the other will content itself with the prospect of a 
financial compensation such as Great Britain gave the West Indian 
planters.69 Events themselves drive to the promulgation of the 
decisive slogan — emancipation of the slaves. 
That even the most hardened Democrats and diplomats of the 
North feel themselves drawn to this point, is shown by some 
announcements of very recent date. In an open letter, General 
Cass,  Secretary of State for War under Buchanan and hitherto one 
of the most ardent allies of the South, declared emancipation of 
the slaves the conditio sine qua non of the Union's salvation. b In his 
last Review for October, Dr. Brownson, the spokesman of the 
Catholic party of the North, on his own admission the most 
energetic adversary of the emancipation movement from 1836 to 
1860,  publishes an article for Abolition. 
"If we have opposed Abolition heretofore," he says among other things, 
"because we would preserve the Union, we must a fortiori now oppose slavery 
whenever, in our judgement, its continuance becomes incompatible with the 
maintenance of the Union, or of our nation as a free republican state."c 
Finally, the  World,  a New York organ of the diplomats of the 
Washington Cabinet, concludes one of its latest blustering articles 
against the Abolitionists with the words: 
a In a letter to Fremont of September 11, 1861, (New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6380, September 15, 1861).— Ed. 
b Cass's statement was quoted in a leading article in the New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6381, September 16,  1861.—  Ed. 
c Marx presumably quotes from the leading article in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6401, October 9, 1861, which contains this passage from the article in 
Brownson's Quarterly Review.—Ed. 

=====第78页=====
52 Karl Marx 
"On the day when it shall be decided that either slavery or the Union must go 
down, on that day sentence of death is passed on slavery. If the North cannot 
triumph without emancipation, it will triumph with emancipation." 
Written about October 20, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 306, 
November 7, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第79页=====
53 
Karl Marx 
THE CRISIS IN ENGLAND 70 
Today, as fifteen years ago, England faces a catastrophe that 
threatens to strike at the root of her entire economic system. As is 
known, the potato formed the exclusive food of Ireland and a not 
inconsiderable section of the English working people when the 
potato blight of 1845 and 1846 struck the root of Irish life with 
decay. The results of this great catastrophe are known. The Irish 
population declined by two million, of whom one part died of 
starvation and the other fled across the Atlantic Ocean. At the 
same time, this dreadful misfortune helped the English Free Trade 
party to triumph; the English landed aristocracy was compelled to 
sacrifice one of its most lucrative monopolies, and the abolition of 
the Corn Laws 3 assured a broader and sounder basis for the 
reproduction and maintenance of the working millions. 
What the potato was to Irish agriculture, cotton is to the 
dominant branch of Great Britain's industry. On its manufacture 
depends the subsistence of a mass of people greater than the total 
number of inhabitants of Scotland and than two-thirds of the 
present number of inhabitants of Ireland. For according to the 
census of 1861, the population of Scotland consisted of 3,061,117 
persons, that of Ireland now only 5,764,543,b whilst more than 
four millions in England and Scotland live directly or indirectly by 
the cotton industry. Now the cotton plant is not, indeed, diseased. 
Just as little is its production the monopoly of a few regions of the 
earth. On the contrary, no other plant that yields clothing material 
a "An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation of Corn" 
[1846].—  Ed. 
b Population of the United Kingdom according to the Census of 1861 (The Times, 
No. 23992, July 23, 1861).— Ed. 
6—1134 

=====第80页=====
54 Karl Marx 
thrives in equally extensive areas of America, Asia and Africa. The 
cotton monopoly of the slave states of the American Union is not a 
natural, but an historical monopoly. It grew and developed 
simultaneously with the monopoly of the English cotton industry 
on the world market. In the year 1793, shortly after the time of 
the great mechanical inventions in England, a Quaker 71 of 
Connecticut, Ely Whitney, invented the cotton gin,a a machine for 
cleaning cotton, which separates the cotton fibre from the cotton 
seed. Prior to this invention, a day of a Negro's most intensive 
labour barely sufficed to separate a pound of cotton fibre from 
the cotton seed. After the invention of the cotton gin, an old 
Negrowoman could comfortably supply fifty pounds of cotton 
daily, and gradual improvements have subsequently doubled the 
efficiency of the machine. The fetters on the cultivation of cotton 
in the United States were now burst asunder. Hand in hand with 
the English cotton industry, it grew swiftly to a great commercial 
power. Now and then in the course of development, England 
seemed to take fright at the monopoly of American cotton, as at a 
spectre that threatened danger. Such a moment occurred, for 
example, at the time when the emancipation of the Negroes in the 
English colonies was purchased for £20,000,000.72 It was a matter 
for misgiving that the industry in Lancashire and Yorkshire 
should rest on the sovereignty of the slave-whip in Georgia and 
Alabama, whilst the English nation imposed on itself so great a 
sacrifice to abolish slavery in its own colonies. Philanthropy, 
however, does not make history, least of all commercial history. 
Similar doubts arose as often as a cotton crop failure occurred in 
the United States and as, in addition, such a natural phenomenon 
was exploited by the slaveholders to artificially raise the price of 
cotton still higher through combination. The English cotton 
spinners and weavers then threatened rebellion against "King 
Cotton". Manifold projects for procuring cotton from Asiatic and 
African sources came to light. This was the case, for example, in 
1850.b  However, the following good crop in the United States 
triumphantly dispelled such yearnings for emancipation. Indeed, 
in the last few years the American cotton monopoly attained 
dimensions scarcely dreamt of before, partly in consequence of the 
free trade legislation, which repealed the hitherto existing 
differential tariff on the cotton grown by slaves; partly in 
a Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
b This may refer to articles on cotton cultivation published in The Economist, 
Nos.  370, 371 and 372, September 28, October 5 and 12, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第81页=====
The Crisis in England 55 
consequence of the simultaneous giant strides made by the English 
cotton industry and American cotton cultivation during the last 
decade. In the year 1857 the consumption of cotton in England 
already amounted to nearly 1,500 million pounds. 
Now, all of a sudden, the American Civil War menaces this 
great pillar of English industry. Whilst the Union blockades the 
harbours of the Southern states, in order to cut off the 
secessionists' chief source of income by preventing the export of 
their cotton crop of this year, the Confederacy lends compelling 
force to this blockade with the decision not to export a bale of 
cotton of its own accord, but rather to compel England to come 
and fetch her cotton from the Southern harbours  herself.  England 
is to be driven to the point of forcibly breaking through the 
blockade, of then declaring war on the Union and so of throwing 
her sword into the scale of the slave states. 
From the beginning of the American Civil War the price of 
cotton in England rose continuously; for a considerable time, 
however, to a less degree than was to be expected. On the whole, 
the English commercial world appeared to look down very 
phlegmatically on the American crisis. The cause of this cold­
blooded way of viewing things was unmistakable. The whole of the 
last American crop was long ago in Europe. The yield of a new 
crop is never shipped before the end of November, and this 
shipment seldom attains considerable dimensions before the end 
of December. Till then, therefore, it remained pretty much a 
matter of indifference whether the cotton bales were held back on 
the plantations or forwarded to the harbours of the South 
immediately after their packing. Should the blockade cease at any 
time before the end of the year, England could safely count on 
receiving her customary cotton imports in March or April, quite 
as if the blockade had never taken place. The English commercial 
world, in large measure misled by the English press, succumbed, 
however, to the delusion that a spectacle of about six months' war 
would end with recognition of the Confederacy by the United 
States. But at the end of August, North Americans appeared in 
the market of Liverpool to buy cotton, partly for speculation in 
Europe, partly for reshipment to North America. This unheard-of 
event opened the eyes of the English. They began to understand 
the seriousness of the situation. The Liverpool cotton market has 
since, been in a state of feverish excitement; the prices of cotton 
were soon driven 100 per cent above their average level; the 
speculation in cotton assumed the same wild features that 
characterised the speculation in railways in 1845.73 The spinning 
6» 

=====第82页=====
56 Karl Marx 
and weaving mills in Lancashire and other seats of the British 
cotton industry limited their labour time to three days a week; a 
number of mills stopped their machines altogether; the disastrous 
reaction on other branches of industry was not wanting, and at 
this moment all England trembles at the approach of the greatest 
economic catastrophe that has yet threatened her. 
The consumption of Indian cotton is naturally increasing, 
and the rising prices will ensure further increase of importation 
from the ancient home of cotton. Nevertheless, it remains 
impossible radically to change the conditions of production and 
the course of trade at, so to speak, a few months' notice. England 
is, in fact, now expiating her long mismanagement of India. Her 
present spasmodic attempts to replace American cotton by Indian 
encounter two great obstacles: the lack of means of communica­
tion and transport in India, and the miserable condition of the 
Indian peasant, which prevents him from taking advantage of the 
momentarily favourable circumstances. But, apart from this, apart 
from the process of improvement that Indian cotton has still to go 
through to be able to take the place of American, even under the 
most favourable circumstances it will be years before India can 
produce for export the requisite quantity of cotton. It is 
statistically established, however, that in four months the stocks of 
cotton in Liverpool will be exhausted. They will hold out even as 
long as this only if the limitation of the labour time to three days a 
week and the complete stoppage of a part of the machinery is 
effected by the British cotton spinners and weavers to a still 
greater extent than hitherto. Such a procedure is already exposing 
the factory districts to the greatest social sufferings. But if the 
American blockade continues over January! What then? 
Written about November 1, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse No. 305, 
November 6, 1861 

=====第83页=====
57 
Karl Marx 
BRITISH COMMERCE 
London, Nov. 2, 1861 
The English Board of Trade Returns for the nine months 
ending Sept. 30, 1861, show in exports a large diminution, and in 
imports a still larger increase. A comparison between the export 
lists of the last three years gives the following general result: 
Value of Exports for the nine months ending Sept. 30. 
1859 £98,037,311 
1860 101,724,346 
1861 93,795,332a 
Consequently the exports of this year, if compared to the 
corresponding period of 1860, have decreased by £7,929,014; of 
which total decrease the by far larger portion, viz.: £5,671,730, is 
accounted for by the sudden contraction of the American trade. 
The rates in which the general loss derived from this source has 
affected the different branches of British industry may be seen 
from the annexed table: 
Value of Exports to the United States in the nine months 
ending Sept. 30. 
1859.  1860. 1861. 
£ £ £ 
78,060 76,843 25,642 
144,556 156,665 200,244 
2,753,782 2,776,472  1,130,973 
448,661 518,778 191,606 
a Here and below the tables are quoted from "The Board of Trade Returns", The 
Economist, No. 949, November 2,  1861.—  Ed. Beer and ale 
Coals and culm 
Cottons 
Earthenware and porcelain 

=====第84页=====
58 Karl Marx 
Haberdashery and millinery  1,204,085 1,083,438  542,312 
Linens  1,486,276  1,337,778  493,654 
Hardwares and cutlery 865,066 776,772 446,095 
Metals—Iron—Pig 205,947 165,052 79,086 
Bar, bolt, and rod 642,822 546,493 148,587 
Railway of all kinds 744,505 665,619 168,657 
Cast 16,489 17,056 9,239 
Wrought of all kinds 357,162 378,842 125,752 
Steel, unwrought 372,465 457,490 216,246 
Copper, sheets and nails 99,422 44,971 10,005 
Lead, pig 53,451 66,015 1,451 
Tin plates 935,692 833,644 274,488 
Oil Seed 122,570 72,915 1,680 
Salt 63,876 84,818 59,809 
Silk stuffs, handkerchiefs, and 
ribbons 197,605 102,393 88,360 
Other silk articles 129,557 93,227 22,984 
Soda 439,584 399,153 142,311 
Spirits, (British) 53,173 56,423 12,430 
Woolens—Cloths of all kinds 586,701 535,130 250,023 
Mixed stuffs, flannels, blankets, 
etc 1,732,224 1,612,284  652,399 
Worsted Stuffs  1,052,053  840,507 377,597 
Total 15,785,784 13,698,77874 5,671,730 
Beyond the diminution due to the decrease of the American 
trade, the general exports show, moreover, a decline of 
£2,257,284. The greater part of this loss was incurred during the 
month of September, when the high price of cotton, and the 
consequent rise in cotton manufactures and yarns, had begun to 
powerfully react on the markets of British North America,3 East 
India, and Australia. During the whole period of nine months 
ended September, 1861, Turkey and Germany were, next to the 
United States, the countries foremost in restraining their absorp­
tion of British merchandise. The export trade to France has not 
grown in any observable degree, the only striking instance of 
increase being- limited to an agricultural article, viz., sheeps' and 
lambs' wool. During the first nine months of 1860, England 
exported to France 4,735,150 pounds of wool, worth £354,047.b 
a Canada.— Ed. 
b The figures here and below are quoted from the Accounts relating to Trade 
and Navigation for the Nine Months ended September 30, 1861 (The Economist, No. 949, 
November 2, 1861).— Ed. 

=====第85页=====
British Commerce 59 
During the corresponding period of this year, that export has 
risen to 8,716,082 pounds, valued at £642,468. The only other 
remarkable feature in the export returns refers to Italy. British 
exports to the new kingdom are evidently enlarging, which fact 
will go a great length in accounting for English sympathies with 
Italian liberty.75 Thus, for instance, the export of British cottons to 
Sardinia, Tuscany, Naples, and Sicily, has increased from 
£756,892 in 1860, to £1,204,287 in 1861; the export of cotton 
yarns from £348,158 in 1860 to £538,373 in 1861; the export of 
irons from £120,867 in 1860, to £160,912 in 1861. 
The import tables extend only to the first eight months of the 
current year. Their general result is shown by the subsequent 
figures: 
Real Value of Imports. 
1859 £ 88,993,762 
1860 106,894,278 
1861 114,588,107 
The principal part of that increase of imports is due to a large 
addition in the purchase of foreign wheat, which, from £6,796,131 
in the first eight months of 1860, had risen to £13,431,487 in the 
corresponding period of 1861. As to raw cotton, the quantity 
imported had, during the period referred to, only slightly fallen 
off, while the price of the article had largely increased, as will be 
seen from the annexed figures: 
Quantity of Cotton imported (during the first eight months). 
Cwts/  Value. 
1859 8,023,082 £24,039,197 
1860 10,616,347 28,940,676 
1861 9,616,087 30,809,279 
There exist no general politics at the present moment in 
England. Everything and everybody are absorbed in the industrial 
question and the American crisis. I called your attention in a 
former letter to the feverish state of the Liverpool cotton market.b 
For the last two weeks it has exhibited, in fact, all the symptoms of 
the railway mania in 1845.76 Surgeons, dentists, physicians, 
barristers, cooks, workingmen, clerks and lords, comedians and 
parsons, soldiers and sailors, newspaper writers and boarding-
a The figures in this column are given for the period of nine months.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 17-20.— Ed. 

=====第86页=====
60 Karl Marx 
school mistresses, males and females, all were speculating in 
cotton. Many of the lots purchased, sold and resold amounted to 
only one, two, three, or four bales. More considerable quantities 
remained in the same warehouses, although changing their 
proprietors twenty times. One who had purchased cotton at 10 
o'clock offered it for sale at T1 o'clock, and realized a profit of 
'^d. on one pound. Many lots circulated in this way through 
several hands in 12 hours. This week, however, a sort of reaction 
has taken place, due to the single circumstance that a shilling is a 
round number, being composed of 12d., and that most people had 
resolved upon selling out so soon as the price of the pound of 
cotton should have been pushed to one shilling; consequently, 
there set in suddenly a great increase in the offers of cotton, and 
hence a reaction in its price. This, however, can be only transitory. 
The British mind once become familiar with the idea that a 
pound of cotton may cost 15d., the temporary barrier to 
speculation will break down, and the speculating mania reappear 
with redoubled fury. There is one thing favorable to the United 
States in this movement. It is hostile to the breaking-of-blockade 
party. Already there have been published protests on the part of 
the speculators, in which it is reasonably said that any warlike 
movement by the British Government would be an act of direct 
injustice to those merchants who, on the faith of the British 
Government's adherence to its recognized and avowed principle of 
non-interference, had made their calculations, speculated at home, 
sent out their orders abroad and purchased cotton on an estimate 
of the price which it would reach under the operation of natural, 
probable and foreseeable courses. 
This day's Economist publishes a very foolish article, in which, 
from statistics given as to the population and the area of the 
United States, he arrives at the conclusion that there would be 
room enough for the establishment of at least seven vast empires, 
and that, consequently, "the dream of universal dominion" ought 
to be banished from the hearts of the Unionists.3 The only rational 
inference which The Economist might have drawn from its own 
statistical statements, viz., that the Northerners, even if they liked 
to do so, could not desist from their claims without sacrificing to 
Slavery the vast States and Territories "in which Slavery still 
lingers, but cannot maintain itself as a permanent institution" — 
this only rational conclusion he successfully contrives not even to 
touch upon. 
a "Motives of the Federalists in Coercing the Secessionists", The Economist, 
No. 949, November 2,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第87页=====
British Commerce 61 
Apart from its own commercial difficulties, England is simul­
taneously bothered by the critical state of the French finances. The 
maneuvers of the Bank of France to stay the bullion drain to 
England by accommodation bills, obtained from the Rothschilds 
and other great firms, have, as was to be foreseen, resulted in a 
but temporary mitigation of her embarrassments. She has now 
successively applied for succor to the banks at Berlin, Hamburg, 
and St. Petersburg; but all these tentatives, instead of procuring 
relief,  have only betrayed despair. The straits to which the French 
Government is actually put appear from two measures recurred to 
in the course of a fortnight. The interest on the Treasury bills, in 
order to keep them afloat, had to be raised to 7  V2 per cent, while 
Victor Emmanuel was commanded to partially postpone the 
instalments of the new Italian loan, of which French capitalists 
hold a very large amount. He, of course, acceded to the 
application of his patron. 
In the Tuileries there are now two opposite influences, 
proposing two opposite nostrums for the temporary cure of the 
financial disease. The real Bonapartists, Persigny, and the Crédit 
Mobilier, 77 cherish a project by which to subject the Bank of 
France to the direct and complete control of the Government, to 
convert her into a mere dependency on the Treasury, and to use 
the power thus obtained for the unrestricted emission of 
inconvertible State paper money. The other party, represented by 
Fould, and other renegades of former regimes, propose a new 
loan, whose amount is variously estimated by the most modest at 
£16,000,000, by the more daring at £30,000,000. 
Written on November 2, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6440, November 23, 1861 

=====第88页=====
62 
Karl Marx 
ECONOMIC NOTES 
London, November 3 
At the present moment general politics are non-existent in 
England. The interest of the country is absorbed in the French 
financial, commercial and agricultural crisis, the British industrial 
crisis,  the dearth of cotton and the American question. 
Competent circles here are not for a moment deceived 
concerning the Bank of France's bill-jobbing with a few big houses 
on both sides of the Channel being a palliative of the weakest 
sort.3  All that could be achieved and has been achieved thereby 
was a momentary abatement of the drain of gold to England. The 
repeated attempts of the Bank of France to raise metallic auxiliary 
troops in Petersburg, Hamburg and Berlin damage its credit, 
without filling its coffers. The raising of the rate of interest on 
treasury bills, in order to keep them in currency, and the necessity 
of securing a remission of the payments for the new Italian loan 
from Victor Emmanuel—both are held here to be serious 
symptoms of French financial sickness. It is known, moreover, that 
at the present moment two projects contend in the Tuileries for 
precedence. The full-blooded Bonapartists, with Persigny and 
Péreire (of the Crédit Mobilier) b at their head, want to make the 
Bank of France completely subject to governmental authority, to 
reduce it to a mere office of the Finance Ministry, and to use the 
institution, thus transformed, as an assignat factory. 
It is known that this principle was originally at the bottom of the 
organisation of the Crédit Mobilier. The less adventurous party, 
a See this volume, p.  61.—  Ed. 
b The Crédit Mobilier bank was founded by the brothers Emile and Isaac 
Péreire. Marx presumably means the latter.— Ed. 

=====第89页=====
Economie Notes 63 
represented by Fould and other renegades of Louis Philippe's 
time,  proposes a new national loan, which is to amount to 400 
million francs, according to some; to 700 million, according to 
others. The Times, in a leading article today, probably reflects the 
view of the City79 when it states that France is completely 
paralysed by her economic crisis and robbed of her European 
influence.3 Nevertheless, The Times and the City are wrong. 
Should the December power80 succeed in outlasting the winter 
without great internal storms, it will then blow the war trumpet in 
the spring. The internal distress will not thereby be remedied, but 
its voice will be drowned. 
In an earlier letterb I pointed out that the cotton swindle in 
Liverpool during the last few weeks fully reminds one of the 
maddest days of the railway mania of 1845. Dentists, surgeons, 
barristers, cooks, widows, workers, clerks and lords, comedians 
and clergymen, soldiers and tailors, journalists and persons letting 
apartments, man and wife, all speculated in cotton. Quite small 
quantities of from 1 to 4 bales were bought, sold and sold again. 
More considerable quantities lay for months in the same 
warehouse, although they changed owners twenty times. Whoever 
had bought cotton at 10 o'clock, sold it again at 11 o'clock with an 
addition of a halfpenny a pound. Thus the same cotton often 
circulated from hand to hand six times in ten hours. This week, 
however, there came a lull, and for no more rational reason than 
that a pound of cotton (namely, middling Orleans cotton) had 
risen to a shilling, that 12 pence make a shilling and are therefore 
a round figure. So everyone had purposed selling out, as soon as 
this maximum was reached. Hence sudden increase of the supply, 
and consequent reaction. As soon as the English make themselves 
conversant with the possibility that a pound of cotton can rise 
above a shilling, the St. Vitus's dance will return more madly than 
ever. 
The last official monthly report of the Board of Trade" on British 
exports and importsd has by no means dispelled the gloomy 
feeling. The export tables cover the nine months' period from 
January to September 1861. In comparison with the same period 
of 1860, they show a falling-off of about £8,000,000. Of this, 
a "To those who concern themselves with French politics...", The Times, 
No. 24080, November 2,  1861.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 53-56.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English name.— Ed. 
d Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Nine Months ended September 30, 
1861 {The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861, Supplement).— Ed. 

=====第90页=====
64 Karl Marx 
£5,671,730 fall to exports to the United States alone, whilst the 
remainder is distributed over British North America, 3 the East 
Indies, Australia, Turkey and Germany. Only in Italy is an 
increase shown. Thus, for example, the export of British cotton 
commodities to Sardinia, Tuscany, Naples and Sicily has risen 
from £756,892 for the year 1860 to £1,204,287 for the year 1861; 
the export of British cotton yarn from £348,158 to £538,373; the 
export of iron from £120,867 to £160,912, etc. These figures are 
not without weight in the scale of British sympathy for Italian 
freedom.81 
Whilst the export trade of Great Britain has thus declined by 
nearly £8,000,000 her import trade has risen in still higher 
proportion, a circumstance that by no means facilitates the 
adjustment of the balance. This rise in imports stems, in 
particular, from the increase in wheat imports. Whereas for the 
first eight months of 1860 the value of the wheat imported 
amounted to only £6,796,131, for the same period of the present 
year it totals £13,431,487. 
The most remarkable phenomenon revealed by the import tables 
is the rapid increase of French imports which have now attained a 
volume of nearly £18,000,000 (yearly), whilst English exports to 
France are not much bigger than, perhaps, those to Holland. 
Continental politicians have hitherto overlooked this entirely new 
phenomenon of modern commercial history. It proves that the 
economic dependence of France on England is, perhaps, six times 
as great as the economic dependence of England on France, if, 
that is, one not only considers the English export and import 
tables,  but also compares them with the French export and import 
tables.  It then follows that England has now become the principal 
export market for France, whereas France has remained a quite 
secondary export market for England. Hence, despite all chauvin­
ism and all Waterloo82 rodomontade, the nervous dread of a 
conflict with "perfidious Albion".83 
Finally, one more important fact emerges from the latest 
English export and import tables. Whilst in the first nine months 
of this year English exports to the United States declined by more 
than 65 per centb in comparison with the same period of 1860, the 
port of New York alone has increased its exports to England by 
a Canada.— Ed. 
b The original mistakenly says 25 per cent. Marx took the figure from The 
Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861, where an error had been made in the 
calculation.— Ed. 

=====第91页=====
Economie Notes 65 
£6,000,000 during the first eight months of the present year. 
During this period the export of American gold to England had 
almost ceased, while now, on the contrary, gold has been flowing 
for weeks from England to New York. It is in fact England and 
France whose crop failures cover the North American deficit, 
while the Morrill  tariff84  and the economy inseparable from a civil 
war have simultaneously decimated the consumption of English 
and French manufactures in North America. And now one may 
compare these statistical facts with the jeremiads of The Times on 
the financial ruin of North America! 
Written on November 3, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 308, 
November 9, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第92页=====
66 
Karl Marx 
INTERVENTION IN MEXICO 
London, November 7 
The Times of today has a leading article 3 in its well-known, 
confusedly kaleidoscopic, affectedly humorous style, on the French 
government's invasion of Dappenthal and on Switzerland's protest 
against this violation of territory.86 The oracle of Printing House 
Square87  recalls how, at the time of most acute struggle between 
English manufacturers and landowners, little children employed in 
the factories were led to throw needles into the most delicate parts 
of the machinery to upset the motion of the whole powerful 
automaton. The machinery is Europe, the little child is Switzer­
land and the needle that she throws into the smoothly running 
automaton is—Louis Bonaparte's invasion of her territory or, 
rather, her outcry at his invasion. Thus the needle is suddenly 
transformed into the outcry at the needle's prick and the 
metaphor into a piece of buffoonery at the expense of the reader 
who expects a metaphor. The Times is further enlivened by its 
own discovery that Dappenthal consists of a single village called 
Cressonnières. It ends its short article with a complete contradic­
tion of its beginning. Why, it exclaims, make so much ado about 
this infinitely small Swiss bagatelle, when every quarter of Europe 
will be ablaze next spring? One may not forget that, shortly 
before, Europe was a well regulated automaton. The whole article 
appears sheer nonsense and yet it has its sense. It is a declaration 
that Palmerston has given carte blanche in the Swiss incident to his 
ally on the other side of the Channel. The explanation of this 
a "Some of our middle-aged readers may recollect the time...", The Times, 
No. 24083, November 6,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第93页=====
Intervention in Mexico 67 
declaration is found in the dry notice in the Moniteur 3 that on 
October 31 England, France and Spain concluded a convention on 
joint intervention in Mexico. 89, The article of The Times on 
Dappenthal and the note of the Moniteur on Mexico stand as 
close together as the Canton of Waadt and Vera Cruz lie far apart. 
It is credible that Louis Bonaparte counted on intervention in 
Mexico among the many possibilities which he continually has 
ready to divert the French people. Surely Spain, whose cheap 
successes in Morocco and St. Domingo 89 have gone to her head, 
dreams of a Restoration in Mexico. But it is certain that France's 
project had not yet matured and that both France and Spain were 
opposed to a crusade against Mexico under English command. 
On September 24, Palmerston's private Moniteur, the Morning 
Post, announced the details of an agreement that England, France 
and Spain had reached for joint intervention in Mexico.* 3 The 
following day the Patrie denied the existence of any such 
agreement. On September 27 The Times refuted the Patrie, 
without naming it. According to The Times' article, Lord Russell 
had communicated the English decision on intervention to the 
French government, whereupon M. Thouvenel had answered that 
the Emperor of the French had arrived at a like conclusion. It 
was now the turn of Spain. In a semi-official organ the Spanish 
government declared that it purposed an intervention in Mexico, 
but by no means an intervention alongside of England. It rained 
dementis. The Times had categorically announced that "the full 
assent of the American President had been given to the 
planned expedition". Hardly had the report reached the other side 
of the Atlantic Ocean when all the organs of the American 
government branded it as a lie, since President Lincoln was going 
with and not against Mexico. From all this it follows that the plan of 
intervention in its present form originated in the Cabinet of St. 
James. 90 
No less puzzling and contradictory than the statements concern­
ing the origin of the convention were the statements concerning its 
points at issue. One organ of Palmerston, the Morning Post, 
announced that Mexico was not an organised state, with an 
established government, but a mere robbers' nest. It was to be 
treated as such. The expedition had only one object—the 
satisfaction of the Mexican state's creditors in England, France and 
a "Bulletin", Le Moniteur universel, No. 309, November 5,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Here and below Marx draws on the press review published in The Free Press, 
No. 10, October 2, 1861 ("The Projected Intervention in Mexico").— Ed. 

=====第94页=====
68 Karl Marx 
Spain. To this end the combined forces would occupy the principal 
ports of Mexico, collect the import and export duties on her coast 
and hold this "material guarantee"a till all debt claims were satisfied. 
The other organ of Palmerston, The Times, declared, on the 
contrary, that England was "steeled against plunderings on the 
part of bankrupt Mexico by long experience". It was not a 
question of the private interests of the creditors, but "they hope 
that the mere presence of a combined squadron in the Gulf of 
Mexico and the seizure of certain ports, will urge the Mexican 
government to new exertions in keeping the internal peace, and will 
compel the malcontents to confine themselves to some form of 
opposition more constitutional than brigandage". 
According to this, the expedition would therefore take place to 
support the official government of Mexico. At the same time, 
however, The Times intimates that "the City of Mexico was 
sufficiently healthy, should it be necessary to penetrate so far". 
The most original means of consolidating a government 
indisputably consists in the sequestration of its revenues and its 
territories by force. On the other hand, mere occupation of the 
ports and collection of the duties in them can only cause the 
Mexican government to set up a more inland-lying line of custom 
houses. Import duties on foreign commodities, export duties on 
American commodities would in this way be doubled; the 
intervention would in fact satisfy the claims of European creditors 
by extortions from European-Mexican trade. The Mexican govern­
ment can become solvent only by internal consolidation, but it can 
consolidate itself at home only so long as its independence is 
respected abroad. 
If the expedition's ostensible ends are so contradictory, then the 
ostensible means to these ostensible ends are still more contradic­
tory. The English government organs themselves admit that if one 
thing or another would be attainable by a unilateral intervention 
of France or England or Spain, everything becomes unattainable 
by a joint intervention of these states. 
One may recall that the Liberal Party in Mexico under Juarez, 
the official President of the republic, has now the upper hand at 
almost all points; that the Catholic Party under General Marquez 
has suffered defeat after defeat, and that the robber band 
organised by it has been driven back to the sierras of Queretaro 
and is dependent on an alliance with Mejïa, the Indian chief there. 
The last hope of the Catholic Party was Spanish intervention. 
a The phrase occurs in an item published in the column "Great Britain" in the 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6462, December 19,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第95页=====
Intervention in Mexico 69 
"The only point," says The Times,' "on which there may possibly be a difference 
between ourselves and our allies, regards the government of the republic. England will 
be content to see it remain in the hands of the Liberal Party, while France and 
Spain are suspected of a partiality for the ecclesiastical rule which has recently been 
overthrown. It would be strange, if France were, in bo.th the old and the new 
world, to make herself the protector of priests and bandits. Just as in Italy the 
partisans of Francis II at Rome are being equipped for their work of making 
Naples ungovernable, so in Mexico the highways, indeed, the streets of the capital, 
are infested with robbers, whom the church party openly declares to be its 
friends." 
And just for this reason England strengthens the Liberal 
government; in undertaking a crusade against it with France and 
Spain she seeks to suppress anarchy by supplying the clerical party 
lying at its last gasp with fresh allied troops from Europe! 
Save during the short winter months the coasts of Mexico, 
pestilential as they are, can only be held by conquest of the 
country  itself.  But a third English government organ, The 
Economist, declares the conquest of Mexico to be impossible. 
"If it is desired," says this paper, "to thrust upon her a British prince with an 
English army, then the fiercest wrath of the United States is excited. France's jealousy 
would make such a conquest impossible, and a motion to this effect would be rejected 
almost unanimously by an English parliament the moment it was submitted to it. 
England, for her part, cannot entrust the government of Mexico to France. Of Spain 
there can be no question whatever."3 
The whole expedition is therefore a mystification, the key to 
which the Patrie gives in these words: 
"The convention recognises the necessity of installing in Mexico a strong 
government that can maintain tranquillity and order there." 
The question is simply one of applying to the states of America 
through a new Holy Alliance the principle according to which the 
Holy Alliance held itself called on to interfere in the internal 
governmental affairs of the countries of Europe.91 The first plan 
of this sort was drawn up by Chateaubriand for the Bourbons 
of Spain and France at the time of the Restoration.92 It was 
frustrated by Canning and Monroe, the President of the United 
States, who declared any European interference in the internal 
affairs of American states to be forbidden. Since then the Ameri­
can Union has constantly asserted the Monroe Doctrine93 as an 
international law. The present Civil War, however, created the 
right situation for securing to the European monarchies an 
a "The Case of Mexico", The Economist, No. 947, October 19,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Marx presumably quotes this passage (La Patrie, October 29, 1861) from a 
reprint in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6434, November 16,  1861.—  Ed. 
7—1134 

=====第96页=====
70 Karl Marx 
intervention precedent on which they can build later. That is the 
real object of the English-French-Spanish intervention. Its im­
mediate result can only be and is only intended to be the 
restoration of the anarchy just dying out in Mexico. 
Apart from all standpoints of international law in general, the 
affair has the great significance for Europe that by concessions in 
the domain of Continental politics England has purchased the 
support of Louis Bonaparte in the Mexican expedition. 
Written on November 6-7, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 311, 
November 12, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第97页=====
71 
Karl Marx 
THE INTERVENTION IN MEXICO 
London, Nov. 8, 1861 
The contemplated intervention in Mexico by England, France, 
and Spain, is, in my opinion, one of the most monstrous 
enterprises ever chronicled in the annals of international history. 
It is a contrivance of the true Palmerston make, astounding the 
uninitiated by an insanity of purpose and an imbecility of the 
means employed which appear quite incompatible with the known 
capacity of the old schemer. 
It is probable that, among the many irons which, to amuse the 
French public, Louis Bonaparte is compelled to always keep in the 
fire, a Mexican Expedition may have figured. It is sure that Spain, 
whose never overstrong head has been quite turned by her recent 
cheap successes in Morocco and St. Domingo, dreams of a 
restoration in Mexico. But, nevertheless, it is certain that the 
French plan was far from being matured, and that both France 
and Spain strove hard against a joint expedition to Mexico under 
English leadership. 
On Sept. 24, Palmerston's private Moniteur, The London Morning 
Post, first announced in detail the scheme for the joint interven­
tion, according to the terms of a treaty just concluded, as it said, 
between England, France, and Spain. 3 This statement had hardly 
crossed the Channel, when the French Government, through the 
columns of the Paris Patrie, gave it the lie direct. On Sept. 27, The 
London Times, Palmerston's national organ, first broke its silence 
a Here and below Marx makes use of the press review from the article "The 
Projected Intervention in Mexico", The Free Press, No. 10, October 2,  1861.—  Ed. 
7* 

=====第98页=====
72 Karl Marx 
on the scheme in a leader contradicting, but not quoting, the 
Patrie. The Times even stated that Earl Russell had communicated 
to the French Government the resolution arrived at on the part of 
England of interfering in Mexico, and that M. de Thouvenel 
replied that the Emperor of the French had come to a similar 
conclusion. Now it was the turn of Spain. A semi-official paper of 
Madrid, while affirming Spain's intention to meddle with Mexico, 
repudiated at the same time the idea of a joint intervention with 
England. The dementis were not yet exhausted. The Times had 
categorically asserted that "the full assent of the American 
President had been given to the Expedition." All the American 
papers taking notice of The Times article, have long since 
contradicted its assertion. 
It is, therefore, certain, and has even been expressly admitted by 
The Times, that the joint intervention in its present form is of 
English—i.e., Palmerstonian—make. Spain was cowed into adher­
ence by the pressure of France; and France was brought round by 
concessions made to her in the field of European policy. In this 
respect, it is a significant coincidence that The Times of Novem­
ber 6, in the very number in which it announces the conclusion 
at London of a convention for the joint interference in Mexico,3 
simultaneously publishes a leader, pooh-poohing and treating with 
exquisite contumely the protest of Switzerland against the recent 
invasion of her territory—viz., the Dappenthal—by a French 
military force.b In return for his fellowship in the Mexican 
expedition, Louis Bonaparte has obtained carte blanche for his 
contemplated encroachments on Switzerland and, perhaps, on 
other parts of the European continent. The transactions on these 
points between England and France have lasted throughout the 
whole of the months of September and October. 
There exist in England no people desirous of an intervention in 
Mexico save the Mexican bondholders, who, however, had never 
to boast the least sway over the national mind. Hence the difficulty 
of breaking to the public the Palmerstonian scheme. The next best 
means was to bewilder the British elephant by contradictory 
statements, proceeding from the same laboratory, compounded of 
the same materials, but varying in the doses administered to the 
animal. 
a "Paris, Tuesday, Nov. 5, 7 A.M.", The Times, No. 24083, November 6, 
1861.—  Ed. 
b "Some of our middle-aged readers may recollect the time...", The Times, 
No. 24083, November 6,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第99页=====
The Intervention in Mexico 73 
The Morning Post, in its print of September 24, announced that 
there would be "no territorial war on Mexico," that the only point 
at issue was the monetary claims on the Mexican exchequer; that 
"it would be impossible to deal with Mexico as an organized and 
established Government," and that, consequently, "the principal 
Mexican ports would be temporarily occupied and their customs 
revenues sequestered."3 
The Times of September 27 declared, on the contrary, that "to 
dishonesty, to repudiation, to the legal and irremediable plunder 
of our countrymen by the default of a bankrupt community, we 
were steeled by long endurance," and that, consequently, "the 
private robbery of the English bondholders" lay not, as The Post 
had it,b at the bottom of the intervention. While remarking, en 
passant, that "the City of Mexico was sufficiently healthy, should it 
be necessary to penetrate so far," The Times hoped, however, that 
"the mere presence of a combined squadron in the  Gulf,  and the 
seizure of certain ports, will urge the Mexican Government to new 
exertions in keeping the peace, and will convince the malcontents 
that they must confine themselves to some form of opposition 
more constitutional than brigandage." 
If, then, according to The Post, the expedition was to start 
because there "exists no Government in Mexico," it was, according 
to The Times, only intended as encouraging and supporting the 
existing Mexican Government. To be sure! The oddest means ever 
hit upon for the consolidation of a Government consists in the 
seizure of its territory and the sequestration of its revenue. 
The Times and The Morning Post having once given out the cue, 
John Bull was then handed over to the minor ministerial oracles, 
systematically belaboring him in the same contradictory style for 
four weeks, until public opinion had at last become sufficiently 
trained to the idea of a joint intervention in Mexico, although kept 
in deliberate ignorance of the aim and purpose of that interven­
tion. At last, the transactions with France had drawn to an end; 
the Moniteur announced that the convention between the three 
interfering powers had been concluded on October  31 ;c and the 
Journal des Débats, one of whose coproprietors is appointed to the 
command of one of the vessels of the French squadron, informed 
the world that no permanent territorial conquest was intended; 
a Here and below Marx draws on the press review given in the article "The 
Projected Intervention in Mexico", The Free Press, No. 10, October 2,  1861.—  Ed. 
b The Morning  Post.—Ed. 
c "Bulletin", Le Moniteur universel, No. 309, November 5,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第100页=====
74 Karl Marx 
that Vera Cruz and other points on the coast were to be seized, an 
advance to the capital being agreed upon in case of non­
compliance by the constituted authorities in Mexico with the 
demands of the intervention; that, moreover, a strong govern­
ment was to be imported into the Republic. 3 
The Times, which ever since its first announcement on Sep­
tember 27,b seemed to have forgotten the very existence of 
Mexico, had now again to step forward. Everybody ignorant of its 
connection with Palmerston, and the original introduction in its 
columns of his scheme, would be induced to consider the to-day's 
leader of The Times as the most cutting and merciless satire on the 
whole adventure. It sets out by stating that "the expedition is a 
very remarkable one" [later on it says a curious one]. 
"Three States are combining to coerce a fourth into good behavior, not so much 
by way of war as by authoritative interference in behalf of order."c 
Authoritative interference in behalf of order! This is literally the 
Holy Alliance94 slang, and sounds very remarkable indeed on the 
part of England, glorying in the non-intervention principle! And 
why is "the way of war, and of declaration of war, and all other 
behests of international law," supplanted by "an authoritative 
interference in behalf of order?" Because, says The Times, there 
"exists no Government in Mexico." And what is the professed aim 
of the expedition? "To address demands to the constituted 
authorities at Mexico." 
The only grievances complained of by the intervening Powers, 
the only causes which might give to their hostile procedure the 
slightest shade of justification, are easily to be summed up. They 
are the monetary claims of the bondholders and a series of 
personal outrages said to have been committed upon subjects of 
England, France and Spain. These were also the reasons of the 
intervention as originally put forth by The Morning Post, and as 
some time ago officially indorsed by Lord John Russell in an 
interview with some representatives of the Mexican bondholders in 
England. The to-day's Times states: 
"England, France, and Spain have concerted an expedition to bring Mexico to 
the performance of her specific engagements, and to give protection to the subjects of the 
respective crowns." 
a "France. Paris, 3 novembre", Journal des Débats, November 6,  1861.—  Ed. 
b "The assurance, in spite of the denial of the Patrie...", The Times, No. 24049, 
September 27, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 
c "In a very short time...", The Times, No. 24085, November 8,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第101页=====
The Intervention in Mexico 75 
However, in the progress of its article, The Times veers round, 
and exclaims: 
"We shall, no doubt, succeed in obtaining at least a recognition of our pecuniary 
claims; in fact, a single British frigate could have obtained that amount of satisfaction at 
any moment. We may trust, too, that the more scandalous of the outrages committed 
will be expiated by more immediate and substantial atonements; but it is clear that, 
if only this much was to be brought about, we need not have resorted to such extremities as 
are now proposed." 
The Times, then, confesses in so many words that the reasons 
originally given out for the expedition are shallow pretexts; that 
for the attainment of redress nothing like the present procedure 
was needed; and that, in point of fact, the "recognition of 
monetary claims, and the protection of European subjects" have 
nothing at all to do with the present joint intervention in Mexico. 
What, then, is its real aim and purpose? 
Before following The Times in its further explanations, we will, 
en passant, note some more "curiosities" which it has taken good 
care.not to touch upon. In the first instance, it is a real "curiosity" 
to see Spain—Spain out of all other countries—turn crusader for 
the sanctity of foreign debts! Last Sunday's3  Courrier du Dimanche 
already summons the French Government to improve the oppor­
tunity, and compel Spain, "into the eternally delayed performance 
of her old standing engagements to French bondholders." 
The second still greater "curiosity" is, that the very same 
Palmerston who, according to Lord John Russell's recent declara­
tion, is about invading Mexico to make its Government pay the 
English bondholders, has  himself,  voluntarily, and despite the 
Mexican Government, sacrificed the treaty rights of England and 
the security mortgaged by Mexico to her British creditors.b 
By the treaty concluded with England in 1826, Mexico became 
bound to not allow the establishment of Slavery in any of the 
territories constituting her then empire.0 By another clause of the 
same treaty, she tendered England, as a security for the loans 
obtained from British capitalists, the mortgage of 45,000,000 acres 
of the public lands in Texas. It was Palmerston who, ten or twelve 
years later,d interfered as the mediator for Texas against Mexico. 
In the treaty then concluded by him with Texas, he sacrificed not 
a November 3,  1861.—  Ed. 
h The Times, No. 24049, September 27,  1861.—  Ed. 
c Here and below Marx draws on documents cited in the article "Annexation of 
the Texas, a Case of War between England and the United States", The Portfolio; 
Diplomatic Review (new series), London, 1844, Vol. Ill, No. XI.— Ed. 
d In 1840.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
76 Karl Marx 
only the Anti-Slavery cause, but also the mortgage on the public lands, 
thus robbing the English bondholders of their security. The 
Mexican Government protested at the time, but meanwhile, later 
on, Secretary John C. Calhoun could permit himself the jest of 
informing the Cabinet of St. James that its desire "of seeing 
Slavery abolished in Texas would be" best realized by annexing 
Texas to the United States. The English bondholders lost, in fact, 
any claim upon Mexico, by the voluntary sacrifice on the part of 
Palmerston of the mortgage secured to them in the treaty of 1826. 
But, since The London Times avows that the present intervention 
has nothing to do either with monetary claims or with personal 
outrages, what, then, in all the world, is its real or pretended aim? 
"An authoritative interference in behalf of Order. "a 
England, France, and Spain, planning a new Holy Alliance, and 
having formed themselves into an armed areopagus for the 
restoration of order all over the world, "Mexico," says The Times, 
"must be rescued from anarchy, and put in the way of  self-
government and peace. A strong and stable government must be 
established" there by the invaders, and that government is to be 
extracted from "some Mexican party." 
Now, does any one imagine that Palmerston and his mouth­
piece, The Times, really consider the joint intervention as a means 
to the professed end, viz: The extinction of anarchy, and the 
establishment in Mexico of a strong and stable government? So far 
from cherishing any such chimerical creed, The Times states 
expressly in its first leader of September 27: 
"The only point on which there may possibly be a difference between ourselves 
and our allies, regards the government of the Republic. England will be content to see 
it remain in the hands of the liberal party which is now in power, while France and 
Spain are suspected of a partiality for the ecclesiastical rule which has recently been 
overthrown.... It would, indeed, be strange, if France were, in both the old and new 
world, to make herself the protector of priests and bandits." 
In its to-day's leader, The Times goes on reasoning in the same 
strain, and resumes its scruples in this sentence: 
"It is hard to suppose that the intervening powers could all concur in the absolute 
preference of either of the two parties between which Mexico is divided, and equally 
hard to imagine that a compromise would be found practicable between enemies so 
determined." 
Palmerston and The Times, then, are fully aware that there 
"exists a government in Mexico," that "the Liberal party," 
a The Times, No. 24085, November 8,  1861.—  Ed, 

=====第103页=====
The Intervention in Mexico 77 
ostensibly favored by England, "is now in power," that "the 
ecclesiastical rule has been overthrown;"3 that Spanish interven­
tion was the last forlorn hope of the priests and bandits; and, 
finally, that Mexican anarchy was dying away. They know, then, 
that the joint intervention, with no other avowed end save the 
rescue of Mexico from anarchy, will produce just the opposite 
effect, weaken the Constitutional Government, strengthen the 
priestly party by a supply of French and Spanish bayonets, 
rekindle the embers of civil war, and, instead of extinguishing, 
restore anarchy to its full bloom. 
The inference The Times itself draws from those premises is 
really "remarkable" and "curious." 
Although, it says, "these considerations may induce us to look with some anxiety 
to the results of the expedition, they do not militate against the expediency of the 
expedition  itself."  b 
It does, consequently, not militate against the expediency of the 
expedition  itself,  that the expedition militates against its only 
ostensible purpose. It does not militate against the means that it 
baffles its own avowed end. 
The greatest "curiosity" pointed out by The Times, I have, 
however, still kept in petto. 
"If," says it, "President Lincoln should accept the invitation, which is provided 
for by the convention, to participate in the approaching operations, the character of 
the work would become more curious still." 
It would, indeed, be the greatest "curiosity" of all if the United 
States, living in amity with Mexico, should associate with the 
European order-mongers, and, by participating in their acts, 
sanction the interference of a European armed Areopagus with 
the internal affairs of American States. The first scheme of such 
a transplantation of the Holy Alliance to the other side of the 
Atlantic was, at the time of the restoration, drawn up for the 
French and Spanish Bourbons by Chateaubriand.95 The attempt was 
baffled by an English Minister, Mr. Canning, and an American 
President, Mr. Monroe. The present convulsion in the United 
States appeared to Palmerston an opportune moment for taking 
up the old project in a modified form. Since the United States, for 
the present, must allow no foreign complication to interfere with 
their war for the Union, all they can do is to protest. Their best 
well-wishers in Europe hope that they will protest, and thus, 
a The Times, No. 24049, September 27,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Here and below, The Times, No. 24085, November 8,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第104页=====
78 Karl Marx 
before the eyes of the world, firmly repudiate any complicity in 
one of the most nefarious schemes. 
This military expedition of Palmerston's, carried out by a 
coalition with two other European powers, is started during the 
prorogation, without the sanction, and against the will of the 
British Parliament. The first extra Parliamentary war of Palmer­
ston's was the Afghan war softened and justified by the pro­
duction of forged papers.396 Another war of that sort was his 
Persian war of 1856-1857.97 He defended it at the time on the plea 
that "the principle of the previous sanction of the House did not 
apply to Asiatic wars."b It seems that it does neither apply to 
American wars. With the control over foreign wars, Parliament will 
lose all control over the national exchequer, and Parliamentary 
government turn to a mere farce. 
Written on November 8, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6440, November 23, 1861 
a Correspondence Relating to Persia and Afghanistan, London, 1839.— Ed. 
b H. J. Palmerston's speech in the House of Commons on July 16, 1857, 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Third series, Vol. CXLVI, London, 1857.— Ed. 

=====第105页=====
79 
Karl Marx 
MONSIEUR FOULD 
Paris,  November 16 
Art experts in the field of high political comedy find a source of 
the purest pleasure in the French Moniteur of November 14. As in 
the ancient classical drama, Fate invisibly, irresistibly enmeshes the 
heroes—Fate in the form of a thousand million-franc deficit. As 
in ancient drama, the dialogue is only between two persons, 
Oedipus-Bonaparte and Teiresias-Fould. The tragedy turns into 
comedy, however, since Teiresias says only what Oedipus has 
whispered to him in advance. 3 
One of the most characteristic tricks of Bonapartist comedy is to 
put its old, worn dramatis personae on stage over and over again as 
brand-new heroes. Billault comes on in place of Persigny, and 
then Persigny comes on in place of Billault! And likewise in the 
Decembrist press!b  Grandguillot, Cassagnac, Limayrac are tossed 
to and fro between the Constitutionnel, the Pays and the Patrie. 
Monsieur Véron, the "Bourgeois de Paris", 0 is replaced by Cesena 
as director of the Constitutionnel, Cesena by Cucheval, Cucheval by 
Cassagnac, Cassagnac by Renée, Renée by Grandguillot, and after 
six years Véron comes on again in his old spot—as a brand-new 
hero. 
Likewise under the constitutional system Thiers became new as 
soon as Guizot was worn out, and Mole new as soon as Thiers was 
worn out, and then the round was repeated. However, these 
a An allusion to Napoleon Ill's message to Fould and the latter's "Mémoire à 
l'Empereur", both published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 318, November 14, 
1861.—Ed. 
b The press of Louis Bonaparte, who staged a coup d'état on December 2, 
1851.—  Ed. 
c An allusion to L. Veron's book Mémoires d'un bourgeois de Paris.—Ed. 

=====第106页=====
80 • Karl Marx 
different men represented different parties and tendencies. If 
they pushed one another out, in order to follow one another, and 
followed one another in order to push one another out again, 
then their toing and froing only snowed the oscillations in the 
balance of the parties that in general formed the pays legal3 under 
Louis Philippe. But Billault or Persigny, Walewski or Thouvenel, 
Laroquette or Fould, Grandguillot or Limayrac? It is what the 
English call "a distinction without a difference".15  They all 
represent the same thing—the coup d'état. They do not represent 
different interests and parties among the people. They only 
represent different facial features of the Emperor. They are only 
different masks, behind which the same head is hidden. 
The Times, whose weak point is comparisons, compares Louis 
Bonaparte with Louis XVI and Fould with Turgot.c  Fould and 
Turgot! It is like trying to compare M. Vaillant with Carnot, 
because both of them were Ministers of War. Turgot was the head 
of the new economic school of the eighteenth century, the 
Physiocratic School." He was one of the intellectual heroes who 
overthrew the old regime, while Louis XVI was the incarnation of 
that old regime. But who is Fould? Fould, a member of the 
dynastic opposition 10° under Louis Philippe, was always passed 
over on principle despite the most obtrusive solicitation, whenever 
the dynastic opposition was in a position to nominate a Finance 
Minister. Fould was held to be a "financier dangereux ", a reputation 
he had earned owing to his various unlucky financial operations. 
He needed only to defend a proposal, and the Chambers rejected 
it. Then came the provisional government. It had hardly been 
proclaimed, when Fould rushed to Ledru-Rollin, offered his 
services as Finance Minister and—proposed national bankruptcy. 
The courtship was unsuccessful, and the rejected suitor got his 
revenge by writing the pamphlet, Pas d'assignats! Finally Fould 
recognised in Louis Bonaparte the man who was foolhardy 
enough to hand the French treasury over to Mr. Fould. 
Fould was closely involved in the manoeuvres that ensured the 
"nephew's"d  election to the presidency on December 10, 1848. 
Fould was a very active friend and made the financial preparations 
for the coup d'état. December 2, 1851 was not only the victory of 
a The section of the people having the right to vote.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
c "The hour of reckoning has at length overtaken France...", The Times, 
No. 24091,  November 15, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 
d Louis Bonaparte's.— Ed. 

=====第107页=====
Monsieur Fould 81 
Louis Bonaparte but also the victory of Fould. Fould became 
all-powerful. Fould became Minister of State. Fould could raise 
even his menus plaisirs* to the level of affairs of state. He seized 
hold of the dictatorship of the theatre along with the dictatorship 
of finances. Like other notorious men of haute finance? Fould 
shared a passion for the dollar with a passion for the heroines of 
the wings. Fould became a sultan of the wings. Fould, with 
Péreire, is the inventor of imperialist finance. He is the direct 
cause of nine-tenths of the current deficit. Finally, in 1860, the 
great Fould withdrew into private life, to reappear in 1861 as "a 
new man" ("a brand new man") c in the imperialist finance 
comedy. Fould appears again as Turgot, Fould as Marquis Posa! 
Applaudite, amici! 
Written on November 16, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 318, 
November 19, 1861 Published in English for the first 
time 
a Lesser pleasures.— Ed. 
b High finance.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase "a new man" and adds "a brand new man" in 
German in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第108页=====
82 
Karl Marx 
FRANCE'S FINANCIAL SITUATION 
The Times, which at first praised the imperialist coup d'éclat 3 
moderately and then lauded it in hyperboles, makes a sudden 
switch today from panegyrics to criticism.b The way in which this 
manoeuvre is executed is typical of the Leviathan of the English 
press: 
"We will leave to others the task of congratulating Caesar on his admission that 
he is a finite and fallible being, and that, indisputably reigning by the power of the 
sword, he does not pretend to rule by virtue of Divine right. We had rather inquire 
what have been the financial results of ten years of Imperial sway, which are better 
worth thinking of than the phrases in which those results have been made 
known.... The Executive did what it pleased; the Ministers were responsible to the 
Emperor alone; the state of the finances was entirely concealed from the public 
and the Chambers. The annual form of voting a budget, instead of a check, was a 
mask; instead of a protection, a delusion. What, then, have the French people 
achieved by placing their liberties and their possessions at the disposal of a single 
man?...  M. Fould himself admits that between 1851 and 1858 extraordinary credits 
have been opened to the amount of 2,800,000,000 francs, and that the deficit for 
the present year amounts to no less than 1,000,000,000 francs. 
"We do not know how these sums were raised, but assuredly it has not been by 
taxation. We are told that four millions paid by the Bank of France for the renewal 
of its privileges have been spent, that five millions and a half of the Army Dotation 
Fund have been borrowed, and that securities of different kinds have been thrown 
into circulation. As to the present state of affairs, our Correspondent in Paris assures 
us that there is not money in the Treasury to pay the half-yearly dividends due next month. 
Such is the disastrous, the disgraceful state of French Finance, after ten years of 
brilliant and successful Imperialism, and it is only now, at a moment when it is 
unable to discharge its current obligations, that the French Government has taken 
the nation in some degree into its confidence and shown it a little of the reality that 
a Glorious exploit.— Ed. 
b "The extraordinary frankness of M. Fould...", The Times, No. 24093, 
November 18, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 

=====第109页=====
France's Financial Situation 83 
has lain hidden behind the glamorous phantasmagoria of the financial prosperity 
of which it has been so often assured. Nay, at this very moment the Revue des Deux 
Mondes is being prosecuted for making statements with regard to the financial 
position of France, the only fault of which is that they are far too rosy." 
The Times goes on to enquire into the causes of this collapse. 
During the imperialist decade France's exports have more 
than doubled. Agriculture has developed along with industry, and 
the railway system with both. The credit system, only incipient 
before 1848, has shot up in all directions. All these developments 
did not arise from any decree of the Emperor's, but from the 
revolutionary changes in the world market since the discovery of 
gold in California and Australia. Then what has caused the 
catastrophe? 
The Times mentions the extraordinary expenditures on the 
army and navy, the natural fruit of Louis Bonaparte's efforts to 
play Napoleon in Europe. It mentions the wars, and finally the 
gigantic outlays on public works in order to occupy the entre­
preneurs and the proletariat and keep them in good humour. 
"But," it continues, "all this is insufficient to account for this frightful deficit, 
the largest of which the history of manjcind furnishes us with an example.... To the 
aggressive military and naval armaments, public works, and occasional wars, has 
been added a shameless and universal system of pillage. A shower of gold has 
descended upon the Empire and its supporters. The enormous fortunes suddenly 
and unaccountably acquired have been the cause of scandal and wonder till scandal 
grew dumb and wonder weak from the frequency, indeed the universality, of the 
phenomenon. Modern France has taught us better to understand those passages in 
Juvenal's satires which treat suddenly acquired wealth as a crime against the 
people.3  The splendid mansions, the brilliant equipages, the enormous wastefulness 
of men who till the coup d'état notoriously starved, have been in every one's mouth. 
The Court has been conducted on a scale of almost incredible wastefulness. New 
palaces have arisen as by the wand of an enchanter, and the splendours of the 
ancien régime h have been surpassed. Extravagance has had no limits but public 
money and public credit; the one is gone and the other shattered. This is what ten 
years of Imperialism have done for France." 
The most important question for Europe is without doubt 
whether the imperialist finance system can be converted into a 
constitutional finance system, as the correspondence between 
Louis Bonaparte and Fould contemplates.0 What is involved here 
is not the momentary intentions of persons. It is the economic 
conditions for the life of the restored empire. The financial fraud 
a Juvenal, Satires, XIV, 173-78.— Ed. 
b The political and social system of France before the revolution of 1789.— Ed. 
c This refers to Napoleon Ill's message to A. Fould and the latter's "Mémoire à 
l'Empereur...", published in Le Moniteur universel, No. 318, November 14, 
1861.—  Ed. 

=====第110页=====
84 Karl Marx 
system could only be converted into a prosaic finance system by 
eliminating corruption as a general means of government; by 
reducing the army and navy to a peace footing, and therefore by 
abandoning the Napoleonic character of the present regime; finally, 
by complete renunciation of the plan followed hitherto of binding 
a part of the middle class and of the city proletariat to the existing 
government by means of great government construction projects 
and other public works. Would not meeting all these conditions 
mean: Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas? 3 Is it actually 
believed that the modest system of Louis Philippe can be brought 
into being again under Napoleonic auspices? As little as that the 
July monarchy could be established under the drapeau blanc. 102 
We therefore called the coup d'éclat of November 14 a comedy b 
from the outset, and did not doubt for a moment that this comedy 
had only two aims in view: remedying the immediate difficulty 
and — getting through the winter. Once these two goals had been 
achieved, the war bugles would blow in the spring and the attempt 
would be undertaken to make the war pay its own way this time. It 
should not be forgotten that up to now—and this was a necessary 
consequence of a merely simulated Napoleonism—Decembrist 
France has pfaid for all its glory out of the French state treasury. 
After a brief period of wavering, the English press has arrived 
at the same conclusions with respect to the seriousness of the 
November 14 promises and the possibility of their being carried 
out. 
Thus,  The Times of to-day says in the leader cited above: 
"The Emperor gives up the power of originating extraordinary credits. This is 
exactly one of those pieces of self-denying virtue which usually precede, but seldom 
survive, a new French loan." 
And its Stock Exchange article says: 
"Whether the financial sanctity suddenly adopted at the crisis of the Treasury 
sickness will outlast the fit for a long time after the Exchequer has been 
replenished and a new loan secured, is now the question.... Public opinion, it is 
asserted, will force the Emperor, whether he will or not, to carry out Fould's 
programme. Would it not be more correct to say that every one is prepared to 
accept this self-delusion, while army and navy contractors and speculators firmly 
rely on it that in the spring, after the present danger has been weathered, the 
Moniteur will find sufficient reasons, in 'the changed circumstances of Europe', or 
the necessity of rectifying something that somewhere threatens French honour, the 
Catholic faith, or the civilisation and liberty of the human race, for a recurrence to 
the old financial system, which can never be permanently abandoned in any 
a "And for life's sake, destroy the very basis of life" (Juvenal, Satires, VIII, 
84).—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp.  79-81.—  Ed. 

=====第111页=====
France's Financial Situation 85 
country under military dictatorship, and unpossessed of constitutional rights that 
are universal and inviolable?"3 
The Economist expresses itself similarly. It concludes its analysis 
with the following words: 
"Despite the decree, political risk must still be the first thought of a man who 
looks to his dynasty as something which any incidental failure may uproot."b 
So far, Louis Bonaparte has only exposed Europe to dangers 
because he himself has been continually exposed to danger in 
France. Is it believed that his danger to Europe will decrease to 
the same extent as the danger to himself in France increases? Only 
if the internal danger is given time to explode. 
Written on November 18, 1861 Printed according to the news-
First published in Die Presse, No. 322, 
November 23, 1861 Published in English for the first 
time 
a "Money-Market and City Intelligence", The Times, No. 24093, November 18, 
1861.—  Ed. 
b "The Constitutional Change in France", The Economist, No. 951, November 16, 
1861.—  Ed. 
8—1134 

=====第112页=====
86 
Karl Marx 
THE DISMISSAL OF FREMONT 
Fremont's dismissal from the post of Commander-in-Chief in 
Missouri forms a turning point in the history of the development 
of the American Civil War. Fremont has two great sins to expiate. 
He was the first candidate of the Republican Party for the 
presidential office (1856), and he is the first general of the North 
to have threatened the slaveholders with emancipation of slaves 
(August 30, 1861).a He remains, therefore, a rival of candidates 
for the presidency in the future and an obstacle to the makers of 
compromises in the present. 
During the last two decades the singular practice developed in 
the United States of not electing to the presidency any man who 
occupied an authoritative position in his own party. The names of 
such men, it is true, were utilised for election demonstrations, but 
as soon as it came to actual business, they were dropped and 
replaced by unknown mediocrities of merely local influence. In 
this manner Polk, Pierce, Buchanan, etc., became Presidents. 
Likewise Abraham Lincoln. General Andrew Jackson was in fact 
the last President of the United States who owed his office to his 
personal importance, whilst all his successors owed it, on the 
contrary, to their personal unimportance. 
In the election year 1860, the most distinguished names of the 
Republican Party were Fremont and Seward. Known for his 
adventures during the Mexican War,104 for his intrepid explora­
tion of California and his candidacy of 1856, Fremont was too 
striking a figure even to come under consideration as soon as it 
was no longer a question of a Republican demonstration, but of a 
a See this volume, pp. 51-52.— Ed. 

=====第113页=====
The Dismissal of Fremont 87 
Republican success. He did not, therefore, stand as a candidate. It 
was otherwise with Seward, a Republican Senator in the Congress 
of Washington, Governor of the State of New York and, since the 
rise of the Republican Party, unquestionably its leading orator. It 
required a series of mortifying defeats to induce Mr. Seward to 
renounce his own candidacy and to give his oratorical patronage 
to the then more or less unknown Abraham Lincoln. As soon, 
however, as he saw his attempt to stand as a candidate fail, he 
imposed himself as a Republican Richelieu on a man whom he 
considered a Republican Louis XIII. He contributed towards 
making Lincoln President, on condition that Lincoln made him 
Secretary of State, an office which is in some measure comparable 
with that of a British Prime Minister. As a matter of fact, Lincoln 
was hardly President-elect, when Seward secured the Secretaryship 
of State. Immediately a singular change took place in the attitude 
of the Demosthenes of the Republican Party, whom the prophesy­
ing of the "irrepressible conflict"3 between the system of free 
labour and the system of slavery had made famous.b  Although 
elected on November 6, 1860, Lincoln took up office as President 
only on March 4, 1861. In the interval, during the winter session 
of Congress, Seward made himself the central figure of all 
attempts at compromise; the Northern organs of the South, such 
as the New-York  Herald,  for example, whose bête noire Seward had 
been till then, suddenly extolled him as the statesman of 
reconciliation and, indeed, it was not his fault that peace at any 
price was not achieved. Seward manifestly regarded the post of 
Secretary of State as a mere preliminary step, and busied himself 
less with the "irrepressible conflict" of the present than with the 
presidency of the future. He has provided fresh proof that 
virtuosos of the tongue are dangerously inadequate statesmen. 
Read his state dispatches! What a repulsive mixture of magnilo­
quence and petty-mindedness, of simulated strength and real 
weakness! 
For Seward, therefore, Fremont was the dangerous rival who 
had to be ruined; an undertaking that appeared so much the 
easier since Lincoln, in accordance with his legal tradition, has an 
aversion for all genius, anxiously clings to the letter of the 
Constitution and fights shy of every step that could mislead the 
"loyal" slaveholders of the border states. Fremont's character 
a Marx gives the English phrase.— Ed. 
b W. H. Seward [Speech at Rochester, October 25, 1858], New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5466, October 28, 1858.— Ed. 
8* 

=====第114页=====
Karl Marx 
offered another hold. He is manifestly a man of pathos, somewhat 
pompous and haughty, and not without a touch of the melodra­
matic. First the government attempted to drive him to voluntary 
retirement by a succession of petty chicaneries. When this did not 
succeed, it deprived him of his command at the very moment 
when the army he himself had organised came face to face with 
the enemy in southwest Missouri and a decisive battle was 
imminent. 
Fremont is the idol of the states of the Northwest, which sing his 
praises as the "pathfinder".3 They regard his dismissal as a 
personal insult. Should the Union government meet with a few 
more mishaps like those of Bull Run and Ball's  Bluff, 105 it has 
itself given the opposition, which will then rise up against it and 
smash the hitherto prevailing diplomatic system of waging war, its 
leader in John Fremont. We shall return later to the indictment of 
the dismissed generalb published by the War Department in 
Washington. 
Written about November 19, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 325, 
November 26, 1861 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b The reference is to Brigadier General A. Thomas's report on the investigation 
of General Fremont's activity as Commander of the Western military area, 
published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6419, October 30,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第115页=====
89 
Karl Marx 
THE TRENT CASE 1 
London, November 28 
The conflict of the English mail ship Trent with the North 
American warship San Jacinto in the narrow passage of the Old 
Bahama Channel is the lion among the events of the day. In the 
afternoon of November 27 the mail ship La Plata brought the 
news of the incident to Southampton, whence the electric 
telegraph at once flashed it to all parts of Great Britain. The same 
evening the London Stock Exchange was the stage of stormy 
scenes similar to those at the time of the announcement of the 
Italian war. Quotations for government stock sank 3/4 to 1 per 
cent. The wildest rumours circulated in London. The American 
Ambassador, Adams, was said to have been given his passports, an 
embargo to have been imposed on all American ships in the 
Thames, etc. At the same time a protest meeting of merchants was 
held at the Stock Exchange in Liverpool, to demand measures 
from the British Government for the satisfaction of the violated 
honour of the British flag. Every sound-minded Englishman went 
to bed with the conviction that he would go to sleep in a state of 
peace but wake up in a state of war. 
Nevertheless, the fact is well-nigh categorically established that 
the conflict between the Trent and the San Jacinto brings no war 
in its train. The semi-official press, like The Times and The 
Morning Post, strikes a peaceful note and pours juridically cool 
deductions on the flickerings of passion.3 Papers like the Daily 
Telegraph, which at the faintest mot d'ordreb roar for the British 
a The reference is to the leading articles "It requires a strong effort...", The 
Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861 and "The Government of the United States 
has taken a step...", The Morning Post, No. 27440, November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Watchword.— Ed. 

=====第116页=====
90 Karl Marx 
lion, are true models of moderation. Only the Tory opposition 
press,  The Morning Herald and The Standard, hits out. These facts 
force every expert to conclude that the ministry has already 
decided not to make a casus belli out of the "untoward event".3 
It must be added that the event, if not the details of its 
enactment, was anticipated. On October 12, Messrs. Slidell, 
Confederacy emissary to France, and Mason, Confederacy emis­
sary to England, together with their secretaries Eustis and 
MacFarland, had run the blockade of Charleston on the steamship 
Theodora and sailed for Havana, there to seek the opportunity of a 
passage to Europe under the British flag. In England their arrival 
was expected daily. North American warships had set out from 
Liverpool to intercept the gentlemen, with their dispatches, on this 
side of the Atlantic Ocean. The British ministry had already 
submitted the question whether the North Americans were 
entitled to take such a step to its official jurisconsults for their 
opinion. Their answer is said to have been in the affirmative. 
The legal question turns in a narrow circle. Since the foundation 
of the United States, North America has adopted British maritime 
law in all its rigour. A major principle of this maritime law is that 
all neutral merchantmen are subject to search by the belligerent 
parties. 
"This right," said Lord Stowell in a judgment which has become famous, 
"offers the sole security that no contraband is carried on neutral ships." b 
The greatest American authority, Kent, states in the same sense: 
"The right of self-preservation gives belligerent nations this right. The doctrine 
of the English admiralty on the right of visitation and search ... has been 
recognised in its fullest extent by the courts of justice in this country."0 
It was not opposition to the right of search, as is sometimes 
erroneously suggested, that brought about the Anglo-American 
War of 1812 to 1814.107 Rather, America declared war because 
England unlawfully presumed to search even American warships, 
on the pretext of catching deserters from the British Navy. 
The San Jacinto, therefore, had the right to search the Trent 
and to confiscate any contraband stowed aboard her. That 
dispatches in the possession of Mason, Slidell and Co. come under 
a Marx uses the English expression here and below, and gives the German 
translation in brackets in the first case.— Ed. 
b Quoted from the leading article "It requires a strong effort...", The Times, 
No. 24102, November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
c Ibidem; The Times quotes from J. Kent's book Commentaries on American 
Law—Ed. 

=====第117页=====
The Trent Case 91 
the category of contraband even The Times, The Morning  Post,  etc., 
admit. There remains the question whether Messrs. Mason, Slidell 
and Co. were themselves contraband and might consequently be 
confiscated! The point is a ticklish one and differences of opinion 
prevail among the doctors of law. Pratt, the most distinguished 
British authority on "Contraband", in the section "Quasi-
Contraband—Dispatches, Passengers" specifically refers to "com­
munication of information and orders from a belligerent govern­
ment to its officers abroad, or the conveyance of military 
passengers".3 Messrs. Mason and Slidell, if not officers, were just 
as little ambassadors, since their governments are recognised 
neither by Britain nor by France. What are they, then? In 
justification of the very broad conceptions of contraband asserted 
by Britain in the Anglo-French wars,108 Jefferson already remarks 
in his memoirs that contraband, by its nature, precludes any 
exhaustive definition and necessarily leaves great scope for 
arbitrariness.11 In any event, however, one sees that from the 
standpoint of English law the legal question dwindles to a Duns 
Scotus controversy,109 the explosive force of which will not go 
beyond exchange of diplomatic notes. 
The political aspect of the North American procedure was 
estimated quite correctly by The Times in these words: 
"Even Mr. Seward himself must know that the voices of the Southern 
commissioners, sounding from their captivity, are a thousand times more eloquent 
in London and in Paris than they would have been if they had been heard in St. 
James's and the Tuileries." 0 
And is not the Confederacy already represented in London by 
Messrs. Yancey and Mann? 
We regard this latest operation of Mr. Seward as a characteristic 
act of tactlessness by self-conscious weakness simulating strength. 
If the naval incident hastens Seward's removal from the Washing­
ton Cabinet, the United States will have no reason to record it as 
an "untoward event" in the annals of its Civil War. 
Written on November 28, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Die Presse, No. 331, 
December 2, 1861 
a F. Th. Pratt, Law of Contraband of War..., London, 1856, pp. LIV-LV.— Ed. 
b Th. Jefferson, Memoirs, Correspondence, and Private Papers..., Vol. Ill, London, 
1829,  p. 488.—  Ed. 
c "It requires a strong effort...".— Ed. 

=====第118页=====
92 
Karl Marx 
THE ANGLO-AMERICAN CONFLICT 110 
London, November 29 
The law officers of the Crown3 had yesterday to give their 
opinion on the naval incident in the Bahama Channel.b Their 
records of the case consisted of the written reports of the British 
officers who have remained on board the Trent and of the oral 
testimony of Commodore Williams, who was on board the Trent as 
Admiralty agent, but disembarked from the steamer La Plata on 
November 27 at Southampton, whence he was immediately 
summoned by telegraph to London. The law officers of the Crown 
acknowledged the right of the San Jacinto to visit and search the 
Trent. Since Queen Victoria's proclamation of neutrality on the 
outbreak of the American Civil War0 expressly lists dispatches 
among articles of contraband,0 there could be no doubt on this 
point either. There remained, then, the question whether Messrs. 
Mason, Slidell and Co. were themselves contraband and therefore 
confiscable. The law officers of the Crown appear to hold this 
view, for they have dropped the material legal question entirely. 
According to the report of The Times* their opinion blames the 
commander of the San Jacinto{ only for an error in procedure. 
Instead of Messrs. Mason, Slidell and Co., he should have taken 
a The Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General. At the time, the posts were 
held by R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp.  89-91.—  Ed. 
c Victoria, R. A Proclamation [May 13, 1861], The Times, No. 23933, May 15, 
1861.—  Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 105-107.— Ed. 
e "Wherever two or three men met together yesterday...", The Times, 
No. 24103, November 29, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 
f Ch. Wilkes.— Ed. 

=====第119页=====
the Trent herself in tow as a prize, brought her to the nearest 
American port and there submitted her to the judgment of a 
North American prize court.1" This is incontestably the procedure 
corresponding to British and therefore to North American 
maritime law. 
It is equally incontestable that the British frequently violated this 
rule during the anti-Jacobin war and proceeded in the summary 
fashion of the San Jacinto. However that may be, the whole conflict 
is reduced by this opinion of the law officers of the Crown to a 
technical error and consequently deprived of any immediate 
import. Two circumstances make it easy for the Union govern­
ment to accept this point of view and therefore to afford formal 
satisfaction. In the first place, Captain Wilkes, the commander of 
the San Jacinto, could have received no direct instructions from 
Washington. On the voyage home from Africa to New York, he 
called on November 2 at Havana, which he left again on 
November 4, whilst his encounter with the Trent took place on the 
high seas on November 8. Captain Wilkes's stay of only two days 
in Havana did not permit any exchange of notes between him and 
his government. The consul of the Uniona was the only American 
authority with whom he could deal. In the second place, however, 
he had obviously lost his head, as his failure to insist on the 
surrender of the dispatches proves. 
The importance of the incident lies in its moral effect on the 
English people and in the political capital that can easily be made 
out of it by the British cotton friends of secession. Characteristic of 
the latter is the Liverpool protest meeting organised by them and 
previously mentioned by me.b The meeting took place on 
November 27 at three in the afternoon, in the cotton auction-
rooms of the Liverpool Exchange, an hour after the alarming 
telegram from Southampton had arrived. 
After vain attempts to press the chairmanship on Mr. Cunard, 
the owner of the Cunard steamships laying between Liverpool and 
New York, and other high trade officials, a young merchant 
named Spence, notorious for a work he wrote in support of the 
slave republic,0 took the chair. Contrary to the rules of English 
meetings, he, the chairman, himself proposed the motion to 
"call upon the government to assert the dignity of the British flag by requiring 
prompt reparation for this outrage".d 
a Charles J. Helm.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  89.—  Ed. 
c J. Spence, The American Union..., London,  1861.—  Ed. 
d "Liverpool, Wednesday", The Times, No. 24102, November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第120页=====
94 Karl Marx 
Tremendous applause, clapping and cheers upon cheers! The 
main argument of the opening speaker for the slave republic was 
that slave ships had hitherto been protected by the American flag 
from the right of search claimed by Britain. And then this 
philanthropist launched a furious attack on the slave trade! He 
admitted that England had brought about the war of 1812-14 with 
the United States by insisting on searching Union warships for 
deserters from the British Navy. 
"But," he continued with wonderful dialectic, "there is a difference between the 
right of search to recover deserters from the British Navy and the right to seize 
passengers, like Mr. Mason and Mr. Slidell, men of the highest respectability, 
regardless of the fact that they were protected by the British flag!" 
He played his highest trump, however, at the close of his 
diatribe. 
"The other day," he bellowed, "while I was on the European Continent, I 
heard observations made as to our conduct in regard to the United States which 
made me blush. What is the feeling of every intelligent man upon the Continent? 
That we would slavishly submit to any outrage and suffer every indignity offered 
to us by the Government of the United States. What could I reply to this? I could 
only blush. But the pitcher goes so often to the well that it is broken at last. Our 
patience had been exercised long enough—as long as it was possible to control it. 
At last we have arrived at facts [!]: this is a very hard and startling fact [!] and it is 
the duty of every Englishman to apprise the Government of how strong and 
unanimous is the feeling of this great community of the outrage offered to our 
flag." 
This senseless rigmarole was greeted with a peal of applause. 
Opposing voices were howled down and hissed down and stamped 
down. To the remark of a Mr. Campbell that the whole meeting 
was "irregular", the inexorable Spence replied: "So may it be, but 
the fact that we have met to consider is rather an irregular fact." 
To the proposal of a Mr. Turner to adjourn the meeting to the 
following day, in order that "the city of Liverpool can have its say 
and not a clique of cotton brokers usurp its name", cries of 
"Collar him, throw him out!" resounded from all sides. Unper­
turbed, Mr. Turner repeated his motion, which, however, was not 
put to the vote, again contrary to all the rules of English meetings. 
Spence triumphed. But, as a matter of fact, nothing has done 
more to cool London's temper than the news of Mr. Spence's 
triumph. 
Written on November 29, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 332, 
December 3, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第121页=====
95 
Karl Marx 
THE NEWS AND ITS EFFECT IN LONDON 
London, Nov. 30, 1861 
Since the declaration of war against Russia I never witnessed an 
excitement throughout all the strata of English society equal to 
that produced by the news of the Trent affair, conveyed to 
Southampton by the La Plata on the 27th inst. At about 2 o'clock 
p.m., by means of the electric telegraph, the announcement of the 
"untoward event" was posted in the news-rooms of all the British 
Exchanges. All commercial securities went down, while the price 
of saltpeter went up. Consols declined 3/4 per cent, while at 
Lloyds 112 war risks of five guineas were demanded on vessels from 
New-York. Late in the evening the wildest rumors circulated in 
London, to the effect that the American Minister3 had forthwith 
been sent his passports, that orders had been issued for the 
immediate seizure of all American ships in the ports of the United 
Kingdom, and so forth. The cotton friends of Secession at 
Liverpool improved the opportunity for holding, at ten minutes' 
notice, in the cotton salesroom of the Stock Exchange, an 
indignation meeting, under the presidency of Mr. Spence, the 
author of some obscure pamphlet in the interest of the Southern 
Confederacy.0 Commodore Williams, the Admiralty Agent on 
board the Trent, who had arrived with the La Plata, was at once 
summoned to London. 
On the following day, the 28th of November, the London press 
exhibited, on the whole, a tone of moderation strangely contrast­
ing with the tremendous political and mercantile excitement of the 
previous evening. The Palmerston papers, Times, Morning Post, 
a Ch. Adams.— Ed. 
b J. Spence, The American Union..., London,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第122页=====
96 Karl Marx 
Daily Telegraph, Morning Advertiser, and Sun, had received orders 
to calm down rather than to exasperate. The Daily News, by its 
strictures on the conduct of the San Jacinto, evidently aimed less at 
hitting the Federal Government than clearing itself of the 
suspicion of "Yankee prejudices," while The Morning Star, John 
Bright's organ, without passing any judgment on the policy and 
wisdom of the "act," pleaded its lawfulness. There were only two 
exceptions to the general tenor of the London press. The 
Tory-scribblers of The Morning Herald and The Standard, forming 
in fact one paper under different names, gave full vent to their 
savage satisfaction of having at last caught the "republicans" in a 
trap,  and finding a casus belli, ready cut out. They were supported 
by but one other journal, The Morning Chronicle, which for years 
had tried to prolong its checkered existence by alternately selling 
itself to the poisoner Palmer and the Tuileries. 113 The excitement 
on the Exchange greatly subsided in consequence of the pacific 
tone of the leading London papers. On the same 28th of Nov., 
Commander Williams attended at the Admiralty, and reported the 
circumstances of the occurrence in the old Bahama Channel. His 
report, together with the written depositions of the officers on 
board the Trent, were at once submitted to the law officers of the 
Crown, a whose opinion, late in the evening, was officially brought 
under the notice of Lord Palmerston, Earl Russell and other 
members of the Government. 
On the 29th of November there was to be remarked some slight 
change in the tone of the ministerial press. It became known that 
the law officers of the Crown, on a technical ground, had declared 
the proceedings of the frigate San Jacinto illegal, and that later in 
the day, the Cabinet, summoned to a general council, had decided 
to send by next steamer to Lord Lyons instructions to conform to 
the opinion of the English law officers. Hence the excitement in 
the principal places of business, such as the Stock Exchange, 
Lloyd's, the Jerusalem, the Baltic,114 etc., set in with redoubled 
force, and was further stimulated by the news that the projected 
shipments to America of saltpeter had been stopped on the 
previous day, and that on the 29th a general order was received at 
the Custom-House prohibiting the exportation of this article to 
any country except under certain stringent conditions. The 
English funds further fell 3/4, and at one time a real panic 
prevailed in all the stock markets, it having become impossible to 
transact any business in some securities, while in all descriptions a 
a R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
The News and Its Effect in London 97 
severe depression of prices occurred. In the afternoon a recovery 
in the stock market was due to several rumors, but principally to 
the report that Mr. Adams had expressed his opinion that the act 
of the San Jacinto would be disavowed by the Washington Cabinet. 
On the 30th of November (to-day) all the London papers, with 
the single exception of The Morning Star, put the alternative of 
reparation by the Washington Cabinet or—war. 
Having summed up the history of the events from the arrival of 
the La Plata to the present day, I shall now proceed to recording 
opinions. There were, of course, two points to be considered—on 
the one hand the law, on the other hand the policy, of the seizure 
of the Southern Commissioners3 on board an English mail 
steamer. 
As to the legal aspect of the affair, the first difficulty mooted by 
the Tory press and The Morning Chronicle was that the United 
States had never recognized the Southern Secessionists as belliger­
ents,  and, consequently, could not claim belligerent rights in 
regard to them. 
This quibble was at once disposed of by the Ministerial press 
itself. 
"We,"  said The Times, "have already recognized these Confederate States as a 
belligerent power, and we shall, when the time comes, recognize their Government. 
Therefore we have imposed on ourselves all the duties and inconveniences of a 
power neutral between two belligerents."15 
Hence, whether or not the United States recognize the 
Confederates as belligerents, they have the right to insist upon 
England submitting to all the duties and inconveniences of a 
neutral in maritime warfare. 
Consequently, with the exceptions mentioned, the whole Lon­
don press acknowledges the right of the San Jacinto to overhaul, 
visit, and search the Trent, in order to ascertain whether she 
carried goods or persons belonging to the category of "contraband 
of war." The Times's insinuation that the English law of 
decisions115 "was given under circumstances very different from those 
which now occur;" that "steamers did not then exist," and mail 
vessels, "carrying letters wherein all the nations of the world have 
immediate interest, were unknown;" that "we (the English) were 
fighting for existence, and did in those days what we should not allow 
others to do," was not seriously thrown out. Palmerston's private 
a J. Mason and J. Slidell.— Ed. 
b "It requires a strong effort...", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861, 
leading article.— Ed. 

=====第124页=====
98 Karl Marx 
Moniteur, The Morning Post, declared on the same day that mail 
steamers were simple merchantmen, not sharing the exemption 
from the right of search of men-of-war and transports. 3 The right 
of search, on the part of the San Jacinto, was in point of fact, 
conceded by the London press as well as the law officers of the 
Crown. The objection that the Trent, instead of sailing from a 
belligerent to a belligerent port, was, on the contrary, bound from 
a neutral to a neutral port, fell to the ground by Lord Stowell's 
decision that the right of search is intended to ascertain the 
destination of a ship.b 
In the second instance, the question arose whether by firing a 
round shot across the bows of the Trent, and subsequently 
throwing a shell, bursting close to her, the San Jacinto had not 
violated the usages and courtesies appurtenant to the exercise of 
the right of visitation and search. It was generally conceded by the 
London press that, since the details of the event have till now been 
only ascertained by the depositions of one of the parties 
concerned, no such minor question could influence the decision to 
be arrived at by the British Government. 
The right of search, exercised by the San Jacinto, thus being 
conceded, what had she to look for? For contraband of war, 
presumed to be conveyed by the Trent. What is contraband of 
war? Are the dispatches of a belligerent Government contraband of 
war? Are the persons carrying those dispatches contraband of war? 
And, both questions being answered in the affirmative, do those 
dispatches and the bearers of them continue to be contraband of 
war, if found on a merchant ship bound from a neutral port to a 
neutral port? The London press admits that the decisions of the 
highest legal authorities on both sides of the Atlantic are so 
contradictory, and may be claimed with such appearance of justice 
for both the affirmative and the negative, that, at all events, a 
prima faciec case is made out for the San Jacinto. 
Concurrently with this prevalent opinion of the English press, 
the English Crown lawyers have altogether dropped the material 
question, and only taken up the formal question. They assert that 
the law of nations was not violated in substance, but in form only. 
They have arrived at the conclusion that the San Jacinto failed in 
seizing, on her own responsibility, the Southern Commissioners, 
a "The Government of the United States has taken a step...", The Morning Post, 
No. 27440, November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
b "It requires a strong effort...".— Ed. 
c Plausible.— Ed. 

=====第125页=====
The News and Its Effect in London 99 
instead of taking the Trent to a Federal port and submitting the 
question to a Federal Prize-Court, no armed cruiser having a right 
to make himself a Judge at sea. A violation in the procedure of the 
San Jacinto is, therefore, all that is imputed to her by the English 
Crown lawyers, who, in my opinion, are right in their conclusion. 
It might be easy to unearth precedents, showing England to have 
similarly trespassed on the formalities of maritime law; but 
violations of law can never be allowed to supplant the law  itself. 
The question may now be mooted, whether the reparation 
demanded by the English Government—that is, the restitution of 
the Southern Commissioners—be warranted by an injury which 
the English themselves avow to be of form rather than of substance? 
A lawyer of the Temple,116 in the to-day's Times, remarks, in 
respect to this point: 
"If the case is not so clearly in our favor as that a decision in the American 
Court condemning the vessel would have been liable to be questioned by us as 
manifestly contrary to the laws of nations, then the irregularity of the American 
Captain3 in allowing the Trent to proceed to Southampton, clearly redounded to 
the advantage of the British owners and the British passengers. Could we in such a 
case find a ground of international quarrel in an error of procedure which in 
effect told in our own favor?" b 
Still, if the American Government must concede, as it seems to 
me, that Capt. Wilkes has committed a violation of maritime law, 
whether formal or material, their fair fame and their interest 
ought alike to prevent them from nibbling at the terms of the 
satisfaction to be given to the injured party. They ought to 
remember that they do the work of the Secessionists in embroiling 
the United States in a war with England, that such a war would be 
a godsend to Louis Bonaparte in his present difficulties, and 
would, consequently, be supported by all the official weight of 
France; and, lastly, that, what with the actual force under the 
command of the British on the North American and West Indian 
stations, what with the forces of the Mexican Expedition,0 the 
English Government would have at its disposal an overwhelming 
maritime power. 
As to the policy of the seizure in the Bahama Channel, the voice 
not only of the English but of the European press is unanimous in 
expressions of bewilderment at the strange conduct of the 
a Ch. Wilkes.— Ed. 
b Justitia, "To the Editor of The Times", The Times, No. 24104, November 30, 
1861.—  Ed. 
c See pp. 71-78 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第126页=====
100 Karl Marx 
American Government, provoking such tremendous international 
dangers, for gaining the bodies of Messrs. Mason, Slidell & Co., 
while Messrs. Yancey and Mann are strutting in London. The 
Times is certainly right in saying: 
"Even Mr. Seward himself must know that the voices of these Southern 
Commissioners, sounding from their captivity, are a thousand times more eloquent 
in London and in Paris than they would have been if they had been heard at St. 
James's and the Tuileries." 3 
The people of the United States having magnanimously submitted 
to a curtailment of their own liberties in order to save their country, 
will certainly be no less ready to turn the tide of popular opinion in 
England by openly avowing, and carefully making up for, an 
international blunder the vindication of which might realize the 
boldest hopes of the rebels. 
Written on November 30, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6462, December 19, 1861 
a "It requires a strong effort...", The Times, No. 24102, November 28, 1861, 
leading article.— Ed. 

=====第127页=====
101 
Karl Marx 
THE PRINCIPAL ACTORS IN THE TRENT DRAMA 117 
London, December 4 
At the present moment it is of interest to get acquainted in some 
measure with the leading figures in the Trent drama. On one side 
stands the active hero, Captain Wilkes, the commander of the San 
Jacinto; on the other, the passive heroes, /. M. Mason and John 
Slidell. Captain Charles Wilkes is a direct descendant of the 
brother of the celebrated English demagogue, [John] Wilkes, who 
threatened for a moment to shake the throne of George III.118 
The struggle with the North American colonies saved the 
Hanoverian dynasty at that time from the outbreak of an English 
revolution, symptoms of which were alike perceptible in the cry of 
a Wilkes and the letters of a Junius. Captain Wilkes, born in New 
York in 1798, forty-three years in the service of the American 
navy, commanded the squadron that from 1838 to 1842 explored 
the North and South Pacific Ocean by order of the Union 
government. He has published a report on this expedition in five 
volumes.3 He is also the author of a work on Western America, 
which contains some valuable information on California and the 
Oregon district.0  It is now certain that Wilkes improvised his coup 
de main c independently and without instructions from Wash­
ington. 
The two intercepted commissioners of the Southern Confedera­
cy— Messrs. Mason and Slidell—form a contrast in every respect. 
Mason, born in 1798, is descended from one of those old 
a Ch. Wilkes, Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition..., Vols. I-V, 
Philadelphia, 1845.— Ed. 
b Ch. Wilkes, Western America, including California and Oregon..., Philadelphia, 
1849.—  Ed. 
c An impetuous and unexpected attack.— Ed. 
9—1134 

=====第128页=====
102 Karl Marx 
aristocratic families of Virginia that fled from England after the 
Royalists had been defeated at the battle of Worcester.119 The 
grandsire of our hero3 belongs to the circle of men who, along 
with Washington, Jefferson, etc.. are designated by the Americans 
as "the revolutionary fathers".b John Slidell is neither, like Mason, 
of aristocratic lineage, nor, like his colleague, a slaveholder by 
birth. His native town is New York, where his grandfather and his 
father lived as honest tallow-chandlers.0 Mason, after he had 
occupied himself for some years with the study of law, stepped on 
the political stage. He figured repeatedly since 1826 as a member 
of the House of Representatives of Virginia; made his appearance 
in 1837 in the House of Representatives of the American Congress 
for a session; but his importance only dates from 1847. In that 
year Virginia elected him to the American Senate, in which he 
held his seat until the spring of 1861. Slidell, who is now 
sixty-eight years old, was obliged to leave New York as a young 
man in consequence of adultery and a duel, in short, of a scandal. 
He betook himself to New Orleans, where he lived first by 
gambling, later by practising law. Having become first a member 
of the legislature of Louisiana, he soon made his way to the House 
of Representatives and finally to the Senate of the American 
Congress. As a director of election rogueries during the presiden­
tial election of 1844 and, later, as a participant in a swindle in state 
lands,  he had even somewhat shocked the sort of morals that 
prevail in Louisiana. 
Mason inherited influence; Slidell acquired it. The two men 
found and supplemented each other in the American Senate, the 
bulwark of the slave oligarchy. In accordance with the American 
Constitution, the Senate elects a special Committee of Foreign 
Relations, which plays about the same role as the Privy Council0  12° 
formerly played in England, before the so-called Cabinet, a 
quantity theoretically unknown to the English Constitution, 
usurped the Privy Council's functions. Mason was for a long time 
chairman of this committee; Slidell, a prominent member of it. 
Mason, firmly convinced that every Virginian is a demi-god and 
every Yankee a plebeian rascal, never sought to conceal his 
contempt for his Northern colleagues. Haughty, overbearing, 
a G. Mason.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English expression and gives the German translation in 
parenthesis.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English words "tallow-chandlers" and gives the German 
translation in parenthesis.— Ed. 
d Marx gives the English name in brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第129页=====
The Principal Actors in the Trent Drama 103 
insolent, he knew how to knit his brows in a somber, Zeus-like 
frown and in fact transported to the Senate the manners native to 
the plantation. A fanatical eulogist of slavery, a shameless 
slanderer of the North and particularly of the Northern working 
class,  a blusterer against England, Mason wearied the Senate with 
the prolix importunity of a persistent flow of speech that vainly 
sought to hide its complete vacuity under a hollow pomp. As a 
sort of demonstration, he went around in recent years in Virginian 
home-made gray linen; but, and this is characteristic of the man, 
the gray coat was adorned with loud buttons, all of which came 
from a state of New England, from Connecticut. 
Whilst Mason played the Jupiter Tonans* of the slave oligarchy 
on the proscenium, Slidell worked behind the scenes. With a rare 
talent for intrigue, tireless perseverance and an unscrupulous lack 
of regard, but at the same time wary, covert, never strutting, but 
always insinuating  himself,  Slidell was the soul of the Southern 
conspiratorial conclave. One may judge the man's repute from the 
fact that when in 1845, shortly before the outbreak of war with 
Mexico, he was sent there as Ambassador, Mexico refused to treat 
with such an individual.121 Slidell's intrigues made Polk President. 
He was one of the most pernicious counsellors of President Pierce 
and the evil genius of Buchanan's administration. The two, Mason 
and Slidell, were the chief sponsors of the law on runaway 
slaves 122; they brought about the bloodbath in Kansas,123 and both 
were wirepullers for the measures whereby Buchanan's administ­
ration smuggled all the means to secession into the hands of the 
South, whilst it left the North defenceless.124 
As early as 1855 Mason declared on a public occasion in South 
Carolina that "for the South only one way lies open—immediate, 
absolute and eternal separation".0 In March 1861 he declared in 
the Senate that "he owed the Union government no allegiance",c 
but retained his seat in the Senate and continued to draw his 
senatorial salary as long as the safety of his person allowed—a spy 
in the supreme council of the nation and a fraudulent parasite on 
the public exchequer. 
Mason's great-grandmother was a daughter of the celebrated Sir 
William Temple. He is therefore a distant relative of Palmerston. 
a Jupiter the thunderer. — Ed. 
b J. M. Mason [Statement urging the separation of the South], New-York Times, 
October 14, 1856.— Ed. 
c J. M. Mason [Speech in the Senate on March 11, 1861], The New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6202, March 12, 1861. In quoting, Marx uses the English word 
"allegiance" and gives the translation in brackets.— Ed. 
9* 

=====第130页=====
104 Karl Marx 
Mason and Slidell appeared to the people of the North not merely 
as their political opponents, but as their personal enemies. Hence the 
general jubilation over their capture, which in its first days even 
overwhelmed regard for the danger threatening from England. 
Written on December 4, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 337, 
December 8, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第131页=====
105 
Karl Marx 
[CONTROVERSY OVER THE TRENT CASE] 125 
London, December 7 
The Palmerston press—and on another occasion I will show 
that in foreign affairs Palmerston's control over nine-tenths of the 
English press is just as absolute as Louis Bonaparte's over 
nine-tenths of the French press3—the Palmerston press feels that 
it works among "pleasing hindrances".15 On the one hand, it 
admits that the law officers of the Crown0 have reduced the 
accusation against the United States to a mere mistake in procedure, 
to a technical error. On the other hand, it boasts that on the basis of 
such a legal quibble a compelling ultimatum has been presented to 
the United States, such as can only be justified by a gross violation 
of law, but not by a formal error in the exercise of a recognised 
right. Accordingly, the Palmerston press now pleads the question 
of material right again. The great importance of the case appears 
to demand a brief examination of the question of material right. 
By way of introduction, it may be observed that not a single 
English paper ventures to reproach the San Jacinto for the visi­
tation and search of the Trent. This point, therefore, falls out­
side the controversy. 
First, we again call to mind the relevant passage in Queen 
Victoria's proclamation of neutrality of May 13, 1861. The passage 
reads: 
"Victoria R. 
"As we are at peace with the United States ... we warn all our beloved subjects 
... to abstain from contravening our Proclamation ... by breaking the legally 
a See this volume, pp. 127-30.— Ed. 
b Heinrich Heine, "Neuer Frühling", Prolog.— Ed. 
c R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed. 

=====第132页=====
106 Karl Marx 
recognised blockade or by carrying officers ... dispatches ... or any other contraband 
of war. All persons so offending will be liable to the various penalties imposed in 
that behalf by the English municipal law and by the law of nations.... Such persons 
will in no way receive our protection against the consequences of their conduct but 
will, on the contrary, incur our displeasure."3 
This proclamation of Queen Victoria, therefore, in the first 
place declares dispatches to be contraband and makes the ship that 
carries such contraband liable to the "penalties of the law of 
nations". What are these penalties? 
Wheaton, an American writer on international law whose 
authority is recognised on both sides of the Atlantic Ocean alike, 
says in his Elements of International Law, p.  565b: 
"The carrying of dispatches of the enemy subjects the neutral vessel in which 
they are transported to capture and confiscation. The consequences of such a service 
are infinitely beyond the effect of conveying ordinary contraband.... As Sir 
W. Scott, the English judge, says, the carrying of military stores is necessarily of 
limited nature, while the carrying of dispatches is an act that may defeat the entire 
plan of campaign of the other belligerent.... The confiscation of the noxious article, 
which constitutes the usual penalty for contraband, would be ridiculous when 
applied to dispatches. There would be no freight dependent on their transporta­
tion. Therefore, their confiscation does not affect the shipowner and hence does 
not punish the ship carrying them. The vehicle, in which they are carried, must, 
therefore, be confiscated." 
Walker, in his Introduction to American Law, says: 
"Neutrals may not be concerned in bearing hostile dispatches, under the penalty 
of confiscation of the vehicle, and of the cargo also." 
Kent, who is accounted a decisive authority in English courts, 
states in his Commentaries: 
"If, on search of a ship, it is found that she carries enemy dispatches, she incurs 
the penalty of capture and of confiscation by judgment of a prize court." 
Dr. Robert Phillimore, Advocate of Her Majesty in Her Office of 
Admiralty,0 says in his latest work on international law, p. 370: 
"Official communications from an official person d on the affairs of a-belligerent 
Government are such dispatches as impress an hostile character upon the carriers of 
them. The mischievous consequences of such a service cannot be estimated, and 
extend far beyond the effect of any Contraband that can be conveyed, for it is 
manifest that by the carriage of such dispatches the most important plans of a 
a Here and below Marx quotes from the article "The Capture of Mason and 
Slidell", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6435, November 18,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Here and below Marx gives the English titles of the books and the German 
translation in brackets.— Ed. 
c Marx gives the English designation and supplies the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
d Marx gives the English words "official" and, below, "carriers" in brackets 
after their German equivalents.— Ed. 

=====第133页=====
Controversy over the Trent Case 107 
Belligerent may be forwarded or obstructed.... The penalty is confiscation of the 
ship which conveys the dispatches and of the cargo.".3 
Two points are therefore established. Queen Victoria's procla­
mation of May 13, 1861, subjects English ships that carry 
dispatches of the Confederacy to the penalties of international law. 
International law, according to its English and American interpre­
ters,  imposes the penalty of capture and confiscation on such ships. 
Palmerston's organs consequently lied on orders from above— 
and we were naive enough to believe their lie—in affirming that 
the captain of the San Jacinto had neglected to seek for dispatches 
on the Trent and therefore had of course found none; and that 
the Trent had consequently become shot-proof through this 
oversight. The American journals of November 17 to 20, which 
could not yet have been aware of the English lie, unanimously state, 
on the contrary, that the dispatches had been seized and were 
already in print for submission to Congress in Washington. This 
changes the whole state of affairs. Because of these dispatches, the 
San Jacinto had the right to take the Trent in tow and every 
American prize court had the duty to confiscate her and her cargo. 
With the Trent, her passengers also naturally came within the pale 
of American jurisdiction. 
Messrs. Mason, Slidell and Co., as soon as the Trent had 
touched at Monroe, came under American jurisdiction as rebels. 
If, therefore, instead of towing the Trent herself to an American 
port, the captain of the San Jacinto contented himself with seizing 
the dispatches and their bearers, he in no way worsened the 
position of Mason, Slidell and Co., whilst, on the other hand, his 
error in procedure benefited the Trent, her cargo and her 
passengers. And it would be indeed unprecedented if Britain 
wished to declare war on the United States because Captain Wilkes 
committed an error in procedure harmful to the United States, but 
profitable to Britain. 
The question whether Mason, Slidell and Co. were themselves 
contraband, was only raised and could only be raised because the 
Palmerston journals had broadcast the lie that Captain Wilkes had 
neither searched for dispatches, nor seized dispatches. For in this 
case Mason, Slidell and Co. in fact constituted the sole objects on 
the ship Trent that could possibly fall under the category of 
contraband. Let us, however, disregard this aspect for the 
moment. Queen Victoria's proclamation designates "officers'^ of a 
belligerent party as contraband. Are "officers" merely military 
a R. Phillimore, Commentaries upon International Law.— Ed. 
b Here and further on Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第134页=====
108 Karl Marx 
officers? Were Mason, Slidell and Co. "officers" of the Confedera­
cy? "Officers, " says Samuel Johnson in his dictionary of the English 
language, are "men employed by the public",3  that is, in German: 
öffentliche Beamte. Walker gives the same definition. (See his 
dictionary, 1861 edition.) 
According to the usage of the English language, therefore, 
Mason, Slidell and Co., these emissaries, id est, officials of the 
Confederacy, come under the category of "officers", whom the 
royal proclamation declares to be contraband. The Trent captain 
knew them in this capacity and therefore rendered  himself,  his 
ship and his passengers confiscable. If, according to Phillimore 
and all other authorities, a ship becomes confiscable as the carrier0 
of an enemy dispatch because it violates neutrality, in a still higher 
degree is this true of the person who carries the dispatches. 
According to Wheaton, even an enemy ambassador, so long as he is 
in transitu, may be intercepted. In general, however, the basis of 
all international law is that any member of the belligerent party 
may be regarded and treated as "belligerent" by the opposing 
party. 
"So long as a man," says Vattel, "continues to be a citizen of his own country, he 
is the enemy of all those with whom his nation is at war."c 
One sees, therefore, that the law officers of the English Crown 
reduced the point of contention to a mere error in  procedure,  not an 
error in re,d but an error in forma,e because, actually, no violation 
of material right is to hand. The Palmerston organs chatter about 
the question of material right again because a mere error in 
procedure, in the interest of the "Trent" at that, gives no plausible 
pretext for a haughty-toned ultimatum. 
Meanwhile, important voices have been raised in this sense from 
diametrically opposite sides: on the one side, Messrs. Bright and 
Cobden; on the other, David Urquhart. These men are enemies on 
grounds of principle and personally: the first two, peaceable 
cosmopolitans; the third, the "last of the Englishmen"™; the former 
always ready to sacrifice all international law to international 
trade; the other hesitating not a moment: "Fiat justitia, pereat 
mundus",1 and by "justice" he understands "English" justice. The 
a Marx gives the definition in English.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
c E. de Vattel, Le Droit des gens..., Tome II, livre III, chapitre V, §  71.—  Ed. 
d In substance.— Ed. 
e In form.— Ed. 
f Let justice be done, though the world perish.— Ed. 

=====第135页=====
Controversy over the Trent Case 109 
voices of Bright and Cobden are important because they represent 
a powerful section of middle-class interests and are represented in 
the ministry by Gladstone, Milner Gibson and also, more or less, 
by Sir Cornewall Lewis. The voice of Urquhart is important 
because international law is his life-study and everyone recognises 
him as an incorruptible interpreter of this international law. 
The usual newspaper sources will communicate Bright's speech 
in support of the United States and Cobden's letter, which is 
conceived in the same sense.3 Therefore I will not dwell on them. 
Urquhart's organ, The Free Press, states in its latest issue, 
published on December 4: 
"'We must bombard New York!' Such were the frantic sounds which met the 
ears of every one who traversed the streets of London on the evening of this day 
week, on the arrival of the intelligence of a trifling warlike incident. The act was 
one which, in every war, England has committed as a matter of course—namely, the 
seizure on board of a neutral of the persons and property of her enemies." 
The Free Press further argues that, in 1856 at the Congress of 
Paris,  Palmerston, without any authority from the Crown or 
Parliament, sacrificed English maritime law in the interest of Russia, 
and then says: 
"In order to justify this sacrifice, Palmerston's organs stated at that time that if 
we maintained the right of visitation and search, we should assuredly be involved in a 
war with the United States on the occasion of the first war in Europe. And now he 
calls on us through the same organs of public opinion to bombard New York 
because the United States act on those laws which are theirs no less than our 
own."11 
With regard to the utterances of the "organs of public opinion", 
The Free Press remarks: 
"The bray of Baron Munchausen's thawing post-horn was nothing to the 
clangour of the British press on the capture of Messrs. Mason and Slidell. "c 
Then humorously, it places side by side, in "strophe" and 
"antistrophe", the contradictions by which the English press seeks 
to convict the United States of a "breach of law". 
Written on December 7, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Die Presse, No. 340, 
December 11, 1861 
a J. Bright's speech and R. Cobden's letter were reported in the note, "Mr. 
Bright on America", The Times, No. 24109, December 6,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Here and above Marx quotes from the article, " 'We must bombard New York!' 
Such were...", The Free Press, No. 12, December 4,  1861.—  Ed. 
' "'Public Opinion' on the San Jacinto Affair", The Free Press, same issue.— Ed. 

=====第136页=====
110 
Karl Marx 
PROGRESS OF FEELING IN ENGLAND 
London, Dec. 7, 1861 
The friends of the United States on this side of the Atlantic 
anxiously hope that conciliatory steps will be taken by the Federal 
Government. They do so not from a concurrence in the frantic 
crowing of the British press over a war incident, which, according 
to the English Crown lawryers themselves, resolves itself into a 
mere error of procedure, and may be summed up in the words 
that there has been a breach of international law, because Capt. 
Wilkes, instead of taking the Trent, her cargo, her passengers, and 
the Commissioners,3 did only take the Commissioners. Nor springs 
the anxiety of the well-wishers of the Great Republic from an 
apprehension lest, in the long run, it should not prove able to 
cope with England, although backed by the civil war; and, least of 
all, do they expect the United States to abdicate, even for a 
moment, and in a dark hour of trial, the proud position held by 
them in the council of nations. The motives that prompt them are 
of quite a different nature. 
In the first instance, the business next in hand for the United 
States is to crush the rebellion and to restore the Union. The wish 
uppermost in the minds of the Slaveocracy and their Northern 
tools was always to plunge the United States into a war with 
England. The first step of England as soon as hostilities broke out 
would be to recognize the Southern Confederacy, and the second 
to terminate the blockade. Secondly, no general, if not forced, will 
accept battle at the time and under the conditions chosen by his 
enemy. 
a J. Mason and J. Slidell.— Ed. 

=====第137页=====
Progress of Feeling in England 111 
"A war with America," says The Economist, a paper deeply in Palmerston's 
confidence, "must always be one of the most lamentable incidents in the history of 
England; but if it is to happen, the present is certainly the period at which it will do us 
the minimum of harm, and the only moment in our joint annals at which it would confer 
on us an incidental and partial compensation."a 
The very reasons accounting for the eagerness of England to 
seize upon any decent pretext for war at this "only moment" 
ought to withhold the United States from forwarding such a 
pretext at this "only moment." You go not to war with the aim to 
do your enemy "the minimum of harm, " and, even to confer upon 
him by the war, "an incidental and partial compensation. " The 
opportunity of the moment would all be on one side, on the side 
of your foe. Is there any great strain of reasoning wanted to prove 
that an internal war raging in a State is the least opportune time 
for entering upon a foreign war? At every other moment the 
mercantile classes of Great Britain would have looked upon a war 
against the United States with the utmost horror. Now, on the 
contrary, a large and influential party of the mercantile communi­
ty has for months been urging on the Government to violently 
break the blockade, and thus provide the main branch of British 
industry with its raw material. The fear of a curtailment of the 
English export trade to the United States has lost its sting by the 
curtailment of that trade having already actually occurred. "They" 
(the Northern States), says The Economist, "are wretched customers, 
instead of good ones." The vast credit usually given by English 
commerce to the United States, principally by the acceptance of 
bills drawn from China and India, has been already reduced to 
scarcely a fifth of what it was in 1857. Last, not least, Decembrist 
France, bankrupt, paralyzed at home, beset with difficulty abroad, 
pounces upon an Anglo-American war as a real godsend, and, in 
order to buy English support in Europe, will strain all her power 
to support "Perfidious Albion" on the other side of the Atlantic. 
Read only the French newspapers. The pitch of indignation to 
which they have wrought themselves in their tender care for the 
"honor of England," their fierce diatribes as to the necessity on 
the part of England to revenge the outrage on the Union Jack, 
their vile denunciations of everything American, would be truly 
appalling, if they were not ridiculous and disgusting at the same 
time.  Lastly, if the United States give way in this instance, they will 
not derogate one iota of their dignity. England has reduced her 
complaint to a mere error of procedure, a technical blunder of which 
a "The Effect of an American War upon English Commerce", The Economist, 
No. 954, December 7, 1861.—Ed. 

=====第138页=====
112 Karl Marx 
she has made herself systematically guilty in all her maritime wars, 
but against which the United States have never ceased to protest, 
and which President Madison, in his message inaugurating the war 
of 1812,a expatiated upon as one of the most shocking breaches of 
international law. If the United States may be defended in paying 
England with her own coin, will they be accused for magnanim­
ously disavowing, on the part of a single American captain,15 acting 
on his own responsibility, what they always denounced as a 
systematic usurpation on the part of the British Navy! In point of 
fact, the gain of such a procedure would be all on the American 
side.  England, on the one hand, would have acknowledged the 
right of the United States to capture and bring to adjudication 
before an American prize court every English ship employed in 
the service of the Confederation. On the other hand, she would, 
once for all, before the eyes of the whole world, have practically 
resigned a claim which she was not brought to desist from either 
in the peace of Ghent, in 1814,c or the transactions carried on 
between Lord Ashburton and Secretary Webster in 1842.127 The 
question then comes to this: Do you prefer to turn the "untoward 
event" to your own account, or, blinded by the passions of 
the moment, turn it to the account of your foes at home and 
abroad? 
Since this day week, when I sent you my last letter,d British 
consols have again lowered, the decline, compared with last 
Friday, amounting to 2 per cent, the present prices being  893/4  to 
7Is for money and 90 to 90 Vs for the new account on the 9th of 
January. This quotation corresponds to the quotation of the 
British consols during the first two years of the Anglo-Russian 
war.e This decline is altogether due to the warlike interpretation 
put upon the American papers conveyed by the last mail, to the 
exacerbating tone of the London press, whose moderation of two 
days'  standing was but a feint, ordered by Palmerston, to the 
dispatch of troops for Canada, to the proclamation forbidding the 
export of arms and materials for gunpowderf and lastly, to the 
a J. Madison, To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States 
[Washington, June 1, 1812].— Ed. 
b Ch. Wilkes.— Ed. 
c A Treaty of Peace and Amity between his Britannic Majesty and the United States of 
America; signed at Ghent, December 24, 1814.— Ed. 
d See this volume, pp. 95-100.— Ed. 
e The Crimean War of 1853-56— Ed. 
f Victoria, R., A Proclamation [December 4, 1861], The Times, No. 24108, 
December 5,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第139页=====
Progress of Feeling in England 113 
daily ostentatious statements concerning the formidable prepara­
tions for war in the docks and maritime arsenals. 
Of one thing you may be sure, Palmerston wants a legal pretext 
for a war with the United States, but meets in the Cabinet councils 
with a most determinate opposition on the part of Messrs. 
Gladstone and Milner Gibson, and, to a less degree, of Sir 
Cornwall Lewis. "The noble viscount" is backed by Russell, an 
abject tool in his hands, and the whole Whig Coterie. If the 
Washington Cabinet should furnish the desired pretext, the 
present Cabinet will be sprung, to be supplanted by a Tory 
Administration. The preliminary steps for such a change of 
scenery have been already settled between Palmerston and 
Disraeli. Hence the furious war-cry of The Morning Herald and 
The Standard, those hungry wolves howling at the prospect of the 
long-missed crumbs from the public almoner. 
Palmerston's designs may be shown up by calling into memory a 
few facts. It was he who insisted upon the proclamation, 
acknowledging the Secessionists as belligerents, on the morning of 
the 14th of May, after he had been informed by telegraph from 
Liverpool that Mr. Adams would arrive at London on the night of 
the 13th May. He, after a severe struggle with his colleagues, 
dispatched 3,000 men to Canada, an army ridiculous, if intended 
to cover a frontier of 1,500 miles, but a clever sleight-of-hand if 
the rebellion was to be cheered, and the Union to be irritated. He, 
many weeks ago, urged Bonaparte to propose a joint armed 
intervention "in the internecine struggle," supported that project 
in the Cabinet council, and failed only in carrying it by the 
resistance of his colleagues. He and Bonaparte then resorted to 
the Mexican intervention as a pis aller? That operation served two 
purposes, by provoking just resentment on the part of the 
Americans, and by simultaneously furnishing a pretext for the 
dispatch of a squadron, ready, as The Morning Post has it, "to 
perform whatever duty the hostile conduct of the Government of 
Washington may require us to perform in the waters of the 
Northern Atlantic." b At the time when that expedition was 
started, The Morning  Post,  together with The Times and the smaller 
fry of Palmerston's press slaves, said that it was a very fine thing, 
and a philanthropic thing into the bargain, because it would 
expose the slaveholding Confederation to two fires—the Anti-
a The last means.— Ed. 
b "We are glad to be able to inform our readers...", The Morning Post, 
No. 27442, November 30,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第140页=====
114 Karl Marx 
Slavery North and the Anti-Slavery force of England and France. 
And what says the very same Morning Post, this curious compound 
of Jenkins and Rhodomonte, of plush and swash, in its to-day's 
issue, on occasion of Jefferson Davis's address? 3 Hearken to the 
Palmerston oracle: 
"We must look to this intervention as one that may be in operation during a 
considerable period of time; and while the Northern Government is too distant to 
admit of its attitude entering materially into this question, the Southern 
Confederation, on the other hand, stretches for a great distance along the frontier 
of Mexico, so as to render its friendly disposition to the authors of the insurrection of 
no slight consequence. The Northern Government has invariably railed at our 
neutrality, but the Southern with statesmanship and moderation has recognized in 
it all that we could do for either party; and whether with a view to our transactions 
in Mexico, or to our relations with the Cabinet at Washington, the friendly 
forbearance of the Southern Confederacy is an important point in our favor. "b 
I may remark that the Nord of December 3—a Russian paper, 
and consequently a paper initiated into Palmerston's designs— 
insinuates that the Mexican expedition was from the first set on 
foot, not for its ostensible purpose, but for a war against the 
United States. 0 
Gen. Scott's letter had produced such a beneficent reaction in 
public opinion, and even on the London Stock Exchange, that the 
conspirators of Downing street and the Tuileries 128 found it 
necessary to let loose the Patrie, stating with all the airs of 
knowledge derived from official sources that the seizure of the 
Southern Commissioners from the Trent was directly authorized 
by the Washington Cabinet. 
Written on December 7, 1861 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6467, December 25, 1861 
a J. Davis, "To the Congress of the Confederate States. Richmond, Nov. 18,  1861", 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25,  1861.—  Ed. 
b "The principal intelligence conveyed by the Edinburgh...", The Morning Post, 
No. 27448, December 7,  1861.—  Ed. 
c "Résumé politique", Le Nord,  No. 337, December 3,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第141页=====
115 
Karl Marx 
THE CRISIS OVER THE SLAVERY ISSUE 129 
London, December 10 
The United States has evidently entered a critical stage with 
regard to the slavery question, the question underlying the whole 
Civil War. General Fremont has been dismissed for declaring the 
slaves of rebels free.3 A directive to General Sherman, the 
commander of the expedition to South Carolina, was a little later 
published by the Washington Government, which goes further 
than Fremont, for it decrees that fugitive slaves even of loyal 
slave-owners should be welcomed and employed as workers and 
paid a wage, and under certain circumstances armed, and consoles 
the "loyal" owners with the prospect of receiving compensation 
later.b Colonel Cochrane has gone even further than Fremont, he 
demands the arming of all slaves as a military measure.0 The 
Secretary of War Cameron publicly approves of Cochrane's 
"views".d  The Secretary of the Interior,6  on behalf of the 
government, then repudiates the Secretary of War. The Secretary 
of War expresses his "views" even more emphatically at a public 
meeting stating that he will vindicate these views in his report to 
Congress/ General H alleck, Fremont's successor in Missouri, and 
General Dix in east Virginia have driven fugitive Negroes from 
their military camps and forbidden them to appear in future in 
the vicinity of the positions held by their armies. General Wool at 
the same time has received the black "contraband" with open 
a See this volume, pp. 86-88. Fremont's proclamation was published in the 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6366, September 1,  1861.—  Ed. 
b The directive was discussed in the item "Instructions to Gen. Sherman", 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6445, November 29,  1861.—  Ed. 
c Cochrane's message to soldiers, New-York Daily Tribune, No.  6433,  November 
15, 1861.—  Ed. 
d Cameron's speech to soldiers, New-York Daily Tribune, same issue.— Ed. 
e C. B. Smith.— Ed. 
f The Smith-Cameron polemic was discussed in a report from Washington and 
published in The Times, No.  24111,  December 9,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第142页=====
116 Karl Marx 
arms at Fort Monroe. 130 The old leaders of the Democratic Party, 
Senator Dickinson and Croswell (a former member of the so-called 
Democratic regency 131), have published open letters in which they 
express their agreement with Cochrane and Cameron,3 and 
Colonel Jennison in Kansas has surpassed all his military predeces­
sors by an address to his troops which contains the following 
passage: 
"No temporising with rebels and those sympathising with them.... I have told 
General Fremont that I would not have drawn my sword had I thought that slavery 
would outlast this struggle. The slaves of rebels will always find protection in this 
camp and we will defend them to the last man and the last bullet. I want no men 
who are not Abolitionists^ I have no use for them and I hope that there are no such 
people among us, for everyone knows that slavery is the basis, the centre and the 
vertex of this infernal war.... Should the government disapprove of my action it can 
take back my patent, but in that case I shall act on my own hook even if in the 
beginning I can only count on six men."c 
The slavery question is being solved in practice in the border 
slave states even now, especially in Missouri and to a lesser extent 
in Kentucky, etc. A large-scale dispersal of slaves is taking place. 
For instance 50,000 slaves have disappeared from Missouri, some 
of them have run away, others have been transported by the 
slave-owners to the more distant southern states. 
It is rather strange that a most important and significant event is 
not mentioned in any English newspaper. On November 18, 
delegates from 45 North Carolina counties met on Hatteras 
Island, appointed a provisional government, revoked the Ordi­
nance of Secession and proclaimed that North Carolina was 
returning to the Union. The counties of North Carolina rep­
resented at this convention have been called together to elect their 
Representatives to Congress at Washington.0 
Written on December 10, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 343, 
December 14, 1861 
a Croswell's letter in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 
1861.  In a postscript to it Dickinson declared himself in agreement with 
Croswell.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the beginning of this sentence in English in brackets, after the 
German equivalent. In the same manner he gives the phrase "on my own hook" 
further in this paragraph.— Ed. 
c Jennison's address was reproduced in the item "Camp Jennison. Kansas City, 
Tuesday, Nov. 12,  1861",  New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 
1861.—  Ed. 
d These events were reported in the item "Hatteras Inlet, N.C., Nov. 18,  1861", 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6438, November 21,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第143页=====
117 
Karl Marx 
AMERICAN MATTERS 
London, December 13 
The news of the fate of the Harvey Birch and the visit of the 
cruiser Nashville in Southampton harbour reached New York on 
November 29, but does not seem to have provoked the sensation 
that was every bit as expected in certain circles here as it was 
feared in others, hostile to the war.132 This time, one wave broke 
on another. For New York was stirred up by the campaign for the 
election of the Mayor on December 3. The Washington correspon­
dent of The Times, Mr. Russell, who spoils his Celtic talent by 
affecting English ways, pretends to shrug his shoulders in wonder 
at this excitement over the mayoral election.3  Of course, Mr. 
Russell is flattering the illusion of the London cockney that the 
election of the Mayor in New York is the same kind of 
old-fashioned tomfoolery as the election of a Lord Mayor in 
London. It is well known that the Lord Mayor of London has 
nothing to do with the greater part of London. He is the nominal 
ruler of the City, a story-book character who strives to prove his 
reality by producing good turtle soups at banquets and bad 
judgments in cases of violation of police regulations. A Lord 
Mayor of London is a government figure only in the imagination 
of Paris writers of vaudeville and faits divers! 3 The Mayor of New 
York, on the contrary, is a real power. At the beginning of the 
secession movement the then Mayor, the notorious Fernando  Wood, 
was on the point of proclaiming New York an independent city 
republic, 133 in collusion, of course, with Jefferson Davis. His plan 
a [W. H. Russell] "Washington, Nov. 29", The Times, No. 24115, December 13, 
1861.—  Ed. 
b Local news items.— Ed. 
10—1134 

=====第144页=====
118 Karl Marx 
foundered owing to the energy of the Republican Party of the 
Empire City.134 
On November 27, Charles Sumner of Massachusetts, a member 
of the American Senate, where he had been beaten with a stick by 
a Southern senator3 at the time of the Kansas affair,135 delivered a 
brilliant speech before a large meeting in Cooper Union 136 in New 
York on the origin and secret motives of the slaveholder 
rebellion.b After his speech the meeting adopted the following 
resolution: 
"The doctrine enunciated by General Fremont, with respect to the emancipa­
tion of the slaves of rebels, and the more recent utterances of General Burnside, 
Senator Wilson,c George Bancroft (the famous historian), Colonel Cochrane and 
Simon Cameron, foreshadowing the eventual rooting out of slavery as the cause of 
the rebellion, indicate a moral, political, and military necessity. In the judgment of 
this meeting, the public sentiment of the North is now fully in sympathy with any 
practicable scheme which may be presented for the extirpation of this national evil, 
and it regards such a result as the only consistent issue of this contest between 
civilisation and barbarism." d 
The New-York Tribune comments, in particular, on Sumner's 
address: 
"The allusion of Mr. Sumner to the coming discussions of Congress on the 
subject of slavery will kindle a hope that that body will at last understand where 
Southern weakness and Northern strength really lie, and will seize the instrumen­
tality by which alone the rebellion is to be brought to a speedy and final 
extirpation. "e 
A private letter from Mexico states among other things: 
"The English ambassadorf  pretends to be a warm friend of the administration 
of President Juarez. Persons well acquainted with the Spanish intrigues assure us 
that General Marquez has been instructed by Spain to bring the scattered forces of 
the Clerical party together again, its Mexican as well as Spanish elements. This 
party is then to take advantage of the opportunity soon to be offered to beg Her 
Catholic Majesty s to provide a king for the Mexican throne. An uncle of the 
a P. S. Brooks.— Ed. 
b Sumner's speech was published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6444, 
November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
c Presumably Henry Wilson.— Ed. 
d "The Sentiment of the Cooper Institute Meeting Last Night", New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6444, November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
e "It is certainly an indicative and important fact...", New-York Daily Tribune, 
same issue, leading article.— Ed. 
f Th. Murphy.— Ed. 
g Isabella IL— Ed. 

=====第145页=====
American Matters 119 
Queen a  is said to have been selected for the position already. As he is an old man, 
he would soon leave the stage in the natural course of events, and since any clause 
concerning the nomination of his successor is to be avoided, Mexico would thus 
revert to Spain—so that the same policy would triumph in Mexico as in Haiti." 137 
Written on December 13, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 346, 
December 17, 1861 Published in English for the first 
time 
a Francisco de Paula Antonio de Borbon. — Ed. 

=====第146页=====
120 
Karl Marx 
A SLANDER TRIAL 
London, December 19 
The ancient Egyptians are known to have developed the division 
of labour to a high degree, so far as it extended to the whole of 
society and not to the individual workshop. With them almost 
every particular part of the body had its own special physician, 
whose therapy was confined by law to this particular region. Theft 
was the occupation of a special trade, the head of which was an 
officially recognised person. But how inadequate the ancient 
Egyptian division of labour appears when compared to that of 
modern England! The strange nature of some trades in London 
amazes us no less than the extent to which they are carried on. 
One of these curious industries is espionage. It divides into two 
big branches, civil espionage and political espionage. We leave the 
latter entirely out of account here. Civil espionage is again broken 
down into two large subdivisions—official and private espionage. 
The official sort is carried on, on the one hand, by detectives, 
who are paid either by the government or the municipal 
authorities, and on the other hand, by common informers, who 
spy on their own and are paid by jobwork3 by the police. 
The business of private espionage breaks down into many subtypes, 
which may be united under two major headings. One comprises 
non-commercial private relations, the other commercial. Under the 
first heading, in which espionage on marital infidelity plays an 
important part, the establishment of Mr. Field has won European 
fame. The business of commercial espionage will be better 
understood from the following incident. 
Last Tuesday13 the Court of Exchequer138 dealt with a suit for 
a Marx uses the English words "detectives", "common informers" and 
"jobwork" and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 
b December 17.— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
A Slander Trial 121 
slander, in which a local weekly paper, Lloyd's Weekly News, was the 
defendant and Stubbs and Comp, the plaintiff.  Stubbs and Comp, 
publish a weekly under the title of Stubbs' Gazette, the organ of 
Stubbs' Trade Protection Company. The paper is sent privately to 
subscribers, who pay 3 guineas a year, but is not sold by single 
copies, as other newspapers are, in stationers' 3 shops, on the 
street, at railway stations, and so on. Actually, it is a proscription 
list of bad debtors, whatever their position in life. Stubbs' 
"Protection Company" spies out the solvency of private individu­
als, Stubbs' Gazette records them in black and white. The number 
of subscribers runs to 20,000. 
Well, Lloyd's Weekly News had published an article in which the 
following statement appeared: "It is the duty of every honourable 
man to put an end to this disgraceful system of espionage." Stubbs 
demanded judicial revenge for this slander. 
After the attorney for the  plaintiff,  Serjeant Shee, had poured 
out the stream of his Irish eloquence, the plaintiff Stubbs 
underwent a cross examinationb (in effect, the cross fire to which 
the witnesses are subjected during the hearing) by Serjeant 
Ballantine, the attorney for Lloyd's Weekly News. The following 
comical dialogue ensued.c 
Ballantine: "Do you ask your subscribers for information?" 
Stubbs: "I invite the subscribers to send me the names of persons 
they consider to be swindlers. We then investigate these cases. I do 
not investigate them  myself.  I have agents in London and other 
large cities. I have 9 or 10 agents in London, who get a yearly 
salary." 
Ballantine: "What do these gentlemen receive for hunting out 
information?" 
Stubbs: "From 150 to 200 pounds sterling." 
Ballantine: "And a new suit? Well, when one of these well-paid 
gentlemen catches a swindler, what happens then?" 
"We publish his name." 
Ballantine: "When he is a thorough swindler?" 
"Yes." 
"But if he is only half a swindler?" 
"Then we enter it in our register." 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English words "serjeant", "cross examination" and, below, 
"solicitor".— Ed. 
c Marx draws on a report published in The Times, No. 24119, December 18, 
1861.—  Ed. 

=====第148页=====
122 Karl Marx 
"Until he is in full bloom, and then you publish it?" 
"Yes." 
"Do you publish autographs of swindlers?" 
"Yes." 
"And you go to even greater expense for the benefit of trade. 
You publish photographs of swindlers?" 
"Yes." 
"Do you not have a secret police agency? Are you not connected 
with Mr. Field?" 
"I am glad to be able to say No!" 
"What is the difference?" 
"I decline to answer that." 
"What do you mean by your 'legal agents'?" 
"That concerns collection of debts. I mean by it solicitors 
(something between attorney and bailiff) who take care of 
subscribers' business according to the conditions stated in the 
prospectus." 
"So, you are a collector of debts, too?" 
"I collect debts through 700 solicitors." 
"Good Lord, you have 700 solicitors, and the world still exists! 
Do you keep the solicitors or do the solicitors keep you?" 
"They keep themselves." 
"Have you had other court cases?" 
"Yes,  half a dozen." 
"Did you ever contest them?" 
"Yes." 
"Was the decision ever in your favour?" 
"Once." 
"What do you mean by the heading in your paper, 'Addresses 
Wanted', followed by a long list of names?" 
"Absconding debtors whose whereabouts neither we nor our 
subscribers could trace." 
"How is your business organised?" 
"Our central office is in London, with branch offices in 
Birmingham, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dublin. My father left me 
the business. He carried it on in Manchester originally." 
Attorney Ballantine in his plea pounced mercilessly on Stubbs, 
whose "smiling and self-complacent attitude during his testimony 
proved at any rate that he had no more idea than a dung-beetle of 
the filth of the material he moved in". English trade must have 
sunk deep indeed, if it needed such a protector. This unworthy 
spy system would give Stubbs a fearful weapon for extortion, 
etc. 

=====第149页=====
A Slander Trial 123 
The Lord Chief Baron,139 who was sitting as judge,3 threw his 
summing-up into the balance for the defence. He concluded with 
the words: 
"The jury owe much to the freedom of the press; but juries are not 
independent because the press is free, but the press is free because the juries are 
independent. You must consider whether the incriminated article goes beyond the 
bounds of honest criticism. Stubbs is a public character and as such is subject to 
criticism. Should you believe that Lloyd's Weekly News has gone beyond the bounds 
of honest criticism, then it is up to you to award the plaintiff appropriate damages." 
The jurors withdrew to the jury room to deliberate. After 
debating for a quarter of an hour they reappeared in the 
courtroom with the verdict: Plaintiff Stubbs is in the right; 
damages for his wounded honour—one farthing. The farthing is 
the smallest English coin, corresponding to the Frencn centime 
and the German pfennig. Stubbs left Guildhall amidst the loud 
laughter of the large audience, escorted by a number of admirers, 
from whose urgent ovations only speedy flight could save his 
modest dignity. 
Written on December 19, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 353, 
December 24, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a J. F. Pollock, the Chief Justice of the Court of Exchequer. Marx gives the 
English title: "Lord Chief Baron".— Ed. 

=====第150页=====
124 
Karl Marx 
THE WASHINGTON CABINET 
AND THE WESTERN POWERS 14 
One of the most striking surprises of a war so rich in surprises 
as the Anglo-French-Turkish-Russian3 was incontestably the decla­
ration on maritime law agreed at Paris in the spring of 1856.141 
When the war against Russia began, England suspended her most 
formidable weapons against Russia: confiscation of enemy-owned 
goods on neutral ships and privateering. At the conclusion of the 
war, England broke these weapons in pieces and sacrificed the 
fragments on the altar of peace/Russia, the ostensibly vanquished 
party, received a concession that, by a series of "armed neu­
tralities",142 wars and diplomatic intrigues, she had tried in vain to 
extort since Catherine II. England, the ostensible victor, re­
nounced, on the other hand, the great means of attack and 
defence that had grown up out of her sea power and that she had 
maintained for a century and a half against a world in arms. 
The humanitarian grounds that served as a pretext for the 
Declaration of 1856 vanish before the most superficial examina­
tion. Privateering is no greater barbarism than the action of 
volunteer corps or guerillas in land warfare. The privateers are 
the guerillas of the sea. Confiscation of the private goods of a 
belligerent nation also occurs in land warfare. Do military 
requisitions, for example, hit only the cash-box of the enemy 
government and not the property of private persons also? The 
nature of land warfare safeguards enemy possessions that are on 
neutral soil, therefore under the sovereignty of a neutral power. 
The nature of sea warfare obliterates these barriers, since the sea, 
a The Crimean War.— Ed. 

=====第151页=====
Washington Cabinet and Western Powers 125 
as the common highway of the nations, cannot fall to the 
sovereignty of any neutral power. 
As a matter of fact, however, the Declaration of 1856 veils 
under its philanthropic phrases a great inhumanity. In principle it 
transforms war from a war of peoples into a war of governments. 
It endows property with an inviolability that it denies to persons. 
It emancipates trade from the terrors of war and thereby makes 
the classes carrying on trade and industry callous to the terrors of 
war. For the rest, it is self-understood that the humanitarian 
pretexts of the Declaration of 1856 were only addressed to the 
European gallery, just like the religious pretexts of the Holy 
Alliance. 
It is a well-known fact that Lord Clarendon, who signed away 
Britain's maritime rights at the Congress of Paris, acted, as he 
subsequently confessed in the Upper House, without the fore­
knowledge or instructions of the Crown. His sole authority 
consisted in a private letter from Palmerston. Up to the present 
Palmerston has not dared to demand the sanction of the British 
Parliament for the Declaration of Paris and its signature by 
Clarendon. Apart from the debates on the contents of the 
Declaration, there was fear of debates on the Constitutional 
question whether, independently of Crown and Parliament, a 
British minister might usurp the right to sweep away the old basis 
of English sea power with a stroke of the pen. That this ministerial 
coup d'état did not lead to stormy interpellations, but, rather, was 
silently accepted as a fait accompli, Palmerston owed to the 
influence of the Manchester school. 143 It found to be in accordance 
with the interests represented by it, and therefore also with 
philanthropy, civilisation and progress, an innovation which would 
allow English commerce to continue to pursue its business with the 
enemy undisturbed on neutral ships, whilst sailors and soldiers 
fought for the honour of the nation. The Manchester men were 
jubilant over the fact that by an unconstitutional coup de main the 
minister had bound England to international concessions whose 
attainment in the constitutional parliamentary way was wholly 
improbable. Hence the present indignation of the Manchester 
party in England over the disclosures of the Blue Book submitted 
by Seward to the Congress in Washington! 
As is known, the United States was the only great power that 
refused to accede to the Paris Declaration of 1856. If they had 
renounced privateering, then they would have to create a great 
state navy. Any weakening of their means of war at sea 
simultaneously threatened them with the dreadful prospect of 

=====第152页=====
126 Karl Marx 
having to maintain a standing land army on the European scale. 
Nevertheless, President Buchanan stated that he was ready to 
accept the Declaration of Paris provided that the same inviolability 
would be assured to all property, enemy or neutral, found on 
ships,  with the exception of contraband of war. His proposal was 
rejected. From Seward's Blue Book it now appears that Lincoln, 
immediately after his assumption of office, offered England and 
France the adhesion of the United States to the Declaration of 
Paris,  so far as it abolishes privateering, on condition that the 
prohibition of privateering should be extended to the parts of the 
United States in revolt, that is, the Southern Confederacy. The 
answer that he received amounted in practice to recognition of the 
belligerent rights of the Southern Confederacy.3 
"Humanity, progress and civilisation" whispered to the Cabinets 
of St. James's and the Tuileries that the prohibition of privateer­
ing would extraordinarily reduce the chances of secession and 
therefore of dissolution of the United States. The Confederacy 
was therefore recognised in all haste as a belligerent party, in 
order afterwards to reply to the Cabinet at Washington that 
England and France could naturally not recognise the proposal of 
one belligerent party as a binding law for the other belligerent 
party. The same "noble uprightness" inspired all the diplomatic 
negotiations of England and France with the Union government 
since the outbreak of the Civil War, and had the San Jacinto not 
held up the Trent in the Bahama Channel, any other incident 
would have sufficed to provide a pretext for the conflict that Lord 
Palmerston aimed at. 
Written about December 20, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 354, 
December 25, 1861 
a The reference is to Queen Victoria's proclamation of neutrality of May 13, 
1861 (see this volume, pp. 92).— Ed. 

=====第153页=====
127 
Karl Marx 
THE OPINION OF THE NEWSPAPERS 
AND THE OPINION OF THE PEOPLE 14 
London, December 25 
Continental politicians, who imagine that in the London press 
they possess a thermometer for the temper of the English people, 
inevitably draw false conclusions at the present moment. With the 
first news of the Trent case the English national pride flared up 
and the call for war with the United States resounded from almost 
all sections of society.3 The London press, on the other hand, 
affected moderation and even The Times doubted whether a casus 
belli existed at all.b Whence this phenomenon? Palmerston was 
uncertain whether the Crown lawyers were in a position to 
contrive any legal pretext for war. For, a week and a half before 
the arrival of the La Plata at Southampton, agents of the Southern 
Confederacy had turned to the English Cabinet from Liverpool, 
denounced the intention of American cruisers to put out from 
English ports and intercept Messrs. Mason, Slidell, etc., on the 
high seas, and demanded the intervention of the English 
government. In accordance with the opinion of its Crown lawyers, 
the latter refused the request. Hence, in the beginning, the 
peaceful and moderate tone of the London press in contrast to the 
warlike impatience of the people. So soon, however, as the Crown 
lawyers—the Attorney-General and the Solicitor-General/ both 
themselves members of the Cabinet0—had worked out a technical 
pretext for a quarrel with the United States, the relationship 
a See this volume, pp. 89-94.— Ed. 
b The reference is to the article "It requires a strong effort...", The Times, 
No. 24102, November 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
c Marx gives the titles in English.— Ed. 
d W. Atherton and R. Palmer.— Ed. 

=====第154页=====
128 Karl Marx 
between the people and the press turned into its opposite. The 
war fever increased in the press in the same measure as the war 
fever abated in the people. At the present moment a war with 
America is just as unpopular with all sections of the English 
people, the friends of cotton and the country squires excepted, as 
the war-howl in the press is overwhelming. 
But now, consider the London press! At its head stands The 
Times, whose leading editor, Bob Lowe, was formerly a dem­
agogue in Australia, where he agitated for separation from 
England. He is a subordinate member of the Cabinet, a kind of 
minister for education, and a mere creature of Palmerston. Punch 
is the court jester of The Times and transforms its sesquipedalia 
verba3 into flat jokes and spiritless caricatures. A principal editor 
of Punch was accommodated by Palmerston with a seat on the 
Board of Health*3 and an annual salary of a thousand pounds 
sterling. 
The Morning Post is in part Palmerston's private property. 
Another part of this singular institution is sold to the French 
Embassy. The rest belongs to the haute volée c and supplies the 
most precise reports for court flunkeys and ladies' tailors. Among 
the English people the Morning Post is accordingly notorious as the 
Jenkins (the stock figure for the lackey) of the press. 
The Morning Advertiser is the joint property of the "licensed 
victuallers",01 that is, of the public houses, which, besides beer, may 
also sell spirits. It is, further, the organ of the English Pietists145 
and ditto of the sporting characters, that is, of the people who 
make a business of horse-racing, betting, boxing and the like. The 
editor of this paper, Mr. Grant, previously employed as a 
stenographer by the newspapers and quite uneducated in a 
literary sense, has had the honour to get invited to Palmerston's 
private soirées. Since then he has been enthusiastic for the "truly 
English minister" 146 whom, on the outbreak of the Russian war, 
he had denounced as a "Russian agent". It must be added that the 
pious patrons of this liquor-journal stand under the ruling rod of 
the Earl of Shaftesbury and that Shaftesbury is Palmerston's 
son-in-law. Shaftesbury is the pope of the Low Churchmen,147 who 
a Words of a foot and a half long (Horace, Art of Poetry, 97).— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English name and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
c High society.— Ed. 
d Here and below Marx uses the English expressions "licensed victuallers", 
"sporting characters", "Low Churchmen", "truly English minister" (he translates 
the last phrase into German in brackets).— Ed. 

=====第155页=====
Opinion of the Newspapers and Opinion of the People 129 
blend the Spiritus sanctus* with the profane spirit of the honest 
Advertiser. 
The Morning Chronicle! Quantum mutatus ab illo! h For well-nigh 
half a century the great organ of the Whig Party and the not 
unfortunate rival of The Times, its star paled after the Whig 
war. 148 It went through metamorphoses of all sorts, turned itself 
into a penny paperc and sought to live by "sensations",149 thus, for 
example, by taking the side of the poisoner, Palmer. It subsequent­
ly sold itself to the French Embassy, which, however, soon 
regretted throwing away its money. It then threw itself into 
anti-Bonapartism, but with no better success. Finally, it found the 
long missing buyer in Messrs. Yancey and Mann—the agents of 
the Southern Confederacy in London. 
The Daily Telegraph is the private property of a certain Levy. 
His paper is stigmatised by the English press itself as Palmerston's 
mob paper. Besides this function it conducts a chronique scan­
daleuse? It is characteristic of this Telegraph that, on the arrival of 
the news about the Trent, by ordre from above it declared war to be 
impossible. In the dignity and moderation dictated to it, it seemed 
so strange to itself that since then it has published half-a-dozen 
articles about this instance of moderation and dignity displayed by 
it. As soon, however, as the ordre to change its line reached it, the 
Telegraph has sought to compensate itself for the constraint put 
upon it by outbawling all its comrades in howling loudly for war. 
The Globe is the ministerial evening paper which receives 
official subsidies from all Whig ministries. 
The Tory papers, The Morning Herald and The Evening Standard, 
both belonging to the same boutique, are governed by a double 
motive: on the one hand, hereditary hate for "the revolted English 
colonies"e; on the other hand, a chronic ebb in their finances. 
They know that a war with America must shatter the present 
coalition Cabinet and pave the way for a Tory Cabinet. With the 
Tory Cabinet official subsidies for The Herald and The Standard 
would return. Accordingly, hungry wolves cannot howl louder for 
prey than these Tory papers for an American war with its ensuing 
shower of gold! 
a Holy Spirit.— Ed. 
b How changed from what he once was! (Virgil,  Aeneid,  II, 274).— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English expression "penny paper" and, below, "mob paper", 
the latter with the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 
d Chronicle of scandal.— Ed. 
e An allusion to the leading article "Let those who believe...", The Times, 
No. 24122, December 21,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第156页=====
130 Karl Marx 
Of the London daily press, The Daily News and The Morning 
Star are the only papers left that are worth mentioning; both work 
counter to the trumpeters of war. The Daily News is restricted in 
its movement by a connection with Lord John Russell; The 
Morning Star (the organ of Bright and Cobden) is diminished in 
its influence by its character as a "peace-at-any-price paper". 
Most of the London weekly papers are mere echoes of the daily 
press,  therefore overwhelmingly warlike. The Observer is in the 
ministry's pay. The Saturday Review strives for esprit and believes it 
has attained it by affecting a cynical elevation above 
"humanitarian" prejudices.3 To show "esprit", the corrupt lawyers, 
parsons and schoolmasters that write this paper have smirked their 
approbation of the slaveholders since the outbreak of the 
American Civil War. Naturally, they subsequently blew the 
war-trumpet with The Times. They are already drawing up plans 
of campaign against the United States displaying a hair-raising 
ignorance. 
The Spectator, The Examiner and, particularly, MacMillan's 
Magazine must be mentioned as more or less respectable 
exceptions. 
One sees: On the whole, the London press—with the exception 
of the cotton organs, the provincial papers form a commendable 
contrast—represents nothing but Palmerston and again Palmer-
ston. Palmerston wants war; the English people don't want it. 
Imminent events will show who will win in this duel, Palmerston 
or the people. In any case, he is playing a more dangerous game 
than Louis Bonaparte at the beginning of 1859.150 
Written on December 25, 1861 
First published in Die Presse, No. 359, 
December 31, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper 
a An allusion to the article "Unblessed Peacemakers", The Saturday Review, 
No. 320, December 14,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第157页=====
131 
Karl Marx 
FRENCH NEWS HUMBUG.— 
ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF WAR151 
London, December 31 
The belief in miracles seems to be withdrawn from one sphere 
only in order to settle in another. If it is driven out of nature, it 
now rises up in politics. At least, that is the view of the Paris 
newspapers and their confederates in the telegraph agencies and 
the newspaper-correspondence shops. Thus, Paris evening papers 
of yesterday announce: Lord Lyons has stated to Mr. Seward that 
he will wait until the evening of December 20, but then depart for 
London, in the event of the Cabinet at Washington refusing to 
surrender the prisoners.2  Therefore, the Paris papers already 
knew yesterday the steps that Lord Lyons took after receiving the 
dispatches transmitted to him on the Europa. Up to today, however, 
news of the arrival of the Europa in New York has not yet reached 
Europe. The Patrie and its associates, before they are informed of 
the arrival of the Europa in America, publish in Europe news of 
the events that ensued on the heels of the Europa's arrival in the 
United States. The Patrie and its associates manifestly believe that 
legerdemain requires no magic. One journal over here remarks in 
its stock exchange article that these Paris inventions, quite like the 
provocatory articles in some English papers, serve not only the 
political speculations of certain persons in power, but just as much 
the stock exchange speculations of certain private individuals. 
a J. Mason and J. Slidell. Marx cites the statement according to The Times, 
No. 24130, December 31,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第158页=====
132 Karl  Marx 
The Economist, hitherto one of the loudest bawlers of the war 
party, publishes in its last number a  letter  from a Liverpool merchant 
and a leading article in which the English public is warned not on 
any account to underestimate the dangers of a war with the 
United States.3 England imported grain worth £15,380,901 during 
1861;  of the whole amount nearly £6,000,000 fell to the United 
States.b England would suffer more from the inability to buy 
American grain than the United States would suffer from the 
inability to sell it. The United States would have the advantage of 
prior information. If they decided for war, then telegrams would fly 
forthwith from Washington to San Francisco, and the American 
ships in the Pacific Ocean and the China seas would commence 
war operations many weeks before England could bring the news 
of the war to India. . 
Since the outbreak of the Civil War the American-Chinese trade, 
and the American-Australian trade quite as much, has diminished 
to an enormous extent. So far, however, as it is still carried on, it 
buys its cargoes in most cases with English letters of credit, 
therefore with English capital. English trade from India, China 
and Australia, always very considerable, has, on the contrary, 
grown still more since the interruption of the trade with the 
United States. American privateers would therefore have a great 
field for privateering; English privateers, a relatively insignificant 
one. English investments of capital in the United States are greater 
than the whole of the capital invested in the English cotton 
industry. American investments of capital in England are nil. The 
English navy eclipses the American, but not nearly to the same 
extent as during the war of 1812 to 1814.152 
If at that time the American privateers already showed 
themselves far superior to the English, then how about them now? 
An effective blockade of the North American ports, particularly in 
winter, is quite out of the question. In the inland waters between 
Canada and the United States—and superiority here is decisive 
for the land warfare in Canada—the United States would, with 
the opening of the war, hold absolute sway. 
In short, the Liverpool merchant comes to the conclusion: 
"Nobody in England dares to recommend war for the sake of mere cotton. It 
would be cheaper for us to feed the whole of the cotton districts for three years at 
a "The Mercantile Realities of an American War", signed "A Liverpool 
Merchant", and the article "Operation of a War with America on England" 
published in The Economist, No. 957, December 28,  1861.—  Ed. 
b "The Board of Trade Tables", The Economist, same issue.— Ed. 

=====第159页=====
French News Humbug.—Economic Consequences of War 133 
state expense than to wage war with the United States on their behalf for one 
year." 
Ceterum censeo* that the Trent case will not lead to war. 
Written on December 31, 1861 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 4, 
January 4, 1862 
a "Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam" ("By the way, I believe that 
Carthage should be destroyed", Plutarch, Life of Cato the Elder)—the words with 
which Cato, Roman soldier and statesman (234-149 B.C.) usually concluded, 
refrain-like, his speeches in the Senate. Here the phrase means, roughly: "I 
repeat".— Ed. 

=====第160页=====
134 
Karl Marx 
A PRO-AMERICA MEETING 
London, January l 
The anti-war movement among the English people gains from 
day to day in energy and extent. Public meetings in the most 
diverse parts of the country insist on settlement by arbitration of 
the dispute between England and America. Memoranda in this 
sense rain on the chief of the Cabinet,3 and the independent 
provincial press is almost unanimous in its opposition to the war-cry 
of the London press. 
Subjoined is a detailed report of the meeting held last Mondayb 
in Brighton, since it emanated from the working class, and the two 
principal speakers, Messrs. Coningham and White, are influential 
members of Parliament who both sit on the ministerial side of the 
House. 
Mr. Wood (a worker) proposed the first motion, to the effect 
"that the dispute between England and America arose out of a misinterpreta­
tion of international law, but not out of an intentional insult to the British flag; that 
accordingly this meeting is of the opinion that the whole question in dispute should 
be referred to a neutral power for decision by arbitration; that under the existing 
circumstances a war with America is not justifiable, but rather merits the 
condemnation of the English people". 
In support of his motion Mr. Wood, among other things, 
remarked: 
"It is said that this new insult is merely the last link in a chain of insults that 
America has offered to England. Suppose this to be true, what would it prove in 
regard to the cry for war at the present moment? It would prove that so long as 
America was undivided and strong, we submitted quietly to her insults; but now, in 
a H. J. Palmerston.— Ed. 
b December 30,  1861.—  Ed. 

=====第161页=====
A Pro-America Meeting 135 
the hour of her peril, we take advantage of a position favourable to us, to revenge 
the insult. Would not such a procedure brand us as cowards in the eyes of the 
civilised world?" 
Mr. Coningham: 
"...At this moment there is developing in the midst of the Union an avowed 
policy of emancipation (Applause), and I express the earnest hope that no intervention 
on the part of the English government will be permitted (Applause).... Will you, 
freeborn Englishmen, allow^ yourselves to be embroiled in an anti-republican war? 
For that is the intention of The Times and of the party that stands behind it.... I 
appeal to the workers of England, who have the greatest interest in the 
preservation of peace, to raise their voices and, in case of need, their hands for the 
prevention of so great a crime (Loud applause)... The Times has exerted every 
endeavour to excite the warlike spirit of the land and by bitter scorn and slanders 
to engender a hostile mood among the Americans.... I do not belong to the 
so-called peace party. 154 The Times favoured the policy of Russia and put forth (in 
1853) all its powers to mislead our country into looking on calmly at the military 
encroachments of Russian barbarism in the East. I was amongst those who raised 
their voices against this false policy. At the time of the introduction of the 
Conspiracy Bill, whose object was to facilitate the extradition of political refugees, 
no expenditure of effort seemed too great to The Times, to force this Bill through 
the Lower House. I was one of the 99 members of the House who withstood this 
encroachment on the liberties of the English people and brought about the 
minister's downfall155 (applause). This minister is now at the head of the Cabinet. I 
prophesy to him that should he seek to embroil our country in a war with America 
without good and sufficient reasons, his plan will fail ignominiously. I promise him 
a fresh ignominious defeat, a worse defeat than was his lot on the occasion of the 
Conspiracy Bill (Loud applause).... I do not know the official communication that 
has gone to Washington; but the opinion prevails that the Crown lawyers3  have 
recommended the government to take its stand on the quite narrow legal ground 
that the Southern commissioners might not be seized without the ship that carried 
them. Consequently the handing over of Slidell and Mason is to be demanded as 
the conditio sine qua non. 
"Suppose the people on the other side of the Atlantic Ocean does not permit its 
government to hand them over. Will you go to war for the bodies of these two 
envoys of the slavedrivers?... There exists in this country an anti-republican war 
party. Remember the last Russian war. From the secret dispatches published in 
Petersburg it was clear beyond all doubt that the articles published by The Times in 
1855 were written by a person who had access to the secret Russian state papers 
and documents. At that time Mr. Layard read the striking passages in the Lower 
House,b and The Times, in its consternation, immediately changed its tone and blew 
the war-trumpet next morning0... The Times has repeatedly attacked the Emperor 
Napoleon and supported our government in its demand for unlimited credits for 
land fortifications and floating batteries. Having done this and raised the alarm cry 
against France, does The Times now wish to leave our coast exposed to the French 
emperor by embroiling our country in a trans-Atlantic war...? It is to be feared that 
a W. Atherton and R. Palmer.— Ed. 
b A. H. Layard [Speech in the House of Commons on March 31, 1854], 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Third series, Vol. CXXXII, London, 1854.— Ed. 
c "To whatever quarter...", The Times, No. 21704, April 1, 1854, leading 
article.— Ed. 
11» 

=====第162页=====
136 Karl Marx 
the present great preparations are intended by no means only for the Trent case 
but for the eventuality of a recognition of the government of the slave states. If 
England does this, then she will cover herself with everlasting shame." 
Mr. White: 
"It is due to the working class to mention that they are the originators of this 
meeting and that all the expenses of organising it are borne by their committee.... 
The present government never had the good judgment to deal honestly and 
frankly with the people.... I have never for a moment believed that there was the 
remotest possibility of a war developing out of the Trent case. I have said to the 
face of more than one member of the government that not a single member of the 
government believed in the possibility of a war on account of the Trent case. Why, 
then, these massive preparations? J believe that England and France have reached 
an understanding to recognise the independence of the Southern states next 
spring. By then Great Britain would have a fleet of superior strength in American 
waters. Canada would be completely equipped for defence. If the Northern states 
are then inclined to make a casus belli out of the recognition of the Southern states, 
Great Britain will then be prepared...." 
The speaker then went on to develop the dangers of a war with 
the United States, called to mind the sympathy that America 
showed on the death of General Havelock, the assistance that the 
American sailors rendered to the English ships in the unlucky 
Peiho engagement, 156 etc. He closed with the remark that the Civil 
War would end with the abolition of slavery and England must 
therefore stand unconditionally on the side of the North. 
The original motion having been unanimously adopted, a 
memorandum for Palmerston was submitted to the meeting, 
debated and adopted. 
Written on January 1, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 5, 
January 5, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第163页=====
137 
Karl Marx 
ENGLISH PUBLIC OPINION 
London, Jan. 11, 1862 
The news of the pacific solution of the Trent conflict157 was, by 
the bulk of the English people, saluted with an exultation proving 
unmistakably the unpopularity of the apprehended war and the 
dread of its consequences. It ought never to be forgotten in the 
United States that at least the working  classes  of England, from the 
commencement to the termination of the difficulty, have never 
forsaken them. To them it was due that, despite the poisonous 
stimulants daily administered by a venal and reckless press, not 
one single public war meeting could be held in the United 
Kingdom during all the period that peace trembled in the balance. 
The only war meeting convened on the arrival of the La Plata, in 
the cotton salesroom of the Liverpool Stock Exchange, was a 
corner meeting where the cotton jobbers had it all to themselves. 
Even at Manchester, the temper of the working classes was so well 
understood that an insulated attempt at the convocation of a war 
meeting was almost as soon abandoned as thought of. 
Wherever public meetings took place in England, Scotland, or 
Ireland, they protested against the rabid war-cries of the press, 
against the sinister designs of the Government, and declared for a 
pacific settlement of the pending question. In this regard, the two 
last meetings held, the one at Paddington, London, the other at 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, are characteristic. The former meeting 
applauded Mr. Washington Wilkes's argumentation that England 
was not warranted in finding fault with the seizure of the 
Southern Commissioners2; while the Newcastle meeting almost 
unanimously carried the resolution—firstly, that the Americans 
a J. Mason and J. Slidell.— Ed. 

=====第164页=====
138 Karl Marx 
had only made themselves guilty of a lawful exercise of the right 
of search and seizure; secondly, that the captain of the Trent* 
ought to be punished for his violation of English neutrality, as 
proclaimed by the Queen.b In ordinary circumstances, the conduct 
of the British workingmen might have been anticipated from the 
natural sympathy the popular classes all over the world ought to 
feel for the only popular Government in the world. 
Under the present circumstances, however, when a great 
portion of the British working classes directly and severely suffers 
under the consequences of the Southern blockade; when another 
part is indirectly smitten by the curtailment of the American 
commerce, owing, as they are told, to the selfish "protective 
policy" of the Republicans; when the only remaining democratic 
weekly, Reynolds's paper, has sold itself to Messrs. Yancey and 
Mann, and week after week exhausts its horse-powers of foul 
language in appeals to the working classes to urge the Govern­
ment, for their own interests, to war with the Union—under such 
circumstances, simple justice requires to pay a tribute to the sound 
attitude of the British working classes, the more so when 
contrasted with the hypocritical, bullying, cowardly, and stupid 
conduct of the official and well-to-do John Bull. 
What a difference in this attitude of the people from what it had 
assumed at the time of the Russian complication!0 Then The 
Times, The Post, and the other Yellowplushes of the London press, 
whined for peace, to be rebuked by tremendous war meetings all 
over the country. Now they have howled for war, to be answered 
by peace meetings denouncing the liberticide schemes and the 
Pro-Slavery sympathy of the Government. The grimaces cut by the 
augurs of public opinion at the news of the pacific solution of the 
Trent case are really amusing. 
In the first place, they must needs congratulate themselves upon 
the dignity, common sense, good will, and moderation, daily 
displayed by them for the whole interval of a month. They were 
moderate for the first two days after the arrival of the La Plata, 
when Palmerston felt uneasy whether any legal pretext for a 
quarrel was to be picked. But hardly had the crown lawyersd hit 
upon a legal quibble, when they opened a charivari unheard of 
since the anti-Jacobin war.158 The dispatches of the English 
a Moir.— Ed. 
b Victoria, R., A Proclamation [May 13, 1861], The Times, No. 23933, May 15, 
1861.—Ed. 
c I.e., of the Crimean War.— Ed. 
d R. Palmer and W. Atherton.— Ed. 

=====第165页=====
English Public Opinion 139 
Government left Queenstown in the beginning of December. No 
official answer from Washington could possibly be looked for 
before the commencement of January. The new incidents arising 
in the interval told all in favor of the Americans. The tone of the 
Transatlantic Press, although the Nashville affair159 might have 
roused its passions, was calm. All facts ascertained concurred to 
show that Capt. Wilkes had acted on his own hook. The position 
of the Washington Government was delicate. If it resisted the 
English demands, it would complicate the civil war by a foreign 
war. If it gave way, it might damage its popularity at home, and 
appear to cede to pressure from abroad. And the Government 
thus placed, carried, at the same time, a war which must enlist the 
warmest sympathies of every man, not a confessed ruffian, on its 
side. 
Common prudence, conventional decency, ought, therefore, to 
have dictated to the London press, at least for the time separating 
the English demand from the American reply, to anxiously abstain 
from every word calculated to heat passion, breed ill-will, 
complicate the difficulty. But no! That "inexpressibly mean and 
groveling" press, as William Cobbett, and he was a connoisseur, 
calls it, really boasted of having, when in fear of the compact 
power of the United States, humbly submitted to the accumulated 
slights and insults of Pro-Slavery Administrations for almost half a 
century, while now, with the savage exultation of cowards, they 
panted for taking their revenge on the Republican Administration, 
distracted by a civil war. The record of mankind chronicles no 
self-avowed infamy like this. 
One of the yellow-plushes, Palmerston's private Moniteur —The 
Morning Post—finds itself arraigned on a most ugly charge from 
the American papers. John Bull has never been informed—on 
information carefully withheld from him by the oligarchs that lord 
it over him—that Mr. Seward, without awaiting Russell's dispatch, 
had disavowed any participation of the Washington Cabinet in the 
act of Capt. Wilkes. Mr. Seward's dispatch arrived at London on 
December 19. On the 20th December, the rumor of this "secret" 
spread on the Stock Exchange. On the 21st, the yellow-plush of 
The Morning Post stepped forward to gravely herald that "the 
dispatch in question does not in any way whatever refer to the 
outrage on our mail packet." 3 
In The Daily News, The Morning Star, and other London 
a "In the present state of the public mind...", The Morning Post, No. 27460, 
December 21, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 

=====第166页=====
140 Karl Marx 
journals, you will find yellow-plush pretty sharply handled, but 
you will not learn from them what people out of doors say. They 
say that The Morning Post and The Times, like the Patrie and the 
Pays, duped the public not only to politically mislead them, but to 
fleece them in the monetary line on the Stock Exchange, in the 
interest of their patrons. 
The brazen Times, fully aware that during the whole crisis it had 
compromised nobody but  itself,  and given another proof of the 
hollowness of its pretensions of influencing the real people of 
England, plays to-day a trick which here, at London, only works 
upon the laughing muscles, but on the other side of the Atlantic, 
might be misinterpreted.3 The "popular classes" of London, the 
"mob",  as the yellow-plush call them, have given unmistakable 
signs—have even hinted in newspapers—that they should con­
sider it an exceedingly seasonable joke to treat Mason (by the by, a 
distant relative of Palmerston, since the original Mason had 
married a daughter of Sir W. Temple), Slidell & Co. with the 
same demonstrations Haynau received on his visit at Barclay's 
brewery.160 The Times stands aghast at the mere idea of such a 
shocking incident, and how does it try to parry it? It admonishes 
the people of England not to overwhelm Mason, Slidell & Co. with 
any sort of public ovation! The Times knows that its to-day's article 
will form the laughing-stock of all the tap-rooms of London. But 
never mind! People on the other side of the Atlantic may, 
perhaps, fancy that the magnanimity of The Times has saved them 
from the affront of public ovations to Mason, Slidell 8c Co., while, 
in point of fact, The Times only intends saving those gentlemen 
from public insult! 
So long as the Trent affair was undecided, The Times, The Post, 
The Herald,  The Economist, The Saturday Review, in fact the whole 
of the fashionable, hireling press of London, had tried its utmost 
to persuade John Bull that the Washington Government, even if it 
willed, would prove unable to keep the peace, because the Yankee 
mob would not allow it, and because the Federal Government was 
a mob Government. Facts have now given them the lie direct. Do 
they now atone for their malignant slanders against the American 
people? Do they at least confess the errors which yellow-plush, in 
presuming to judge of the acts of a free people, could not but 
commit? By no means. They now unanimously discover that the 
American Government, in not anticipating England's demands, 
a "A turn of the wheel, which the American Cabinet has managed to make...", 
The Times, No. 24140, January 11, 1862, leading article.— Ed. 

=====第167页=====
English Public Opinion 141 
and not surrendering the Southern traitors as soon as they were 
caught, missed a great occasion, and deprived its present 
concession of all merit. Indeed, yellow plush! Mr. Seward 
disavowed the act of Wilkes before the arrival of the English 
demands, and at once declared himself willing to enter upon a 
conciliatory course3; and what did you do on similar occasions? 
When, on the pretext of impressing English sailors on board 
American ships—a pretext not at all connected with maritime 
belligerent rights, but a downright, monstrous usurpation against 
all international law—the Leopard fired its broadside at the 
Chesapeake, killed six, wounded twenty-one of her sailors, and 
seized the pretended Englishmen on board the Chesapeake, what 
did the English Government do? That outrage was perpetrated on 
the 20th of June, 1807. The real satisfaction, the surrender of the 
sailors, &c, was only offered on November 8, 1812, five years 
later. The British Government, it is true, disavowed at once the act 
of Admiral Berkeley, as Mr. Seward did in regard to Capt. Wilkes; 
but, to punish the Admiral, it removed him from an inferior to a 
superior rank. England, in proclaiming her Orders in Council,161 
distinctly confessed that they were outrages on the rights of 
neutrals in general, and of the United States in particular; that 
they were forced upon her as measures of retaliation against 
Napoleon, and that she would feel but too glad to revoke them 
whenever Napoleon should revoke his encroachments on neutral 
rights. b Napoleon did revoke them, as far as the United States 
were concerned, in the Spring of 1810. England persisted in her 
avowed outrage on the maritime rights of America. Her resistance 
lasted from 1806 to 23d of June, 1812—after, on the 18th of 
June,  1812, the United States had declared war against England. 
England abstained, consequently, in this case for six years, not 
from atoning for a confessed outrage, but from discontinuing it. 
And this people talk of the magnificent occasion missed by the 
American Government! Whether in the wrong or in the right, it 
was a cowardly act on the part of the British Government to back 
a complaint grounded on pretended technical blunder, and a 
mere error of procedure, by an ultimatum, by a demand for the 
surrender of the prisoners. The American Government might 
have reasons to accede to that demand; it could have none to 
anticipate it. 
a "New York, Dec. 28", The Times, No. 24139, January 10, 1862.— Ed. 
b Order in Council. At the Court at the Queen's Palace, the 11th of November, 1807, 
present, the King's most Excellent Majesty in Council.—Ed. 

=====第168页=====
142 Karl Marx 
By the present settlement of the Trent collision, the question 
underlying the whole dispute, and likely to again occur—the 
belligerent rights of a maritime power against neutrals—has not 
been settled. I shall, with your permission, try to survey the whole 
question in a subsequent letter. For the present, allow me to add 
that, in my opinion, Messrs. Mason and Slidell have done great 
service to the Federal Government. There was an influential war 
party in England, which, what for commercial, what for political 
reasons, showed eager for a fray with the United States. The 
Trent affair put that party to the test. It has failed. The war 
passion has been discounted on a minor issue, the steam has been 
let off, the vociferous fury of the oligarchy has raised the 
suspicions of English democracy, the large British interests 
connected with the United States have made a stand, the true 
character of the civil war has been brought home to the working 
classes, and last, not least, the dangerous period when Palmerston 
rules single-headed without being checked by Parliament, is 
rapidly drawing to an end. That was the only time in which an 
English war for the slaveocrats might have been hazarded. It is 
now out of question. 
Written on January 11, 1862 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6499, February 1, 1862 

=====第169页=====
143 
Karl Marx 
MORE ON SEWARD'S SUPPRESSED DISPATCH 
London, January 14 
The defunct Trent case is resurrected, this time, however, as a 
casus belli not between England and the United States, but 
between the English people and the English government. The new 
casus belli will be decided in Parliament, which assembles next 
month. Without doubt you have already taken notice of the 
polemic of The Daily News* and The Star against The Morning Post 
over the suppression and denial of Seward's peace dispatch of 
November 30,b which on December 19 was read to Lord John 
Russell by the American Ambassador, Mr. Adams. Permit me, 
now, to return to this matter. With the assurance of The Morning 
Post that Seward's dispatch had not the remotest bearing on the 
Trent affair,c stock exchange securities fell and property worth 
millions changed hands, was lost on the one side, won on the 
other. In commercial and industrial circles, therefore, the wholly 
unjustifiable semi-official lie of The Morning Post disclosed by the 
publication of Seward's dispatch of November 30 arouses the most 
tremendous indignation. 
On the afternoon of January 9 the peace news reached London. 
The same evening The Evening Star (the evening edition of The 
Morning Star) interpellated the government concerning the 
suppression of Seward's dispatch of November 30. The following 
morning, January 10, The Morning Post replied as follows: 
a The reference is to the leading article in The Daily News, No. 4890, January 
11, 1862 ("As the rising of the sun after a night of troublous watchings...").— Ed. 
b Seward's dispatch was published in the item "Southampton, Jan. 12", The 
Times, No.  24141,  January 13, 1862.— Ed. 
c "In the present state of the public mind...", The Morning Post, No. 27460, 
December 21, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
144 Karl Marx 
"It is asked why nothing has been heard sooner of Mr. Seward's dispatch, which 
reached Mr. Adams some time in December. The explanation of this is very simple. 
It is that the dispatch received by Mr. Adams was not communicated11 to our 
government." b 
On the evening of the same day The Star gave the lie to the Post 
completely and declared its "rectification" to be a miserable 
subterfuge. The dispatch, it wrote, had in fact not been 
"communicated" to Lord Palmerston and Lord Russell by 
Mr. Adams, but had been "read out". 
Next morning, Saturday, January 11, The Daily News entered 
the lists and proved from The Morning Post's article of December 
21 that the Post and the government had been fully acquainted 
with Seward's dispatch at that time and deliberately falsified it. 
The government now prepared to retreat. On the evening of 
January 11 the semi-official Globe declared that Mr. Adams had, 
to be sure, communicated Seward's dispatch to the government on 
December 19; this, however, "contained no offer by the Washing­
ton Cabinet" any more than "a direct apology for the outrage on 
the British flag". This shamefaced admission of a deliberate 
deception of the English people for three weeks only fanned the 
flame higher, instead of quenching it. A cry of anger resounded 
through all the organs of the industrial districts of Great Britain, 
which yesterday finally found its echo even in the Tory 
newspapers. The whole question, one should note, was placed on 
the order of the day, not by politicians, but by the commercial 
public. Today's Morning Star remarks on the subject: 
"Lord John Russell is undoubtedly an accomplice in that suppression of the 
truth; he allowed the Morning Post's lie to circulate uncontradicted, but he is 
incapable of having dictated that mendacious and incalculably pernicious article 
which appeared in The Morning Post on the 21st of December. This could only be 
done by one man. The Minister who fabricated the Afghan war is alone capable of 
having suppressed Mr. Seward's message of peace.163 The foolish leniency of the 
House of Commons condoned the one offence. Will not Parliament and people 
unite in the infliction of punishment for the other?" 
Written on January 14, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 17, 
January 18, 1862 
a Marx gives the English words "not communicated" in brackets after the 
German translation.— Ed. 
b "We have it in our power to state...", The Morning Post, No. 27476, 
January 10, 1862, leading article.— Ed. 

=====第171页=====
145 
Karl Marx 
A COUP D'ÉTAT BY LORD JOHN RUSSELL 164 
London, January 17 
Lord John Russell's position during the recent crisis was a 
thoroughly vexatious one, even for a man whose whole parliamen­
tary life proves that he has seldom hesitated to sacrifice real power 
for official position. No one forgot that Lord John Russell had lost 
the Premiership to Palmerston, but no one seemed to remember 
that he had gained the Foreign Office from Palmerston. All the 
world considered it a self-evident axiom that Palmerston directed 
the Cabinet in his own name and foreign policy under the name 
of Russell. On the arrival of the first peace news from New York,3 
Whigs and Tories vied with one another in trumpet-blasts to the 
greater glory of Palmerston's statesmanship, whilst the Foreign 
Secretary, Lord John Russell, was not even a candidate for praise 
as his assistant. He was absolutely ignored. Hardly, however, had 
the scandal over the suppressed American dispatch of Novem­
ber 30b broken out, when Russell's name was resurrected from 
the dead. 
Attack and defence now made the discovery that the responsible 
Foreign Secretary was called Lord John Russell! But now even 
Russell's patience gave way. Without waiting for the opening of 
Parliament and contrary to every ministerial convention, he 
published forthwith in the official Gazette of January 14 his own 
a "New York, Dec. 27, Evening", The Times, No. 24138, January 9,  1861.—  Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 143-44.— Ed. 

=====第172页=====
146 Karl Marx 
correspondence with Lord Lyons.3 This correspondence proves 
that Seward's dispatch of November 30 was read by Mr. Adams to 
Lord John Russell on December 19; that Russell expressly 
acknowledged this dispatch as an apology for the act of Captain 
Wilkes, and that Mr. Adams, after Russell's disclosures, considered 
a peaceful outcome of the dispute as certain. After this official 
disclosure, what becomes of the Morning Post of December 21, 
which denied the arrival of any dispatch from Seward relating to 
the Trent caseb; what becomes of the Morning Post of January 10, 
which blamed Mr. Adams for the suppression of the dispatch,0 
what becomes of the entire war racket of the Palmerston press 
from December 19, 1861, to January 8, 1862? Even more! Lord 
John Russell's dispatch to Lord Lyons of December 19, 1861, 
proves that the English Cabinet presented no war ultimatum; that 
Lord Lyons did not receive instructions to leave Washington seven 
days after delivering "this ultimatum"; that Russell ordered the 
ambassador to avoid every semblance of a threat, and, finally, that 
the English Cabinet had decided to make a definitive decision only 
after receipt of the American answer. The whole of the policy 
trumpeted by the Palmerston press, which found so many servile 
echoes on the Continent, is therefore a mere chimera. It has never 
been carried out in real life. It only proves, as a London paper 
states today, that Palmerston "sought to thwart the declared and 
binding policy of the responsible advisers of the Crown". 
That Lord John Russell's coup de main struck the Palmerston 
press like a bolt from the blue, one fact proves most forcibly. The 
Times of yesterday suppressed the Russell correspondence and 
made no mention of it whatever. Only today a reprint from the 
London Gazette figures in its columns, introduced and prefaced by 
a leading article that carefully avoids the real issue, the issue between 
the English people and the English Cabinet, and touches on it merely 
in the ill-humoured phrase that "Lord John Russell has exerted all 
his ingenuity to extract an apology out of Seward's dispatch of 
November 30". d On the other hand, the wrathful Jupiter Tonanse 
a "Foreign Office, January 14, 1862. Copies of Correspondence...", The London 
Gazette, No. 22589, January 14, 1862.— Ed. 
b "In the present state of the public mind...", The Morning Post, No. 27460, 
December 21, 1861, leading article.— Ed. 
c "We have it in our power to state...", The Morning Post, No. 27476, 
January 10, 1862, leading article.— Ed. 
d "The following additional correspondence...", The Times, No. 24144, 
January 16, 1862, leading article.— Ed. 
e Jupiter the thunderer. — Ed. 

=====第173页=====
A Coup d'État by Lord John Russell \47 
of Printing House Square165 lets off steam in a second leading 
article, in which Mr. Gilpin, a member of the ministry, the 
President of the Board of Trade3 and a partisan of the 
Manchester school,166 is declared to be unworthy of his place in 
the ministry.b For last Tuesday,c at a public meeting in Northamp­
ton, whose parliamentary representative he is, Gilpin, a former 
bookseller, a demagogue and an apostle of moderation, whom 
nobody will take for a hero, criminally urged the English people to 
prevent by public demonstrations an untimely recognition of the 
Southern Confederacy, which he inconsiderately stigmatised as an 
offspring of slavery. As if, The Times indignantly exclaims, as if 
Palmerston and Russell— The Times now remembers the existence 
of Lord John Russell once more—had not fought all their lives to 
put down slavery!0  It was surely an indiscretion, a calculated 
indiscretion on the part of Mr. Gilpin, to call the English people 
into the lists against the pro-slavery longings of a ministry to which 
he himself belongs. But Mr. Gilpin, as already mentioned, is no 
hero.  His whole career evidences little capacity for martyrdom. His 
indiscretion occurred on the same day as Lo d John Russell carried 
out his coup de main. We may therefore conclude that the Cabinet 
is not a "happy family" 6 and that its individual members 
have already familiarised themselves with the idea of "separa­
tion". 
No less noteworthy than the English ministerial sequel to the 
Trent drama is its Russian epilogue. Russia, which during the entire 
racket stood silently in the background with folded arms, now 
springs to the proscenium, claps Mr. Seward on the shoulders— 
and declares that the moment for the definitive regulation of the 
maritime rights of neutrals has at last arrived. Russia, as is known, 
considers herself called on to put the urgent questions of 
civilisation on the agenda of world history at the right time and in 
the right place. Russia becomes unassailable by the maritime 
powers the moment the latter give up, with their belligerent rights 
against neutrals, their power over Russia's export trade. The Paris 
Convention of April 16, 1856, which is in part a verbatim copy of 
a Marx gives the English name.— Ed. 
b "The true and just instinct of the House of Commons...", The Times, same 
issue.— Ed. 
c January 14.— Ed. 
d "Mr. Gilpin, M. P., and Lord Henley, M. P., on America and England", The 
Times, No. 24143, January 15, 1862.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 

=====第174页=====
148 Karl Marx 
the Russian "Armed" Neutrality Treaty of 1780 against England,3 
is meanwhile not yet law in England. What a trick of destiny if the 
Anglo-American dispute ended with the British Parliament and the 
British Crown sanctioning a concession that two British ministers 
made to Russia on their own authority at the end of the 
Anglo-Russian war. 
Written on January 16-17, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 20, 
January 21, 1862 
a Here Marx probably drew on the excerpts from documents on the law of the 
sea published in The Free Press, No. 1, January 1, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第175页=====
149 
Karl Marx 
STATISTICAL OBSERVATIONS 
ON THE RAILWAY SYSTEM 
The English railways are a generation old, 30 years. Except for 
the national debt, no other branch of the national wealth has 
developed so rapidly to such an enormous size. According to a 
recently published Blue Book, the capital invested in the railways 
until 1860 came to £348,130,127, of which £190,791,067 were 
raised by common stock, £67,873,840 by preferred stock, 
£7,576,878 by bonds, and £81,888,546 by current loans. The total 
capital amounts to about half the national debt and is five times 
the yearly revenue from all the real estate in Great Britain. This 
parvenu form of wealth, the most colossal offspring of modern 
industry, a remarkable economic hybrid whose feet are rooted in 
the earth and whose head lives on the Stock Exchange, has given 
aristocratic landowning a powerful rival, and the middle class an 
army of new auxiliary troops. 
In 1860, the steel rails stretched for 22,000 English miles, 
counting double-track and branch lines. On average, therefore, 
733 miles of track have been laid every year over the last 30 years. 
This sort of average figure, however, is even more deceptive in 
this branch of industry than in any other, as regards expressing 
the actual living process. Some years of the railway mania,167 such 
as 1844 and 1845, conquered the bulk of the territory at the 
double. The other years fill things out gradually, connect the 
major lines, branch out, expand relatively slowly. During these 
years the production of railways falls below the average level. 
An enormous amount of work precedes the laying of the rails. 
According to the data provided by Robert Stephenson as early as 
12—1134 

=====第176页=====
150 Karl Marx 
1854 some 70 miles of railway tunnels had been driven through, 
there were 25,000 railway bridges and numerous viaducts, one of 
which, near London, was more than 11 miles long. The 
earthworks, 70,000 cubic yards per mile, would fill an area of 
550 million cubic yards. Piled up in the form of a pyramid, 
the diameter would be half an (English) mile and the height a mile 
and a  half,  a mountain of earth beside which St. Paul's Cathedral 
would shrink to Lilliputian size. But since the time of Robert 
Stephenson's estimate the length of railways has increased by a 
third. 
The "eternal way", as the English have baptised the railway, is 
not immortal by any means. It is subject to constant metabolism. 
The iron, which is continually being lost by wear, oxidation, and 
new manufacture, has constantly to be replaced. It has been 
calculated that a locomotive wears off 2.2 pounds in a run of 60 
miles,  every empty car 472 ounces, every ton of freight an ounce 
and a  half,  and that the railways like the London-North Western 
Line will last about 20 years. The yearly total of iron worn off is 
estimated at half a pound per yard; 24,000 tons of iron are 
required for replacements over the whole system in its present 
extent every year and 240,000 tons for the annual installation. But 
the rails form the bones and need to be replaced much more 
slowly than the wooden supports of the rails. The wood part of 
the apparatus of the network requires an annual input of 300,000 
trees,  which need an area of 6,000 acres to grow in. 
When the railway is completed, it needs locomotives, coal, water, 
railway cars, and finally working personnel to operate it. The 
number of locomotives was 5,801 in 1860, or more than one 
locomotive for every two miles. Like most machines in their 
infancy, locomotives were at first clumsy-looking, awkward in 
motion, still bound up to a certain extent in reminiscences of the 
old-fashioned instrument they replaced, and relatively cheap. The 
first English locomotive, four-wheeled, weighing barely 6 tons and 
priced at £550, has gradually been replaced by steam engines 
priced at £3,000, which pull 30 passenger cars, each weighing 572 
tons,  at 30 miles an hour, or 500 tons of goods at 20 miles per 
hour. Like their predecessors, the horses, individual locomotives 
have their own names and have attained varying degrees of fame 
for their names. 
The Liverpool, belonging to the North Western Line, pours out 
1,140 horsepower at full load. A monster like this consumes a ton 
of coal and 1,000 to 1,500 gallons of water daily. The organism of 
these iron horses is extremely delicate. It has no less than 5,416 parts, 

=====第177页=====
Statistical Observations on the Railway System 151 
which are assembled as carefully as the parts of a watch. A railway 
train going 50 (English) miles per hour has a sixth of the velocity of a 
cannon ball. Reckoning the average cost of a locomotive at £2,200, 
the outlay on 5,801 locomotives comes to over £12,700,000. Every 
minute of the year 4 to 5 tons of coal turn 20 to 25 tons of water into 
steam. Stephenson remarks that the water thus converted into steam 
would be an adequate daily water supply for the entire population of 
Liverpool. The quantity of fuel consumed is almost as much as 
Britain's total coal exports four years ago, more than half the entire 
consumption of London. 
The 5,801 locomotives are followed, as baggage, by 15,076 
passenger cars and 180,574 goods wagons, which represent a total 
capital of £20 million. A train made up of all the locomotives and 
cars would take the entire line from Brighton to Aberdeen, over 
600 miles. 
More than 7,000 trains run every day, over seven trains every 
minute throughout the twenty-four hours. Last year passengers 
and goods travelled over 100 million miles, more than four 
thousand times the circumference of the earth. Every second of 
the year over 3 miles of railway are covered by trains. Twelve 
millions cattle, sheep, and pigs made railway journeys; 90 million 
tons of goods and minerals were transported. The minerals came 
to twice the quantity of all the other goods. 
The gross revenue totalled £28 million. The production costs, 
apart from the wear of the railway  itself,  came to 41 per cent of 
the revenue for the Midland Company, 42 per cent for the 
Yorkshire and Lancashire railway line, 46 per cent for the West 
Midland Line and 55 to 56 per cent for the Great Northern Line; 
the average outlay for all the lines came to £13,187,368, or 47 per 
cent of revenue. 
The London and North Western Line ranks first in size. 
Originally limited to the London and Birmingham Line, the 
Grand Junction, the Manchester and Liverpool Line, it now 
extends with its branch lines from London to Carlisle and from 
Peterborough to Leeds in the east and to Holyhead in the west. Its 
management controls over a thousand miles of railways and is at 
the head of an industrial army of about 20,000 men. Construction 
of the railway line costs over £36 million. Every hour of the day 
and night its gross revenue is £500; its weekly law costs are 
£1,000. The net yield of this railway, as of most of the others, fell 
relatively as their extent increased to cover less populous and less 
industrial districts. Their shares, issued at £100, gradually sank 
from £240 to £92-93, and dividends from 10 per cent to 33/4 per 
12» 

=====第178页=====
152 Karl Marx 
cent. As the scale of operations grew enormously, for this as well 
as other railways, control by the shareholders decreased, 
the management gained greater power and mismanagement 
ensued. 
Written not later than January 20, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 22, 
January 23, 1862 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第179页=====
153 
Karl Marx 
A LONDON WORKERS' MEETING 
London, January 28 
The working class, so preponderant a part of a society that 
within living memory has no longer possessed a peasantry, is known 
not to be represented in Parliament. Nevertheless, it is not without 
political influence. No important innovation, no decisive measure 
has ever been carried through in this country without pressure 
from without,3 whether it was the opposition that required such 
pressure against the government or the government that required 
the pressure against the opposition. By pressure from without the 
Englishman understands great, extra-parliamentary popular dem­
onstrations, which naturally cannot be staged without the lively 
participation of the working class. Pitt understood how to use the 
masses against the Whigs in his anti-Jacobin war. The Catholic 
emancipation, the Reform Bill, the abolition of the Corn Laws, the 
Ten Hours Bill, the war against Russia, the rejection of 
Palmerston's Conspiracy Bill,169 all were the fruit of stormy 
extra-parliamentary demonstrations, in which the working class, 
sometimes artificially incited, sometimes acting spontaneously, 
played the principal part only as a persona dramatis, only as the 
chorus or, according to circumstances, performed the noisy part. 
So much the more striking is the attitude of the English working 
class in regard to the American Civil War. 
The misery that the stoppage of the factories and the shortening 
of the labour time, motivated by the blockade of the slave states, 
has produced among the workers in the northern manufacturing 
districts is incredible and in daily process of growth. The other 
a Marx uses the English words "pressure from without" and gives the German 
translation in brackets. He also uses the English phrase further in the text.— Ed. 

=====第180页=====
154 Karl Marx 
component parts  of the  working class  do not  suffer  to the  same 
extent;  but  they suffer severely from  the  reaction  of the  crisis  in 
the cotton industry  on the  other industries, from  the  curtailment 
of the  export  of their  own  products  to the  North  of America  in 
consequence  of the  Morrill  tariff170 and  from  the  loss  of this 
export  to the  South  in consequence  of the  blockade.  At the 
present moment, English interference  in America  has  accordingly 
become  a knife-and-fork questionm  for the  working class. 
Moreover,  no  means  of inflaming  its wrath against  the  United 
States  is scorned  by its  "natural superiors".3  The  sole great  and 
widely circulating workers' organ still existing, Reynolds's Newspaper, 
has been purchased expressly  in order that  for six  months  it might 
reiterate weekly  in raging diatribes  the  ceterum censeob  of English 
intervention.  The  working class  is accordingly fully conscious that 
the government  is only waiting  for the  intervention  cry  from 
below,  the  pressure from without,  to put an end to the  American 
blockade  and  English misery. Under these circumstances,  the 
persistence with which  the  working class keeps silent,  or breaks  its 
silence only  to raise  its voice against intervention  and for the 
United States,  is admirable. This  is a new,  brilliant proof  of the 
indestructible staunchness  of the  English popular masses,  of that 
staunchness which  is the  secret  of England's greatness  and  which, 
to speak  in the  hyperbolic language  of Mazzini, made  the  common 
English soldier seem  a demi-god during  the  Crimean  War and the 
Indian insurrection. 
The following report  on a  great workers' meeting that took place 
yesterday  in Marylebone,  the  most populous district  of London, 
may serve  to characterise  the  "policy"  of the  working class: 
Mr. Steadman,  the  chairman, opened  the  meeting with  the 
remark that  the  question  was one of a  decision  on the  part  of the 
English people  in regard  to the  reception  of Messrs. Mason  and 
Slidell. 
"It has to be  considered whether these gentlemen were coming here  to free  the 
slaves from their chains  or to  forge  a new  link  for  these chains." 
Mr. Yates: 
"On the  present occasion  the  working class dare  not  keep silent.  The two 
gentlemen  who are  sailing across  the  Atlantic Ocean  to our  country  are the  agents 
of slaveholding  and  tyrannical states. They  are in  open rebellion against  the lawful 
Constitution  of their country  and  come here  to induce  our  government  to 
recognise  the  independence  of the  slave states.  It is the  duty  of the  working class  to 
a Marx uses  the  English phrase  and  gives  the  German translation  in 
brackets.—  Ed. 
b See p. 133,  footnote  a.—Ed. 

=====第181页=====
A London Workers' Meeting 155 
pronounce its opinion now, if the English government is not to believe that we 
regard its foreign policy with indifference. We must show that the money 
expended by this people on the emancipation of slaves cannot be allowed to be 
^uselessly squandered. Had our government acted honestly, it would have 
supported the Northern states heart and soul in suppressing this fearful rebellion." 
After a detailed defence of the Northern states and the 
observation that "Mr. Lovejoy's violent tirade against England3 
was called forth by the slanders of the English press", the speaker 
proposed the following motion: 
"This meeting resolves that the agents of the rebels, Mason and Slidell, now on 
the way from America to England, are absolutely unworthy of the moral 
sympathies of the working class of this country, since they are slaveholders as well 
as the confessed agents of the tyrannical faction that is at this very moment in 
rebellion against the American republic and the sworn enemy of the social and 
political rights of the working class in all countries." 
Mr. Whynne supported the motion. It was, however,  self-
understood that every personal insult to Mason and Slidell must 
be avoided during their stay in London. 
Mr. Nichols, a resident "of the extreme North of the United 
States", as he announced, who was in fact sent to the meeting by 
Messrs. Yancey and Mann as the advocatus diaboli,b protested 
against the motion. 
"I am here, because here freedom of speech prevails. With us at home, the 
government has permitted no man to open his mouth for three months. Liberty 
has been crushed not only in the South, but also in the North. The war has many 
opponents in the North, but they dare not speak. No less than two hundred 
newspapers have been suppressed or destroyed by the mob. The Southern states 
have the same right to secede from the North as the United States had to separate 
from England." 
Despite the eloquence of Mr. Nichols, the first motion was 
carried unanimously. He now sprang up afresh: 
"If they reproached Messrs. Mason and Slidell with being slaveholders, the 
same thing would apply to Washington and Jefferson, etc." 
Mr. Beales refuted Nichols in a detailed speech and then 
brought forward a second motion: 
"In view of the ill-concealed efforts of The Times and other misleading journals 
to misrepresent English public opinion on all American affairs; to embroil us in 
a In his speech in Congress on January 14, 1862, Lovejoy called on the 
government to declare war on England after the suppression of the Southern 
rebellion.— Ed. 
b Advocatus diaboli (the devil's advocate)—a participant in the canonisation 
procedure of the Catholic Church whose task is to point out defects in the character 
of the person for whom the honour is sought; figuratively, an implacable 
accuser.— Ed. 

=====第182页=====
156 Karl Marx 
war with millions of our kinsmen on any pretext whatever, and to take advantage 
of the perils currently threatening the republic to defame democratic institutions, 
this meeting regards it as the very special duty of the workers, since they are not 
represented in the Senate of the nation, to declare their sympathy with the United 
States in their titanic struggle for the maintenance of the Union; to denounce the 
shameful dishonesty and advocacy of slaveholding on the part of The Times and 
kindred aristocratic journals; to express themselves most emphatically in favour of 
the strictest policy of non-intervention in affairs of the United States and in favour 
of the settlement of all matters that may be in dispute by commissioners or 
arbitration courts nominated by both sides; to denounce the war policy of the 
organ of the stock exchange swindlers a and to express the warmest sympathy with 
the strivings of the Abolitionists for a final solution of the slave question." 
This motion was unanimously adopted, as well as the final 
motion 
"to forward to the American government per medium of Mr. Adams a copy of 
the resolutions framed, as an expression of the feelings and opinions of the 
working class of England". 
Written on January 28, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 32, 
February 2, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
a The Economist.—Ed. 

=====第183页=====
157 
Karl Marx 
ANTI-INTERVENTION FEELING 1 
London, January 31 
Liverpool's commercial greatness derives its origin from the slave 
trade. The sole contributions with which Liverpool has enriched 
the poetic literature of England are odes to the slave trade. Fifty 
years ago Wilberforce could set foot on Liverpool soil only at the 
risk of his life. As in the preceding century the slave trade, so in 
the present century the trade in the product of slavery—cotton— 
formed the material basis of Liverpool's greatness. No wonder, 
therefore, that Liverpool is the centre of the English friends of 
secession. It is in fact the sole city in the United Kingdom where 
during the recent crisis it was possible to organise a quasi-public 
meeting in favour of a war with the United States.3 And what does 
Liverpool say now? Let us hearken to one of its great daily organs, 
the Daily Post. 
In a leading article entitled "The Cute Yankees"b it is stated 
among other things: 
"The Yankees, with their usual adroitness, have converted an apparent loss into 
a real gain and made England subservient to their advantage.... Great Britain has 
in fact displayed her power, but to what end? Since the foundation of the United 
States the Yankees have always claimed for a neutral flag the privilege that 
passengers sailing under it are protected from any intervention and attack by the 
belligerents. We contested this privilege to the limit during the Anti-Jacobin War, 
the Anglo-American War of 1812 to 1814, and again, more recently, in 1842, 
during the negotiations between Lord Ashburton and the Secretary of State, Daniel 
Webster.174 Now our opposition must cease. The Yankee principle has triumphed. Mr. 
Seward registers the fact and declares that we have given way in principle and that 
a See this volume, pp. 93-94, 95.— Ed. 
b The Daily Post, No. 2061, January 13, 1862. Marx gives the title in English and 
supplies the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第184页=====
158 Karl Marx 
through the Trent case the United States have obtained a concession from us to 
secure which they had hitherto exhausted every means of diplomacy and of war in 
vain." 
More important still is the Daily Post's admission of the shift in 
public opinion even in Liverpool. 
"The Confederates", it says, "have certainly done nothing to forfeit the good 
opinion entertained of them. Quite the contrary. They have fought manfully and 
made dreadful sacrifices. If they do not obtain their independence everyone must 
admit that they deserve it. Public opinion, however, has now run counter to their 
claims. They are no longer the fine fellowsa they were four weeks ago. They are 
now pronounced a very sorry set. ...A reaction has indeed commenced. The 
anti-slavery people, who shrank into their shoes during the recent popular 
excitement, now come forth to thunder big words against man-selling and the 
rebellious slave-owners.... Are not even the walls of our town posted with large 
placards full of denunciations and angry invectives against Messrs. Mason and 
Slidell, the authors of the accursed Fugitive Slave Law? The Confederates have lost 
by the Trent affair. It was to be their gain; it has turned out to be their ruin. The 
sympathy of this country will be withdrawn from them, and they will have to realise 
as soon as possible their peculiar situation. They have been very ill-used but they 
will have no redress." 
After this admission by such a friend of secession as the 
Liverpool daily paper it is easy to explain the altered language that 
some important organs of Palmerston now suddenly make use of 
before the opening of Parliament. Thus The Economist of last 
Saturday has an article entitled, "Shall the Blockade be Re­
spected?" b 
It proceeds in the first place from the axiom that the blockade is 
a mere paper blockade and that its violation is therefore permitted 
by international law. France demanded the blockade's forcible 
removal. The practical decision of the question lay accordingly in 
the hands of England, who had great and pressing motives for 
such a step. In particular she was in need of American cotton. 
One may remark incidentally that it is not quite clear how a "mere 
paper blockade" can prevent the shipping of cotton. 
"But nevertheless," cries The Economist, "England must respect 
the blockade." Having motivated this judgment with a series of 
sophisms, it finally comes to the gist of the matter.0 
a Marx quotes in German but gives a number of phrases in English in brackets 
after their German equivalents: "fine fellows", "a very sorry set", "they will have 
no redress".— Ed. 
b The Economist, No. 961, January 25, 1862.— Ed. 
c Marx has: "des Pudels Kern", an allusion to the saying, "Das also war des 
Pudels Kern", in Goethe's Faust (Der Tragödie erster Theil, "Studierzimmer"). — 
Ed. 

=====第185页=====
Anti-Intervention Feeling 159 
"In a case of this kind," it says, "the government w7ould have to have the whole 
country behind it. The great body of the British people are not yet prepared for any 
interposition which would even have the semblance of aiding the establishment of a 
slave republic. The social system of the Confederacy is based on slavery; the 
Federalists have done what they could to persuade us that slavery lay at the root of 
the Secession movement, and that they, the Federalists, were hostile to slavery; and 
slavery is our especial horror and detestation.... The real error of the popular 
sentiment is here. The dissolution, not the restoration, of the Union, indepen­
dence, not the defeat of the South, is the only sure path to the emancipation of the 
slaves. We hope soon to make this clear to our readers. But it is not clear yet. The 
majority of Englishmen still think otherwise; and as long as they persist in this 
prejudice, any intervention on the part of our government which should place us 
in active opposition to the North, and inferential alliance with the South, would 
scarcely be supported by the hearty cooperation of the British nation." 
In other words: the attempt at such intervention would cause 
the downfall of the ministry. And this also explains why The Times 
pronounces itself so decidedly against any intervention and for 
England's neutrality. 
Written on January 31, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 34, 
February 4, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第186页=====
160 
Karl Marx 
ON THE COTTON CRISIS 1 
Some days agoa the annual meeting of the Chamber of Commerce 
of Manchester took place. It represents Lancashire, the greatest 
industrial district of the United Kingdom and the chief seat of 
British cotton manufacture. The chairman of the meeting, Mr. 
E. Potter, and the principal speakers at it, Messrs. Bazley and 
Turner, represent Manchester and a part of Lancashire in the 
Lower House. From the proceedings of the meeting, therefore, we 
learn officially what attitude the great centre of the English cotton 
industry will adopt in the "Senate of the nation" in face of the 
American crisis.0 
At the meeting of the Chamber of Commerce last year Mr. 
Ashworth, one of England's biggest cotton barons, had celebrated 
with Pindaric extravagance the unexampled expansion of the 
cotton industry during the last decade.0 In particular he stressed 
that even the commercial crises of 1847 and 1857 had produced 
no falling off in the export of English cotton yarns and textile 
fabrics. He explained the phenomenon by the wonder-working 
powers of the free trade system introduced in 1846.d Even then it 
sounded strange that this system, though unable to spare England 
the crises of 1847 and 1857, should be able to withdraw a 
a January 30, 1862.— Ed. 
b Below Marx makes use of the article "Indian Import Duties and the 
American Question", published in Thé Times, No. 24157, January 31, 1862.— Ed. 
c The meeting was held on January 30, 1860. A report on it appeared in The 
Times, No. 23530, on January 31, 1860, under the title "Manchester Chamber of 
Commerce".— Ed. 
d The system was introduced by "An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the 
Importation of Corn".— Ed. 

=====第187页=====
On the Cotton Crisis 161 
particular branch of English industry—the cotton industry—from 
the influence of those crises. But what do we hear to-day? All the 
speakers, Mr. Ash worth included, confess that since 1858 an 
unprecedented glutting of the Asian markets has taken place and 
that in consequence of steadily continuing overproduction on a mass 
scale the present stagnation was bound to occur, even without the 
American Civil War, the Morrill  tariff176  and the blockade. 
Whether without these aggravating circumstances the falling off in 
last year's exports would have been as much as £6,000,000, 
naturally remains an open question, but does not appear 
improbable when we hear that the principal markets of Asia and 
Australia are stocked with English cotton manufactures for twelve 
months. 
Thus,  according to the admission of the Manchester Chamber of 
Commerce, which in this matter speaks with authority, the crisis in 
the English cotton industry has so far been the result not of the 
American blockade, but of English overproduction. But what 
would be the consequences of a continuation of the American Civil 
War? To this question we again receive an unanimous answer: 
Measureless suffering for the working class and ruin for the 
smaller manufacturers. 
"It is said in London," observed Mr. Cheetham, "that we have still plenty of 
cotton to go on with; but it is not a question of cotton, but a question of price, and 
at present prices the capital of the millowners is being destroyed." 
The Chamber of Commerce, however, declares itself to be 
decidedly against any intervention in the United States, although 
most of its members are sufficiently swayed by The Times to 
consider the dissolution of the Union to be unavoidable. 
"The last thing," says Mr. Potter, "that we could recommend is intervention. 
The last place whence such a proposal could issue is Manchester. Nothing will 
tempt us to suggest anything that is morally wrong." 
Mr. Bazley: 
"Our attitude to the American quarrel must be one of strict non-intervention. 
The people of that vast country must be allowed to settle their own affairs." 
Mr. Cheetham: 
"The leading opinion in this district is wholly opposed to any intervention in 
the American dispute. It is necessary to make this clear, because strong pressure 
would be put by the other side upon the Government if there was any doubt of it." 
What, then, does the Chamber of Commerce recommend? The 
English government ought to remove all the obstacles of an 
administrative character that still impede cotton cultivation in 
India. In particular, it ought to lift the import duty of 10 per cent 

=====第188页=====
162 Karl Marx 
with which English cotton yarns and textile fabrics are burdened 
in India. The régime of the East India Company 177 had hardly 
been done away with, East India had hardly been incorporated in 
the British Empire, when Palmerston introduced this import duty 
on English manufactures through Mr. Wilson, and that at the 
same time as he sold Savoy and Nice for the Anglo-French 
commercial treaty.178 Whilst the French market was opened to 
English industry to a certain extent, the East Indian market was 
closed to it to a greater extent. 
With reference to the above, Mr. Bazley remarked that since the 
introduction of this duty great quantities of English machinery 
had been exported to Bombay and Calcutta and factories had 
been erected there in the English style. These were preparing to 
snatch the best Indian cotton from them. If 15 per cent for freight 
are added to the 10 per cent import duty, the rivals artificially 
called into being through the initiative of the English government 
enjoy a protective duty of 25 per cent. 
In general, bitter resentment was expressed at the meeting of 
magnates of English industry at the protectionist tendency that 
was developing more and more in the colonies, in Australia in 
particular. The gentlemen forget that for a century and a half the 
colonies protested in vain against the "colonial system" of the 
mother country. At that time the colonies demanded free trade. 
England insisted on prohibition. Now England preaches free 
trade, and the colonies find protection against England better 
suited to their interests. 
Written in early February 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 38, 
February 8, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第189页=====
163 
Karl Marx 
ENGLISH 179 
"Eccentricity" or "individuality" are the marks of insular John 
Bull in the minds of continentals. On the whole, this notion 
confuses the Englishman of the past with the Englishman of the 
present. Intense class development, extreme division of labour and 
what is called "public opinion", manipulated by the Brahmins of 
the press, have, on the contrary, produced a monotony of 
character that would make it impossible for a Shakespeare, for 
example, to recognise his own countrymen. The differences no 
longer belong to the individuals but to their "profession" and 
class.  Apart from his profession, in everyday life one "respectable" 
Englishman is so like another that even Leibniz could hardly 
discover a difference, a differentia specifica, between them.3  The 
individuality, so highly praised, is banished from every sphere of 
politics and society and finds its last refuge in the crotchets and 
whims of private life, asserting itself there now and then sans-gêne h 
and with unconscious humour. Hence it is chiefly in the courts of 
justice—those great public arenas in w'hich private whims clash 
with one another—that the Englishman still appears as a being sui 
generis.c 
This is the preface to a diverting courtroom scene that took 
place a few days ago in the Court of Exchequer.*1 The dramatis 
personae were, on one side, Sir Edwin Landseer, the greatest 
a See G. W. Leibniz, Nouv eaux essais  sur l'entendement humain. Livre deuxième "Des 
idées",  chapitre XXVII "Ce que c'est qu'identité ou diversité." —Ed. 
b Brusquely.— Ed. 
c Unique of its kind.— Ed. 
•' Marx uses the English  name.—Erf. 

=====第190页=====
164 Karl Marx 
English painter of the present time, and, on the other, Messrs. 
Haldane, first-rate London tailors; Sir Edwin was the defendant, 
Messrs. Haldane the plaintiffs. The corpus delicti consisted of an 
overcoat and a frock-coat, valued at £12, for which the painter 
refused to pay. Sergeant3 Ballantine pleaded for Landseer, 
Mr. Griffiths for Haldane. 
Haldane testifies: Sir Edwin Landseer ordered the two coats. 
They had been sent to him to try on and he had complained 
about the height of the collars. They were altered. Now he 
complained that he could not wear them without feeling hot and 
uncomfortable in them. In addition, they rubbed against the hair of 
his head. To please the defendant, various alterations were made. 
Finally, the plaintiffs refused to make any more alterations unless 
they were specially paid for. At that point Landseer sent the two 
coats back by his servant. The plaintiffs then sent him the following 
letter: b 
"We beg respectfully to send you two coats, having again altered them 
according to the direction you last gave. The many alterations you speak of as 
being unsuccessful arise from your own fault. The coats when first tried on fitted 
remarkably well, but if you will place your body into the most unreasonable 
positions it will require something more than human science to fit you. (Laughter.) 
We have most unwillingly made the alterations you have required, believing them 
to be unnecessary and contrary to the rules of our craft, and we now find it 
impossible to please you. With reference to your demand that we should take the 
coats back, we cannot think of doing so. We therefore annex the enclosed 
statement and request prompt payment." 
Sergeant Ballantine: You would not assert that the coats fit now? 
Haldane: That is what I assert. 
Ballantine: Were they not better before they were altered? 
Haldane: Yes. 
B.: Coats are not your speciality. You are big in the trousers 
field, aren't you? 
H.: Well, we are better known for trousers. 
B.: But not for coats? Did not Mr. Alfred Montgomery, who 
introduced Sir Edwin Landseer to you, warn him about your coats? 
H.: Yes, he did. 
B.: Did not you or your brother tell Sir Edwin that you would 
rather make the coats for nothing than not make them at all? 
H.: We said nothing of the sort. 
B.: What do you mean by "weakening" the collar? 
a Here and below Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Quoted from the report "Court of Exchequer, Feb. 1" published in The 
Times, No. 24159, February 3, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第191页=====
English 165 
H.: Sir Edwin complained that the coat collar irritated his neck. 
So we weakened the collar, that is, we reduced it to a smaller size. 
B.: And how much are you charging for this reduction? 
H.: Two or three pounds. 
Sergeant Ballantine: Sir Edwin Landseer considered it necessary 
to complain of Haldane's insulting letter. Mr. Montgomery advised 
Sir Edwin to entrust the lower part of his body to the Haldane 
firm, but by no means the upper portion. Although Sir Edwin is a 
great artist, he is a mere child in these things and so took the risk, 
and the jury sees what the consequences were. The  plaintiff, 
whom the jurors have just seen on the witness stand, is also a 
great artist. But would a great artist ever remodel his work? He 
must stand or fall on his feeling of its excellence; but Haldane did 
not stand up for the excellence of his work. He acceded to 
alterations so long as they corresponded to his own principles. 
And then to ask two or three pounds for his botching! I have the 
honour of addressing a tribunal that wears coats; I ask it whether 
there is any greater torture in the world than a stiff collar on the 
neck? I hear that when Sir Edwin put on one of these coats, his 
neck was in a vice and England was in danger of losing one of its 
greatest artists. Sir Edwin consents to put the coats in question on 
before the court, and the gentlemen of the jury can then decide 
for themselves. I now call Sir Edwin as a witness, and he will tell 
you the story of the two coats. 
Sir Edwin Landseer: ... When I put the coats on—the collar was 
like this. (At this point Sir Edwin turned around and to loud 
laughter presented his back to the jurors, leaving the impression 
in their minds that he had suddenly suffered an apoplectic fit.) ... I 
offered to leave the decision to the arbitration of any tailor; but all 
the same any one must know best how his coat fits or where his 
shoe pinches. 
Mr. Griffiths: What did Mr. Montgomery say when he intro­
duced you to the Haldane firm? 
He said to me: "Sir Edwin, you are usually not so fortunate with 
your trousers as your coats." 
Griffiths: Would you try the coats on here? 
Why not? (Puts one of the coats on.) Now look! (Laughter.) 
Baron Martin (the judge): There is a tailor among the jurors. 
Will the gentleman be good enough to look carefully at the corpus 
delicti? 
The aforesaid tailor leaves the jury box and goes over to Sir 
Edwin, has him put on the frock-coat and the overcoat, examines 
them expertly and shakes his head. 
13—1134 

=====第192页=====
166 Karl Marx 
Griffiths: Sir Edwin, do you consider the frock-coat too tight? 
Yes!  (Laughter.) 
Too narrow? I ask. 
Well, I would have to take it off, if I had to eat luncheon in it. 
Ballantine: Then, Sir Edwin, you need not be stuck in it any 
longer. Emancipate yourself from it. 
I am much obliged to you. (Takes the coats off.) 
After moving pleas by the two attorneys and a comical 
summing-up by the judge, who stressed in particular that English 
comfort should not be sacrificed to the artistic ideals of the firm of 
Haldane, the jury found for Sir Edwin Landseer. 
Written about February 3, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 39, 
February 9, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第193页=====
167 
Karl Marx 
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATE 
ON THE ADDRESS 180 
London, February 7 
The opening of Parliament was a lusterless ceremony. The 
absence of the Queen and the reading of the Speech from the 
Throne3 by the Lord Chancellorb  banished every theatrical effect. 
The Speech from the Throne itself is short without being striking. 
It recapitulates the faits accomplis c of foreign politics and, for an 
estimation of these facts, refers to the documents submitted to 
Parliament.* 1 Only one remark created a certain sensation, the one 
in which the Queen "trusts6 there is no reason to apprehend any 
disturbance of the peace of Europe". It in fact implies that 
European peace is relegated to the domain of hope and faith. 
In accordance with parliamentary practice, the gentlemen who 
moved the Reply to the Speech from the Throne in the two 
Houses had already been commissioned by the ministers with this 
business three weeks before. In conformity with the usual 
procedure, their Reply consists of a broad echo of the Speech 
from the Throne and of fulsome praises that the ministers bestow 
upon themselves in the name of Parliament. When Sir Francis 
Burdett anticipated the official movers of the Address in 1811 and 
seized the opportunity to subject the Speech from the Throne to a 
a Victoria [Speech from the Throne on the opening of Parliament], The Times, 
No. 24163, February 7, 1862.— Ed. 
b R. Bethell.— Ed. 
c Accomplished facts.— Ed. 
d The reference is to Convention, conclue à Londres, le 31 octobre 1861, entre 
l'Espagne, la France et la Grande-Bretagne pour combiner une action commune contre le 
Mexique and Convention entre la Grande-Bretagne et le Maroc relative à un emprunt à 
faire à Londres par le Maroc; signée à Tanger, le 24 octobre 1861.— Ed. 
e Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
13» 

=====第194页=====
168 Karl Marx 
cutting criticism,3  Magna Charta 181 itself appeared to be imper­
illed. Since that time no further enormity of the kind has 
happened. 
The interest of the debate on the Speech from the Throne is 
therefore limited to the "hints" of the official Opposition clubs 
and the "counter-hints" of the ministers. This time, however, the 
interest was more academic than political. It was a question of the 
best funeral oration on Prince Albert, who during his life found 
the yoke of the English oligarchy by no means light. According to 
the vox populi, Derby and Disraeli have borne off the academic 
palm, the first as a natural speaker, the other as a rhetorician. 
The "business" part of the debate turned on the United States, 
Mexico, and Morocco. 
With regard to the United States, the Outs (those out of office) 
eulogised the policy of the Insh (the beati possidentesc). Derby, the 
Conservative leader in the House of Lords, and Disraeli, the 
Conservative leader in the Lower House, opposed not the Cabinet, 
but each other. 
Derby in the first place gave vent to his dissatisfaction*1 over the 
absence of "pressure from without".* He "admired", he said, the 
stoical and dignified bearing of the factory workers. As far as the 
millowners were concerned, however, he ought to exclude them 
from his commendation. For them the American disturbance had 
come in extraordinarily handy, since overproduction and glutting of 
all markets had in any case imposed on them a restriction of trade. 
Derby went on to make a violent attack on the Union 
government, "which had exposed itself and its people to the most 
undignified humiliation" and had not acted like "gentlemen", 
because it had not taken the initiative and voluntarily surrendered 
Mason, Slidell and company and made amends. His seconder in 
the Lower House, Mr. Disraeli, at once grasped how very 
damaging Derby's onslaught was to the Conservatives' aspirations 
to the Ministry. He therefore declared to the contrary: 
"When I consider the great difficulties which the statesmen of North America 
have had to encounter ... I would venture to say they have met these manfully and 
courageously."f 
a In his speech in the House of Commons of February 12,  1811.—  Ed. 
b Marx uses the English words "Ins" and "Outs" here and below.— Ed. 
c Blessed possessors.— Ed. 
d E. Derby [Speech in the House of Lords on February 6, 1862], The Times, 
No. 24163, February 7, 1862.— Ed. 
e Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
f B. Disraeli [Speech in the House of Commons, February 6, 1862], The Times, 
same issue.— Ed. 

=====第195页=====
The Parliamentary Debate on the Address 169 
On the other hand—with the consistency customary to him— 
Derby protested against the "new doctrines" of maritime law. 
England had at all times upheld belligerents' rights against the 
pretensions of neutrals. Lord Clarendon, it was true, had made a 
"dangerous" concession at Paris in 1856.182 Happily, this had not 
yet been ratified by the Crown, so that "it did not alter the state of 
international law". Mr. Disraeli, on the contrary, manifestly in 
collusion with the ministry here, avoided touching on this point at 
all. 
Derby approved of the non-intervention policy of the ministry. 
The time to recognise the Southern Confederacy had not yet 
come, but he demanded authentic documents for the purpose of 
judging "how far the blockade is effective and therefore legally 
binding". Lord John Russell, on the other hand, declared that the 
Union government had employed a sufficient number of ships in 
the blockade, but had not everywhere carried this out consistently. 
Mr. Disraeli will permit himself no judgment on the nature of the 
blockade, but demands ministerial papers for enlightenment. He 
gives such emphatic warning against any premature recognition of 
the Confederacy since England is compromising herself at the 
present moment by threatening an American state (Mexico), the 
independence of which she herself was the first to recognise. 
After the United States, it was Mexico's turn. No member of 
Parliament condemned a war without declaration of war,183 but 
they condemned interference in the internal affairs of a country 
under the shibboleth of a "non-intervention policy", and the 
coalition of England with France and Spain in order to intimidate 
a semi-defenceless country. As a matter of fact, the Outs merely 
indicated that they reserve Mexico to themselves for party 
manoeuvres. Derby demands documents on both the Convention 
between the three powers and the mode of carrying it out. He 
approves of the Convention because—in his view—the right way 
was for each of the contracting parties to enforce its claims inde­
pendently of the others. Certain public rumours caused him to fear 
that at least one of the powers—Spain—purposed operations going 
beyond the provisions of the treaty. As if Derby really believed 
the great power, Spain, capable of the audacity of acting counter to 
the will of England and France! Lord John Russell answered: The 
three powers pursued the same aim and would anxiously avoid 
hindering the Mexicans from regulating their own political affairs. 
In the Lower House, Mr. Disraeli defers any judgment prior to 
scrutinising the documents submitted. However, he finds "the 
announcement of the government suspicious". The independence 

=====第196页=====
170 Karl Marx 
of Mexico was first recognised by England. This recognition recalls 
a notable policy—the anti-Holy-Alliance policy—and a notable 
man, Canning. What singular occasion, then, drove England to 
strike the first blow against this independence? Moreover, the 
intervention has changed its pretext within a very short time. 
Originally it was a question of satisfaction for wrong done to 
English subjects. Now there are rumours about the introduction of 
new governmental principles and the setting up of a new dynasty. 
Lord Palmerston refers to the papers submitted, to the Conven­
tion that prohibits the "subjugation" of Mexico by the Allies or 
the imposition of a form of government distasteful to the people. 
At the same time, however, he opens a diplomatic loophole. He 
has it from hearsay that a party in Mexico' desires the transforma­
tion of the republic into a monarchy. The strength of this party he 
does not know. He, "for his part, only wishes that there shall be 
established some form of government in Mexico with which foreign 
governments may treat". He wishes, therefore, to establish a 
"new" form of government. He declares the non-existence of the 
present government. He claims for the alliance of England, France 
and Spain the prerogative of the Holy Alliance to decide over the 
existence or non-existence of foreign governments. "That is the 
utmost," he adds modestly, "which the government of Great 
Britain is desirous of obtaining." Nothing more! 
The last "open question" of foreign policy concerned Morocco. 
The English government has concluded a convention with 
Morocco in order to enable her to pay off her debt to Spain, a 
debt with which Spain could never have saddled Morocco without 
England's leave. Certain persons, it appears, have advanced 
Morocco money with which to pay her instalments to Spain, thus 
depriving the latter of a pretext for further occupation of Tetuan 
and resumption of war.184 The British government has in one way 
or another guaranteed these persons the interest on their loan 
and, in its turn, takes over the administration of Morocco's 
customs houses as security. Derby found this manner of ensuring 
the independence of Morocco "rather strange",,a but elicited no 
answer from the ministers. In the Lower House Mr. Disraeli went 
into the transaction further: it was "to some extent unconstitution­
al", since the ministry had saddled England with new financial 
obligations behind Parliament's back. Palmerston simply referred 
him to the "documents" submitted. 
a Marx uses the English words "rather strange" and gives the German 
translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第197页=====
The Parliamentary Debate on the Address 171 
Home affairs were hardly mentioned. Derby merely warned 
members, out of regard "for the state of mind of the Queen", not 
to raise "disturbing" controversial questions like parliamentary 
reform. He is ready to pay his tribute of admiration regularly to 
the English working class, on condition that it suffers its exclusion 
from popular representation with the same restraint and stoicism 
as it suffers the American blockade. 
It would be a mistake to infer from the idyllic opening of 
Parliament an idyllic future. Quite the contrary! Dissolution of 
Parliament or dissolution of the ministry is the motto of this year's 
session. Opportunity to substantiate these alternatives will be 
found later. 
Written on February 7, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 42, 
February 12, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第198页=====
172 
Karl Marx 
THE MEXICAN IMBROGLIO 
London, Feb. 15, 1862 
The Blue Book on the intervention in Mexico,3 just published, 
contains the most damning exposure of modern English diploma­
cy with all its hypocritical cant, ferocity against the weak, crawling 
before the strong, and utter disregard of international law. I must 
reserve for another letter the task of forwarding, by a minute 
analysis of the dispatches exchanged between Downing street and 
the British representatives of Mexico, the irrefragable proof that 
the present imbroglio is of English origin, that England took the 
initiative in bringing about the intervention, and did so on 
pretexts too flimsy and self-contradictory to even veil the real but 
unavowed motives of her proceedings. This infamy of the means 
employed in starting the Mexican intervention is only surpassed by 
the anile imbecility with which the British government affect to be 
surprised at and slink out of the execution of the nefarious 
scheme planned by themselves. It is the latter part of the business 
I propose dealing with for the present.b 
On the 13th December, 1861, Mr. Isturiz, the Spanish Ambas­
sador at London, submitted to John Russell a note including the 
instructions sent by the Captain-General of Cubac  to the Spanish 
commanders, at the head of the expedition to Mexico. John 
Russell shelved the note and kept silent. On the 23d December, 
Mr. Istûriz addresses him a new note, professing to explain the 
a Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of Mexico. Presented to both Houses of 
Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, 3 parts, London, 1862.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx draws on material published under the heading 
"Papers Relating to Mexican Affairs" in The Times, No. 24168, February 13, 
1862.—  Ed. 
c F. Serrano y Dominguez.— Ed. 

=====第199页=====
The Mexican Imbroglio 173 
reasons that had induced the Spanish expedition to leave Cuba 
before the arrival of the English and French forces. John Russell 
again shelves the note and persists in his taciturn attitude. Mr. 
Isturiz, anxious to ascertain whether that protracted restraint of 
speech so unusual in the verbose upshoot of the house of 
Bedford, means possibly  mischief,  urges a personal interview, 
which is granted to him, and takes place on the 7th of January. 
John Russell had now for more than a month been fully 
acquainted with the onesided opening of the operations against 
Mexico on the part of Spain. A month had almost passed since the 
event had been officially communicated to him by Mr. Isturiz. 
With all that, in his personal interview with the Spanish 
Ambassador, John Russell breaks no word breathing the slightest 
displeasure or astonishment at "the precipitate steps taken by Gen. 
Serrano," nor leave his utterances the faintest impression on the 
mind of Mr. Isturiz that all was not right, and that the Spanish 
proceedings were not fully approved of by the British Govern­
ment. The Castilian pride of Mr. Isturiz shuns, of course, any 
notion of Spain being played with by her powerful allies and made 
a mere catspaw of. Yet, the time of the meeting of Parliament 
approached, and John Russell had now to pen a series of 
dispatches, especially intended, not for international business, but 
for Parliamentary consumption. Accordingly, on the 16th of 
January, he pens a dispatch inquiring, in rather angry tones, about 
the onesided initiative ventured upon by Spain. Doubts and 
scruples, which for longer than a month had slumbered in his 
bosom, and had not even matured into symptoms of existence, on 
the 7th of January, during his personal interview with Mr. Isturiz, 
all at once disturb the serene dream of that confident, sincere and 
unsuspecting statesman. Mr. Isturiz feels thunderstruck, and in his 
reply, dated January 18, somewhat ironically reminds his Excellen­
cy of the opportunities missed by him of giving vent to his 
posthumous spleen. He pays in fact his Excellency in his own coin, 
assuming in his justification of the initiative taken by Spain, the 
same air of naïveté Lord John Russell affected in his request for 
an explanation. 
"The Captain-General of Cuba," says Mr. Isturiz, "came too early because he 
was fearful of arriving too late at Vera Cruz." "Besides," and here he pinches Lord 
John, "the expedition had been for a long time ready on every point," although 
the Captain-General, till the middle of December, was "unacquainted with the 
details of the treaty, and with the point fixed for the meeting of the squadrons." 
Now, the treaty was not concluded before the 20th of 
November. If, then, the Captain-General had his expedition for a 

=====第200页=====
174 Karl Marx 
long time "ready in every point before the middle of December," 
the orders originally sent out to him from Europe for starting the 
expedition, had not waited upon the treaty. In other words, the 
original agreement between the three Powers, and the steps taken 
in its execution, did not wait upon the treaty, and differed in their 
"details" from the clauses of the treaty, which, from the 
beginning, were intended not as a rule of action, but only as 
decent formulas, necessary to conciliate the public mind to the 
nefarious scheme. On the 23d January, John Russell replies to 
Mr. Isturiz in rather a bluff note, intimating to him that "the British 
Government was not entirely satisfied with the explanation offered," 
but, at the same time would not suspect Spain of the fool-hardiness 
of presuming to act in the teeth of England and France. Lord John 
Russell, so sleepy, so inactive, for a whole month, becomes all life and 
wide awake as the Parliamentary session rapidly draws near. No time 
is to be lost. On the 19th of January he has a personal interview with 
Count Flahaut, the French Ambassador at London. Flahaut broaches 
to him the ill-omened news that his master considered it necessary 
"to send an additional force to Mexico," that Spain by her precipitate 
initiative had spoiled the mess; that 
"the allies must now advance to the interior of Mexico, and that not only the 
forces agreed upon would now prove insufficient for the operation, but that the 
operation itself would assume a character in regard to which Louis Bonaparte 
could not allow the French forces to be in a position of inferiority to those of 
Spain, or run the risk of being compromised." 
Now, Flahaut's argumentation was anything but conclusive. If 
Spain had overstepped the convention, a single note to Madrid 
from the quarters of St. James and the Tuileries would have 
sufficed to warn her off her ridiculous pretensions, and drive her 
back to the modest part imposed upon her by the convention. But 
no. Because Spain has broken the convention—a breach merely 
formal and of no consequence, since her premature arrival at 
Vera Cruz changed nothing in the professed aim and purpose of 
the expedition—because Spain had presumed to cast anchor at 
Vera Cruz in the absence of the English and French forces, there 
remained no other issue open to France but to follow in the track 
of Spain, break also the convention, and augment, not only her 
expeditionary forces, but change the whole character of the 
operation. There was, of course, no pretext needed for the Allied 
Powers to let the murder out, and, on the very outset of the 
expedition, set at naught the pretexts and purposes upon which it 
was ostensibly started. Consequently, John Russell, although he 

=====第201页=====
The Mexican Imbroglio 175 
"regrets the step" taken by France, indorses it by telling Count 
Flahaut that "he had no objection to offer, on behalf of her 
Majesty's Government, to the validity of the French argument." In 
a dispatch dated January 20, he forwards to Earl Cowley, the 
English Ambassador at Paris, the narrative of this his interview 
with Count Flahaut. The day before, on the 19th January, he had 
penned a dispatch to Sir F. Crampton, the English Ambassador at 
Madrid—that dispatch being a curious medley of hypocritical cant 
addressed to the British Parliament, and of sly hints to the Court 
of Madrid as to the intrinsic value of the liberal slang so freely 
indulged in. "The proceedings of Marshal Serrano," he says, "are 
calculated to produce some uneasiness," not only because of the 
precipitate departure of the Spanish expedition from Havana, but 
also "of the tone of the proclamations issued by the Spanish 
Government." But, simultaneously, the bon homme suggests to the 
Madrid Court a plausible excuse for their apparent breach of the 
Convention. He is fully convinced that the Madrid Court means 
no harm; but, then, commanders, at a distance from Europe, are 
sometimes "rash," and require "to be very closely watched." Thus, 
good man Russell volunteers his services, in order to shift the 
responsibility from the Court at Madrid to the shoulders of 
indiscreet Spanish commanders "at a distance," and even out of 
the reach of good man Russell's sermonizing. Not less curious is 
the other part of his dispatch. The Allied forces are not to 
preclude the Mexicans from their right "of choosing their own 
Government," thus intimating that there exists "no Government" 
in Mexico; but that, on the contrary, not only new governors, but 
even "a new form of Government," must so be chosen by the 
Mexicans under the auspices of the Allied invaders. Their 
"constituting a new Government" would "delight" the British 
Government; but, of course, the military forces of the invaders 
must not falsify the general suffrage which they intend calling the 
Mexicans to for the installation of a new Government. It rests, of 
course, with the commanders of the armed invasion to judge what 
form of new government is or is not "repugnant to the feelings of 
Mexico." At all events, good man Russell washes his hands in 
innocence. He dispatches foreign dragoons to Mexico, there to 
force the people into "choosing" a new Government; but he hopes 
the dragoons will do the thing gently, and be very careful in 
sifting the political feelings of the country they invade. Is it 
necessary to expatiate one moment upon this transparent farce? 
Apart from the context of good man Russell's dispatches, read The 
Times and The Morning Post of October, six weeks before the 

=====第202页=====
176 Karl Marx 
conclusion of the sham convention of Nov. 30,a and you will find 
the English Government prints to foretell all the very same 
untoward events Russell feigns to discover only at the end of 
January, and to account for by "the rashness" of some Spanish 
Ambassadors at a distance from Europe. 
The second part of the farce Russell had to play was the putting 
on the tapis of the Archduke Maximilian of Austria as the 
Mexican King held in petto by England and France. 
On the 24th of January, about ten days before the opening of 
Parliament, Lord Cowley writes to Lord Russell that not only Paris 
gossip was much busied with the Archduke, but that the very 
officers going with the re-enforcements to Mexico, pretended that 
the expedition was for the purpose of making the Archduke 
Maximilian King of Mexico. Cowley thinks it necessary to 
interpellate Thouvenel upon the delicate subject. Thouvenel 
answers him, that it was not the French Government, but Mexican 
emissaries, "come for the purpose, and gone to Vienna," that had 
set on foot such negotiations with the Austrian Government. 
Now, at last, you expect unsuspecting John Russell, who even 
five days ago, in his dispatch to Madrid, had harped upon the 
terms of the convention, who even later yet, in the Royal speech of 
Feb. 6, had proclaimed "the redress" of wrongs sustained by 
European subjects the exclusive motive and purpose of the 
intervention b—you expect him now at last to fly into a passion and 
to fret and foam at the very idea of his kind-natured confidence 
having been played such unheard-of pranks with. Nothing of the 
sort! Good man Russell receives Cowley's gossip on the 26th of 
January, and on the following day he hastens to sit down and 
write a dispatch volunteering his patronage of the Archduke 
Maximilian's candidature for the Mexican throne.0 
He informs Sir C. Wyke, his representative at Mexico, that the 
French and Spanish troops will march "at once" to the City of 
Mexico; that Archduke Maximilian "is said" to be the idol of the 
Mexican people, and that, if such be the case, "there is nothing in 
the convention to prevent his advent to the throne of Mexico." 
There are two things remarkable in these diplomatic revelations: 
first, the fool Spain is made of; and secondly, that there never 
passes the slightest thought through Russell's mind that he cannot 
a This probably refers to the treaty signed on November 20,  1861.—  Ed. 
b J. Russell [Speech in the House of Lords on February 6, 1862], The Times, 
No. 24163, February 7, 1862.— Ed. 
c Presumably, a slip of the pen in the text. Russell received Cowley's report on 
the 25th, Russell's dispatch was sent on the 27th.— Ed. 

=====第203页=====
The Mexican Imbroglio 177 
wage war upon Mexico without a previous declaration of war, and 
that he can form no coalition for that war with foreign Powers, 
except on the ground of a treaty binding upon all parties. And 
such is the people who have fatigued us for two months with their 
hypocritical cant on the sacredness of, and their homage to, the 
strict rules of international law!186 
Written on February 15, 1862 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6530, March 10, 1862 

=====第204页=====
178 
Karl Marx 
AMERICAN AFFAIRS1 
President Lincoln never ventures a step forward before the tide 
of circumstances and the general call of public opinion forbid 
further delay. But once "Old Abe" a realises that such a turning 
point has been reached, he surprises friend and foe alike by a 
sudden operation executed as noiselessly as possible. Thus, in the 
most unassuming manner, he quite recently carried out a coup 
that half a year earlier would possibly have cost him his 
presidential office and only a few months ago would have called 
forth a storm of debate. We mean the removal of McClellan from 
his post of Commander-in-Chiefb of all the Union armies. Lincoln 
first of all replaced the Secretary of War, Cameron, by an 
energetic and ruthless lawyer, Mr. Edwin Stanton. An order of the 
day was then issued by Stanton to generals Buell, Halleck, Butler, 
Sherman and other commanders of whole areas or leaders of 
expeditions, notifying them that in future they would receive all 
orders, open and secret, from the War Department direct and, on 
the other hand, would have to report directly to the War 
Department. Finally, Lincoln issued some orders which he signed 
as "Commander-in-Chief of the Army and Navy", an attribute to 
which he was constitutionally entitled. In this "quiet" manner "the 
young Napoleon" 188 was deprived of the supreme command he 
had hitherto held over all the armies and restricted to the com­
mand of the army on the Potomac, although the title of "Com­
mander-in-Chief" was left to him. The successes in Kentucky, 
a Marx uses the English nickname.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx uses the English title.— Ed. 

=====第205页=====
American Affairs 179 
Tennessee and on the Atlantic coast propitiously inaugurated 
the assumption of the supreme command by President Lincoln. 
The post of Commander-in-Chief hitherto occupied by McClel­
lan was bequeathed to the United States by Britain and 
corresponds roughly to the dignity of a Grand Connétable' 1 in the 
old French army. During the Crimean War even Britain discov­
ered the inexpediency of this old-fashioned institution. A 
compromise was accordingly effected by which part of the 
attributes hitherto belonging to the Commander-in-Chief were 
transferred to the War Ministry. 
The requisite material for an estimate of McClellan's Fabian 
tactics189 on the Potomac is still lacking. That his influence, 
however, acted as a brake on the general conduct of the war, is 
beyond doubt. One can say of McClellan what Macaulay says of 
Essex: 
"The military errors of Essex were produced for the most part by political 
timidity. He was honestly, but by no means warmly, attached to the cause of 
Parliament; and next to a great defeat he dreaded nothing so much as a great 
victory." b 
McClellan and most of the officers of the regular army who got 
their training at West Point190  are more or less bound by esprit de 
corps c to their old comrades in the enemy camp. They are inspired 
by the same jealousy of the parvenus among the "civilian soldiers". 
In their view, the war must be waged in a strictly businesslike 
fashion, with constant regard to the restoration of the Union on its 
old basis, and therefore must above all be kept free from 
revolutionary tendencies and tendencies affecting matters of 
principle. A fine conception of a war which is essentially a war of 
principles. The first generals of the English Parliament fell into 
the same error. 
"But," said Cromwell in his speech to the Rump on July 4, 1653, "how changed 
everything was as soon as men took the lead who professed a principle of godliness 
and religion!"d 
The Washington Star,e McClellan's special organ, declares in 
one of its latest issues: 
a Grand Constable.— Ed. 
b Th. B. Macaulay, Critical and Historical Essays Contributed to the Edinburgh 
Review, Vol. I, John Hampden.—Ed. 
c Common spirit pervading the members of a body as a whole.— Ed. 
d Th. Carlyle, Oliver Cromwell's Letters and Speeches, with elucidations, Vol. II. 
Marx partly quotes in English: "a principle of godliness, etc.".— Ed. 
e Evening  Star.—Ed. 

=====第206页=====
180 Karl Marx 
"The end and aim of all General McClellan's military combinations is the 
restoration of the Union just as it existed before the Rebellion began." 3 
No wonder, therefore, that on the Potomac, under the eyes of 
the general-in-chief, the army was trained to catch slaves! Only 
recently, by a special order, McClellan expelled the Kutchinson 
family of musicians from the camp because they sang anti-slavery 
songs. 
Apart from such "anti-tendency" demonstrations, McClellan 
covered the traitors in the Union army with his saving shield. 
Thus,  for example, he promoted Maynard to a higher post, 
although Maynard, as the papers made public by the committee of 
inquiry of the House of Representatives prove, was active as an 
agent of the secessionists. From General Patterson, whose 
treachery determined the defeat at Manassas, to General Stone, 
who brought about the defeat at Ball's Bluff in direct agreement 
with the enemy,191 McClellan managed to save every military 
traitor from court martial, and in most cases even from dismissal. 
The Congress committee of inquiry has revealed the most 
surprising facts in this respect. Lincoln resolved to prove by an 
energetic step that with his assumption of the supreme command 
the hour of the traitors in epaulets had struck and a turning point 
in the war policy had been reached. By his order, General Stone 
was arrested in his bed at two o'clock in the morning of February 
10 and taken to Fort Lafayette. A few hours later, the order for 
his arrest, signed by Stanton, appeared; in this the charge of high 
treason was formulated, to be judged by court martial. Stone's 
arrest and putting on trial took place without any previous 
communication to General McClellan. 
As long as he himself remained in a state of inaction and merely 
wore his laurels in advance, McClellan was obviously determined 
to allow no other general to forestall him. Generals Halleck and 
Pope had resolved on a combined movement to force General 
Price, who had already been saved once from Fremont by the 
intervention of Washington, to a decisive battle. A telegram from 
McClellan forbade them to deliver the blow. General Halleck was 
"ordered back" by a similar telegram from the capture of Fort 
Columbus, at a time when this fort stood half under water. 
McClellan had expressly forbidden the generals in the West to 
correspond with one another. Each of them was obliged first to 
apply to Washington whenever a combined movement was 
a Quoted from an item in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6508, February 12, 
1862,  beginning with the words: "The Washington Star, in an article...".— Ed. 

=====第207页=====
American Affairs 181 
intended. President Lincoln has now restored to them the 
necessary freedom of action. 
How advantageous to secession McClellan's general military 
policy was is best proved by the panegyrics that the New-York 
Herald continually lavishes upon him. He is a hero after the 
Herald's own heart. The notorious Bennett, proprietor and 
editor-in-chief of the  Herald,  had formerly held the administra­
tions of Pierce and Buchanan in his power through his "special 
representatives", alias correspondents, in Washington. Under 
Lincoln's Administration he sought to win the same power again 
in a roundabout way, by having his "special representative", Dr. 
Ives, a man of the South and brother of an officer who had 
deserted to the Confederacy, worm himself into McClellan's 
favour. Under McClellan's patronage, great liberties must have 
been allowed this Ives at the time when Cameron was at the head 
of the War Department. He evidently expected Stanton to 
guarantee him the same privileges and accordingly presented 
himself on February 8 at the War Office, where the Secretary of 
War, his chief secretary and some members of Congress were 
discussing war measures. He was shown the door. He got up on 
his hind legs and finally beat a retreat, threatening that the Herald 
would open fire on the present War Department in the event of 
its withholding from him his "special privilege" of having, in 
particular, Cabinet deliberations, telegrams, public communica­
tions and war news confided to him in the War Department. Next 
morning, February 9, Dr. Ives had assembled the whole of 
McClellan's General Staff at a champagne breakfast with him. 
Misfortune, however, moves fast.3 A non-commissioned officer 
entered with six men, seized the mighty Ives and took him to Fort 
McHenry, where, as the order of the Secretary of War expressly 
states,  he "is to be kept under strict watch as a spy".b 
Written in late February 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Die Presse, No. 61, 
March 3, 1862 
a A line from Schiller's Lied von der Glocke. —Ed. 
b "War Department, Washington, Feb. 10, 1862", New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6507, February 11, 1862.— Ed. 
14—1134 

=====第208页=====
182 
Karl Marx 
THE SECESSIONISTS' FRIENDS IN THE LOWER HOUSE.— 
RECOGNITION OF THE AMERICAN BLOCKADE192 
London, March 8 
Parturiunt montes!* Since the opening of Parliament the English 
friends of Secessia had threatened a "motion" on the American 
blockade. The resolution has at length been introduced in the 
Lower House b in the very modest form of a motion in which the 
government is urged "to submit further documents on the state of 
the blockade"—and even this insignificant motion was rejected 
without the formality of a division. 
Mr. Gregory, the member for Galway, who moved the resolution, 
had in the parliamentary session of last year, shortly after the 
outbreak of the Civil War, already introduced a motion for 
recognition of the Southern Confederacy.c To his speechd of this 
year a certain sophistical adroitness is not to be denied. The 
speech merely suffers from the unfortunate circumstance that it 
falls into two parts, of which the one cancels the other. One part 
describes the disastrous effects of the blockade on the English 
cotton industry and therefore demands removal of the blockade. 
The other part proves from the papers submitted by the ministry, 
two memorials by Messrs. Yancey and Mann and by Mr. Mason 
among them, that the blockade does not exist at all, except on 
paper, and therefore should no longer be recognised. Mr. Gregory 
spiced his argument with successive citations from The Times. The 
Times, for whom a reminder of its oracular pronouncements is at 
a Parturiunt montes, nascetur ridiculus mus! —The mountains are in labour, a 
ridiculous mouse will be born! (Horace, Art of Poetry,  139.)—Ed. 
b W. H. Gregory [Speech in the House of Commons, March 7, 1862], The 
Times, No. 24188, March 8, 1862.— Ed. 
c W. H. Gregory [Speech in the House of Commons, May 28, 1861], The Times, 
No. 23945, May 29,  1861.—  Ed. 
d Marx gives the English word.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
The Secessionists' Friends in the Lower House 183 
this moment thoroughly inconvenient, thanks Mr. Gregory with a 
leader* in which it holds him up to public ridicule.b 
Mr. Gregory's motion was supported by Mr. Bentinck,c an ultra-
Tory who for two years has laboured in vain to bring about a seces­
sion from Mr. Disraeli in the Conservative camp. 
It was a ludicrous spectacle in and by itself to see the alleged 
interests of English industry represented by Gregory, the rep­
resentative of Galway, an unimportant seaport in the West of 
Ireland, and by Bentinck, the representative of Norfolk, a purely 
agricultural district. 
Mr. Forster, the representative of Bradford, a centre of English 
industry, rose to oppose them both. Forster's speech deserves 
closer examination, since it strikingly proves the vacuity of the 
phrases concerning the character of the American blockade given 
currency in Europe by the friends of secession. In the first place, 
he said, the United States have observed all formalities required by 
international law. They have declared no port in a state of 
blockade without previous proclamation, without special notice of 
the moment of its commencement or without fixing the fifteen 
days after the expiration of which entrance and departure shall be 
forbidden to foreign neutral ships. 
The talk of the legal "inefficacy" of the blockade rests, 
therefore, merely on the allegedly frequent cases in which it has 
been broken through. Before the opening of Parliament it was 
said that 600 ships had broken through it. Mr. Gregory now 
reduces the number to 400. His evidence rests on two lists handed 
the government, the one on November 30 by the Southern 
commissioners Yancey and Mann, the other, the supplementary 
list, by Mason. According to Yancey and Mann, more than 400 
ships broke through between the proclamation of the blockade 
and August 20, running the blockade either inwards or outwards. 
According to official customs-house reports, however, the total 
number of the incoming and outgoing ships amounts to only 322. 
Of this number, 119 departed before the declaration of the 
blockade, 56 before the expiration of the time allowance of fifteen 
days.  There remain 147 ships. Of these 147 ships, 25 were river 
boats that sailed from inland to New Orleans, where they lie idle; 
106 were coasters; with the exception of three ships, all were, in 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b "The demand which Mr. Gregory makes...", The Times, No. 24188, March 8, 
1.862.—  Ed. 
c The speeches of Bentinck and other members of the House of Commons on 
March 7, 1862 are cited according to The Times, same issue.— Ed. 
14* 

=====第210页=====
184 Karl Marx 
the words of Mr. Mason  himself,  "quasi-inland"a  vessels. Of these 
106, 66 sailed between Mobile and New Orleans. Anyone who 
knows this coast is aware how absurd it is to call the sailing of a 
vessel behind lagoons, so that it hardly touches the open sea and 
merely creeps along the coast, a breach of the blockade. The same 
holds of the vessels between Savannah and Charleston, where they 
sneak between islands and narrow tongues of land. According to 
the testimony of the English consul, Bunch, these flat-bottomed 
boats only appeared for a few days on the open sea. After 
deducting 106 coasters, there remain 16 departures for foreign 
ports;  of these, 15 were for American ports, mainly Cuba, and one 
for Liverpool. The "ship" that berthed in Liverpool was a 
schooner, and so were all the rest of the "ships", with the 
exception of a sloop. There has been much talk, exclaimed Mr. 
Forster, of sham blockades. Is this list of Messrs. Yancey and 
Mann not a sham list? He subjected the supplementary list of Mr. 
Mason to a similar analysis, and showed further that the number 
of cruisers that slipped out only amounted to three or four, 
whereas in the last Anglo-American war b no less than 516 
American cruisers broke through the English blockade and 
harried the English seaboard. 
"The blockade, on the contrary, has been wonderfully effective from its 
commencement. " 
Further proof is provided by the reports of the English consuls; 
above all, however, by the Southern price lists. On January 11 the 
price of cotton in New Orleans offered a premium of 100 per cent 
for export to England; the profit on import of salt amounted to 
1500 per cent and the profit on contraband of war was 
incomparably higher. Despite this alluring prospect of profit, it 
was just as impossible to ship cotton to England as salt to New 
Orleans or Charleston. In fact, however, Mr. Gregory does not 
complain that the blockade is inefficacious, but that it is too 
efficacious. He urges us to put an end to it and with it to the 
crippling of industry and commerce. One answer suffices: 
"Who urges this House to break the blockade? The representatives of the 
suffering districts? Does this cry resound from Manchester, where the factories 
have to close, or from Liverpool, where from lack of freight the ships lie idle in the 
docks? On the contrary. It resounds from Galway and is supported by Norfolk." 
On the side of the friends of secession Mr. Lindsay, a large 
shipbuilder of North Shields, made himself conspicuous. Lindsay 
a Marx gives che English words: "quasi-inland".— Ed. 
b Of 1812-14.— Ed. 

=====第211页=====
The Secessionists' Friends in the Lower House 185 
had offered his shipyards to the Union, and, for this purpose, had 
travelled to Washington, where he experienced the vexation of 
seeing his business propositions rejected. Since that time he has 
turned his sympathies to the land of Secessia. 
The debate was concluded with a circumstantial speech by Sir 
R. Palmer, the Solicitor-General,3 who spoke in the name of the 
government. He furnished well grounded juridical proof of the 
validity of the blockade in international law and of its sufficiency. 
On this occasion he in fact tore to pieces—and was taxed with so 
doing by Lord Cecil—the "new principles" proclaimed at the 
Paris Convention of 1856.193  Among other things, he expressed his 
astonishment that in a British Parliament Gregory and his 
associates ventured to appeal to the authority of Monsieur de 
Hautefeuille. The latter, to be sure, is a brand-new "authority" 
discovered in the Bonapartist camp. Hautefeuille's compositions 
in the Revue contemporaine on the maritime rights of neutrals' 5 
prove the completest ignorance or mauvaise foi c at higher 
command. 
With the complete fiasco of the parliamentary friends of 
secession in the blockade question, all prospect of a breach 
between Britain and the United States is eliminated. 
Written on March 8, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 70, 
March 12, 1862 
a Marx gives the English title.— Ed. 
b L. B. Hautefeuille, "Nécessité d'une loi maritime...", "Le règlement du 31 
janvier 1862 sur l'asile maritime..." and "Le droit maritime international devant le 
parlement britannique", Revue contemporaine, 2 e série, Tomes 25, 27, Paris, 
1862.—  Ed. 
c Unconscientiousness. — Ed. 

=====第212页=====
186 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR194 
From whatever standpoint one regards it, the American Civil 
War presents a spectacle without parallel in the annals of military 
history. The vast extent of the disputed territory; the far-flung 
front of the lines of operation; the numerical strength of the 
hostile armies, the creation of which hardly drew any support from 
a prior organisational basis; the fabulous cost of these armies; the 
manner of commanding them and the general tactical and 
strategic principles in accordance with which the war is being 
waged, are all new in the eyes of the European onlooker. 
The secessionist conspiracy, organised, patronised and sup­
ported long before its outbreak by Buchanan's administration, 
gave the South a head-start, by which alone it could hope to 
achieve its aim. Endangered by its slave population and by a 
strong Unionist element among the whites themselves, with 
two-thirds less free men than in the North, but readier to attack, 
thanks to the multitude of adventurous idlers that it harbours— 
for the South everything depended on a swift, bold, almost 
foolhardy offensive. If the Southerners succeeded in taking 
St. Louis, Cincinnati, Washington, Baltimore, and perhaps Philadel­
phia, they might then count on a panic, during which diplomacy 
and bribery could secure recognition of the independence of all 
the slave states. If this first onslaught failed, at least at the decisive 
points, their position must then become worse from day to day, 
while the North was gaining in strength. This point was rightly 
understood by the men who in truly Bonapartist spirit had 
organised the secessionist conspiracy. They opened the campaign 
in the corresponding manner. Their bands of adventurers overran 

=====第213页=====
The American Civil War 18/ 
Missouri and Tennessee, while their more regular troops invaded 
eastern Virginia and prepared a coup de main* against Washington. 
If this coup were to miscarry, the Southern campaign was lost from 
a military point of view. 
The North came to the theatre of war reluctantly, sleepily, as 
was to be expected considering its higher industrial and commer­
cial development. The social machinery there was far more 
complicated than in the South, and it required far more time to 
get it moving in this unusual direction. The enlistment of 
volunteers for three months was a great, but perhaps unavoidable 
mistake. It was the policy of the North to remain on the defensive 
in the beginning at all decisive points, to organise its forces, to 
train them through operations on a small scale and without risk of 
decisive battles, and, as soon as the organisation had become 
sufficiently strong and the traitorous element had simultaneously 
been more or less removed from the army, to go on to an energetic, 
unflagging offensive and, above all, to reconquer Kentucky, 
Tennessee, Virginia, and North Carolina. The transformation of 
civilians into soldiers was bound to take more time in the North than 
in the South. Once effected, one could count on the individual 
superiority of the Northern men. 
By and large, and allowing for the mistakes that arose more 
from political than from military sources, the North acted in 
accordance with those principles. The guerilla warfare in Missouri 
and West Virginia, while protecting the Unionist population, 
accustomed the troops to field service and to fire without exposing 
them to decisive defeats. The great disgrace of Bull Run 195  was, to 
a certain extent, the result of the earlier error of enlisting 
volunteers for three months. It was absurd to let raw recruits 
attack a strong position, on difficult terrain and having 
an enemy scarcely inferior in numbers. The panic, which seized 
the Union army at the decisive moment, and the cause of which 
has yet to be established could surprise no one who was at all 
familiar with the history of people's wars. Such things happened to 
the French troops very often from 1792 to 1795; this did not, 
however, prevent these same troops from winning the battles of 
Jemappes and Fleurus, Montenotte, Castiglione and Rivoli. 196 The 
only excuse for the silliness of the jests of the European press 
with regard to the Bull Run panic is the previous bragging of a 
section of the North American press. 
The six months' respite that followed the defeat at Manassas was 
a A surprise attack.— Ed. 

=====第214页=====
188 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
utilised to better advantage by the North than by the South. Not 
only were the Northern ranks replenished in greater measure than 
the Southern ones. Their officers received better instructions; the 
discipline and training of the troops did not encounter the same 
obstacles as in the South. Traitors and incompetent interlopers 
were increasingly removed, and the period of the Bull Run panic 
is a thing of the past. The armies on both sides are naturally not 
to be measured by the standard of the great European armies or 
even of the former regular army of the United States. Napoleon 
could in fact train battalions of raw recruits in the depots during 
the first month, have them on the march during the second and 
during the third lead them against the enemy, but then every 
battalion received a sufficient reinforcement of experienced 
officers and non-commissioned officers, every company some old 
soldiers, and on the day of the battle the new troops were 
brigaded together with veterans and, so to speak, framed by the 
latter. All these conditions were lacking in America. Without the 
considerable amount of people of military experience who had 
immigrated to America in consequence of the European revolution­
ary unrest of 1848-49, the organisation of the Union army would 
have required a much longer time still. The very small number of 
killed and wounded in proportion to the total of the troops 
engaged (usually one in every twenty) proves that most of the 
engagements, even the most recent ones in Kentucky and 
Tennessee, were fought mainly with firearms at fairly long range, 
and that the occasional bayonet charges either soon halted in the 
face of enemy fire or put the adversary to flight before it came to 
a hand-to-hand encounter. Meanwhile, the new campaign has 
been opened under more favourable auspices with the successful 
advance of Buell and Halleck through Kentucky and Tennessee.3 
After the reconquest of Missouri and West Virginia, the Union 
opened the campaign with the advance on Kentucky. Here the 
secessionists held three strong positions, fortified camps: Colum­
bus on the Mississippi to their left, Bowling Green in the centre, 
and Mill Springs on the Cumberland River to the right. Their line 
stretched for 300 miles from west to east. The extent of this line 
prevented the three corps from rendering each other support and 
offered the Union troops the chance of attacking each individually 
with superior forces. The great mistake in the disposition of the 
secessionists sprang from their attempt to occupy all the ground. 
a From here on the text is practically identical with that of Engels' article "The 
War in America" (present edition, Vol. 18).— Ed. 

=====第215页=====
The American Civil War 189 
A single fortified, strong central camp, chosen as the battlefield 
for a decisive engagement and held by the main body of the army, 
would have defended Kentucky far more effectively. It was bound 
either to attract the main force of the Unionists or put them in a 
dangerous position, had they attempted to march on, disregarding 
so strong a concentration of troops. 
Under the given circumstances the Unionists resolved to attack 
those three camps one after another, to manoeuvre their enemy 
out of them and force him to fight in open country. This plan, 
which conformed to all the rules of the art of war, was carried out 
with energy and dispatch. Towards the middle of January a corps 
of about 15,000 Unionists marched on Mill Springs, which was 
held by 10,000 secessionists. The Unionists manoeuvred in a 
manner that led the enemy to believe he only had to deal with a 
weak reconnoitring body. General Zollicoffer at once fell into the 
trap,  sallied from his fortified camp and attacked the Unionists. 
He soon realised that a superior force confronted him. He fell and 
his troops suffered as complete a defeat as,the Unionists at Bull 
Run. This time, however, the victory was exploited in quite 
another fashion. The defeated army was hard pressed until it 
arrived broken, demoralised, without field artillery or baggage, in 
its encampment at Mill Springs. This camp was pitched on the 
north bank of the Cumberland River, so that in the event of 
another defeat the troops had no retreat open to them save across 
the river by way of a few steamers and river boats. We find in 
general that almost all the secessionist camps were pitched on the 
enemy side of the river. To take up such a position is not only 
according to rule, but also very practical if there is a bridge in the 
rear. In such a case, the encampment serves as the bridgehead 
and gives its holders the chance of throwing their fighting forces 
at will on both banks of the river and so maintaining complete 
command of these banks. Without a bridge in the rear a camp on 
the enemy side of the river, on the contrary, cuts off the retreat 
after an unsuccessful engagement and compels the troops to 
capitulate, or exposes them to massacre and drowning, a fate that 
befell the Unionists at Ball's Bluff on the enemy side of the 
Potomac, whither the treachery of General Stone had sent them.197 
When the beaten secessionists reached their camp at Mill 
Springs, they at once understood that an enemy attack on their 
fortifications must be repulsed or capitulation must follow in a 
very short time. After the experience of the morning, they had 
lost confidence in their powers of resistance. Accordingly, when 
the Unionists advanced to attack the camp next day, they found 

=====第216页=====
190 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
that the enemy had taken advantage of the night to cross the 
river, leaving the camp, the baggage, the artillery and stores 
behind him. In this way, the extreme right of the secessionist line 
was pushed back to Tennessee, and east Kentucky, where the mass 
of the population is hostile to the slaveholders' party, was 
reconquered for the Union. 
At about the same time—towards the middle of January—the 
preparations for dislodging the secessionists from Columbus and 
Bowling Green commenced. A strong fleet of mortar vessels and 
ironclad gunboats was held in readiness, and the news was spread 
in all directions that it was to serve as a convoy to a large army 
marching along the Mississippi from Cairo to Memphis and New 
Orleans. All the demonstrations on the Mississippi, however, were 
merely mock manoeuvres. At the decisive moment, the gunboats 
were brought to the Ohio and thence to the Tennessee, up which 
they sailed as far as Fort Henry. This place, together with Fort 
Donelson on the Cumberland River, formed the second line of 
defence of the secessionists in Tennessee. The position was well 
chosen, for in case of a retreat beyond the Cumberland the latter 
river would have covered its front, the Tennessee its left flank, 
while the narrow strip of land between the two rivers was 
sufficiently covered by the two forts mentioned above. But the 
swift action of the Unionists broke through even the second line 
before the left wing and the centre of the first line had been 
attacked. 
In the first week of February the Unionists' gunboats appeared 
in front of Fort Henry, which surrendered after a short 
bombardment. The garrison escaped to Fort Donelson, since the 
land forces of the expedition were not strong enough to encircle 
the spot. The gunboats now sailed down the Tennessee again, 
upstream to the Ohio and thence up the Cumberland as far as 
Fort Donelson. A single gunboat sailed boldly up the Tennessee 
through the very heart of the State of Tennessee, skirting the 
State of Mississippi and pushing on as far as Florence in northern 
Alabama, where a series of swamps and banks (known by the 
name of the Muscle Shoals) prevented further navigation. The fact 
that a single gunboat made this long voyage of at least 150 miles 
and then returned, without experiencing any attack, proves that 
Union sentiment prevails along the river and will be very useful to 
the Union troops should they push forward as far as that. 
The boat expedition on the Cumberland now combined its 
movements with those of the land forces under generals Halleck 
and Grant. The secessionists at Bowling Green were deceived over 

=====第217页=====
The American Civil War 191 
the movements of the Unionists. Accordingly they remained 
quietly in their camp, while a week after the fall of Fort Henry, 
Fort Donelson was surrounded on the land side by 40,000 
Unionists and threatened on the river side by a strong fleet of 
gunboats. Just as in the case of the camp at Mill Springs and Fort 
Henry, the river lay beyond Fort Donelson, without a bridge for 
retreat. It was the strongest place the Unionists had attacked up to 
the present. The works had been carried out with greater care; 
moreover, the place was capacious enough to accommodate the 
20,000 men who occupied it. On the first day of the attack the 
gunboats silenced the fire of the batteries trained towards the river 
side and bombarded the interior of the defence works, while the 
land troops drove back the enemy outposts and forced the main 
body of the secessionists to seek shelter close under the guns of 
their own defence works. On the second day, the gunboats, which 
had suffered severely the day before, appear to have accomplished 
but little. The land troops, on the other hand, had to fight a long 
and, in places, hard battle with the columns of the garrison, which 
sought to break through the right wing of the enemy in order to 
secure their line of retreat to Nashville. However, an energetic 
attack by the Unionist right wing on the left wing of the 
secessionists and considerable reinforcements received by the left 
wing of the Unionists decided the victory in favour of the 
assailants. Various outworks had been stormed. The garrison, 
pressed back into its inner lines of defence, without the chance of 
retreat and manifestly not in a position to withstand an assault 
next morning, surrendered unconditionally on the following day. 
[II]a 
With Fort Donelson the enemy's artillery, baggage and military 
stores fell into the hands of the Unionists; 13,000 secessionists 
surrendered on the day of its captureb; 1,000 more the next day, 
and as soon as the advance guard of the victors appeared before 
Clarksville, a town that lies further up the Cumberland River, it 
opened its gates. Here, too, considerable supplies had been 
accumulated for the secessionists. 
The capture of Fort Donelson presents only one riddle: the 
a Here Die Presse has the editorial note, "Conclusion of yesterday's feuil­
leton". — Ed. 
b February 16, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第218页=====
192 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
flight of General Floyd with  5,000  men on the second day of the 
bombardment. These fugitives were too numerous to be smuggled 
away in steamers during the night. If certain precautions had been 
taken by the assailants, they could not have got away. a 
Seven days after the surrender of Fort Donelson, Nashville was 
occupied by the Federals. The distance between the two places is 
about 100 English miles, and a march of 15 miles a day, on very 
bad roads and in the most unfavourable season of the year, 
redounds to the honour of the Unionist troops. On receipt of the 
news that Fort Donelson had fallen, the secessionists evacuated 
Bowling Green; a week later, they abandoned Columbus and 
withdrew to a Mississippi island, 45 miles south. Thus, Kentucky 
was completely reconquered for the Union. Tennessee, however, 
can be held by the secessionists only if they give and win a big 
battle. They are said in fact to have concentrated 65,000 men for 
this purpose. Meanwhile, nothing prevents the Unionists from 
bringing a superior force against them.b 
The leadership of the Kentucky campaign from Somerset to 
Nashville deserves the highest praise. The reconquest of so 
extensive a territory, the advance from the Ohio to the Cumber­
land in a single month, evidence energy, resolution and speed 
such as have seldom been attained by regular armies in Europe. 
One may compare, for example, the slow advance of the Allies 
from Magenta to Solferino in 1859198—without pursuit of trie 
retreating enemy, without endeavour to cut off his stragglers or in 
any way to outflank and encircle whole bodies of his troops. 
Halleck and Grant, in particular, offer good examples of 
resolute military leadership. Without the least regard either for 
Columbus or Bowling Green, they concentrate their forces on the 
decisive points, Fort Henry and Fort Donelson, launch a swift and 
energetic attack on these and precisely thereby render Columbus 
and Bowling Green untenable. Then they march at once to 
Clarksville and Nashville, without allowing the retreating secession­
ists time to take up new positions in northern Tennessee. During 
this rapid pursuit the corps of secessionist troops in Columbus 
remains completely cut off from the centre and right wing of its 
army. The English papers have criticised this operation unjustly. 
Even if the attack on Fort Donelson had failed, the secessionists 
kept busy by General Buell at Bowling Green could not dispatch 
a End of the passage identical with Engels's article.— Ed. 
b The last two sentences are identical with the corresponding passage in Engels's 
article.— Ed. 

=====第219页=====
The American Civil War 193 
sufficient men to enable the garrison to follow the repulsed 
Unionists into the open country or to endanger their retreat. 
Columbus, on the other hand, lay so far off that it could not 
interfere with Grant's movements at all. In fact, after the Unionists 
had cleared Missouri of the secessionists, Columbus became an 
entirely useless post for the latter. The troops that formed its 
garrison had greatly to hasten their retreat to Memphis or even to 
Arkansas in order to escape the danger of ingloriously laying 
down their arms. 
In consequence of the clearing of Missouri and the reconquest 
of Kentucky, the theatre of war has so far narrowed that the 
different armies can co-operate to a certain extent along the whole 
line of operations and work to achieve definite results. In other 
words, for the first time the war is now assuming a strategic 
character, and the geographical configuration of the country is 
acquiring a new interest. It is now the task of the Northern 
generals to find the Achilles' heel of the cotton states. 
Before the capture of Nashville, no concerted strategy between 
the army of Kentucky and the army on the Potomac was possible. 
They were too far apart from each other. They stood in the same 
front line, but their lines of operation were entirely different. 
Only with the victorious advance into Tennessee did the move­
ments of the army of Kentucky become important for the entire 
theatre of war. 
The American papers influenced by McClellan are full of talk 
about the "anaconda" envelopment plan. According to it, an 
immense line of armies is to wind round the rebellion, gradually 
tighten its coils and finally strangle the enemy. This is sheer 
childishness. It is a rehash of the so-called cordon system199 devised 
in Austria about 1770, which was employed against the French 
from 1792 to 1797 with such great obstinacy and with such 
constant failure. At Jemappes, Fleurus and, more especially, at 
Montenotte, Millesimo, Dego,200  Castiglione and Rivoli, the final 
blow was dealt at this system. The French cut the "anaconda" in 
two by attacking at a point where they had concentrated superior 
forces. Then the coils of the "anaconda" were cut to pieces one 
after another. 
In densely populated and more or less centralised states there is 
always a centre, with the occupation of which by the enemy the 
national resistance would be broken. Paris is a brilliant example.201 
The slave states, however, possess no such centre. They are 
sparsely populated, with few large towns and all these on the 
seacoast. The question therefore arises: Does a military centre of 

=====第220页=====
194 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
gravity nevertheless exist, with the capture of which the backbone 
of their resistance will be broken, or are they, just as Russia still 
was in 1812, not to be conquered without occupying every village 
and every plot of land, in short, the entire periphery?202 
Cast a glance at the geographical shape of the secessionists' 
territory, with its long stretch of coast on the Atlantic Ocean and 
its long stretch of coast on the Gulf of Mexico. So long as the 
Confederates held Kentucky and Tennessee, the whole formed a 
great compact mass. The loss of both these states drives an 
enormous wedge into their territory, separating the states on the 
North Atlantic Ocean from the States on the Gulf of Mexico. The 
direct route from Virginia and the two Carolinas to Texas, 
Louisiana, Mississippi and even, in part, to Alabama leads through 
Tennessee; which is now occupied by the Unionists. The sole route 
that, after the complete conquest of Tennessee by the Union, 
connects the two sections of the slave states goes through Georgia. 
This proves that Georgia is the key to the secessionists' territory. With 
the loss of Georgia the Confederacy would be cut into two 
sections, which would have lost all connection with one another. A 
reconquest of Georgia by the secessionists, however, would be 
almost unthinkable, for the Unionist fighting forces would be 
concentrated in a central position, while their adversaries, divided 
into two camps, would have scarcely sufficient forces to put in the 
field for a joint attack. 
Would the conquest of all Georgia, with the seacoast of Florida, 
be required for such an operation? By no means. In a land where 
communication, particularly between distant points, depends much 
more on railways than on highways, the seizure of the railways is 
sufficient. The southernmost railway line between the States on the 
Gulf of Mexico and the Atlantic coast goes through Macon and 
Gordon near Milledgeville. 
The occupation of these two points would accordingly cut the 
secessionists' territory in two and enable the Unionists to beat one 
part after another. At the same time, one gathers from the above 
that no Southern republic is viable without the possession of 
Tennessee. Without Tennessee, Georgia's vital spot lies only eight 
or ten days' march from the frontier; the North would constantly 
have its hand at the throat of the South, and, at the slightest 
pressure, the South would have to yield or fight for its life anew, 
under circumstances in which a single defeat would cut off every 
prospect of success. 
From the foregoing considerations it follows: 
The Potomac is not the most important position in the war 

=====第221页=====
The American Civil War 195 
theatre. The seizure of Richmond and the advance of the Potomac 
army further south—difficult on account of the many rivers that 
cut across the line of march—could produce a tremendous moral 
effect. From a purely military standpoint, they would decide 
nothing. 
The outcome of the campaign depends on the Kentucky army, 
now in Tennessee. On the one hand, this army is nearest to the 
decisive points; on the other hand, it occupies a territory without 
which secession cannot survive. This army would accordingly have 
to be strengthened at the expense of all the rest and the sacrifice 
of all minor operations. Its next points of attack would be 
Chattanooga and Dalton on the Upper Tennessee, the most 
important railway junctions of the entire South. After their 
occupation, the link between the eastern and western states of 
Secessia would be limited to the lines of communication in 
Georgia. The further problem would then be to cut off another 
railway line, with Atlanta and Georgia, and finally to destroy the 
last link between the two sections by the capture of Macon and 
Gordon. 
On the contrary, should the anaconda plan be followed, then, 
despite all the successes gained at particular points and even on 
the Potomac, the war may be prolonged indefinitely, while the 
financial difficulties together with diplomatic complications acquire 
fresh scope. 
Written between March 7 and 22, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Die  Presse,  Nos. 84 and 
85, March 26 and 27, 1862 

=====第222页=====
196 
Karl Marx 
AN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRE MIRÉS 
London, April 28 
A main theme of diplomatic circles here is France's conduct on 
the Mexican scene. People are puzzled by the fact that Louis 
Bonaparte should have increased the expeditionary troops at the 
moment when he promised to reduce them, and that he should 
want to go forward whilst England draws back. Here people are 
well aware that the impulse for the Mexican expedition204  came 
from the Cabinet of St. James and not from that of the Tuileries. 
It is equally well known that Louis Bonaparte likes to carry out all 
his undertakings, and particularly the overseas adventures, under 
England's aegis. As is known, the restored Empire has not yet 
emulated the feat of its original 3 in quartering the French armies 
in the capital cities of modern Europe. As a pis aller,h on the other 
hand, it has led them to the capital cities of ancient Europe, to 
Constantinople, Athens and Rome, and, over and above that, even 
to Peking.205  Should the theatrical effect of a jaunt to the capital 
city of the Aztecs be lost, and the opportunity for military 
archaeological collections à la Montauban 206? If, however, one 
considers the present state of French finance and the future 
serious conflicts with the United States and England to which 
Louis Bonaparte's actions in Mexico may lead, one is then obliged 
to reject without further question the foregoing interpretation of 
his doings which is popular with various British papers. I believe I 
can give you the real explanation. 
At the time of the Convention of July 17,  1861,207  when the 
claims of the English creditors were to be settled, but the English 
a The empire of Napoleon I.— Ed. 
b As a pis aller —here: instead.— Ed. 

=====第223页=====
An International Affaire Mirés 197 
plenipotentiary simultaneously demanded that the entire register 
of the Mexican debts or misdeeds should be examined, Mexico's 
Foreign Minister3 put the debt to France at $200,000, i.e., a mere 
bagatelle of some £40,000. The account now drawn up by France, 
on the other hand, does not confine itself to these modest limits by 
any means. 
Under the Catholic administration of Zuloaga and Miramon, an 
issue of Mexican state bonds to the amount of $14,000,000 was 
contracted through the Swiss banking house of J. B. Jecker and 
Co. The whole sum that was realised by the first issue of these 
bonds came to only 5 per cent of the nominal amount or to 
$700,000. The sum total of the bonds issued very soon fell into 
the hands of prominent Frenchmen, among them relatives of the 
Emperor and fellow string-pullers of "haute politique"!' The house 
of Jecker and Co. let these gentlemen have the aforesaid bonds 
for far less than their original nominal price. 
Miramon contracted this debt at a time when he was in 
possession of the capital city. Later, after he had come down to the 
role of a mere guerilla leader, he again caused state bonds to the 
nominal value of $38,000,000 to be issued through his so-called 
Finance Minister, Sefior Peza-y-Peza. Once more it was the house 
of Jecker and Co. which negotiated the issue, but, on this occasion, 
it limited its advances to the modest sum of barely $500,000, or 
from one to two per cent to the dollar. Once more, the Swiss 
bankers knew how to dispose of their Mexican property as quickly 
as possible, and once more the bonds fell into the hands of those 
"prominent" Frenchmen, among whom were some habitués of the 
imperial court whose names will live on in the annals of the 
European stock exchanges as long as the affaire Mires. 
This debt, then, of $52,000,000, of which not even $4,200,000 
have hitherto been advanced, the administration of President 
Juarez declines to recognise, on the one hand, because it knows 
nothing about it and, on the other hand, because it claims that 
Messrs. Miramon, Zuloaga and Peza-y-Peza were possessed of no 
constitutional authority to contract such a state debt. The above-
mentioned "prominent" Frenchmen, however, had to carry the 
contrary view at the decisive place. Lord Palmerston was, for his 
part, opportunely instructed by some members of Parliament that 
the whole affair would lead to highly objectionable interpellations 
in the Lower House. Among other things to be feared, it was said, 
a M. de Zamacona.— Ed. 
h High politics.— Ed. 
15—1134 

=====第224页=====
198 Karl Marx 
was the question whether British land and sea power might be 
employed to support the gambling operations of certain rouge-et-
noir 3 politicians on the other side of the Channel. Accordingly, 
Palmerston caught eagerly at the Conference of Orizaba208  to 
withdraw from a business that threatens us with the filth of an 
international affaire Mirés. 
Written on April 28, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 120, 
May  ^2, 1862 
a Red and black, a game of chance.— Ed. 

=====第225页=====
199 
Karl Marx 
THE ENGLISH PRESS 
AND THE FALL OF NEW ORLEANS 
London, May 16 
On the arrival of the first rumours of the fall of New 
Orleans,210 The Times, The  Herald,  The Standard, The Morning Post, 
The Daily Telegraph, and other English "sympathisers"3  with the 
Southern "nigger-drivers" proved strategically, tactically, philologi-
cally, exegetically, politically, morally and fortificationally that the 
rumour was one of the "canards" which Reuter, Havas,  Wolff 211 
and their understrappers so often let fly. The natural means of 
defence of New Orleans, it was said, had been augmented not only 
by newly constructed forts, but by submarine infernal machines of 
every sort and ironclad gunboats. Then there was the Spartan 
character of the citizens of New Orleans and their deadly hatred 
of Lincoln's mercenaries. Finally, was it not at New Orleans that 
England suffered the defeat that brought her second war against 
the United States (1812 to 1814) to an ignominious end? 
Consequently, there was no reason to doubt that New Orleans 
would immortalise itself as a second Saragossa or a Moscow of the 
"South". 212 Besides, it harboured 15,000 bales of cotton, with 
which it could so easily have kindled an inextinguishable fire to 
destroy  itself,  quite apart from the fact that in 1814 the duly 
damped cotton bales proved more indestructible by cannon fire 
than the earthworks of Sevastopol. It was therefore as clear as 
daylight that the fall of New Orleans was a case of the familiar 
Yankee bragging. 
When the first rumours were confirmed two days later by 
steamers arriving from New York, the bulk of the English 
a Marx uses English words: "sympathisers" and, below, "nigger-drivers", and 
"understrappers".— Ed. 
15* 

=====第226页=====
200 Karl Marx 
pro-slavery press persisted in its scepticism. The Evening Standard, 
especially, was so positive in its unbelief that in the same number it 
published a first leader which proved the Crescent City's213 
impregnability in black and white, whilst its "latest news" 
announced the impregnable city's fall in large type. The Times, 
however, which has always held discretion for the better part of 
valour,3 veered round. It still doubted, but, at the same time, it 
made ready for every eventuality, since New Orleans was a city of 
"rowdies"b and not of heroes.0  On this occasion, The Times was 
right. New Orleans is a settlement of the dregs of the French 
bohème, in the true sense of the word, a French convict colony—and 
never, with the changes of time, has it belied its origin. Only, The 
Times came post festum d to this pretty widespread realisation. 
Finally, however, the fait accompli* struck even the blindest 
Thomas. What was to be done? The English pro-slavery press now 
proves that the fall of New Orleans means a gain for the 
Confederates and a defeat for the Federals. 
The fall of New Orleans allowed General Lovell to reinforce 
Beauregard's army with his troops; Beauregard was all the more 
in need of reinforcements, since 160,000 men (surely an exaggera­
tion!) were said to have been concentrated on his front by Halleck 
and, on the other hand, General Mitchel had cut Beauregard's 
communications with the East by breaking the railway connection 
between Memphis and Chattanooga, that is, with Richmond, 
Charleston and Savannah. After his communications had been cut 
(which we indicated as a necessary strategical move long before the 
battle of Corinthf), Beauregard had no longer any railway 
connections from Corinth, save those with Mobile and New 
Orleans. After New Orleans had fallen and he was only left with 
the single railway to Mobile to rely on, he naturally could no 
longer procure the necessary provisions for his troops. He 
therefore fell back on Tupelo and, in the estimation of the English 
pro-slavery press, his provisioning capacity has, of course, been 
increased by the entry of Lovell's troops! 
On the other hand, the same oracles remark, the yellow fever 
a Shakespeare, King Henry IV, Part I, Act V, Scene 4.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
c "The spirit in which the fall of New-Orleans has been met...", leading article 
in The Times, No. 24244, May 13, 1862.— Ed. 
d Too late. From the Latin saying, "Post festum venire miserum est"—"It is a 
wretched thing to arrive after the feast" (Plato, Gorgias,  1).—  Ed. 
e Accomplished fact.— Ed. 
f See this volume, p.  194  — Ed. 

=====第227页=====
The English Press and the Fall of New Orleans 201 
will take a heavy toll of the Federals in New Orleans and, finally, 
if the city itself is no Moscow, is not its mayor3  a Brutus? Only 
read (cf. New York b) his melodramatically valorous epistle to 
Commodore Farragut, "Brave words, Sir, brave words!"c But 
hard words break no bones. 
The press organs of the Southern slaveholders, however, do not 
construe the fall of New Orleans so optimistically as their English 
comforters. This will be seen from the following extracts: 
The Richmond Dispatch says: 
"What has become of the ironclad gunboats, the Mississippi and the Louisiana, 
from which we expected the salvation of the Crescent City? In respect of their 
effect on the foe, these ships might just as well have been ships of glass. It is 
useless do deny that the fall of New Orleans is a heavy blow. The Confederate 
government is thereby cut off from West Louisiana, Texas, Missouri and Arkansas." 
The Norfolk Day Book observes: 
"This is the most serious reverse since the beginning of the war. It augurs 
privations and want for all classes of society and, what is worse, it threatens our 
army supplies." d 
The Atlantic Intelligencer laments: 
"We expected that the outcome would be different. The approach of the enemy 
was no surprise attack; it has long been foreseen, and we had been promised that, 
should he even pass by Fort Jackson, fearful artillery contrivances would force him 
to withdraw or ensure his annihilation. In all this, we have deceived ourselves, as 
on every occasion when the defences were supposed to guarantee the safety of a 
place or town. It appears that modern inventions have destroyed the defensive 
capacity of fortification. Ironclad gunboats destroy them or sail past them 
unceremoniously. Memphis, we fear, will share the fate of New Orleans. Would it 
not be folly to deceive ourselves with hope?"e 
Finally, the Petersburg Express: 
"The capture of New Orleans by the Federals is the most extraordinary and 
fateful event of the whole war." 
Written on May 16, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 138, 
May 20, 1862 
a J. F. Monroe.— Ed. 
b This parenthesis, added by the editors of Die  Presse,  referred the reader to the 
report from New York, "Des Bürgermeisters von Neuorleans Erklärung", published 
in the same issue of the paper.— Ed. 
c Paraphrase of Falstaff's words ("Rare words! brave world!") from Shakespeare's 
King Henry IV, Part I, Act III, Scene  3.—  Ed. 
d Quoted from the report, "From Fortress Monroe", the New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6575, May 1, 1862.— Ed. 
e Quoted from the report, "Washington, Thursday, May 1, 1862", the New-York 
Daily Tribune, No. 6576, May 2, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第228页=====
202 
Karl Marx 
A TREATY AGAINST THE SLAVE TRADE 214 
London, May 18 
The Treaty on the suppression of the slave trade concluded 
between the United States and Britain on April 7 of this year in 
Washington3 is now communicated in extensob by the American 
newspapers. The main points of this important document are the 
following: The right of search is reciprocal, but can be exercised 
only by such warships on either side as have received special 
authority for this purpose from one of the contracting powers. 
From time to time, the contracting powers supply one another 
with complete statistics concerning the sections of their navies that 
have been appointed to keep watch on the traffic in Negroes. The 
right of search can be exercised only against merchantmen within 
a distance of 200 miles from the African coast and south of 32° 
north latitude, and within 30 nautical miles of the coast of Cuba. 
Search, whether of British ships by American cruisers or of 
American ships by British cruisers, does not take place in that part 
of the sea which is British or American territory (therefore within 
three nautical miles of the coast); no more does it take place just 
outside the ports or settlements of foreign powers. 
Mixed courts, composed half of Englishmen, half of Americans, 
and resident in Sierra Leone, Capetown and New York will pass 
judgment on the prize vessels. In the event of a ship's conviction, 
her crew will be handed over to the jurisdiction of the nation 
under whose flag the ship sailed, so far as this can be done 
without great cost. Not only the crew (including the captain, mate, 
etc.),  but also the owners of the vessel will then incur the penalties 
customary in the country. Compensation to owners of merchant­
men that have been acquitted by the mixed courts is to be paid 
within a year by the power under whose flag the capturing 
a "Treaty between the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, for the Suppression of the 
African Slave-Trade. Concluded at Washington, April 7, 1862".— Ed. 
b In detail.— Ed. 

=====第229页=====
A Treaty Against the Slave Trade 203 
warship sailed. Not only the presence of captive Negroes is 
regarded as affording legal grounds for the seizure of ships, but 
also special equipment in the ship for the traffic in Negroes, 
manacles, chains and other instruments for guarding the Negroes 
and, lastly, stores of provisions that greatly exceed the 
requirements of the ship's company. A ship on which such 
suspicious articles are found has to furnish proof of her innocence 
and even in the event of acquittal can claim no compensation. 
The commander of a cruiser who oversteps the authority 
conferred on him by the Treaty, is liable to punishment by his 
respective government. Should the commander of a cruiser of one 
of the contracting powers harbour a suspicion that a merchant 
vessel under escort by one or more warships of the other 
contracting power is carrying Negroes on board, or was engaged 
in the African slave trade, or is equipped for this trade, he has 
then to communicate his suspicion to the commander of the escort 
and search the suspected ship in his presence; the latter is to be 
conducted to the place of residence of one of the mixed courts if, 
according to the Treaty, it comes under the category of suspicious 
ships.  The Negroes found on board convicted ships are placed at 
the disposal of the government under whose flag the capture was 
made. They are to be set at liberty at once and remain free under 
guarantee of the government in whose territory they find 
themselves. The Treaty can only be terminated after ten years. It 
remains in force for a full year from the date of the notice given 
by one of the contracting parties. 
A mortal blow has been dealt the Negro trade by this 
Anglo-American Treaty—the result of the American Civil War. 
The effect of the Treaty will be completed by the Bill recently 
introduced by Senator Sumner,3 which repeals the law of 1808 
dealing with the traffic in Negroes on the coasts of the United 
States and punishes the transport of slaves from one port of the 
United States to another as a crime.215 This Bill does, to a large 
extent, paralyse the trade that the states raising Negroes (border 
slave statesb) are carrying on with the states consuming Negroes 
(the slave states proper). 
Written on May 18, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 140, 
May 22, 1862 
a A report on the Bill date-lined "Senate. Washington, May 2, 1862" appeared 
in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6577, May 3, 1862.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx gives the English words in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第230页=====
204 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE SITUATION 
IN THE AMERICAN THEATRE OF WAR 216 
The capture of New Orleans, as the detailed reports now to 
hand show, is distinguished as an almost unparalleled act of valour 
on the part of the fleet. The Unionists' fleet consisted merely of 
wooden ships: about six warships, each having from 14 to 25 guns, 
supported by a numerous flotilla of gunboats and mortar vessels. 
This fleet had before it two forts which blocked the passage of the 
Mississippi. Within range of the 100 guns of these forts the river 
was barred by a strong chain, beyond which there was a mass of 
torpedoes, fire-floats and other instruments of destruction. These 
first obstacles had therefore to be overcome in order to pass 
between the forts. On the other side of the forts, however, was a 
second formidable line of defence, formed by ironclad gunboats, 
among them the Manassas, an iron ram, and the Louisiana, a 
powerful floating battery. After the Unionists had bombarded the 
two forts, which completely command the river, for six days 
without any effect, they resolved to brave their fire, force the iron 
barrier in three divisions, sail up the river and risk battle with the 
"ironsides". 3 The hazardous enterprise succeeded. As soon as the 
flotilla effected a landing before New Orleans, the victory was 
naturally decided. 
Beauregard now had nothing more to defend in Corinth. His 
position there only made sense so long as it covered Mississippi 
and Louisiana, and especially New Orleans. He now finds himself 
strategically in the position that a lost battle would leave him no 
other choice than to disband his army into guerillas, for without a 
a The authors use the English word.— Ed. 

=====第231页=====
The Situation in the American Theatre of War 205 
large town, where railways and supplies are concentrated, in the 
rear of his army, he can no longer hold masses of men together. 
McClellan has irrefutably proved that he is a military incompe­
tent who, having been raised by favourable circumstances to a 
commanding and responsible position, wages war not to defeat the 
foe, but rather not to be defeated by the foe and thus forfeit his 
own usurped greatness. He bears himself like the old so-called 
"manoeuvring generals", wrho excused their anxious avoidance of 
any tactical decision with the plea that, by strategic flanking 
manoeuvres, they obliged the enemy to give up his positions. The 
Confederates always escape him, because at the decisive moment 
he never attacks them. Thus, although their plan of retreat had 
already been announced ten days before even by the New York 
papers (for example, the Tribune*), he let them retire unmolested 
from Manassas to Richmond. He then divided his army and 
flanked the Confederates strategically by establishing himself with 
one body of troops near Yorktown. Siege warfare always affords 
an excuse for wasting time and avoiding battle. As soon as he had 
concentrated a military force superior to the Confederates, he let 
them retire from Yorktown to Williamsburg and from there 
further, without forcing them to give battle. A war has never yet 
been so wretchedly waged. If the rearguard action at Williamsburg 
ended in defeat for the Confederate rearguard instead of in a 
second Bull Run217 for the Union troops, McClellan was in no way 
responsible for this result. 
After a march of about twelve miles (English) in a twenty-four 
hours'  downpour and through veritable seas of mud,  8,000  Union 
troops under General Heintzelman (of German descent, but born 
in Pennsylvania) arrived in the vicinity of Williamsburg and met 
with only weak enemy pickets. As soon, however, as the enemy 
had assured himself of their numerically inferior strength, he 
dispatched from his picked troops at Williamsburg reinforcements 
that gradually increased the number of his men to 25,000. By nine 
o'clock in the morning, battle was being waged in earnest; at half 
past twelve General Heintzelman discovered that the engagement 
was going in favour of the foe. He sent messenger after 
messenger to General Kearny, who was eight miles to his rear, but 
could only push forward slowly since the road had been 
completely "dissolved" by the rain. For a whole hour Heintzelman 
remained without reinforcements and the 7th and 8th Jersey 
a "Movements of the Manassas Rebels", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6517, 
February 22, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第232页=====
206 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
regiments, which had expended their stock of powder, began to 
run for the woods on either side of the road. Heintzelman now 
made Colonel Menill with a squadron of Pennsylvanian cavalry 
take up positions on both edges of the forest, under the threat of 
firing on the fugitives. This brought the latter once more to a 
standstill. 
Order was further restored by the example of a Massachusetts 
regiment, which had likewise expended its powder, but now fixed 
bayonets to its muskets and calmly awaited the enemy. At length, 
Kearny's vanguard under Brigadier Berry (from the State of 
Maine) came in sight. Heintzelman's army welcomed its rescuers 
with a wild "Hurrah"; he ordered the regimental band to strike 
up Yankee Doodle* and Berry's fresh forces to form a line almost 
half a mile in length in front of his exhausted troops. After 
preliminary musket fire, Berry's brigade made a bayonet charge at 
the double and drove the enemy off the battlefield to his 
earthworks, the largest of which after repeated attacks and 
counter-attacks remained in the possession of the Union troops. 
Thus,  the equilibrium of the battle was restored. Berry's arrival 
had saved the Unionists. The arrival of the brigades of Jameson 
and Birney at four o'clock decided the victory. At nine o'clock in 
the evening the retreat of the Confederates from Williamsburg 
began; on the following day they continued it—in the direction of 
Richmond—hotly pursued by Heintzelman's cavalry. On the 
morning after the battle, between six and seven o'clock, Heintzel­
man ordered Williamsburg to be occupied by General Jameson. 
The rearguard of the fleeing enemy had evacuated the town from 
the opposite end only half an hour before. Heintzelman's battle 
was an infantry battle in the true sense of the word. Artillery 
hardly came into action. Musket fire and bayonet attack were 
decisive. If the Congress at Washington wanted to pass a vote of 
thanks, it should have been to General Heintzelman, who saved 
the Yankees from a second Bull Run, and not to McClellan, who 
in his wonted fashion avoided "the tactical decision" and let the 
numerically weaker adversary escape for the third time. 
The Confederate army in Virginia has better chances than 
Beauregard's army, first because it is facing a McClellan instead of 
a Halleck, and then because the many rivers on its line of retreat 
flow crosswise from the mountains to the sea. However, to avoid 
breaking up into bands without a battle, its generals will sooner or 
later be forced to accept a decisive battle, just as the Russians were 
a English title in the original.— Ed. 

=====第233页=====
I 
The Situation in the American Theatre of War 207 
obliged to fight at Smolensk and Borodino218 against the will of 
the generals, who judged the situation correctly. Lamentable as 
McClellan's manner of conducting the war has been, the constant 
withdrawals, accompanied by abandonment of artillery, munitions 
and other military stores, and simultaneously the small unsuccess­
ful rearguard engagements, have at any rate badly demoralised 
the Confederates, as will become manifest on the day of a decisive 
battle. To sum up: 
Should Beauregard or Jefferson Davis lose a decisive battle, 
their armies will then break up into bands. Should one of them 
win a decisive battle, which is most unlikely, at best the disbanding 
of their armies will be deferred. They are not in a position to 
draw the least lasting benefit even from a victory. They cannot 
advance 20 English miles without coming to a standstill and again 
awaiting the renewed offensive of the enemy. 
It still remains to examine the chances of a guerilla war. But 
precisely in respect of the present war of the slaveholders it is 
most amazing how slight or rather how wholly lacking is the 
participation of the population in it. In 1813, the communications 
of the French were continually cut and harassed by Colomb, 
Lützow, Chernyshev and twenty other leaders of partisans and 
Cossacks. In 1812, the population in Russia vanished completely 
from the French line of march; in 1814, the French peasants 
armed themselves and slew the patrols and stragglers of the Allies. 
But here nothing happens at all. People resign themselves to the 
fate of the big battles and console themselves with "Victrix causa diis 
placuit, sed victa Catoni"? The tall talk of war even with knives is 
going up in smoke. There can be hardly any doubt, it is true, that 
the white trash, h as the planters themselves call the "poor whites", 
will attempt guerilla warfare and brigandage. Such an attempt, 
however, will very quickly transform the propertied planters into 
Unionists. They will even call the Yankee troops to their aid. The 
alleged burnings of cotton, etc., on the Mississippi rest exclusively 
on the testimony of two Kentuckians who are said to have come to 
Louisville—certainly not on the Mississippi. The conflagration in 
New Orleans was easily organised. The fanaticism of the New 
Orleans merchants is explained by the fact that they were obliged 
to take a quantity of Confederate treasury bonds for hard cash. 
The conflagration at New Orleans will be repeated in other towns; 
a "The conquering cause pleased the gods, but the conquered one pleased 
Cato"  (Lucan, Pharsalia, I, 128).— Ed. 
b Here and below the English phrase is used.— Ed. 

=====第234页=====
208 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
assuredly, also, there will be a lot more burning; but theatrical 
coups like this can only bring the dissension between the planters 
and the "white trash" to a head and therewith—finis  secessiae!* 
Written on May 23-25, 1862 Printed according to the news-
First published in Die Presse, No. 148, 
May 30, 1862 
a The end of secession.— Ed. 

=====第235页=====
209 
Karl Marx 
ENGLISH HUMANITY AND AMERICA 219 
London, June 14 
Humanity in England, like liberty in France, has now become an 
export article for the traders in politics.3 We recollect the time 
when Tsar Nicholas had Polish ladies flogged by soldiers and 
when Lord Palmerston found the moral indignation of some 
parliamentarians over the event "impolitic". We recollect that 
about a decade ago a revolt took place on the Ionian Islands220 
which gave the English governorb there occasion to have a fairly 
considerable number of Grecian women flogged. Probatum est,c 
said Palmerston and his Whig colleagues who at that time were in 
office. Just a few years ago proof was furnished to Parliament 
from official documents that the tax collectors in India employed 
means of coercion against the wives of the ryots,221 the infamy of 
which forbids giving further details. Palmerston and his colleagues 
did not, it is true, dare to justify these atrocities, but what an 
outcry they would have raised, had a foreign government dared to 
publicly proclaim its indignation over these English infamies and 
distinctly indicate that it would step in if Palmerston and 
colleagues did not at once disavow the Indian tax officials. But 
Cato the Censor himself could not watch over the morals of the 
Roman citizens more anxiously than the English aristocrats and 
their ministers over the "humanity" of the war-waging Yankees! 
The ladies of New Orleans, yellow beauties, tastelessly bedecked 
with jewels and comparable, perhaps, to the women of the old 
Mexicans, save that they do not devour their slaves in natura? are 
a Marx gives the English words: "traders in politics".— Ed. 
b G. Colborne.— Ed. 
c Approved.— Ed. 
d Alive.— Ed. 

=====第236页=====
210 Karl Marx 
this time—previously it was the harbours of Charleston—the 
occasions for the British aristocrats' display of humanity. The 
English women who are starving in Lancashire (they are, however, 
not ladies, nor do the^possess any slaves), have inspired no 
parliamentary utterance hitherto; the cry of distress from the Irish 
women, who, with the progressive eviction of the small tenant 
farmers in green Erin,3 are flung half naked on the street and 
driven from house and home quite as if the Tartars had 
descended upon them, has hitherto called forth only one echo 
from the Lords, the Commons, and Her Majesty's government13— 
homilies on the absolute rights of landed property.222 But the 
ladies of New Orleans! That, to be sure, is another matter. These 
ladies were far too enlightened to participate in the tumult of war, 
like the goddesses of Olympus, or to cast themselves into the 
flames, like the women of Saguntum.223 They have invented a new 
and safe mode of heroism, a mode that could have been invented 
only by female slaveholders and, what is more, only by female 
slaveholders in a land where the free part of the population 
consists of shopkeepers by vocation, tradesmen in cotton or sugar 
or tobacco, and does not keep slaves, like the civesc of the ancient 
world. After their men had run away from New Orleans or had 
crept into their back closets, these ladies rushed into the streets in 
order to spit in the faces of the victorious Union troops or to stick 
out their tongues at them or, like Mephistopheles, to make in 
general "an unseemly gesture",*1 accompanied by insulting words. 
These Magaeras imagined they could be ill-mannered "with 
impunity". 
This was their heroism. General Butler issued a proclamation6 in 
which he notified them that they should be treated as street­
walkers, if they continued to act as street-walkers. Butler has, 
indeed, the makings of a lawyer, but does not seem to have 
undertaken the requisite study of English statute law.224 Otherwise, 
by analogy with the laws imposed on Ireland under Castlereagh,225 
he would have prohibited them from setting foot on the streets at 
all. Butler's warning to the "ladies" of New Orleans has aroused 
a Old name of Ireland.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the English words: "Lords," "Commons" and "Her Majesty's 
government".— Ed. 
c Citizens.— Ed. 
d Cf. Goethe, Faust, Der Tragödie erster Teil, "Hexenküche". — Ed. 
e B. F. Butler, A Proclamation [May 15, 1862], The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 
1862.—  Ed. 

=====第237页=====
i 
English Humanity and America 211 
such moral indignation in Earl Carnarvon, Sir. J. Walsh (who 
played so ridiculous and odious a role in Ireland) and Mr. 
Gregory, who was already demanding recognition of the Confed­
eracy a year ago,a that the Earl in the Upper House, the knight and 
the man "without a handle to his name"b in the Lower House, 
interrogated the Ministry to learn what steps it intended to take in 
the name of outraged "humanity". Russell and Palmerston both 
castigated Butler, both expected that the government at Washington 
would disavow him; and the so very tender-hearted Palmerston, 
who behind the Queen's0  back and without the foreknowledge of his 
colleagues recognised the coup d'état of December 1851 226 (on which 
occasion "ladies" were actually shot dead, whilst others were violated 
by Zouaves227) merely out of "human admiration"—the same 
tender-hearted Viscount declared Butler's warning to be an 
"infamy".d Ladies, indeed, who actually own slaves—such ladies 
were not even to be able to vent their anger and their malice on 
common Union troops, peasants, artisans and other, rabble with 
impunity! It is "infamous". 
Among the public here, no one is deceived by this humanity 
farce. It is meant partly to call forth, partly to fortify the feeling in 
favour of intervention, in the first place on the part of France. 
After the first melodramatic outbursts, the knights of humanity in 
the Upper and Lower House, as if by word of command, 
discarded their emotional mask. Their declamation served 
merely as a prologue to the question whether the Emperor of the 
Frenche had communicated with the English government in the 
matter of mediating, and whether the latter, as they hoped, had 
received such an offer favourably. Russell and Palmerston both 
declared they did not know of the offer. Russell declared the 
present moment extremely unfavourable for any mediation. 
Palmerston, more guarded and reserved, contented himself with 
saying that at the present moment the English government had no 
intention of mediating. 
a W. Gregory [Speech in the House of Commons, May 28, 1861], The Times, 
No. 23945, May 29,  1861.—  Ed. 
b Marx gives the English phrase.— Ed. 
c Victoria's.— Ed. 
d The reference is to the speeches of H. Carnarvon and J. Russell in the House of 
Lords and of J. Walsh, W. Gregory and H. Palmerston in the House of Commons on 
June 13, 1862 published in The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.— Ed. 
e Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第238页=====
212 Karl Marx 
The plan is that during the recess of the English Parliament 
France should play her role of mediator and, in the autumn, if 
Mexico is secure, should open her intervention. The lull in the 
American theater of war has resuscitated the intervention 
speculators in St. James and the Tuileries from their marasmus. 
This lull is itself due to a strategic error on the part of the North. 
If, after its victory in Tennessee, the Kentucky army had rapidly 
advanced on the railway junctions in Georgia, instead of letting 
itself be drawn South down the Mississippi on a side track, Reuter 
and Co. would have been cheated of their business in "interven­
tion" and "mediation" rumours. However that may be, Europe 
can wish nothing more fervently than that the coup d'état 3 should 
attempt "to restore order in the United States" and "to save 
civilisation" there too. 
Written on June 14, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 168, 
June 20, 1862 Published according to the news­
paper 
An allusion to Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第239页=====
213 
Frederick Engels 
THE AMERICAN CIVIL WAR 
AND THE IRONCLADS AND RAMS 
About three and a half months ago, on March 8, 1862, the naval 
battle between the Merrimac and the frigates Cumberland and 
Congress in Hampton Roads ended the long era of wooden 
men-of-war. On March 9, 1862, the naval battle between the 
Merrimac and the Monitor in the same waters opened the era of 
war between ironclad ships.3 
Since then the Congress in Washington has approved considera­
ble sums for building various ships armoured with iron and 
completing the large iron floating battery of Mr. Stevens (in 
Hoboken, near New York). In addition, Mr. Ericsson is engaged in 
completing six ships built on the pattern of the Monitor, but larger 
and with two mobile turrets, each flanked with two heavy cannons. 
The Galena, a second ironclad, not constructed by Mr. Ericsson, 
and of different design to the Monitor, has been completed and 
has joined the Monitor, at first to watch the Merrimac and then to 
clear the banks of the James River of rebel forts; this task has 
been performed to within seven or eight miles of Richmond. The 
third ironclad in the James River is the Bengaluche, first named the 
Stevens after its inventor and former owner. 
A fourth ironclad, the New Ironsides, is being built in Philadel­
phia and should be ready to go to sea in a few weeks. The 
Vanderbilt and another large steamer have been converted into 
rams;  a large number of other wooden men-of-war, such as the 
Roanoke, are to be reborn as ironclads. In addition, the Union 
government had 4 or 5 ironclad gunboats built on the Ohio, which 
did good service at Fort Henry, Fort Donelson and Pittsburg 
a See this volume, pp. 289-95.— Ed. 
16— 1134 

=====第240页=====
214 Frederick Engels 
Landing. Finally, Colonel Eilet and his friends fitted out various 
rams by levelling down and ironcladding the bows of old 
steamships at Cincinnati and other places on the Ohio. He did not 
arm them with cannons but with sharpshooters, in which the West 
abounds. He then offered the rams, the crews and his own 
services to the Union government. We shall come back later to the 
first feat of arms of these improvised rams. 
On the other side, the Confederates did not remain inactive. 
They began to build new iron ships and remodel old ones at 
Norfolk. Before they had finished their work there, Norfolk fell to 
the Union troops and all those ships were destroyed. In addition, 
the Confederates built three very strong iron rams at New Orleans, 
and a fourth ironclad of enormous size with excellent armament 
was nearing completion when New Orleans fell. According to 
Union naval officers, the last-named ship, when ready for battle, 
would have exposed the entire Union navy to the greatest peril, 
since the government in Washington had nothing equal to 
opposing this monster. Its cost came to two million dollars. As we 
know, the rebels themselves destroyed the ship. 
At Memphis, the Confederates had built no fewer than eight 
rams,  each of which carried four or six guns of large caliber. It 
was at Memphis that the first "battle of the rams" took place on the 
Mississippi on June 6. Although the Union flotilla, coming down 
the Mississippi, had five ironclad gunboats, it was two of Colonel 
Eilet's rams, the Queen and the Monarch, that essentially decided 
the combat. Of the eight enemy rams, four were destroyed, three 
were captured and one escaped. After the gunboats of the Union 
flotilla had opened a lively cannonade against the rebel ships and 
kept it up for some time, the Queen and the Monarch sailed into 
the midst of the enemy squadron. The fire of the gunboats ceased 
almost completely, since Colonel Ellet's rams were tied up in such 
a knot with the enemy ships that the gunners could not distinguish 
friend from foe. 
Ellet's rams, as already mentioned, carried no cannons but a 
host of sharpshooters. Their engines and boilers were protected 
only by timber work. Powerful steam engines and a sharp oak bow 
covered with iron constituted the entire equipment of these rams. 
Men, women and children streamed out of Memphis by the 
thousands to the steep banks of the Mississippi, at some points 
hardly half an English mile from the scene of battle, to watch the 
"battle of the rams" in anxious suspense. The conflict lasted little 
more than an hour. While the rebels lost 7 ships and 100 men, 
about 40 of them by drowning, only one Union ship was seriously 

=====第241页=====
I 
The American Civil War and the Ironclads and Rams 215 
damaged, only one man wounded and none killed. 
Apart from the one iron ram that escaped from the naval 
engagement at Memphis, the Confederates may still have a couple 
of rams and ironclads at Mobile. Except for these, and the few 
gunboats at Vicksburg, which are, simultaneously, threatened by 
Farragut, sailing up the river, and Davis, sailing down it, their 
navy has already seen the end of its days. 
Written at the end of June, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 181, 
July 3, 1862 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第242页=====
216 
Karl Marx 
CHINESE AFFAIRS 
A little while before tables started to dance,229 China, that living 
fossil, began to revolutionise.230 In  itself,  there was nothing 
extraordinary about this phenomenon, for the Oriental empires 
demonstrate constant immobility in their social substructure, with 
unceasing change in the persons and clans that gain control of the 
political superstructure. China is dominated by a foreign dynas­
ty.231 Why should not a movement to overthrow this dynasty make 
its appearance after 300 years? The movement had a religious 
tinge right from the outset; but it had this in common with all the 
Oriental movements. The immediate causes giving rise to the 
movement were evident: European intervention, the opium 
wars, 232 the resultant undermining of the existing regime, outflow 
of silver abroad, disturbance of the economic equilibrium by the 
importation of foreign goods, etc. To me it seemed a paradox that 
opium, instead of lulling, stimulated. Actually, the only thing novel 
about this Chinese revolution are those who are making it. They 
are aware of no task except changing the dynasty. They have no 
slogans. They are an even greater abomination for the masses of 
the people than for the old rulers. They seem to have no other 
vocation than, as opposed to conservative stagnation, to produce 
destruction in grotesquely detestable forms, destruction without 
any nucleus of new construction. The following excerpts from a 
letter of Mr. Harvey (English consul at Ningpo) to Mr. Bruce, 
the English ambassador in Peking,3 may help to give one an idea 
of these "scourges of God". 
a Harvey [Letter to Mr. Bruce], The Times, No. 24274, June 17, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第243页=====
Chinese Affairs 217 
For three months, Mr. Harvey writes, Ningpo has been in 
the hands of the revolutionary Taipings. Here, as everywhere else 
where these robbers had extended their domination, devastation 
has been the only result. Have they any other aims? In point of 
fact, the power of unbridled and boundless licentiousness seems to 
be as important to them as the destruction of other people's lives. 
This view of the Taipings is, of course, at odds with the illusions 
of English missionaries, who fabricated stories about the "salvation 
of China", the "rebirth of the empire", the "saving of the 
people", and the "introduction of Christianity" by the Taipings. 
After ten years of tumultuous pseudo-activity they have destroyed 
everything and produced nothing. 
At any rate, Mr. Harvey says, the Taipings show to advantage, as 
compared to the mandarins, in their official dealings with 
foreigners because of a certain openness of conduct and energetic 
crudeness; but that is their entire catalogue of virtues. 
How do the Taipings pay their troops? They receive no pay but 
live off booty. If the captured cities are rich, they swim in plenty. 
If they are poor, the soldier holds out with exemplary patience. 
Mr. Harvey asked a well-dressed Taiping soldier how he liked his 
trade. "Why shouldn't I like it?" he answered. "I take what I like; 
if there is any resistance, then—" and he made the gesture with 
his hand of cutting off a head. And this is his manner of speech. 
A human head means no more than a head of cabbage to a 
Taiping. 
•The revolutionary army has a core of regular troops, old, 
veteran and tested partisans. The rest consists of younger recruits 
or peasants drafted for service on raids. The leaders systematically 
send conscripts from a conquered province into a different 
province far off. Thus, at the present time, forty different dialects 
are spoken among the rebels in Ningpo, while the Ningpo dialect 
is now being heard for the first time in remote districts. All the 
riffraff,  vagabonds and bad characters in a district join up 
voluntarily. Discipline extends only to obedience in the service. 
Marriage and opium smoking are forbidden to the Taipings under 
penalty of death. Marrying will only come "when the empire has 
been established". As compensation, the Taipings get carte blanche 
for the first three days after capturing a city whose inhabitants did 
not flee in good time, to perpetrate every conceivable act of 
violence on women and girls. At the end of the three days all 
females are driven out of the cities by force. 
To produce terror is the entire tactics of the Taipings. Their 
success is based solely on the operation of this mechanism. The 

=====第244页=====
218 Karl Marx 
means of producing the terror are: first of all, the overwhelming 
masses in which they appear at a given point. Emissaries are sent 
out first to feel the way out in secret, spread alarming rumours, 
start some fires. If these emissaries are seized by the mandarins 
and executed, others follow immediately, until either the manda­
rins flee with the population of the city or, as was the case at 
Ningpo, the demoralisation that has set in makes the victory of the 
insurgents much easier. 
One important means of causing terror is the variegated 
clownish attire of the Tai pings.  They would make a comical 
impression on Europeans. On the Chinese they work like a 
talisman. This buffoon-like clothing gives the rebels a greater 
advantage in battle than rifled cannons would afford them. Added 
to this is their long, unkempt hair, black or dyed black, their wild 
looks,  their melancholy howls and an affectation of anger and 
raving, enough to frighten to death the polite, tame, ordinary 
Chinese, moving within the pale of his traditional way of life. 
If the emissaries have spread panic, they are followed by 
purposely chased fugitive villagers, who exaggerate the number 
and power and frightfulness of the advancing army. While the 
flames rise inside the city and, perhaps, its troops take the field 
under the impression of these scenes of terror, they see in the 
distance, dizzying their minds, a few of the harlequin hellhounds, 
whose appearance has a magnetic effect. Then, at the right 
moment a hundred thousand Taipings, armed with knives, spears 
and fowling-pieces, rush wildly at their half-dismayed adversaries 
and overrun everything, unless, as was recently the case at 
Shanghai, they meet with resistance. 
"The essence of the Taipings," says Mr. Harvey, "is a huge mass of 
nothingness.3" 
Obviously, the Taiping represents the devil in persona, as the 
Chinese fantasy must represent him. But also, only in China was 
this sort of devil possible. It is the product of a fossil social life. 
Written between June 17 and early July, Printed according to the news-
1862 paper 
First published in Die Presse, No. 185, Published in English for the first 
July 7, 1862 time 
a Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 

=====第245页=====
1 
219 
Karl Marx 
A SCANDAL 
At the moment London is absorbed in one of those characteris­
tic scandals that are only possible in a country where old 
aristocratic tradition flourishes in the midst of the most modern 
bourgeois society. The corpus delicti is a Blue Book of the 
Parliamentary committee set up to report on the embankment of 
the Thames and a road to be built along its bank within the city, 
which is to connect Westminster Bridge with Blackfriars Bridge.3 
The project, very costly, kills several birds with one stone— 
making London more attractive, cleaning up the Thames, creating 
more salubrious conditions, a splendid promenade, and finally a 
new way of communication intended to free the Strand, Fleet 
Street, and the other streets running parallel to the Thames from 
the flood of traffic overwhelming them and becoming more 
dangerous every day, a flood that almost reminds us of the satire 
of Juvenal's in which a Roman makes his will before leaving the 
house, because he is almost sure of being run over or knocked 
down.b Now, on the section of the bank of the Thames which is to 
undergo this metamorphosis, on the north bank, east of Westmin­
ster Bridge and at the end of Whitehall there are the city 
residences of some major aristocrats, with their palaces and 
gardens stretching down to the Thames. Naturally, these gentle­
men welcome the project by and large, because it would improve 
a Correspondence relating to the Works under the Thames Embankment Bill..., 
London, 1862.— Ed. 
b Juvenal, Satires, III, 270-74.— Ed. 

=====第246页=====
220 Karl Marx 
the immediate surroundings of their mansions3 at government 
expense and raise their value. They have only one reservation. 
The projected construction should be interrupted at those points 
where it would directly cause the public road to run along their 
own estates and thus bring them into contact with the "misera 
contribuens plebs"}' The Olympian seclusion of the "fruges consumere 
nati" c should not be disturbed by the sight, or the noise or the 
breath of the busy world of commoners. At the head of these 
noble Sybarites is the Duke of Buccleuch, who, as the richest and 
most powerful, went furthest in his "modest" demands. And lo 
and behold, the Parliamentary committee draws up its report in 
the spirit of the wishes of the Duke of Buccleuch! The new 
constructions are to be interrupted—where they would inconven­
ience the Duke of Buccleuch. On that committee of the Lower 
House are Lord Robert Montagu, a relative of the Duke, and Sir 
John Shelley, member for a part of London, Westminster. He may 
as well start looking for a suit of armour to protect him from the 
Armstrong bombs in the shape of rotten apples and eggs full of 
hydrogen sulphide that he is already threatened with at the 
coming elections. 
On the committee's report  itself,  The Times says: 
"That Blue Book is a maze of ravellings. It consists of eight lines of Report, the 
rest being a chaos of, for the most part, worthless partisan opinions of members of 
the public and experts. There is no index, no analysis, no argument. We wander 
through a wishy-washy, everlasting flood of twaddle, without meeting with facts 
which we can test or estimates in which we can confide. When we think we are 
coming at last to some real expert testimony, the Committee suddenly interposes 
and refuses to hear any evidence discordant with the wishes of the Duke of 
Buccleuch. The book is a vast and ponderous suppressio veriß It has obviously been 
compiled with the object of making any substantive Parliamentary debate impossible. 
For this purpose, even the plan drawings have been suppressed, and are to be 
published post festumf probably after the debate." f 
In the wake of this scandal, the Londoner has raised two 
questions. First, who is this Duke of Buccleuch, this mighty man 
whose private caprices run counter to the interests of three million 
people? Who is this giant who single-handed challenges all of 
a Here and below Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Wretched taxpaying rabble.— Ed. 
c Those born to eat the fruits of the field. (Horace, Epistles, Book I, II, 27.)— 
Ed. 
d Suppression of the truth.— Ed. 
e Literally: after the feast. From the Latin saying "Post festum venire miserum 
est"—"It is a wretched thing to arrive after the feast" (Plato, Gorgias,  1).—  Ed. 
1 "That Blue Book which has just emanated...", The Times, No. 24287, July 2, 
1862,  leading article.— Ed. 

=====第247页=====
A Scandal 221 
London to a duel? Nobody knows the name of this man from any 
parliamentary battle. He sits in the Upper House but takes as little 
part in its work as a eunuch in the joys of the seraglio. The 
answers he gave before the committee suggest an abnormal lack of 
phosphorus in the substance of his brain. And so who is "that man 
Buccleuch",3 as the London cockney says in his unceremonious 
manner? Answer: A descendant of the bastards that the "merry 
monarch" Charles II gave to the world with Lucy Parsons, the 
most shameless and notorious of his mistresses. That is "that man 
Buccleuch"! The second question that the Londoner raised was: 
How did this Duke of Buccleuch come to own his "mansion" on 
the Thames? For the Londoner remembers that the land on which 
this "mansion" is built belongs to the crown and only eight years 
ago was managed by the royal Department of Lands and Woods. 
The answer to this second question was not long in coming. In 
these matters the press here does not mince words. To character­
ise not only the case itself but also the manner in which the 
English press handles such delicate subjects I quote verbatim from 
last Saturday's Reynolds's Newspaper:h 
"The Duke of Buccleuch's privilege of obstructing the proposed improvements 
in London is not seven or eight years old. In 1854, the duke became the lessee of 
Montagu House, Whitehall, by a stroke of sharp practice which in all probability 
would have brought a poor man face to face with a criminal judge at the Old 
Bailey.233  But the duke has a yearly income of 300,0001 and, in addition, the 
advantage of being the descendant of Lucie Parsons, the brazen paramour of the 
Merry Monarch. Montagu House was Crown property, and it was well known in 
1854 that the site on which it stood would be required for public improvements. 
For this reason, Mr. Disraeli, who was then Chancellor of the Exchequer, refused to 
sign the lease drawn up for the duke. But, d'une manière ou d'une autre, 0 the lease 
was signed. Mr. Disraeli was indignant at this, and denounced his successor, Mr. 
Gladstone, in the House of Commons for sacrificing the interests of the public to 
the private interests of a duke. Mr. Gladstone, in his usual ironically suave manner, 
owned that it was wrong to sign the duke's lease, but thought there must be some 
special reason for it. A Parliamentary investigation ensued, when, lo! it was 
discovered that the signer of the lease was none other than—Mr. Disraeli  himself. 
"Here, then, comes the above-mentioned sharp practice, reeking of the criminal 
gang at the Old Bailey, by the noble descendant of Lucie Parsons. Mr. Disraeli 
declared that he was utterly unconscious of his having signed the lease. But he 
admitted the genuineness of his signature. No one doubts Mr. Disraeli's veracity. 
What then is the explanation of the mystery? The noble descendant of Lucie 
Parsons used some tool or friend of his to smuggle in the lease for Montagu House 
a Here and below Marx uses the English phrases "that man Buccleuch", 
"cockney" and "lands and woods". He also uses the English nickname "Merry 
Monarch" and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 
b Reynolds's Newspaper appeared on Sundays.— Ed. 
c Somehow or other.— Ed. 

=====第248页=====
222 Karl Marx 
among the mass of papers submitted to Mr. Disraeli for signature as part of his 
routine duties. Thus he signed it, not having the slightest idea of its contents. And 
thus Lucie Parsons' descendant obtained the power to oppose his whims to the 
welfare of 3 million Londoners. The Parliamentary Committee has become the 
servile tool of his arrogance. If the dwellings of a thousand workmen, instead of 
the ill-gotten mansion of one Duke of Buccleuch, had been in the way, they would 
be instantly and remorselessly razed to the ground and their owners bundled out, 
without one farthing of compensation."3 
Written not earlier than July 2, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 189, 
July 11, 1862 Published in English for the first 
time 
a "The Duke of Buccleuch Stops the Way", Reynolds's Newspaper, No. 620, June 
29, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第249页=====
I 
223 
Karl Marx 
A SUPPRESSED DEBATE ON MEXICO 
AND THE ALLIANCE WITH FRANCE22 
London, July 16 
One of the most curious of English parliamentary devices is the 
count out.a What is the count out? If less than 40 members are 
present in the Lower House, they do not form a quorum, that is, 
an assembly competent to adopt resolutions. If a motion is 
introduced by an independent parliamentarian, which is equally 
irksome to both oligarchical factions, the Ins and the Outsb (those 
in office and those in opposition), they then come to an agreement 
that on the day of the debate parliamentarians from both sides will 
gradually slip off, alias absent themselves. When the emptying of 
the benches has reached the necessary maximum, the government 
whip,0  that is, the parliamentarian entrusted with party discipline 
by the ministry of the day, then tips the wink to a brother 
previously chosen for this purpose. The brother parliamentarian 
gets up and quite nonchalantly requests the chairman to have the 
house counted. The counting takes place and, behold, it is 
discovered that there are less than 40 members assembled. 
Herewith the proceedings come to an end. The obnoxious motion 
is got rid of without the government party or the opposition party 
having put itself in the awkward and compromising position of 
being obliged to vote it down. 
At yesterday's sitting the count out was brought up in an 
interesting manner. Lord R. Montagu had given notice of a 
motion for that day which dealt with the communication of new 
a Marx uses the English term "count out", and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx uses the English terms "Ins" and "Outs".— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English terms "government whip" and, below, "chairman", giving 
the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第250页=====
224 Karl Marx 
diplomatic documents on intervention in Mexico. He began his 
speech3 with the following words: 
"Last Saturday the latest Blue Book on Mexicob was presented to the House, 
which therefore ought to be in a position to debate the Mexican question. I know 
that Government and Opposition have agreed to dispose of my motion by means of 
a count out. I expect that the House, conscious of its duty, will not tolerate such a 
manoeuvre in so important a matter." 
But Lord R. Montagu had reckoned without his host. After he 
himself had spoken, Layard had replied to him on behalf of the 
government and Fitzgerald had delivered himself of some official 
chatter on behalf of the Tories, Kinglake (a Liberal member) rose. 
The exordium of his speech concluded with the following words: 
"The whole series of negotiations disclosed by the papers presented is a striking 
illustration of the way in which the French government uses its relations with this 
country as a means to prop the Imperial throne. 
"It is of decisive moment to the French government to divert the attention of 
the French people from affairs at home by causing it to be seen that the French 
government is engaged in great transactions abroad, and it is still more important 
for it to show that it is engaging in them in concert with one of the great 
respectable powers." 
Hardly had Kinglake uttered these words when an "honourable" 
member of the House moved that the House be "counted." And 
behold! The House had dwindled to just 33 members. Lord 
Montagu's motion had been killed by the same count out against 
which he had protested at the beginning of the debate. 
Apart from Kinglake's interrupted speech, only that of Lord 
Montagu was of any material interest. Lord R. Montagu's speech 
contains the following important analysis of the facts of the case: 
"Sir Charles Wyke had concluded a treaty with Mexico. Out of servility to Louis 
Bonaparte, this treaty was not ratified by Lord John Russell. Sir Charles Wyke 
concluded the said treaty after France, through her connection with Almonte, the 
leader of the reactionary party, had entered upon a path that abrogated the joint 
convention between England, France and Spain.c  Lord John Russell himself 
declared in an official dispatch that that treaty satisfied all England's legitimate 
demands. In his correspondence with Thouvenel, however, he promised, in 
compliance with Bonaparte's wish, not to ratify the treaty for the time being. He 
allowed Thouvenel to communicate this decision to the Corps  législatif.  Indeed, 
Lord John Russell lowered himself so far as to promise Thouvenel that he would 
break off all communication with Sir Charles Wyke until July 1, 1862—a date that 
gave Thouvenel time to answer. Thouvenel answered that Bonaparte did not 
a The deputies' speeches in the House of Commons on July 15, 1862, are cited 
according to the reports published in The Times, No. 24299, July 16, 1862.— Ed. 
b Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of Mexico, London, 1862.— Ed. 
c Convention, conclue à Londres, le 31 octobre 1861, entre l'Espagne, la France et la 
Grande-Bretagne pour combiner une action commune contre le Mexique. —Ed. 

=====第251页=====
Suppressed Debate on Mexico and Alliance with France 225 
contest England's right to act in isolation, but disapproved of the Anglo-Mexican 
treaty concluded by Sir Charles Wyke. Thereupon Russell ordered Wyke to withhold 
the ratification of the treaty." 
England, added Lord Montagu, lends her influence to enforce 
the fraudulent claims on the Mexican Treasury with which Morny 
"and perhaps persons of higher standing in France" have provided 
themselves per medium of the Swiss bourse-swindler Jecker. 
"The whole Mexican business," he continued, "was launched without the 
foreknowledge of Parliament. The first extra-Parliamentary war was waged in 
1857. 235 Palmerston defended that on the ground that it was an Asiatic war.3 The 
same principle is now being applied to America. It will ultimately be applied to 
Europe. The Parliamentary system thus becomes a mere farce, for, in losing 
control over wars, the people's representatives lose control over their purse." 
Lord Montagu wound up with the words: 
"I accuse the Ministry of having made us accomplices in the murder of liberty 
in France and of enabling that unscrupulous adventurer15 to plant despotism in a 
foreign country. It ties our future to that of one doomed to the abhorrence of man 
and the vengeance of Heaven." 
Written on July 16, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 198, 
July 20, 1862 
a H. J. Palmerston [Speech in The House of Commons on July 16, 1857], 
Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Third series, Vol. CXLVI, London, 1857.— Ed. 
b Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第252页=====
226 
Karl Marx 
A CRITICISM OF AMERICAN AFFAIRS 
The crisis, which at the moment reigns in the United States has 
been brought about by two causes: military and political. 
Had the last campaign been conducted according to a single 
strategic plan, the main army of the West was then bound, as 
previously explained in these columns,3 to exploit its successes in 
Kentucky and Tennessee to make its way through north Alabama 
to Georgia and to seize the railway junctions there at Decatur, 
Milledgeville, etc. The link between the Eastern and Western 
armies of the secessionists would thereby have been broken and 
their mutual support rendered, impossible. Instead of this, the 
Kentucky army marched south down the Mississippi in the 
direction of New Orleans and its victory near Memphis had no 
other result than to dispatch the greater part of Beauregard's 
troops to Richmond, so that the Confederates, with a superior 
army in a superior position, here now suddenly confronted 
McClellan, who had not exploited the defeat of the enemy's troops 
at Yorktown and Williamsburg and, moreover, had from the first 
split up his own forces. McClellan's generalship, already described 
by us previously,15 was in itself sufficient to ensure the ruin of the 
biggest and best disciplined army. Finally, War Secretary Stanton 
committed an unpardonable error. To make an impression 
abroad, he suspended recruiting after the conquest of Tennessee 
and so condemned the army to be constantly weakened, just when 
it was most in need of reinforcements for a rapid, decisive 
offensive. Despite the strategic blunders and despite McClellan's 
generalship, with a steady influx of recruits the war, if not 
a See this volume, pp. 194, 212.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp.  179-81,  205-08.— Ed. 

=====第253页=====
A Criticism of American Affairs 227 
decided, had hitherto been rapidly nearing a victorious end. 
Stanton's step was all the more disastrous since the South had at 
that precise moment enlisted every man from 18 to 35 years old 
and therefore staked everything on a single card. It is those men, 
who have been trained in the meantime, that give the Confeder­
ates the upper hand almost everywhere and secure them the 
initiative. They held Halleck fast, dislodged Curtis from Arkansas, 
beat McClellan, and under Stonewall Jackson gave the signal for 
the guerilla raids that are now already pushing forward as far as 
the Ohio. 
In part, the military causes of the crisis are connected with the 
political ones. It was the influence of the Democratic Party that 
elevated an incompetent like McClellan to the position of 
Commander-in-Chief3 of all the military forces of the North, 
because he had been a supporter of Breckinridge. It is anxious 
regard for the wishes, advantages and interests of the spokesmen 
of the border slave statesh that has so far broken off the Civil War's 
point of principle and deprived it of its soul, so to speak. The 
"loyal" slaveholders of these border states saw to it that the 
fugitive slave lawsc dictated by the South237 were maintained and 
the sympathies of the Negroes for the North forcibly suppressed, 
that no general could venture to put a company of Negfoes in the 
field and that slavery was finally transformed from the Achilles' 
heel of the South into its invulnerable horny hide. Thanks to the 
slaves, who do all the productive work, all able-bodied men in the 
South can be put into the field! 
At the present moment, when secession's stocks are rising, the 
spokesmen of the border states are making even greater claims. 
However, Lincoln's appeald to them, in which he threatens them 
with inundation by the Abolition party, shows that things are 
taking a revolutionary turn. Lincoln knows what Europe does not 
know, that it is by no means apathy or giving way under pressure 
of defeat that causes his demand for 300,000 recruitse to meet 
a Marx uses the English term.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the English designation in brackets after the German equivalent.— 
Ed. 
c Marx uses the English words "fugitive slave laws" and gives the German 
translation in brackets.— Ed. 
d A. Lincoln [Address to the Representatives and Senators of the Border 
Slaveholding States, July 12, 1862], New-York Daily Tribune, No.  6643,  July 19, 
1862.—  Ed. 
e A. Lincoln, Executive Mansion. Washington, July 1, 1862. Ordinance on the 
enlistment of 300,000 recruits, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6628, July 2, 
1862.—  Ed. 

=====第254页=====
228 Karl Marx 
with such a cold response. New England and the Northwest, which 
have provided the main body of the army, are determined to force 
on the government a revolutionary kind of warfare and to inscribe 
the battle-slogan of "Abolition of Slavery!" on the star-spangled 
banner. Lincoln yields only hesitantly and uneasily to this pressure 
from without, 3 but he knows that he cannot resist it for long. 
Hence his urgent appeal to the border states to renounce the 
institution of slavery voluntarily and under advantageous contrac­
tual conditions. He knows that only the continuance of slavery in 
the border states has so far left slavery untouched in the South 
and prohibited the North from applying its great radical remedy. 
He errs only if he imagines that the "loyal" slaveholders are to be 
moved by benevolent speeches and rational arguments. They will 
yield only to force. 
So far, we have only witnessed the first act of the Civil 
War—the constitutional waging of war. The second act, the 
revolutionary waging of war, is at hand. 
Meanwhile, during its first session Congress, now adjourned, 
decreed a series of important measures that we shall briefly 
summarise here. 
Apart from its financial legislation, it passed the Homestead 
Bill, which the Northern masses had long striven for in vain; in 
accordance with this Bill, part of the state lands is given gratis to 
the colonists, whether indigenous or new-comers, for cultivation.238 
It abolished slavery in Columbia and the national capital, with 
monetary compensation for the former slaveholders.239 Slavery was 
declared "forever impossible" in all the Territories of the United 
States.c The Act, under which the new State of West Virginia is 
admitted into the Union, prescribes abolition of slavery by stages 
and declares that all Negro children born after July 4, 1863, are 
born free. The conditions of this emancipation by stages are on 
the whole borrowed from the law that was enacted 70 years ago in 
Pennsylvania for the same purpose.240 By a fourth Act all the 
slaves of rebels are to be emancipated, as soon as they fall into the 
hands of the republican army.d Another law, which is now being 
put into effect for the first time, provides that these emancipated 
a Marx uses the English words: "pressure from without".— Ed. 
b Marx gives the English name.— Ed. 
c An Act to secure Freedom to all Persons within the Territories of the United 
States.—Ed. 
d An Act to suppress insurrection, to punish treason and rebellion, to seize and 
confiscate the property of Rebels, and for other purposes.—Ed. 

=====第255页=====
A Criticism of American Affairs 229 
Negroes may be militarily organised and put into the field against 
the South. The independence of the Negro republics of Liberia 
and Haiti241 has been recognised and, finally, a treaty on the 
abolition of the slave trade has been concluded with Britain.3 
Thus,  no matter how the dice may fall in the fortunes of war, 
even now it can safely be said that Negro slavery will not long 
outlive the Civil War. 
Written in early August, 1862 Printed according to the news-
First published 
August 9, 1862 paper First published in Die Presse, No. 218, 
a "Treaty between the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of 
the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland, for the Suppression of the 
African Slave-Trade".— Ed. 

=====第256页=====
230 
Karl Marx 
RUSSELL'S PROTEST AGAINST AMERICAN RUDENESS.— 
THE RISE IN THE PRICE OF GRAIN.— 
ON THE SITUATION IN ITALY24-
London, August 20 
Lord John Russell is known as a "letter writer"11 among the 
English. In his last missive to Mr. Stuartb  he complains ol the 
insults to "Old England"' in the North American papers. Et tu, 
Brute! ([ It is impossible to speak privately with a respectable 
Englishman who will not throw up his hands in astonishment at 
this tour de  force."  It is well known that from 1789 to 1815 English 
journalism broke all records in its scurrilous hate attacks on the 
French nation. And yet it has broken its own record this past year 
by its "malignant brutality" f against the United States! A few 
recent examples may suffice. 
"We owe all our moral support," says The Times, "to our kin" (the Southern 
slaveholders), "who are fighting so bravely and staunchly for their freedom, against 
a mixed race of robbers and oppressors." 
To this the New York Evening Post (the Abolitionist organ) 
remarks: 
"Are these English lampoon-writers, these descendants of Britons, Danes, 
Saxons, Celts, Normans and Dutchmen, of such pure blood that all other peoples 
are mixed races as compared with them?" 
a Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
b J. Russell [Letter to W. Stuart], "Foreign-office, July 28, 1862", The Times, 
No. 24323, August 13, 1862.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
d Caesar's exclamation at seeing Marcus Brutus, his relative and favourite, 
among his assassins (Shakespeare, Julius Caesar, Act III, Scene  I).—  Ed. 
e Feat of strength or skill.— Ed. 
f Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 

=====第257页=====
Russell's Protest Against American Rudeness 23 1 
Shortly after the foregoing passage was published, The Times, in 
bold Garamond type, called President Lincoln "a respectable 
buffoon", his cabinet ministers "a gang of rogues and  riffraff", 
and the army of the United States "an army whose officers are 
Yankee swindlers and whose privates are German thieves". And 
Lord John Russell, not content with the laurels of his epistles to 
the Bishop of Durham and Sir James Hudson in Turin,' 211 dares 
to speak, in his letter to Stuart, of the "insults of the North 
American press" to England. 
Yet there is a limit to everything. In spite of malignant 
impertinence and nasty rancour, official England will keep the 
peace with the "Yankee swindlers" and confine its deep sym­
pathies with the high-minded vendors of human blood in the 
South to blotting-paper phrases, and isolated smuggling ventures, 
for a rise in the price of grain is no joke, and any conflict with the 
Yankees would now add a food famine to the cotton famine. 
England has long since ceased to live off its own grain 
production. In 1857, 1858 and 1859 it imported grain and flour 
to the amount of 66 million pounds sterling, and in I860, 1861 
and 1862 for 118 million pounds sterling. As for the quantity of 
grain and flour imported, it was 10,278,774 quarters'' in 1859, 
14,484,976 quarters in 1860 and 16,094,914 quarters in 1861. In 
the last five years alone, therefore, grain imports have risen by 50 
per cent. 
England is now in fact already satisfying half of its grain 
requirements with imports. And there is every probability that 
next year will add at least 30 per cent to this importation, we 
mean 30 per cent to the cost price, since the very large harvest in 
the United States will prevent any excessive rise in grain prices. 
The extensive reports from all the farming districts that the Mark 
Lane Express' and The Gardeners' Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette 
have just published virtually prove that the grain harvest of this 
year will be from '/4 to '/r, below the average harvest. Just as 
after the peace treaty of 1815 Lord Brougham said that England, 
by its national debt of a thousand million, gave Europe a pledge of 
a J. Russell, "To the Right Reverend the Bishop of Durham. Downing Street, 
Nov. 4", The Times, No. 20640, November 7, 1850; [Despatch addressed to the 
British Minister at Turin], *'Foreign-office, Oct. 27'*, The Times, No. 23769, 
November 5, I860.— Ed. 
b A quarter is 12.7 kilograms.— Ed. 
1 "Review of the British Corn Trade, during the Past Week", The Mark Lane 
Express and Agricultural Journal, No. 1599, August 18, 1862.— Ed. 
17* 

=====第258页=====
232 Karl Marx 
"good behaviour",3 so this year's grain deficit gives the United 
States the best security that England "will not break the Queen's 
peace ".b 
I have been shown a letter from one of Garibaldi's best friends 
in Genoa, from which I give some excerpts. 
Among other things, it says: 
"The last letters of Garibaldi and various officers in his camp arrived here 
yesterday (August 16). They are dated August 12. All of them breathe the 
unshakable determination of the general to keep to his programme: 'Rome or 
death!' and contain peremptory orders to this effect to his friends. On the other 
side,  positive orders went out yesterday from Turin to General Cugia to proceed to 
the ultimate acts of violence, i.e. to attack the volunteers with guns and bayonets 
and to capture Garibaldi and his friends, if he should refuse to lay down his arms 
in twenty-four hours. If the troops obey orders, a grave catastrophe is imminent. 
The decision to resort to extreme measures was taken as the result of a telegram from 
Paris,  whose tenor is: 'The Emperor will not condescend to negotiation with the 
Italian Government until Garibaldi is disarmed.' If Rattazzi had loved his country 
more than his office, he would have resigned and let Ricasoli or some other less 
unpopular minister take his place. He would have considered the fact that taking 
Louis Bonaparte's side against Italy, instead of Italy's side against Bonaparte, 
means endangering the monarchy he professes to serve. If Italian blood is shed at 
Italian hands in Sicily, that is not Garibaldi's fault, for his slogan is: 'Long live the 
Italian army!', and the enthusiastic manner in which this army is received 
everywhere proves what obedience there is to Garibaldi. But, if the army should 
shed the blood of the volunteers, who would dare to count on quiet tolerance on 
the part of the people?" 
Written on August 20, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 233, 
August 24, 1862 Published in English in full for the 
first time 
a Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the quoted passage in English and supplies the German translation 
in brackets.— Ed. 

=====第259页=====
233 
Karl Marx 
ABOLITIONIST DEMONSTRATIONS 
IN AMERICA 244 
It was previously observed in these columns3 that President 
Lincoln, legally cautious, constitutionally conciliatory, by birth a 
citizen of the border slave state of Kentucky, is escaping only with 
difficulty from the control of the "loyal" slaveholders, seeking to 
avoid any open breach with them and precisely thereby provoking 
a conflict with the parties of the North which are consistent in 
point of principle and are being pushed more and more into the 
foreground by events. The speech that Wendell Phillips delivered 
at Abington, Massachusetts? on the occasion of the anniversary of 
the slaves' emancipation in the British West Indies,245 may be 
regarded as a prologue to this conflict. 
Together with Garrison and G. Smith, Wendell Phillips is the 
leader of the Abolitionists in New England. For 3f0 years he has 
without intermission and at the risk of his life proclaimed the 
emancipation of the slaves as his battle-cry, regardless alike of the 
persiflage of the press, the enraged howls of paid rowdiesc and 
the conciliatory representations of solicitous friends. Even his 
opponents acknowledged him as one of the greatest orators of the 
North, as combining iron character with forceful energy and 
purest conviction. The London Times—and what could character^ 
i'se this magnanimous paper more strikingly—today denounces 
Wendell Phillips' speech at Abington to the government in 
Washington. It says it is an "abuse" of freedom of speech. 
"Anything more violent it is impossible to imagine," .says The Times, "and 
anything more daring in a time of Civil War was never said in any country by any 
a See pp. 178-79, 227-28 of this volume.— Ed. 
b On August 1, 1862. The source from which Marx quotes is unknown.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第260页=====
234 Karl Marx 
sane man who valued his life or liberty. In reading the speech it is scarcely possible 
to avoid coining to the conclusion that the speaker's object was to lorce the 
government to prosecute him/'1 
And The Firnes, in spite of, or perhaps because of, its hatred of 
the Union government, appears not at all disinclined to assume 
the role of public prosecutor! 
In the present state of affairs Wendell Phillips' Abington speech 
is of greater importance than a battle bulletin. We therefore 
summarise its most striking passages. 
"The government," he says among oilier things, "is fighting for the 
preservation of slavery, and therefore it is lighting in vain. Lincoln is waging a 
political war. Lven now he is more afraid of Kentucky than of the entire North. He 
believes in the South.  1 he Negroes on the Southern battlefields, when asked 
whether the rain of cannon-balls and bombs that tore up the earth all round and 
split the trees asunder did no! (errifv them, answered: 'No, massa; we know that 
the y are not meant loi us!' the rebels could speak of McClellan's bombs in the 
same way. Thev know that lhe\ are no! meant for them, to cfo them harm. I do not 
sa\ that McClellan ts a traitor; but I say lhat, if lie were a traitor, he would have 
had to act exactly as he has done. Have no fear for Richmond; McClellan will not 
take: it. If-the wai is continued in this fashion, without a rational aim, then it is a 
useless squandering of blood and gold. It would be better were the South 
independent toda\ than to ha/aid one more human life for a war based on the 
present execrable policy. To continue the war in the fashion prevailing hitherto, 
requites 125,000 men a year and a million dollars a clay. But you cannot get rid of 
the South. As Jelferson said of slavery: 
"The Southern states have the wolf bv the ears, but they can neither hold him 
nor let him go." In the same way, we have the South by the ears and can neither 
hold it nor let it go. Recognise it tomorrow and you will have no peace. For 80 
years it has lived with us, in fear of us the whole time, with hatred for us half the 
time,  ever troubling and abusing us. Made presumptuous by a concession of its 
present claims, it would not keep within an imaginary border-line a year—nay, the 
moment that we speak of conditions of peace, it will cry victory! We shall never 
have peace until slaven is uprooted. So long as you retain the present tortoise1' at 
the head of our government, you make a hole with one hand in order to fill it with 
the other. Let the entire nation endorse the resolutions of the New York Chamber 
of Commerce-'1'1 and then the army will have something for which it is worth while 
fighting. Had Jefferson Davis the power, he would not capture Washington. He 
knows that the bomb that fell in this Sodom would rouse the whole nation. 
"The entire North would thunder with one voice! 'Down with slavery, down 
with everything that stands in the way of saving the republic!' Jefferson Davis is 
quite satisfied with his successes. They are greater than he anticipated, far greater! 
If he can continue to swim on them till March 4, 1863, England will then, and this 
is in order, recognise the Southern Confederacy.... The President has not put the 
Confiscation Act' into effect. He may be honest, but what has his honesty to do 
with the matter? He has neither insight nor foresight. When I was in Washington, I 
;1 "New York, Aug. 8", The Times, No.  24331,  August 22, 1862.—Ed 
b An allusion to Abraham Lincoln.— Ed. 
' An Act to confiscate the property of Rebels for the payment of the expenses of the 
present rebellion, and for other purposes [1S62].—Ed. 

=====第261页=====
Abolitionist Demonstrations in America 235 
ascertained that three months ago Lincoln had written the proclamation for 
general emancipation of the slaves and that McClellan bullied him out of his 
decision and that the representatives of Kentucky bullied him into the retention of 
McClellan, in whom he places no confidence. It will take years for Lincoln to learn 
to combine his legal scruples as an attorney with the demands of the Civil War. 
This is the appalling state of a democratic government and its greatest evil. 
"In France a hundred men, convinced of the righteousness of their cause, 
would cart) the nation with them; but in order that our government may take a 
step,  19 million people must previously put themselves in motion. And to how 
many of these millions has it been preached for years that slavery is an institution 
ordained by God! With these prejudices, with paralysed hands and hearts, vou 
entieat the President to save you from the Negro! If this theory is correct, then 
only slaveholding despotism can bring a temporal) peace.... I know Lincoln. I have 
taken his measure in Washington. He is a first-rate second-rate man,'1 He waits 
honestly, like a new broom, for the nation to take him in hand and sweep away 
slavery through him.... In past years, not far Ironi the platform from which I now 
speak, the Whigs-17 fired small mortars in order to smother my voice. And what is 
the resultr 
"The sons of these Whigs now fill their own graves in the marshes of 
Chickahominv  ! -ts Dissolve this Union in Cod's name and replace it with another, 
on the corner-stone of which is written: 'Political equality for all the citizens of the 
world'... During my stay in Chicago I asked lawvers of Illinois, among whom 
Lincoln had practised, what sort of man lie was. Whether he could say No. The 
answer was: 'He lacks backbone. If the Americans wanted to elect a man absolutely 
incapable of leadership, of initiative, then thev were bound to elect Abraham 
Lincoln.... Never has a man heard him say No!' 1 asked: 'Is McClellan a man who 
can say No?' The manager of the Chicago Central Railroad, on which McClellan 
was employed, answered: 'He is incapable of making a decision. Put a question to 
him and it lakes an hour for him to think of the answer. During the time that he 
was connected with the administration of the Central Railroad, lie never decided a 
single important controversial question." 
"And these are the two men who, above all others, now hold the fate of the 
Northern Republic in their hands! Those- best acquainted with the state of the armv 
assure us that Richmond could have been taken five times, had the do-nothing at 
the head of the army of the Potomac allowed it: but he preferred to dig up dirt in 
the Chickahominv swamps, in order lo ignominious!) abandon the locality and his 
dirt ramparts. Lincoln, out of a cowaidlv fear ol the border slave- states, keeps this 
man in his present position; but the day will come when Lincoln will confess that 
lie has never believed in McClellan.... Let us hope thai the wai lasts long enough to 
make men of us, and then we shall soon triumph. God has put the thunderbolt of 
emancipation into our hands in order to crush this rebellion..." 
Written on August 22, 1862 Printed according to the news-
P-'P er First published in Die Presse, No. 239, 
August 30, 1862 
Marx gives the English phrase in biackets alter its German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第262页=====
236 
Karl Marx 
A MEETING FOR GARIBALDI 
Preparations are being made for a Garibaldi meeting in 
London249; another was held yesterday in Gateshead, a third one 
in Birmingham is announced, while Newcastle began the cycle of 
these popular demonstrations last Tuesday.3 A brief report on the 
Newcastle meeting may serve to indicate the characteristic mood 
prevailing here. Such a meeting is always a curious event. The one 
in question took place in Newcastle Town Hall. Mr. Newton (a 
town councillor) opened the proceedings with a speech in which he 
said, among other things: 
"As long as Italy is not free, no freedom is possible in Europe. As long as 
France keeps a great army in the heart of Europe, there is no guarantee even of 
the freedoms we now boast. It should not be forgotten for an instant that the true 
cause of the disaster that has befallen Garibaldi is to be found not so much in Italy 
as in Paris. The French rulerb  is the true author of that misfortune. (Loud 
applause.) It is the same force that has silenced the press and the rostrum, that has 
suffocated, gagged, and unmanned the whole of France. I do not doubt that a day 
of reckoning will come, that the coup d'état c will be punished, that Providence 
will demand atonement for its sins and crimes! Great self-control is needed to 
speak calmly of France's behaviour towards Italy. Ever since the time of Charles 
VIII it has made it its business to destroy Italy and make Italy the pretext for 
breaking the peace of Europe. 250... I have read somewhere that the old Romans 
did not dare to proceed with the trial of Manlius in view of the Capitol.251 Is there 
an inch of Italian soil that could bear a trial of Garibaldi?..." 
Jos. Cowen moved that a memorandum be sent to Lord Russell 
demanding that the British government should urge the French 
Emperor to evacuate Rome. 
a September 9, 1862.—-Ed. 
b Napoleon III.— Ed. 
c Of December 2,  1851.—  Ed. 

=====第263页=====
A Meeting for Garibaldi 237 
"Rome," he said, "is the old and honourable capital of Italy.... How does this 
ancient seat of civilisation come to be held prisoner by the troops of a foreign 
despot? What more right do French troops have to Rome than to Naples, Turin or 
London? (Loud applause.) The Pope3 had fled, refused to return, and left Rome 
without a government for three months. At that point, the Romans elected their 
own government. While they were still engaged in setting up the new organisation, 
they were attacked by the same French who had set them an example a year 
earlier.252 
"Inconsistency is too weak an expression to describe such conduct. It was 
infamous (furious applause), and history will brand every Frenchman who took part 
in this nefarious deed.... With the possible exception of the partition of Poland,253 
there has never been a more shameless violation of every principle of national 
independence and the law of nations than that committed by the French bands of 
pretorians 254 in murdering the Roman Republic! Rome fell in June 1849, and Louis 
Bonaparte holds it to this day, a full 13 years!... When his ministers explained to the 
French National Assembly that the expedition was due to anarchy in Rome, they were 
lying. (Hear, hear!b) When his officers explained to the troops in Toulon, who 
objected to the annihilation of a sister republic, that the struggle was not against Rome 
but against Austria, they were lying. After the army had landed in Civitavecchia, they 
lied again, proclaiming to the people that they came not as enemies but as friends, and 
deceitfully interweaving French and Italian flags! The French plenipotentiary and his 
underlings lied when they gained admission to the triumvirs0 on the pretext of 
negotiations but actually for the purpose of studying the state of the defences. General 
Oudinot lied when he promised not to attack the city before June 4 but actually 
attacked it on the 2nd, and thus took the Romans by surprise. The entire conduct of 
the French in this infamous action was deliberate and hypocritical guile. (Loud 
applause.) 
"From Louis Bonaparte down to his lowest agents, they all deceived Rome, the 
French people and Europe. Louis Bonaparte never wanted a free Italy. What he 
wants is a Sardinian kingdom in the north, another kingdom in the south under 
Murat, and a third in the centre for cousin Plon-Plon. (Applause and laughter.) 
These three small monarchies, all linked to the house of Bonaparte by family ties, 
all seeking their inspiration in the Tuileries, would assure Louis Bonaparte of a 
great increase of his power in Europe. The plan was not a bad one, and its 
execution would have done honour to his dexterity, but Garibaldi thwarted it. 
(Storm of applause.) For the moment Garibaldi is disarmed. This makes it all the 
more the duty of the English people to put an end to the encroachments of 
French despotism and to close the gates of Rome to the pretorian hordes of the 
coup d'état.... Bonapartism is the source of all the evil in Europe. But the days of its 
power are numbered.... An implacable will, hundreds of thousands of soldiers, all 
the deadly instruments of war in profusion, a senate packed full of servile 
place-seekers, a house of representatives drummed up by gendarmes and 
prefects—but on the other side stands human nature, which has to defend its 
eternal rights!" (Storm of applause.) 
Mr. Co-wen  then argued in favour of and read the memorandum 
to Lord Russell, which was adopted unanimously, after the 
attempt of a certain Mr. Rule to take the part of "our noble ally 
a Pius IX.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the English phrase.— Ed. 
c G. Mazzini, A. Saffi and C. Armellini.— Ed. 

=====第264页=====
238 Karl Marx 
across the Channel" was buried under a storm of hisses, yells, 
catcalls and laughter. 
Mr. Rutherford (A Protestant minister) then made the second 
motion, to this effect: 
"This meeting invites General Garibaldi to take up residence in England and 
assures him of the constant and growing admiration of the English people." 
In supporting his motion Mr. Rutherford remarked, among 
other, things: 
"It the Pope should find Rome too hot, he too will find asylum in England. We 
will even welcome him, not as a secular prince but as the head of an enormous 
church." 
The motion was adopted unanimously. The chairman closed the 
proceedings with a violent apostrophe against "the despot of 
Paris". 
"Let him remember ancient Italy with its Brutus and Cassius; let him remember 
the Nemesis that dogs his heels; let him reflect, like Macbeth, that an armed hand 
and a helmeted head can spring from the earth.-' and let him not forget that not all 
the Orsinis have had their heads cut off." 
Thus spoke Town Councillor Mr. Newton. 
The present language of English newspapers and meetings is 
reminiscent of the first days after the coup d'état, in such vivid 
contrast to the later hvmns to the "saviour of society". 1' 
Written on September 11, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 256 
September 17, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
;l Shakespeare, Macbeth, Act II, Scene I, and Act IV, Scene I.— Ed. 
b Napoleon  III.—  -F.d. 

=====第265页=====
239 
Karl Marx 
WORKERS' DISTRESS IN ENGLAND 
For the last two months a polemic has been going on in the local 
press whose records should be of much more interest to the future 
historian of English society than all the catalogues of the Great 
Exhibition,"'" illustrated or not illustrated. 
It will be recalled that shortly before the closing of Parliament a 
bill was rushed through both houses in great haste, at the 
insistence of the big industrialists, which raises the tax for the poor 
in the municipalities of Lancashire and Yorkshire.' This measure, 
very limited in  itself,  in the main affects the lower middle classes 
in the factory districts, while it hardly touches the landlords and 
the cotton lords.1 ' During the debate on the Bill, Palmerston used 
harsh language towards the cotton lords, whose wo.rkers were 
starving in the streets while they themselves were heaping up 
riches by speculative buying and selling of cotton.' He explained 
their '"masterly inaction" during the crisis likewise on "specula­
tive"  grounds. Even at the opening of the session, lord Derby had 
declared that the cotton shortage had been like a ileus ex machina' 1 
for the manufacturers, since an enormous Hooding of the markets 
would have caused a frightful crisis if the American Civil War had 
•' An Act to enable Boards of Guardians of certain I'mons to obtain temporary Aid to 
meet the extraordinary Demands {or Reliej therein.—Ed. 
'' Here and below Marx uses the English words landlords", "cotton lords" and 
'"masterly inaction", and gives the German translation in brackets.— Ed. 
1 Falmerston's speech in the House ol Commons on July ,H0, 18t>2 ('Ehe Times, 
No. 24312, July 31. 1862).— Ed. 
d Literally: "a deitv from a machine" (in the ancient Greek and Roman theatre, 
the intervention of a god, brought in suddenly bv stage machinery, to resohe an 
apparently insoluble conflict).— Ed. 

=====第266页=====
240 Karl Marx 
not suddenly cut off imports of raw materials.3 Cobden, as 
spokesman for the industrialists, answered with a three-day 
diatribe against Palmerston's foreign policies.b 
After the prorogation of Parliament, the fight went on in the 
press.  Appeals to the English public for relief for the suffering 
working population, and the constantly growing dimensions of 
impoverishment in the factory districts, gave new occasions daily 
for continuing the fight. The Morning Star and other organs of 
the industrial press recalled that the Earl of Derby and a whole 
gang of aristocrats owed their yearly rents of 300,000 and more 
pounds sterling on their real estate holdings in the factory districts 
solely to industry, in which they had never invested anything, and 
which had given their previously worthless land its present price. 
The Morning Star went so far as to set a figure for the charitable 
contributions that Derby and other big landlords should give. It 
set Derby's contribution, e.g., at 30,000 pounds. In fact, Lord 
Derby called a meeting in Manchester shortly after Parliament 
adjourned, to collect charitable contributions. He taxed himself at 
1,000 pounds and the other large landholders signed for 
corresponding amounts. The result was not brilliant, but the 
landed aristocracy had done something at least. They beat their 
breasts with a "salvavi animam meam".c 
The high dignitaries of the cotton industry, meanwhile, per­
sisted in their "stoic" attitude. They are nowhere to be found, 
neither in the local committees that were formed to alleviate the 
distress nor in the London committee. "They are neither here nor 
there, but they are on the Liverpool market",d says a London 
paper. The Tory journals and The Times fulminate daily against 
the cotton despots who have sucked millions "out of the flesh and 
blood of the workers" and now refuse even to contribute a few 
pennies to preserve "the source of their wealth".6 The Times has 
sent its reporters into the factory districts; their highly detailed 
reports are in no way calculated to make the "cotton lords" 
popular/ On the other hand, the industrial organs of the 
a E. G. Derby's speech in the House of Lords on February 6, 1862 (The Times, 
No. 24163, February 7, 1862).— Ed. 
b Cobden spoke about foreign policy on August 1, 1862, i.e. on the third day of his 
long House of Commons address (The Times, No. 24314, August 2, 1862).— Ed. 
c "I have delivered my soul" (cf. Ezekiel, 3:19,  33:9).—  Ed. 
d Marx gives this sentence in English and supplies the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
e "It must tend to relieve...", The Times, No. 24333, August 25, 1862.— Ed. 
1 Reports from Blackburn, Wigan, Stockport and Ashton-under-Lyne published 
in The Times on August 30 and September 2, 5, 12 and 16, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第267页=====
Workers' Distress in England 241 
press—the Morning Star, Economist* Manchester Guardian, etc.— 
accuse The Times of fomenting the class struggle in order to cover 
up the guilt of the government, its mismanagement in India, etc. 
Indeed, The Times is even charged with "communist tendencies". 
The Times, obviously much pleased at this chance to win back its 
popularity, replies with biting sarcasm: While the "cotton lords" 
act in a highly economistic manner, on the one hand, in that they 
take speculative advantage of the present cotton shortage, on the 
other hand, they are hardened communists, and indeed "com­
munists of the most loathsome kind". These rich gentlemen 
demanded that England open its pockets in order to preserve the 
most valuable portion of their capital, without any cost to 
themselves, whatsoever. For their capital does not consist solely of 
factories, machinery and bank balances, but, to an even greater 
extent, of the well-disciplined armies of workers in Lancashire and 
Yorkshire. And while the gentlemen close down their factories in 
order to sell the raw material at 500 per cent profit, they 
demanded that the English people keep their discharged armies 
going! 
During this strange dispute between the landed aristocracy and 
the industrial aristocracy, as to which of them grinds the working 
class down the most, and which of them is least obliged to do 
something about the workers' distress, things are happening to the 
patients themselves that the continental admirers of the "Great 
Exhibition'"3 have no inkling of. The incident that I describe in the 
following lines is officially confirmed. 
In a small cottagec  at Gauxholme, near Todmorden (West 
Riding of Yorkshire), there lived a father and his two daughters; 
the father was old and feeble, and the girls earned their living as 
workers at the Halliwells' cotton mill. They lived in a miserable 
room on the ground floor, a few feet from a filthy little brook, 
and past their window a staircase, used by the people who lived 
upstairs, cut off the light from their dreary habitation. At the best 
of times, they earned just enough to "keep body and soul 
together", but for the last 15 weeks they had lost the only source 
of their livelihood. The factory had been closed down; the family 
could no longer earn the means to buy food. Step by step, poverty 
dragged them into its abyss. Every hour brought them nearer to 
the grave. Their pitiful savings were soon exhausted. Next came 
a See, e.g., "Distress and Relief in Lancashire", The Economist, No. 994, 
September 13, 1862.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English name.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第268页=====
242 Karl Marx 
their few sticks of furniture, clothing, linen, and whatever could 
be sold or pawned — to be converted into bread. It is a fact that 
during the 14 weeks in which they did not earn a farthing, they 
never asked for help from the parish. 
To add to their troubles, the old man had been sick for a month 
and unable to leave his bed. 1 he tragedy of Ugolino and his sons'' 
was repeated, without their cannibalism, in the cottage at 
Todmorden. In desperation, about a week ago (on the 12th) the 
stronger of the two girls pulled herself together, went to the head 
of the poorhouse and told him the pitiful story. This gentleman, 
hard though it may be to believe, told her he could do nothing for 
the family until the following Wednesday. The three poor 
sufferers would have to perish for five more days until the mighty 
bailiff would condescend to give them some help. The family 
waited — there was nothing else they could do. When the 
appointed Wednesday finally arrived on which official charity was 
to throw a crumb to the starving family, the village was horrified 
by the report that one of the sisters had died of starvation. The 
terrible news was all too true. Stretched out on a wretched plank 
bed, among the signs of the most terrible poverty, lay the corpse 
of the starved girl, while her father, worn and helpless, sobbed on 
his bed and the surviving sister had just enough strength to tell 
the story of her woe. We know, by experience, where this horrible 
case,  by no means an exception today, will lead. An inquest will be 
held. The coroner 1' will dwell at length on the charitable spirit of 
the English poor law; he will again adduce the excellence of the 
machinery for administering it as prima facie' proof that the law 
cannot possibly be responsible for the deplorable event. The head 
of the poorhouse will be whitewashed, and if not warmly 
complimented by the court, will at any rate learn, to his comfort, 
that there is not the slightest stain on him. Finally, the jury will 
crown the solemn comedy by the verdict: "Died by the visitation of 
God.'"1 
Written about September 20, 1862 Primed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse. No. 2(>(î, 
September 27, 18C>2 Published in English for the first 
time 
•' Dante, La Divina (Urmmedia. Inferno, Canto XXXIII.— Ed. 
'' Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed, 
< Self-evident.— Ed. 
(l Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 

=====第269页=====
243 
Karl Marx 
A NOTE ON THE AMNESTY 256 
Wilhelm  Wolff,  former editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung and 
at present a teacher in Manchester, sent an application to the 
Breslau' 1 authorities on January 4, 1862. In it he requested the 
restoration of his Prussian citizenship in accordance with the 
recently proclaimed amnesty. 217 Nine months later he received the 
following piece of writing in reply: 
"In response to your applications of January 4 and June 4 of this year,1' we 
have to in form you that since you have by your flight withdrawn from the further 
continuation of the judicial proceedings brought against you in 1845 and 1848, we 
are not in a position to accede to your request to be reinstated in your rights as a 
Prussian subject (!). Furthermore, if you believe that the Royal Decree of January 
12 renders the case against you null and  void,  this rests on a false interpretation of 
that Decree, according to which it is your duty to present yourself (!) to the 
authorities in these states so that the proceedings against you may be resumed and 
whose outcome you must await. 
"Breslau, September 5, 1862 
H. M. Government, 
Ministry of the Interior, 
(signed) Stich 
"To Mr. Johann Friedrich Wilhelm  Wolff,  student of philosophy, in Man­
chester." 
We may note in passing the curious circumstance that, although 
Wolff has lost his citizenship "in these states", his status as 
"student" lives on in them for ever. But to the matter in hand. 
Since the Breslau authorities took three months to compose the 
document we have just cited, might we not have expected, at the 
very least, factual accuracy in the justification of their refusal? 
:l Wroclaw.—  F.d. 
'' See this volume, p.  335.—  Ed. 

=====第270页=====
244 Karl Marx 
However, the Breslau authorities appear to "believe" that the 
administration shares with the law the privilege of "fictiones juris  ".a 
Wolff became a refugee in 1846 (not 1845), after the press trial 
launched against him had gone through all the stages of investiga­
tion, after he had himself undergone all the interrogations and not 
long before judgment was due. He withdrew by his flight, 
therefore, from the judgment, and not from "the further continua­
tion of the judicial proceedings brought against him". 
Furthermore, in 1848 the people wrested from the authorities a 
general amnesty as a result of which Wolff returned in the first 
place to Breslau. In April 1848 he was summoned to appear 
before the criminal court in Breslau in order to declare in 
writing—which he actually did—that he accepted the amnesty on 
his own  behalf. 
The Breslau authorities appear to "believe", therefore, that the 
amnesty of 1848 and the rights obtained in consequence of it have 
been annulled by the amnesty of 1861. This type of "retroactive" 
legislation would certainly inaugurate a new era in the annals of 
law. 
It is no less a "fiction" on the part of the Breslau authorities 
that Wolff "withdrew by his flight from the further continuation 
of the judicial proceedings brought against him in 1848". Wolff 
became a refugee not in 1848 but in 1849 and this was in fact 
before any proceedings against him had begun. The latter related 
to his participation in the Rump Parliament. 258 In the summer of 
1849 Wolff made his way to Switzerland. At that time, no 
proceedings against him were in progress and he could not 
therefore "withdraw" from them. The warrant for his arrest was 
issued in the autumn of 1849, long after he had been abroad. 
Judicial proceedings that precede the flight and a warrant that 
follows it seem to be identical things in the eyes of the Breslau 
authorities. 
What do government bodies pay a legal adviser259 for, if such 
crude schoolboy violations of the simplest and most ordinary rules 
in interpreting the law are possible? 
Written in mid-September 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in the Barmer Zeitung, 
No. 226, September 27, 1862 Published in English for the first 
time 
a Legal fictions.— Ed. 

=====第271页=====
245 
Karl Marx 
GARIBALDI MEETINGS.— 
THE DISTRESSED CONDITION OF COTTON WORKERS 
London, September 30 
After the Garibaldi meeting in Newcastle which I described in a 
previous letter,3 similar meetings were held in Sunderland, 
Dundee, Birmingham, London, and other places. The tone of the 
meetings was the same everywhere and their last word was always: 
"Removal of the French from Rome". At this moment, it is 
intended to choose delegates in every London district and send 
them en masse to Lord John Russell to compel him to take steps 
against the continuing occupation of Rome by French troops. 
"Pressure from without"0 is the ultima ratioc of the Englishman 
against his government. 
In the meanwhile, the Tuileries cabinet 0 neither feels easy about 
nor is indifferent to the demonstrations of the British people, as 
the following excerpt from the Newcastle Journal will show: 
"The Emperor of the French has called the attention of the English 
government to the language prevailing at the last Garibaldi meeting in Newcastle. 
It was emphasised that two speakers, including the chairman, Town Councillor 
Newton, alluded to plots to assassinate the Emperor and, in the most unmistakable 
way, threatened him with death because of his Italian policy. The government 
therefore felt itself obliged to take steps in this matter and to declare that the laws 
of England are to be applied rigorously to prevent and punish any such 
conspiracies, like those of Orsini, Dr. Bernard, and others, particularly since a 
repetition of Orsini's attempt at assassination was announced so openly at the 
meeting. This warning by the government is based on the fact that in Mazzini 
circles speeches have recently been made, threats uttered and dark hints dropped 
a See this volume, pp. 236-38.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
c Last resort.— Ed. 
d The government of Napoleon III.— Ed. 
18 — 1134 

=====第272页=====
246 Karl Marx 
similar to those that foreshadowed the Orsini conspiracy. Finally, we are able to 
inform the public that the first legal steps arising out of the Newcastle meeting 
have already been taken." 
This is what the Newcastle Journal had to say about it. Anyone 
who has the slightest knowledge of English conditions and the 
attitude prevailing here knows, in addition, that any interference 
on the part of the present cabinet with the popular demonstra­
tions can only end in the fall of the government, as at the time of 
the Orsini attempt.21'0 
As winter approaches, the conditions in the factory districts 
grow more menacing every day. The Morning Star warns today 
that, if the present method of "official charity" is continued, next 
winter will see the violent scenes of 1842-432('' far exceeded. The 
immediate occasion for its Cassandra cry is a declaration, 
which appeared in all the English papers, of a Manchester worker 
previously employed at a machine (cotton) weaving mill and now 
out of a job. In order to understand this declaration, which I will 
summarise briefly further on, it is necessary to know what the 
"labour test"a is. The English poor law of 1834,l> which aimed at 
eliminating pauperism by punishing it as a disgraceful crime, 
requires the applicant for help to prove his "willingness to work", 
before his application is granted, by breaking stones or "picking 
oakum",1 useless operations with which criminals condemned to 
"hard labour" are punished in English prisons. After this "labour 
test", the applicant receives a shilling a week for each member of 
his family, that is, half a shilling in cash and half a shilling in 
bread per capita. 
Now to the "declaration" of the English weaver. His family 
consists of six persons. Previously he earned good wages. For 18 
weeks, however, he had been cut down to half-time and 
quarter-time. During this period the weekly income of the family 
hardly came to 8 shillings. Last week the factory he worked at was 
dosed down completely. His rent is 2 sh. 3d. a week. He had 
pawned everything that was not nailed or riveted down; he had 
nothing more to sell, not a penny in his pocket; hunger was 
staring him and his family in the face. He was therefore forced to 
•' Marx uses the English term and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
'•' An Ait for the amendment and better administration of the laws relating to the poor 
in England and Wales [1834J.— Ed. 
' Marx uses the English expression and gives the German translation in 
brackets— £dL 

=====第273页=====
Garibaldi Meetings 247 
look for help from the poor board. Early last Monday1 he went to 
the "guardians".b 
After "pointed questioning", they gave him a note to the relief 
officer of his district. It took an hour for the official to allow him 
into his august presence. Then he underwent questioning again  — 
and was denied relief on the grounds that he had earned 3 
shillings in the preceding week, although "the patient" had given 
a detailed accounting of the way in which this "fortune" had been 
spent. He and his family had to go hungry until the following 
Wednesday. He went back to the office of the "guardians". There 
he learned that he had to go through the "labour test" before 
help could be given him. And so he marched to the workhouse (a 
Bastille for the poor) and there, on an empty stomach, he had to 
pick oakum until half past five, packed in together with 300 other 
workers in a narrow room about 30 yards [long]. There, squeezed 
tightly together on benches, in the stifling summer heat, choking 
with smoke and dust, the "patients of the labour test", skilled 
workers, pillars of England's national wealth, had to perform the 
meanest operations that can be imposed on a human being. One 
could just as well require a watchmaker to hammer horseshoes, or 
an organist to blow his own bellows. At the end of this operation, 
he received exactly 5 shillings, half in bread, half in money. After 
paying the rent, there was hardly 2 pence (about 2 Prussian 
silbergroschen) for the daily consumption of 6 persons. And the 
following Wednesday he would have to go through the "ordeal" 
again, since it is repeated every week. The "weaver" now declares 
publicly that he would rather starve to death with his family than 
have that ignominy repeated. 
Written on September 30, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in Die Presse, No. 273, 
October 4, 1862 Published in English for the first 
time 
a September 22, 1862.— Ed. 
b Here and below Marx uses the English word. He also uses, further on, the 
English words "workhouse", "oakum" and "labour test".— Ed. 

=====第274页=====
248 
Karl Marx 
COMMENTS ON THE NORTH AMERICAN EVENTS 
The short campaign in Maryland263 has decided the fate of the 
American Civil War, however much the fortune of war may still 
vacillate between the opposing parties for a shorter or longer time. 
As we have already stated in this newspaper, the fight for the 
possession of the border slave states is a fight for the domination 
over the Union,3 and the Confederacy has been defeated in this 
fight, which it started under extremely favourable circumstances 
that are not likely ever to occur again. 
Maryland was rightly considered the head and Kentucky the arm 
of the slaveholders' party in the border states. Maryland's capital, 
Baltimore, has been kept "loyal" up to now only by martial law. It 
was a dogma not only in the South but also in the North that the 
arrival of the Confederates in Maryland would be the signal for a 
popular rising en masse against "Lincoln's satellites". Here it was 
not only a question of a military success but also of a moral 
demonstration which was expected to electrify the Southern 
elements in all the border states and to draw them forcefully into 
the vortex. 
With Maryland Washington would fall, Philadelphia would be 
menaced and New York would no longer be safe. The invasion of 
Kentucky,264 the most important of the border states owing to the 
size of its population, its situation and its economic resources, 
which took place simultaneously, was, considered in isolation, 
merely a diversion. But supported by decisive success in Maryland, 
a See pp. 43-52, 226-29 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第275页=====
Comments on the North American Events 249 
it could have crushed the Union party in Tennessee, outflanked 
Missouri, protected Arkansas and Texas, threatened New Orleans, 
and above all shifted the theatre of war to Ohio, the central state 
of the North, whose possession spells the subjugation of the North 
just as the possession of Georgia spells that of the South. A 
Confederate army in Ohio would cut off the West of the Northern 
states from the East and fight the enemy from his own centre. 
After the fiasco of the rebels' main army in Maryland, the invasion 
of Kentucky which was not pressing ahead with sufficient drive 
and was nowhere supported by popular sympathy, was reduced to 
an insignificant guerilla attack. Even the occupation of Louisville 
would now only unite the "Great West",265 the legions from Iowa, 
Illinois, Indiana and Ohio, so that they would form an "avalanche" 
similar to that which crashed down on the South during the first 
glorious Kentucky campaign.266 
The Maryland campaign has thus proved that the waves of 
secession lack the power to roll over the Potomac and reach the 
Ohio.  The South has been reduced to the defensive, but offensive 
operations were its only chance of success. Deprived of the border 
states and hemmed in by the Mississippi in the west and the 
Atlantic in the east, the South has conquered nothing—but a 
graveyard. 
One must not forget even for a moment that, when the 
Southerners hoisted the banner of rebellion, they held the border 
states and dominated them politically. What they demanded were 
the Territories. They have lost both the Territories and the border 
states. 
Nevertheless, the invasion of Maryland was risked at a most 
favourable conjuncture. The North had suffered a disgraceful 
series of quite unprecedented defeats, the Federal army was 
demoralised, Stonewall Jackson the hero of the day, Lincoln and 
his government a universal laughing-stock, the Democratic Party, 
strong again in the North and people expecting Jefferson Davis to 
become president, France and England were openly preparing to 
proclaim the legitimacy—already recognised at home—of the 
slaveholders. "E pur si muove. "a Reason nevertheless prevails in 
world history. 
Lincoln's proclamation15 is even more important than the 
a "But it does move"—the words Galileo is supposed to have said after recanting 
his theory on the rotation of the Earth.— Ed. 
b A. Lincoln, A Proclamation [September 22, 1862], New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6699, September 23, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第276页=====
250 Karl Marx 
Maryland campaign. Lincoln is a sui generis'' figure in the annals 
of history. He has no initiative, no idealistic impetus, no 
cothurnus, no historical trappings. He gives his most important 
actions always the most commonplace form. Other people claim to 
be "fighting for an idea", when it is for them a matter, of square 
feet of land. Lincoln, even when he is motivated by an idea, talks 
about "square feet". He sings the bravura aria of his part 
hesitatively, reluctantly and unwillingly, as though apologising for 
being compelled by circumstances "to act the lion". The most 
redoubtable decrees—which will always remain remarkable histori­
cal documents—flung by him at the enemy all look like, and are 
intended to look like, routine summonses sent by a lawyer to the 
lawyer of the opposing party, legal chicaneries, involved, 
hidebound actiones juris. b His latest proclamation, which is drafted 
in the same style, the manifesto abolishing slavery,267 is the most 
important document in American history since the establishment 
of the Union, tantamount to the tearing up of the old American 
Constitution. 
Nothing is simpler than to show that Lincoln's principal political 
actions contain much that is aesthetically repulsive, logically 
inadequate, farcical in form and politically contradictory, as is 
done by the English Pindars of slavery, The Times, The Saturday 
Review and tutti quanti.' But Lincoln's place in the history of the 
United States and of mankind will, nevertheless, be next to that of 
Washington! Nowadays, when the insignificant struts about 
melodramatically on this side of the Atlantic, is it of no 
significance at all that the significant is clothed in everyday dress 
in the new world? 
Lincoln is not the product of a popular revolution. This 
plebeian, who worked his way up from stone-breaker to Senator in 
Illinois,26* without intellectual brilliance, without a particularly 
outstanding character, without exceptional importance—an aver­
age person of good will, was placed at the top by the interplay of 
the forces of universal suffrage unaware of the great issues at 
stake. The new world has never achieved a greater triumph than 
by this demonstration that, given its political and social organisa­
tion, ordinary people of good will can accomplish feats which only 
heroes could accomplish in the old world! 
Hegel once observed that comedy is in fact superior to tragedy 
a Unique.—  F.d. 
h Juridical acts.— Ed. 
c The rest.— Ed. 

=====第277页=====
Comments on the North American Events 251 
and humourous reasoning superior to grandiloquent reasoning.'1 
Although Lincoln does not possess the grandiloquence of historical 
action, as an average man of the people he has its humour. When 
does he issue the proclamation declaring that from January 1, 
1863,  slavery in the Confederacy shall be abolished? At the very 
moment when the Confederacy as an independent state decided 
on "peace negotiations" at its Richmond Congress.1' At the very 
moment when the slave-owners of the border states believed that 
the invasion of Kentucky by the armies of the South had made 
"the peculiar institution"' just as safe as was their domination 
over their compatriot, President Abraham Lincoln in Washington."1 
Written on October 7, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper hirst published in Die Presse, No. 281, 
October 12, 18(32 
H Marx presumably refers to Hegel's Vorlesungen über die Aesthetik, Bd. Ill, 
Theil III, Abschnitt III, Kapitel III "Das Princip der Tragödie, Komödie und des 
Drama". — Ed. 
b On September 19, 1862.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
d Lincoln was born in Kentucky, a border state.— Ed. 

=====第278页=====
252 
Karl Marx 
BREAD MANUFACTURE 
Garibaldi, the American Civil War, the revolution in Greece, the 
cotton crisis, Veillard's bankruptcy 269—everything is overshadowed 
for the moment in London by the—question of  bread,  but the 
question of bread in the literal sense. The English, who are so 
proud of their "ideas in iron and steam", have suddenly 
discovered that they have been making the "staff of life"3  in the 
same antediluvian manner as at the time of the Norman Conquest. 
The only essential progress consists in the adulteration of the 
foodstuffs that modern chemistry has facilitated. It is an old 
British proverb that every man, even the best, must eat "a peck of 
dirt" in his lifetime. This was meant in the moral sense. John Bull 
has not the slightest suspicion that he is eating, in the coarsest 
physical sense, an incredible mixtum compositum^ of flour, alum, 
cobwebs, black beetles, and human sweat. Being the Bible reader 
he is, he knew, of course, that man earns his bread in the sweat of  • 
his brow c; but it was something brand-new to him that human 
sweat must enter into bread dough as a seasoning. 
The sequence of steps in which big industry appropriates the 
various territories in which it finds handiwork, artisanship and 
manufacture established seems preposterous at first sight. Produc­
ing wheat, for example, is a rural occupation, and baking bread an 
urban one. Should it not be expected that industrial production 
would take over the urban trade earlier than the rural one? And 
a Marx uses the English phrase and gives the German translation in brackets. 
Further on he uses the English phrases "a peck of dirt" and "black beetles" and giving 
the German translation in the first case.— Ed. 
b Hodge-podge.— Ed. 
c Genesis, 3:19.— Ed. 

=====第279页=====
Bread Manufacture 253 
yet things have gone in the opposite direction. Wherever we look, 
we shall find that the most immediate needs have thus far avoided 
the influence of large-scale industry, with more or less obstinacy, 
and their satisfaction depends upon the hopelessly detailed craft 
methods of ancient tradition. It is not England but North America 
that first made a breach in this tradition, and that only in our 
times.  The Yankee was the first to apply machinery to tailoring, 
bootmaking, etc., and even transferred them from the factory into 
the private house. The phenomenon can easily be explained, 
however. Industrial production calls for mass production, on a 
large scale, for commerce, instead of for private consumption, and 
by the nature of things raw materials and semi-manufactured 
goods are the first things it takes over, and finished goods 
destined for immediate consumption the last. 
Now, however, the hour of the downfall of the master bakers 
and of the rise of the bread manufacturer seems to have struck in 
England. The disgust and loathing evoked by Mr. Tremenheere's 
disclosures as to the "mysteries of bread"3 would not by 
themselves have been sufficient to produce such a revolution if it 
were not for the added circumstance that capital, in large amounts 
driven by the American crisis out of domains it has long 
monopolised, is anxiously looking around for new fields to settle 
down in. 
The journeymen at the London bakeries had flooded Parlia­
ment with petitions protesting their exceptionally wretched condi­
tion. The Home Secretary6 appointed Mr. Tremenheere inves­
tigator and a kind of examining magistrate into these complaints. 
Mr. Tremenheere's report was the signal for the storm to begin. 
Mr. Tremenheere's report is divided into two main sections. 
The first describes the wretched state of the workers in the 
bakeries; the second reveals the disgusting mysteries of breadmak-
ing itself. 
The first part portrays the journeymen in the bakeries as "the 
white slaves of civilisation". Their usual working hours begin at 11 
in the evening and last until 3 or 4 in the afternoon. The work 
increases towards the weekend. In most London bakeries it 
continues without a break from 10 o'clock Thursday evening till 
Saturday night. The average life-span of these workers, most of 
whom die of consumption, is 42 years. 
a This refers to the Report Addressed to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for 
the Home Department, Relative to the Grievances Complained of  by the Journeymen Bakers. 
London, 1862.— Ed. 
b G. Grey.— Ed. 

=====第280页=====
254 Karl Marx 
As for the  breadmaking  itself, it  takes place  for the  most part  in 
cramped underground vaults either ventilated badly  or not at all. 
In addition  to lack  of ventilation, there  are the  pestilential vapours 
from  bad  outlet ducts,  "and the  fermenting bread gets impre­
gnated with  the  noxious gases surrounding  it".  Cobwebs, black 
beetles, rats  and  mice  are  "incorporated with  the  dough". 
"It was  with  the  utmost reluctance,"  sa\s Mr.  Tremenheere, "that  I came  to the 
conclusion that  a batch  of dough  is rarely made without having more  or less  of the 
perspiration,  and  often  of the  more morbid secretions,  of the men who  make  it 
mixed  up with  it." 
Even  the  finest bakeries  are not  free from these revolting 
abominations,  but  they reach  an indescribably  low  point  in the 
holes where  the  bread  of the  poor  is baked,  and  where  too the 
adulteration  of the  flour with alum  and  bone-earth  is practised 
most freely. 
Mr. Tremenheere proposes stricter laws against adulteration  of 
bread,  as well  as putting  the  bakeries under government supervi­
sion, limiting  the  working hours  for  "young people" (i.e., those 
who have  not  reached  the age of 18)  from  5 in the  morning  to 9 
at night,  and so  forth,  but  very reasonably does  not  expect  the 
elimination  of the  abuses, which arise  out of the old  method  of 
production  itself, to  come from Parliament,  but  from large-scale 
industry. 
As a matter  of fact,  the  Stevens machine  for  preparing dough 
has already been installed  in certain places. There  is another, 
similar machine  at the  industrial exhibition. Both still leave  too 
much  of the  baking process  to manual work.  On the  other hand, 
Dr. Dauglish  has  revolutionised  the  entire process  of making 
bread. From  the  moment  the  flour leaves  the  hopper  to the  time 
the bread goes into  the  oven,  no human hand touches  it in  this 
system.  Dr.  Dauglish does away with yeast entirely  and  effects 
fermentation  by the use of  carbonic acid.  He  reduces  the  entire 
operation  of making bread, including  the  baking, from eight 
hours  to 30  minutes. Night work  is entirely done away with.  The 
employment  of carbonic acid  gas  interdicts  any  admixture  of 
adulterants.  A great saving  is made  by the  changed method  of 
fermentation,  and  also  in particular  by  combining  the new 
machinery with  an American invention,  by which  the gritty coating 
of the  grain  is removed without,  as  previously, destroying 
three-fourths  of the  bran, which  is the  most nutritious part  of the 
grain, according  to the  French chemist, Mége Mouriès.  Dr. 
Dauglish calculates that  his process would save England  8 million 
pounds sterling  in flour every year. Another saving  is in  coal 

=====第281页=====
Bread Manufacture 255 
consumption. The cost of coal, including the steam engine, for the 
oven is reduced from 1 shilling to 3 pence. The carbonic acid gas, 
prepared from the best sulfuric acid, costs about 9 pence per sack, 
while at the present time the yeast comes to over a shilling for the 
bakers. 
A bakery on the now much improved method of Dr. Dauglish 
was installed some time ago in a part of London, at Dockhead, 
Bermondsey, but went out of business because of the unfavourable 
location of the shop. At the present time, similar plants are 
operating in Portsmouth, Dublin, Leeds, Bath, and Coventry, and, 
it is said, with very satisfying results. The plant recently installed 
in Islington (a suburb of London) under Dr. Dauglish's personal 
supervision is aimed more at training the workers than at sales. 
Preparations for introducing the machinery on a large scale are 
being made at the municipal bakery of Paris. 
General adoption of the Dauglish method will turn most of 
today's English master bakers into mere agents of a few large 
bread manufacturers. They will only be engaged in retail selling 
thereafter, not with production; and for most of them that will not 
be a particularly painful metamorphosis, since in point of fact they 
are already only agents of the large millers. The triumph of 
machine-made bread will mark a turning point in the history of 
large-scale industry, the point at which it will storm the hitherto 
doggedly defended last ditch of medieval artisanship. 
Written on October 26, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 299, 
October 30, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第282页=====
256 
Karl Marx 
THE SITUATION IN NORTH AMERICA 
London, November 4 
General Bragg, who commands the Southern army in Ken­
tucky—the other fighting forces of the South there are restricted to 
guerilla bands—on invading this border state issued a proclama­
tion which throws considerable light on the latest combined moves 
of the Confederacy. 3 Bragg's proclamation, addressed to the states 
of the Northwest, presupposes his success in Kentucky as a matter 
of course, and obviously reckons on the eventuality of a victorious 
advance into Ohio, the central state of the North. In the first 
place, he declares the readiness of the Confederacy to guarantee 
freedom of navigation on the Mississippi and the Ohio. This 
guarantee only makes sense the moment the slaveholders are in 
possession of the border states. At Richmond, therefore, it was 
assumed that the simultaneous invasions of Lee in Maryland and 
Bragg in Kentucky would secure possession of the border states at 
one sweep. Bragg then goes on to vindicate the South, which is 
only fighting for its independence, but, for the rest, wants peace. 
The real, characteristic point of the proclamation, however, is the 
offer of a separate peace with the Northwestern states, the 
invitation to them to secede from the Union and join the 
Confederacy, since the economic interests of the Northwest and 
the South coincide just as much as those of the Northwest and the 
Northeast are inimically opposed. The following can be seen: No 
sooner did the South fancy itself safely in possession of the border 
states,  than it officially boasted of its ulterior motive of reconstruct­
ing the Union but without the states of New England. 
a B. Bragg, "Address to the People of the Northwest...", September 26, 
1862.—  Ed. 

=====第283页=====
The Situation  in North America  257 
Like the  invasion  of Maryland, however, that  of Kentucky came 
to grief:  just like  the former  in the  battle  of Antietam Creek,  so it 
happened  to the  latter  in the  battle  of Perryville, near Louisville.271 
The Confederates were  on the  offensive here, just  as they were 
there, having attacked  the  advance guard  of Buell's army.  The 
Federals  owe  their victory  to General McCook,  the  commander  of 
the advance guard,  who  held  his  ground against  the  enemy's 
considerably superior forces long enough  to give Buell time  to 
bring  his main body into  the field. There  is not the  slightest doubt 
that the  defeat  at Perryville will entail  the evacuation  of Kentucky. 
The most considerable guerilla band, formed  of the  most fanatical 
partisans  of the  slave system  in Kentucky  and led by  General 
Morgan,  was  annihilated  at Frankfort (between Louisville  and 
Lexington)  at almost  the  same time.272 Finally, there comes  the 
decisive victory  of Rosecrans  at Corinth, which makes imperative 
the hastiest retreat  of the  beaten invasion army commanded  by 
General Bragg.273 
Thus,  the  Confederate campaign  for the  reconquest  of the  lost 
border slave states which  was  undertaken  on a  large scale, with 
military skill  and  with  the  most favourable chances,  has  come 
utterly  to grief.  Apart from  the  immediate military results, these 
battles contribute  in another  way to the  removal  of the  main 
difficulty.  The  hold  of the  slave states proper  on the  border states 
naturally rests  on the  slave element  of the  latter,  the same element 
that enforces diplomatic  and  constitutional considerations  on the 
Union government  in its  struggle against slavery. However,  in the 
border states,  the principal theatre  of the  Civil  War,  this element  is 
in practice being destroyed  by the  Civil  War itself. A  large section 
of the  slaveholders, with their "black chattels",3  are  constantly 
migrating  to the  South,  in order  to bring their property  to a  place 
of safety. With each defeat  of the  Confederates this migration  is 
renewed  on a  larger scale. 
One of my  friends,  a German officer,  who  fought under  the 
star-spangled banner  in Missouri, Arkansas, Kentucky  and  Ten­
nessee  in turn,b writes  to me  that this migration  is wholly 
reminiscent  of the  exodus from Ireland  in 1847 and  1848.274 
Furthermore,  the  energetic sections  of the  slaveholders,  the young 
people,  on the one  hand,  and the  political  and  military leaders,  on 
the other, separate themselves from  the  bulk  of their class, since 
they either form guerilla bands  in their  own  states  and, as  guerilla 
a Here  and  below Marx uses  the  English phrase.  In the  first instance  he gives 
the German translation  in brackets.—  Ed. 
b Joseph Weydemeyer.—  Ed. 

=====第284页=====
258 Karl Marx 
bands,  are annihilated, or they leave home and join the army or 
the administration of the Confederacy. Hence the result: on the 
one hand, a tremendous dwindling of the slave element in the 
border states, where it had always to contend with the "encroach­
ments" a of its competitor, free labour; on the other hand, removal 
of the energetic section of the slaveholders and its white following. 
Only a sediment of "moderate" slaveholders is left, who will soon 
grasp greedily at the pile of money offered them by Washington 
for the ledemption of their "black chattels", whose value will in 
any case be lost as soon as the Southern market is closed to their 
sale. Thus, the war itself brings about a solution by, in fact, 
radically changing the form of society in the border states. 
For the South the most favourable season for waging war is 
over; for the North it is beginning, since the inland rivers are now 
navigable once more and the combination of land and sea warfare 
already attempted with so much success is again possible. The 
North has used the interval to good advantage. "Ironclads", ten in 
number, for the rivers of the West, are rapidly nearing 
completion; to which must be added twice as many semi-armoured 
vessels for shallow waters. In the East many new armoured vessels 
have already left the yards, whilst others are still under the 
hammer. All will be ready by January 1, 1863. Ericsson, the 
inventor and builder of the Monitor}' is directing the building of 
nine new ships after the same model. Four of them are already 
"afloat". 
On the Potomac, in Tennessee and Virginia, as well as at 
different points in the South — Norfolk, New Bern, Port Royal, 
Pensacola and New Orleans—the army daily receives fresh 
reinforcements. The first levy of 300,000 men, which Lincoln 
announced in July, has been fully provided and is in part already 
at the theatre of war. The second levy of 300,000 men for nine 
months is gradually being raised. In some states conscription has 
been replaced by voluntary enlistment; in none does it encounter 
serious difficulties. Ignorance and hatred have decried conscrip­
tion as an unheard-of occurrence in the history of the United 
States. Nothing can be more mistaken. Large numbers of troops 
were conscripted during the War of Independence275 and the 
second war.with England (1812-15),"''' indeed, even in sundry small 
wars with the Indians, without this ever encountering opposition 
worth mentioning. 
•' Marx uses the English word and gives the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 
'' See this volume, p. 213.— Ed. 

=====第285页=====
The Situation in North America 259 
It is a noteworthy fact that during the present year Europe 
supplied the United States with an emigrant contingent of 
approximately 100,000 souls and that half of these emigrants 
consist of Irishmen and Britons. At the recent congress of the 
English Association for the Advancement of Science1  at Cam­
bridge, the economist Merivale was obliged to remind his 
countrymen of a fact that The Times, The Saturday Review, The 
Morning Post and The Morning  Herald,  not to mention the dit 
minorum gentium, 1' have so completely forgotten, or want to make 
England forget, namely, that the majority of the English surplus 
population finds a new home in the United States. 
Written on November 4, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 309 
November 10, IS62 Printed according to the news­
paper 
•' Marx gives the English name.—  F.d. 
'• Literally: "gods of humbler lineage", i.e., in this context, less important 
newspapers.—  h.ii 

=====第286页=====
260 
Karl Marx 
SYMPTOMS OF DISINTEGRATION 
IN THE SOUTHERN CONFEDERACY 
The English press is more Southern than the South  itself. 
While it sees everything black in the North, and everything white 
in the land of the "nigger",3 people in the slave states themselves 
do not by any means lull themselves with the "certainty of victory" 
that The Times celebrates. 
The Southern press, with one voice, raises cries of dismay at the 
defeat at Corinth and accuses Generals Price and Van Dorn of 
"incompetence and conceit". 278 The Mobile Advertiser speaks of a 
regiment, the 42nd Alabama, that went into battle on Fridayb 530 
men strong, numbered 300 men on Saturday and consisted of 
only 10 men on Sunday evening. The rest were killed, captured, 
wounded or otherwise lost in the meantime.0 The Virginia papers 
use similar language. 
"It is clear," says the Richmond Whig, "that the immediate purpose of our 
Mississippi campaign has not been attained." "It is to be feared," says the Richmond 
Enquirer, "that the outcome of this battle will have the most harmful effect on our 
campaign in the West." 
This foreboding has come true, as the evacuation of Kentucky 
by Bragg and the defeat of the Confederates at Nashville 
(Tennessee) show.279 
From the same source, the newspapers of Virginia, Georgia and 
Alabama, we are getting interesting disclosures concerning the 
conflict between the central government in Richmond and the 
governments of the individual slave states. The occasion for the 
conflict arose out of the last Conscription Act, in which the 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b October  3.—  Ed. 
c Mobile Advertiser and Register, October 10, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第287页=====
Symptoms of Disintegration in Southern Confederacy 261 
Congress extended military service far beyond the normal age.a A 
certain Levingood was enrolled in Georgia under this Act and 
arrested by an agent of the Confederacy, J. P. Bruce, because he 
refused to serve. Levingood appealed to the highest court of 
Elbert County (Georgia), which ordered his immediate release. 
The extensive substantiation of the ruling says inter alia: 
"The preamble to the constitution of the Confederacy is careful to emphasise 
explicitly that the individual states are sovereign and independent. How can this be 
said of Georgia if any militiaman can be forcibly removed from the control of his 
commander? If the Congress in Richmond can pass a conscription act with 
exceptions, what is to prevent it from passing a conscription act without exceptions 
and thus enrolling the Governor, the Legislature, the judges, and thereby putting 
an end to the entire state government?... For these and other reasons, it is hereby 
ordered and decreed that the Conscription Act of the Congress is null and void 
and has no force of law..." 
Thus,  the State of Georgia has forbidden conscription within its 
borders, and the Confederate government did not dare to revoke 
the prohibition. 
Similar friction occurred in Virginia between the "individual 
state"  and the "league of individual states". The source of the 
dispute is the refusal of the state government to grant the agents 
of Mr. Jefferson Davis the right to conscript the militiamen of 
Virginia and enrol them in the Confederate army. The incident 
led to an exchange of caustic letters between the Secretary of Warb 
and General J. B. Floyd, the notorious character who as Secretary 
of War of the Union under President Buchanan prepared the 
secession and in the process managed to "secede" notable portions 
of the Treasury funds into his private coffers. This chief of the 
secession, known in the North as "Floyd the  thief", c now appears 
as the champion of the rights of Virginia as against the 
Confederacy. The Richmond Examiner comments, among other 
things, on the correspondence between Floyd and the Secretary of 
War: 
"The entire correspondence is a good illustration of the resistance and hostility 
that our state (Virginia) and its army have to suffer at the hands of those who 
abuse the power of the Confederacy in Richmond. Virginia has been plagued with 
endless burdens. But everything has limits, and the state will no longer tolerate the 
repetition of injustice.... Virginia supplied almost all the arms, ammunition and 
military supplies that won the battles of Bethel and Manassas. It gave the 
a The Conscription Act was an amendment to the earlier Act to provide further 
for the public defence.— Ed. 
b E. M. Stanton.— Ed. 
c Marx uses the English nickname and gives the German translation in 
brackets.— Ed. 
19—1134 

=====第288页=====
262 Karl Marx 
Confederate service, out of its own armouries and arsenals, 75,000 rifles and 
muskets, 233 pieces of artillery and a magnificent arms factory. Its manpower 
capable of bearing arms has been drained to the dregs in the service of the 
Confederacy; it had to drive the enemy from its western frontier unaided, and is it 
not a cause for indignation if the creatures of the Confederate government now 
dare to make sport of it?" 
In Texas, too, the repeated drawing-off of its adult male 
population to the east has aroused antagonism towards the 
Confederacy. On September 30, Mr. Oldham, the Texas represen­
tative, protested to the Congress in Richmond: 
"In the wild-goose expedition of Sibley, 3,500 picked troops were sent out from 
Texas to perish in the arid plains of New Mexico. The result was to bring the 
enemy to our borders, which he will cross in the winter. You have transported 
Texas' best troops east of the Mississippi, dragged them to Virginia, used them at 
the points of greatest danger, where they were decimated. Three-fourths of every 
Texas regiment sleep in the grave or have had to be discharged because of illness. 
If this government continues to draw the able-bodied men out of Texas in this 
manner in order to keep those regiments up to normal strength, Texas will be 
ruined, irrevocably ruined. This is unjust and impolitic. My constituents have 
families, property and their homeland to defend. I protest in their name against 
transporting men from west of the Mississippi to the east and thus laying their own 
country open to invasion by enemies from the north, east, west and south." 
Two things emerge from the foregoing quotations taken from 
Southern journals. The coercive measures of the Confederate 
government to swell the ranks of the army have gone too far. The 
military resources are giving out. Secondly, and this is even more 
decisive, the doctrine of the "states' rights",3 (the sovereignty of 
states) with which the usurpers in Richmond gave the secession a 
constitutional colouring,281 is already beginning to turn against  itself. 
That is how little Mr. Jefferson Davis has succeeded in "making a 
nation of the South",b as his English admirer Gladstone boasted. 
Written on November 7, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 313, 
November 14, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
a Marx uses the English phrase.— Ed. 
b This refers to Gladstone's speech in Newcastle on October 7, 1862, reported 
in The Times, No. 24372, October 9, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第289页=====
263 
Karl Marx 
[THE ELECTION RESULTS 
IN THE NORTHERN STATES] 
The elections have in fact been a defeat for the Washington 
government.283 The old leaders of the Democratic Party have 
skilfully exploited the dissatisfaction over the financial clumsiness 
and military ineptitude, and there is no doubt that the State of New 
York, officially in the hands of the Seymours, Woods and 
Bennetts, can become the centre of dangerous intrigues. At the 
same time, the practical importance of this reaction should not be 
exaggerated. The existing Republican House of Representatives 
continues, and its recently elected successors will not replace it 
until December 1863. For the time being, therefore, the elections 
are nothing more than a demonstration, so far as the Congress in 
Washington is concerned. No gubernatorial elections have been 
held except in New York. The Republican Party thus retains the 
leadership in the individual states. The electoral victories of the 
Republicans in Massachusetts, Iowa, Illinois and Michigan more or 
less balance the losses in New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and 
Indiana. 
A closer analysis of the "Democratic" gains leads to an entirely 
different result than the one trumpeted by the English papers. 
New York City, strongly corrupted by Irish rabble, actively 
engaged in the slave trade until recently, the seat of the American 
'money market and full of holders of mortgages on Southern 
plantations, has always been decidedly "Democratic", just as 
Liverpool is still Tory. The rural districts of New York State voted 
Republican this time, as they have since 1856, but not with the 
same fiery enthusiasm as in 1860. Moreover, a large part of their 
men entitled to vote is in the field. Reckoning the urban and rural 
19« 

=====第290页=====
264 Karl Marx 
districts together, the Democratic majority in New York State 
comes to only 8,000-10,000 votes. 
In Pennsylvania, which has long wavered, first between Whigs284 
and Democrats, and later between Democrats and Republicans, the 
Democratic majority was only 3,500 votes. In Indiana it is still 
smaller, and in Ohio, where it numbers 8,000, the Democratic 
leaders known to sympathise with the South, such as the notorious 
Vallandigham, have lost their seats in Congress. The Irishman sees 
the Negro as a dangerous competitor. The efficient farmers in 
Indiana and Ohio hate the Negro almost as much as the 
slaveholder. He is a symbol, for them, of slavery and the 
humiliation of the working class, and the Democratic press 
threatens them daily with a flooding of their territories by 
"niggers".3 In addition, the dissatisfaction with the miserable way 
the war in Virginia is being waged was strongest in those states 
which had provided the largest contingents of volunteers. 
All this, however, is by no means the main thing. At the time 
Lincoln was elected (1860) there was no civil war, nor was the 
question of Negro emancipation on the order of the day. The 
Republican Party, then quite independent of the Abolitionist 
Party, aimed its 1860 electoral campaign solely at protesting 
against the extension of slavery into the Territories, but, at the 
same time, it proclaimed non-interference with the institution in 
the states where it already existed legally.b If Lincoln had had 
Emancipation of the Slaves as his motto at that time, there can be no 
doubt that he would have been defeated. Any such slogan was 
vigorously rejected. 
Matters were quite different in the latest election. The 
Republicans made common cause with the Abolitionists. They 
came out emphatically for immediate emancipation, whether for 
its own sake or as a means of ending the rebellion. If this 
circumstance is taken into account, the majority in favour of the 
government in Michigan, Illinois, Massachusetts, Iowa and Dela­
ware, and the very significant minority vote it obtained in the states 
of New York, Ohio and Pennsylvania, are equally surprising. 
Before the war such a result would have been impossible, even in 
Massachusetts. All that is needed now is energy, on the part of the 
government and of the Congress that meets next month, for the 
Abolitionists, now identical with the Republicans, to have the 
upper hand everywhere, both morally and numerically. Louis 
a Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b "The Platform", New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5950, May 19, I860.— Ed. 

=====第291页=====
The Election Results in the Northern States 265 
Bonaparte's hankering to intervene285 strengthens the Abolition­
ists' case "from abroad". The only danger lies in the retention of 
such generals as McClellan, who are, apart from their incompe­
tence, avowed pro-slavery men."a 
Written on November 18, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 321, 
November 23, 1862 
a Marx uses the English words "pro-slavery men".— Ed. 

=====第292页=====
266 
Karl Marx 
THE DISMISSAL OF McCLELLAN 
McClellan's dismissal! That is Lincoln's answer to the election 
victories of the Democrats.3 
The Democratic journals had stated with the most positive 
assurance that the election of Seymour as Governor of New York 
State would entail the immediate revocation of the proclamation in 
which Lincoln declared slavery abolished in Secessia from January 
1, 1863. b The paper that took this prophetic imprint had hardly 
left the press when their favourite general—their favourite-
because "next to a great defeat he most dreaded a decisive 
victory"0—was deprived of his command and went back to private 
life. 
We recall that McClellan replied to this proclamation of Lincoln 
with a counter-proclamation, an order of the day to his army, in 
which he indeed forbade any demonstration against the Presi­
dent's measure, but at the same time let slip the fatal words: "...It 
is the task of citizens through the polls to remedy the govern­
ment's errors or to pass judgement on its actions." d McClellan, at the 
head of the main army of the United States, therefore appealed from 
the President to the impending elections. He threw the weight of his 
a See this volume, pp. 263-65.— Ed. 
b A. Lincoln, A Proclamation [September 22, 1862], New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6699, September 23, 1862.— Ed. 
c Th. B. Macaulay, Critical and Historical Essays Contributed to the Edinburgh 
Review, Vol. I, John Hampden.— Ed. 
d G. B. McClellan [Order, Enjoining on his Officers and Soldiers Obedience to 
the President's Proclamation of Freedom], Headquarters Army of the Potomac. Camp 
near Sharpsburg, Md. Oct. 7, 1862, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6713, October 9, 
1862.—  Ed. 

=====第293页=====
The Dismissal of McClellan 267 
position into the scales. A pronunciamento in the Spanish manner 
aside, he could not have demonstrated his hostility to the 
President's policy more strikingly. Accordingly, after the election 
victory of the Democrats the only choice left to Lincoln was either 
to sink to the level of a tool of the pro-slavery compromise party 
or with McClellan to remove from under it its point of support in 
the army. 
McClellan's dismissal at this moment is accordingly a political 
demonstration. In any case, however, it had become indispensable. 
Halleck, the Commander-in-Chief,3 in a report to the Secretary of 
War,b had charged McClellan with direct insubordination.0 For, 
shortly after the defeat of the Confederates in Maryland, on 
October 6, Halleck ordered the crossing of the Potomac, 
particularly as the low water-level of the Potomac and its 
tributaries favoured military operations at the time. In defiance of 
this order, McClellan remained immobile, under the pretext of his 
army's inability to march due to lack of provisions. In the report 
mentioned, Halleck proves that this was a hollow subterfuge, that, 
compared with the Western army, the Eastern army enjoyed great 
privileges in respect of the commissariat and that the supplies still 
lacking could have been received just as well south as north of the 
Potomac. A second report links up with this report of Halleck's; in 
it the committee appointed to inquire into the surrender of 
Harper's Ferry287 to the Confederates accuses McClellan of having 
concentrated the Union troops stationed near that arsenal in an 
inconceivably slow fashion—he let them march only six English 
miles (about one and a half German miles) a day—for the 
purpose of its  relief. d Both reports, that of Halleck and that of the 
committee, were in the President's hands before the election victory 
of the Democrats. 
McClellan's generalship has been described in these columns so 
repeatedlye that it is sufficient to recall how he sought to 
substitute strategic envelopment for tactical decision and how 
indefatigable he was in discovering considerations of general-staff 
discretion which forbade him either to take advantage of victories 
a Marx gives the title in English.— Ed. 
b E. M. Stanton.— Ed. 
c H. W. Halleck [Report to E. M. Stanton, Secretary of War], Headquarters of the 
Army, Washington, October 28, 1862, New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6740, November 10, 
1862.—  Ed. 
d [Report of the Investigating Commission...], New-York Daily Tribune, same 
issue.— Ed. 
« See this volume,  179-81,  205-08, 226-27, 234-35.— Ed. 

=====第294页=====
268 Karl Marx 
or to anticipate defeats. The brief Maryland campaign cast a false 
halo about his head. Here, however, we have to consider the fact 
that he received his general marching orders from General 
Halleck, who also drew up the plan of the first Kentucky 
campaign, and that the victory on the battlefield was due 
exclusively to the bravery of the subordinate generals, in 
particular, of General Reno, who fell, and of Hooker, who has not 
yet recovered from his wounds. Napoleon once wrote to his 
brother Joseph that on the battlefield there was danger at all 
points and one ran into its jaws most surely when one sought to 
avoid it. McClellan seems to have grasped this axiom, but without 
giving it the practical application that Napoleon suggested to his 
brother. During the whole of his military career McClellan has 
never been on the battlefield, has never been under fire, a 
peculiarity that General Kearny strongly stresses in a letter, which 
his brother published, after Kearny, fighting under Pope's 
command, fell in one of the battles near Washington.3 
McClellan understood how to conceal his mediocrity under a 
mask of restrained earnestness, laconic reticence and dignified 
reserve. His very defects secured him the unshakable trust of the 
Democratic Party in the North and the "loyal acknowledgement" 
of the secessionists. Among the higher officers of his army he 
gained supporters through the formation of a general staff of 
dimensions hitherto unprecedented in the annals of military 
history. Some of the older officers, who had belonged to the 
former army of the Union and had received their training at West 
Point Academy, found in him a point of support for their rivalry 
with the newly-sprung-up "civilian generals" and for their secret 
sympathies with the "comrades" in the enemy camp. The soldiers, 
finally, knew of his military qualities only by hearsay; for the rest 
they ascribed to him all the merits of the commissariat and could 
tell many a glorious tale of his reserved affability. McClellan 
possessed one single gift of the supreme commander—that of 
assuring himself of popularity with his army. 
McClellan's successor, Burnside, is too little known to pronounce 
a judgement on him. He belongs to the Republican Party. Hooker, 
on the other hand, who is assuming command of the army corps 
serving specifically under McClellan, is incontestably one of the 
best warriors in the Union. "Fighting Joe",b as the troops call him, 
a Ph. Kearney [Letter to O. S. Halstead, Jr., August 4, 1862], New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6719, October 16, 1862.— Ed. 
b Marx gives the English nickname, and the German translation in brackets.— 
Ed. 

=====第295页=====
The Dismissal of McClellan 269 
played the biggest part in the successes in Maryland. He is an 
Abolitionist. 
The same American papers which bring us the news of 
McClellan's dismissal, contain utterances of Lincoln in which he 
resolutely declares that he will not deviate a hair's breadth from 
his proclamation. 
"[Lincoln]," The Morning Star* observes quite justly, "has taught the world to 
know him as a slow, but solid man, who advances with exceeding caution, but does 
not go back. Each step of his administrative career has been in the right direction 
and has been stoutly maintained. Starting from the resolution to exclude slavery 
from the Territories, he has at last arrived at the ultimate purpose of all 
'anti-slavery movements'—the uprooting of this evil from the soil of the 
Union—and has already reached the high vantage point on which the Union has 
ceased to be responsible in any way for the continuance of slavery." 
Written on November 24, 1862 
First published in Die Presse, No. 327, 
November 29, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper 
a Of November 22, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第296页=====
270 
Karl Marx 
ENGLISH NEUTRALITY.— 
THE SITUATION IN THE SOUTHERN STATES 
London, November 29 
The negotiations between the Cabinet here and the government 
at Washington on the corsair Alabama289 are still pending, whilst 
fresh negotiations on the renewed fitting out of Confederate 
warships in English ports have already begun. Professor Francis 
W. Newman, one of the theoretical representatives of English 
radicalism, publishes a letter in today's Morning Star in which, 
among other things, he says: 
"After the American Consul at Liverpool3 had been assured by an English 
lawyer that the Alabama affair was illegal, he directed a formal protest to Lord 
John Russell. The law officers of the Crown were consulted on the matter and 
likewise declared the fitting out of the Alabama illegal; but so much time was lost in 
the process that the pirate meanwhile escaped. At this moment a flotilla of more or 
less ironclad ships is ready at Liverpool, prepared to break through the American 
blockade. Apart from this, a swarm of pirate ships is waiting to follow the Alabama 
in its infamous progress any moment. Is our government a second time going to 
wink at the successors of the Alabama escaping? I fear that it is. Mr. Gladstone, in 
his speech at Newcastle,0 said he had been informed that the rebel President,d 
whom he panegyrised, was soon to have a navy. Did this allude to the navy his 
Liverpool friends have built?.. Lord Palmerston and Lord Russell, as much as the 
Tory Party, are animated by a hatred of republicanism strong enough to overbear 
all scruples and doubts; while Mr. Gladstone, a probable future Prime Minister, 
avows himself an admirer of the perjured men who have leagued together to 
perpetuate and extend slavery."e 
a T. H. Dudley.— Ed. 
b W. Atherton and R. Palmer.— Ed. 
c W. E. Gladstone [Speech in Newcastle on October 7, 1862], The Times, 
No. 24372, October 9, 1862.— Ed. 
d J. Davis.— Ed. 
e F. W. Newman [To the editor of the Morning Star], The Morning Star 
November 29, 1862.— Ed. 

=====第297页=====
English Neutrality.—Situation in the Southern States 271 
Of the papers that arrived from America today, the Richmond 
Examiner, an organ of the Confederates, is perhaps the most 
interesting. It contains a detailed article on the situation, the most 
important features of which I summarise in the following extract: 
"The extraordinary and sudden increase in the enemy's sea power threatens to 
make our prospects gloomy. This weapon has acquired such a range that in many 
respects it seems more dangerous to us than the power of the enemy on land. The 
Yankees now command 200 more warships than at the outbreak of the war. Great 
preparations have been made for naval operations during the coming winter and, 
apart from the vessels already fit for service, some 50 ironclad warships are in 
process of construction. We have every reason to believe that, in the armament and 
construction of its ships, the Yankee fleet, which will descend upon our coast this 
winter, far surpasses its predecessors. The objectives of the forthcoming 
expeditions are of the greatest importance. It is intended to capture our last 
seaports, complete the blockade and, finally, open up points of invasion in 
Southern districts, in order to put the Emancipation Acts into practical operation 
from the beginning of the new year. It would be foolish to deny the advantages 
which must accrue to our enemy from the capture of our last seaports, or to 
dismiss such misfortune lightly with the consoling thought that we can still always 
beat the foe by waging war in the interior.... With Charleston, Savannah and 
Mobile in the enemy's hands, the blockade would be carried out with a severity of 
which even our sufferings hitherto have given no idea. We would have to give up 
all thought of building a fleet on this side of the Atlantic Ocean and submit anew 
to the humiliation of surrendering our shipbuilding to the enemy or destroying it 
ourselves. Our great system of railroad connections in the cotton states would be 
more or less broken through, and, perhaps too late, we would make the discovery 
that the land warfare, on which such great hopes are built, would have to be 
continued under circumstances which forbade the maintenance, provisioning and 
concentration of great armies.... These disastrous results arising from the capture 
of our seaports became insignificant, however, before a greater danger, the greatest 
danger of this war—the occupation of points in the cotton states from which the 
enemy can carry out his emancipation plan. Great efforts are naturally being made 
to safeguard this pet measure of the Abolitionists from falling through and to 
prevent the spirit of revenge, which Mr. Lincoln has corked in a bottle till January 
1, from fizzling out in the harmless hissing of soda-water.... The attempt is now 
being made on our most defenceless side; the heart of the South is to be 
poisoned.... Prediction of future misfortune sounds bad to the ears of the masses, 
who blindly believe in the government and consider boasting to be patriotism.... We 
do not assert that Charleston, Savannah and Mobile are in no state to defend 
themselves. In the South there are naturally scores of military authorities, asserting 
that these ports are more impregnable than Gibraltar; but military men and their 
mouthpieces have too often lulled our people into false security.... We heard the 
same story with regard to New Orleans. According to their description, its defences 
surpassed those of Tyre against Alexander.3 Nevertheless, the people woke up one 
fine morning to see the enemy's flag flying over its harbour.... The state of our 
ports'  defences is a secret of the official circles. But the indications of the 
immediate past are not comforting. A few weeks ago, Galveston fell into the 
enemy's hands almost without a struggle. The local newspapers had been forbidden 
to write about the town's means of defence. No cry for help resounded, save that 
a Alexander of Macedon.— Ed. 

=====第298页=====
272 Karl Marx 
which fell on the deaf ear of the government. The people were not stirred to 
action. Their patriotism was requested to remain in ignorance, to trust the leaders 
and to submit to the decrees of providence. In this way, another prize fell into the 
lap of the enemy.... The method of wrapping all military matters in a mantle of 
secrecy has borne bad fruit for the South. It may have reduced criticism to dead 
silence and drawn a veil over the mistakes of the government. But it has not 
blinded the foe. He always seems thoroughly instructed on the state of our 
defences, whilst our people first learn of their weakness when they have fallen into 
the hands of the Yankees. 
Written on November 29, 1862 Printed according to the news­
paper First published in Die Presse, No. 332, 
December 4, 1862 
«. 

=====第299页=====
273 
Karl Marx 
[LETTER TO THE EDITORS 
OF THE BERLINER REFORM] 
The anecdote related in No. 83 of your paper referring to my 
stay in Berlin in 1861a has only "one drawback", that it is a 
fabrication. This is just to keep the record straight. 
Karl Marx 
London, April 13, 1863 
First published in Berliner Reform, Printed according to the manu-
No. 89, April 17, 1863 script and checked with the text 
in the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a "Wie wir hören, ist Lassalle...", Berliner Reform, No. 83, April 10, 1863.—  Ed. 

=====第300页=====
274 
Frederick Engels 
KINGLAKE ON THE BATTLE OF THE ALMA 
Kinglake's book on the Crimean War has caused a great stir in 
England and outside, and deservedly. It contains a great deal of 
valuable, new material, and it could hardly be otherwise, since the 
author was able to use the papers of the English headquarters, 
many notes by senior English officers, and not a few memoirs 
prepared especially for him by Russian generals.293 Nonetheless, so 
far as the military presentation is concerned, this is not a history 
but a novel; its hero is Lord Raglan, the English commander-in-
chief,  its ultimate aim is glorification, carried to absurdity, of the 
English army. 
Kinglake's account is likely to produce a great effect in 
Germany; while it reduces the share of the French in the victory 
on the Alma to a minimum, it treats the Russians with ostensible 
respectful impartiality, refers to the already known sources of all 
three nations involved, and steers clear of the specifically French 
variety of bragging that we find as offensive in Thiers and his 
consorts as it is laughable. At the same time, our friends the 
English can brag, too, and, although they are slightly more 
accomplished in praising themselves than the French are, the 
colours are laid on at least as thick. If for no other reason, this 
makes it worthwhile to strip off the fictional cover from the 
description of the only military event in the two volumes which 
have appeared up to now, the battle of the Alma, and to separate 
the real new historical material from the embellishments, 
rodomontades and conjectures with which Mr. Kinglake fills out 
his picture. 
An additional factor is that the battle of the Alma is of very 
special tactical interest, an aspect that has been inadequately 
appreciated thus far. In this battle, for the first time since 
Waterloo,294 two different tactical formations clashed, one of them 

=====第301页=====
Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 275 
practised by preference by all the armies of Europe, the other 
rejected by all but one—the English. On the Alma, the English 
line advanced against the Russian columns and routed them 
without any particular difficulty. This is at least an indication that 
the old line is not yet as obsolete as the continental textbooks on 
tactics assert, and it is at least worth the trouble of looking a little 
more closely into the matter. 
I 
Kinglake lists the forces engaged on the two sides very 
carelessly. For the English he had the official data at his disposal 
and from them establishes the number of combatants as 25,404 
infantrymen and artillerymen, something more than 1,000 cavalry­
men and 60 guns. This may be regarded as authentic. He gives a 
round number for the French, 30,000 men and 68 cannons; there 
were also 7,000 Turks. In round numbers, this makes 63,500 allies 
with 128 guns, which may be fairly correct by and large. But Mr. 
Kinglake begins to have difficulties with the Russians. Now, we 
have in Anichkov's Feldzug in der Krim (German translation, 
Berlin, Mittler, 1857, first part) an account that is obviously based 
on official sources and that has never been contested until now in 
any essential point, with the names and numbers of the regiments, 
battalions, squadrons, and batteries. According to this account, the 
Russians had 42 battalions, 16 squadrons, 11 Cossack squadrons, 3 
and 96 guns in ten and a half batteries on the Alma, 35,000 men 
in all. But this does not satisfy Mr. Kinglake at all. He puts 
together a special reckoning, constantly referring to Anichkov as 
his authority, but arriving at quite different conclusions, without 
however thinking it worth the trouble to cite evidence in favour of 
his divergent data. In general, it is characteristic of the entire book 
that it constantly cites authorities when reporting notorious facts 
but carefully avoids doing so when making new and risky 
assertions. 
The two accounts differ little with respect to the infantry. 
Anichkov gives 40 battalions of the line, 1 battalion of skirmishers 
and V2 battalion of marine sharpshooters; Kinglake transforms this 
last half-battalion into two battalions and, to support this, refers to 
Chodasiewicz (major in the Tarutino infantry regiment), who is 
said to have seen them.b The point is unimportant, since Kinglake 
a Engels uses the Russian word "Sotnien" (hundreds).— Ed. 
b R. Hodasevich, A Voice from within the Walls of Sebastopol, London, 1856, 
pp. 59-60.— Ed. 

=====第302页=====
276 Frederick Engels 
himself concedes that the Russians themselves think very little of 
these troops. He also transforms the 2 companies of engineers that 
appear in Anichkov into an entire battalion and always counts 
them as infantry. 
In the case of the cavalry, however, Kinglake's exaggeration is 
more marked. Throughout the account of the battle it is 
emphasised on every occasion that the Russians had "3,400 
lances" in the field, and on every map there appears an enormous 
column behind the Russian right wing with a note that the Russian 
cavalry, 3,000 strong, was held in this region. We are reminded 
continually of the remarkable inactivity of these 3,000 men and 
the danger their proximity constituted for the English, who had 
only just over 1,000 horsemen. Kinglake is very careful not to call 
our attention to the fact that over a third of this cavalry consisted 
of Cossacks, of whom everyone knows that they are incapable of 
fighting in close order against regular cavalry. Given the great 
ignorance of all military matters that pervades the entire book, this 
gross blunder should be attributed to a lack of knowledge rather 
than to malice. 
Kinglake's critical judgement fails him completely, when he comes 
to the artillery. Anichkov, as has been said, gives 96 guns in all, in 10 
specified light and heavy field batteries, supplemented by 4 
horse-drawn naval guns. He knows exactly where each of these 
batteries was located during the battle. All these batteries appear in 
Kinglake (with a few minor discrepancies in the numbers), but three 
additional ones are given. The 5th battery of the 17th brigade, which 
Anichkov also lists, figures twice in Kinglake in the original position, 
once on the left wing (p. 231 a) and immediately thereafter again in 
the main reserve (p. 235)! Similarly, the 3rd battery of the same 17th 
brigade, which, according to Anichkov, was not there at all, appears 
twice in Kinglake, once on the left wing (p. 231) and again—but as a 
"fixed battery"—in the centre! The fact that, in accordance with the 
well-known organisation of the Russian artillery at the time of the 
Crimean War (cf. Haxthausen, Studien über Russland b) there was 
only one heavy battery of 12 guns in every artillery brigade, and that 
later, when the batteries were set up with 8 guns each, there could 
therefore be a 1st and a 2nd heavy battery in a brigade but never a 3rd 
a Here and below the references are to pages in the second volume of 
Kinglake's book.— Ed. 
h A. F. Haxthausen, Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und 
insbesondere die ländlichen Einrichtungen Russlands, Dritter Theil, Berlin, 1852, 
S. 255-92.— Ed. 

=====第303页=====
Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 277 
heavy battery—all this does not disturb our historian. What he is 
concerned with is presenting the heroic deeds of the English on the 
Alma as prodigiously as possible; and for that he required as many 
Russian cannons as possible. Hence, wherever he finds a battery 
listed in Russian reports (all of which, with the exception of 
Anichkov's, are more or less useless in terms of such details) that 
Anichkov does not mention, he assumes Anichkov forgot it and 
calmly adds it to the batteries listed by Anichkov. If he finds the same 
battery listed in different sources at two different points on the 
battlefield, he calmly counts it twice and at best assumes that a light 
battery is meant in one case and a heavy battery in the other. 
All this sleight of hand notwithstanding, Kinglake can only 
scrape up 13  V2 batteries with 8 guns each, a total of 108 guns, 
and since he fails to see that, according to Anichkov, the three 
batteries of the 16th brigade were still organised on the old basis 
of 12 guns (we see how superficially the man works), that still 
gives,  as against Anichkov, only an addition of 12 guns. Hence, 
Kinglake must make an extraordinary effort in order to stud the 
heights of the Alma with Russian cannons. He is helped in this 
task by the fieldworks which the English bombastically call "the 
great redoubt". Of this Anichkov says simply: 
"To the right of the road, Battery No. 1 of the same (16th) brigade was drawn 
up in an advantageous position and protected by an epaulement." 
Kinglake describes this insignificant work quite correctly, but 
cannot imagine that simple twelve-pounders would be stationed 
behind it; he asserts they were heavy guns from Sevastopol. 
Chodasiewicz states, to be sure, that the guns of the 2nd battery 
of the 16th brigade were emplaced there (he confuses the 1st and 
2nd battery), but the calibre of the cannon and howitzer, which, he 
said, are still in Woolwich, proved that these guns were hot part of 
the regular field artillery (p. 233). Kinglake is even better informed. 
He says very definitely (p. 229): 
"They were 32-pounders and 24-pound howitzers." 
In 1849, during the uprising in the Palatinate,295 some officers 
of the volunteers always justified the continual backwards move­
ments of their units by claiming that they had been under fire 
from "red-hot 24-pound bombshot". This writer certainly never 
expected that the howitzer from which these terrible balls were shot 
would be captured by Mr. Kinglake on the Alma. As for these 24-lb. 
balls.... 3 
a The next two pages of the manuscript are missing.— Ed. 
20—1134 

=====第304页=====
278 
[il] 
...guns separated by a distance of 1,500 paces from Canrobert, 
whose division was neutralised by the Russian cannons while his 
own artillery tried to reach him by a circuitous route of at least 
half a German milea ; finally, Prince Napoleon was held down in 
the valley, 1,200 paces away from Canrobert and hesitating to 
cross the river. This scattering of his troops on a front of 6,000 
paces and especially Bosquet's exposed position finally caused 
Marshal Saint-Arnaud such anxiety that he resorted to the 
desperate measure of sending his entire reserve forward. Lour-
mel's brigade was sent to Bouat, while d'Aurelle's brigade 
reinforced Prince Napoleon. By sending both of his reserves 
precisely into the two defiles that were already choked with troops, 
Saint-Arnaud completed the scattering of his forces. If this were 
not all stated in the official French report (the Atlas historique de la 
guerre d'Orient), it would be hard to believe. 
What was it like on the Russian side, and what saved the French 
from this perilous situation? 
The Russian left wing was commanded by Kiryakov. Over 
against Canrobert and Prince Napoleon he had in the first line 4 
reserve battalions (Brest and Bialystok regiments), indifferent 
troops; in the second line the 4 battalions of the Tarutino 
regiment, in reserve the 4 Moscow battalions and the 2nd battalion 
of the Minsk regiment, which with 4 guns (4th battery of 17th art. 
brigade) was detached to the left to observe the seacoast. The 4 
Borodino battalions, which were also under his command, were 
placed further east, right by the Sevastopol road, and when they 
a The German mile is 7.420 km.— Ed. 

=====第305页=====
Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 279 
were not engaged as skirmishers, they fought almost exclusively 
against the English. All in all, the French were therefore opposed 
by 13 battalions with 8 guns. 
When Bosquet's flanking column appeared on the plateau south 
of the Alma, Prince Menshikov himself came to the left wing, 
bringing with him from the main reserve the remaining 3 
battalions of the Minsk regiment, one foot- and two horse-
batteries, and 6 squadrons of hussars. Up to that point the 
fighting had been limited to skirmishing and cannonade; the main 
bodies of Russians had pulled back somewhat, for the most part, 
and the French—Napoleon and Canrobert—had not yet ap­
peared on the plateau at all or were so far off (Bosquet, Bouat, 
Lourmel) that they could not for the moment enter into combat. 
Now since the troops of Prince Napoleon had got stuck in the 
defile so thoroughly that they had not yet debouched, the Russians 
had no other point to attack than the Canrobert division covered 
beyond the edge of the plateau. Against him, Menshikov now 
formed a monster column of the 8 Minsk and Moscow battal­
ions—  two battalions in the front and four battalions deep, all in 
attack columns against the middle. Called away to his centre, he 
turned this unwieldy mass over to Kiryakov with the order to 
attack at once. When the column came to within gunshot range of 
the French, the latter 
"no longer bore up under the weight that is laid upon the heart of a 
Continental soldier by the approach of a great column of infantry" (p. 400). 
They withdrew a little further down the slope. At this moment, 
however, Canrobert's two batteries, along with those of Bosquet, 
came up rapidly a little further to the right through a depression 
in the terrain; they positioned their cannons quickly and opened 
fire against the left flank of the massive Russian force, with such 
effect that the latter quickly took cover. The French infantry did 
not follow them up. 
Kiryakov's four reserve battalions had "dissolved", as 
Chodasiewicz puts it, under the skirmisher and artillery fire; the 
four Tarutino battalions had also suffered heavy losses; the eight 
battalions of the monster column were certainly not in any shape 
to renew the attack too soon. The French infantry of d'Aurelle 
and Canrobert now deployed on the plateau under cover of their 
artillery, and Bosquet had come close to them; Prince Napoleon's 
troops (whose 2nd Zouave regiment296 had already joined 
Canrobert) finally began to climb the heights. The superiority had 
grown out of all proportion; the Russian battalions, concentrated 

=====第306页=====
280 Frederick Engels 
on Telegraph Hill, melted away under the crossfire of the French 
artillery; finally, the Russian right wing had "entered into a very 
definite movement of withdrawal", as Kiryakov himself says. In 
these circumstances, it retreated, "not pursued by the enemy" 
(Kiryakov's manuscript memoir). 
In French accounts the general forward rush of the French that 
followed at this point is crowned by an alleged storming of the 
telegraph tower in hand-to-hand combat, which gives the fray a 
neatly melodramatic conclusion. The Russians are unaware of this 
combat, and Kiryakov flatly denies that it took place. It is indeed 
likely that the tower was occupied by sharpshooters and had to be 
taken by storm, and there may also have been some other Russian 
skirmishers in the vicinity who had to be driven off; but that did 
not, of course, require the storming, or rather the race, of an 
entire division, and even the account given in the Atlas historique is 
grossly exaggerated anyway. 
This marked the end of the battle, and Saint-Arnaud declined 
to pursue when Raglan called on him to do so, on the grounds 
that 
"the troops had left their knapsacks on the other side of the river" (p. 492). 
The heroic deeds recounted to us by Saint-Arnaud after the 
battle, and by Bazancourt later, 3 shrink considerably according to 
this description. The entire French army, 37,000 strong with the 
Turks,  and with 68 guns, had....b 
a The reference is to Saint-Arnaud's reports of September 21 and 22, 1854, 
published in the Moniteur universel, Nos.. 280 and 281, October 7 and 8, 1854, and 
to C. L. Bazancourt's L'expédition de Crimée jusqu'à la prise de Sébastopol. —Ed. 
b The next page of the manuscript is missing.— Ed. 

=====第307页=====
281 
in 
The English advanced on the allied left flank. Their first 
battle-line consisted of the Evans division and Brown's light 
division; the second line was made up of the England and Duke of 
Cambridge divisions. The Cathcart division, from which one 
battalion had been detached, and the cavalry brigade followed on 
the left as reserve behind the left wing which was dangling in the 
air. Each division had 6 battalions in two brigades. The attack 
front of the English, which linked up with Prince Napoleon's left 
wing at the village of Burliuk, was about 3,600 paces long, so that 
each of the 12 battalions of a line had a front of 300 paces. 
After reaching the gentle slope down to the Alma, the columns 
came under the fire of the Russian batteries positioned opposite, 
and, in conformity with English custom, the first line deployed at 
once.  However, because the width of the front had been too 
narrowly reckoned, it came about that the right wing of the light 
division was overlapped by the left of the Evans division; in this 
way an entire battalion (7th regiment) was forced out of the line of 
battle. The artillery was placed before the front. In the second 
line, the Cambridge division likewise deployed, and since its 
battalions (Guards and Highlanders) were stronger, by themselves 
they formed an almost adequately extended second line; the 
England division remained out of range of the artillery fire in 
columns, as did the reserve. The Russians began to fire at about 
half past one. Until the French attack developed, the English lay 
flat on the ground to minimise losses from the fire. The 
skirmishers were engaged in the thickets and vineyards in the 
valley, pressing the Russians back slowly; as the Russians were 

=====第308页=====
282 Frederick Engels 
withdrawing, they set the village of Burliuk on fire, thereby 
making the English attack front still narrower. 
The English faced all the rest of the Russian army, i.e. 25 V2 
(Anichkov) or 27 battalions (Kinglake), and 64 guns. They 
attacked with 29 battalions and 60 guns; their battalions were 
stronger than the Russian ones. The Russians had, in their first 
line, the Suzdal (extreme right wing) and Kazan (or Grand Duke 
Mikhail Nikolayevich, right centre) regiments, to which the 
Borodino regiment was added. In the second line was the 
Vladimir regiment, in the special reserve the Uglich regiment; the 
Volhynia regiment remained available in the main reserve; each 
of these regiments had 4 battalions, besides a skirmisher battalion 
and the marine skirmishers. 
Towards three o'clock the French attack had developed to such 
an extent that the Bosquet and Canrobert columns had come to a 
halt on the plateau, and Prince Napoleon's were halted in the 
valley; the reserves, as we saw, had already been ordered forward. 
Now Raglan had the English go forward. The first line stood up 
and moved down into the valley in the line it had formed. The 
vineyards and thickets soon disrupted the order of the troops, 
even where they formed into double-file columns in squads, as is 
prescribed in England for such conditions. Evans's division sent 
two battalions and a battery to the right around the burning 
village, while the rest went to the left of it alongside the Sevastopol 
road. Here they soon came under the fire at close range of the 
two Russian batteries protecting the road; the two batteries, 
although under fire from 18 English guns, brought the English 
troops to a halt. The Russian infantry opposite them were the 4 
Borodino battalions and the 6th skirmisher battalion; we learn 
nothing of their action. 
The light division advanced further to the left. Facing it were 
the 4 Kazan battalions to the right and left of the 1st battery of 
the 16th artillery brigade emplaced behind an epaulement; in the 
second line were the 4 Vladimir battalions, all in column 
formation, and, according to Kinglake's data, in columns of two 
battalions each. The English crossed the river by the numerous 
fords,  as best they could, and found on the south bank a natural 
ledge fifteen paces wide protected by a steep drop 8 to 10 feet 
high, under whose cover they could reform. Beyond the drop, the 
terrain rose gently and was open to the battery some 300 paces 
away. Here they were bothered by skirmishers only at a few 
points; their own thinly scattered skirmishers had gone far off to 
the left and cleared the entire front. But they did not send 

=====第309页=====
Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 283 
skirmishers forward themselves nor did they reform; Brown 
himself abandoned the attempt and ordered the advance, "relying 
on the courage of the troops" (p. 315). While the brigadier of the 
left flank kept two battalions in hand to meet any possible flank 
attacks by the Russian cavalry, the other four, with a battalion of 
Evans's division that joined them (95th regiment), advanced on the 
battery, half in line, half in irregular bunches. 
They had hardly climbed the slope, when the two columns of 
the Kazan regiment marched on them. And here our author 
begins one of his most glowing dithyrambs on the inimitability of 
the British troops. 
"Here it came to be seen that now, after near forty years of peace, our soldiery 
were still gifted with the priceless quality which hinders them from feeling the weight 
of an infantry column in the same way as foreigners ... In their English way, ... they 
begaij half jesting, half annoyed, shooting easy shots into the big, solid mass of 
infantry which was solemnly marching against them. The column was not unsteady, 
but it was perhaps an over-drilled body of men, unskilfully or weakly handled. At all 
events, their chiefs were unable to make its strength tell against clusters of English 
lads, a who marched on it merrily and vexed it with bullets. Soon the column came 
to a halt, retreated and lapsed out of sight behind an undulation of the terrain" 
<P-  325>- . 
We will not go any further into this bragging and boasting than 
to point out that these "lads" and "young troops", as Kinglake 
likes to call them, and whom we saw often enough (the 33rd 
regiment, which fought here, only a short time before it left for 
the Crimea), were at that time at least 27 years old on average, 
given the 12-year enlistment period in England and the frequent 
reenlistments for 9 years more, and that since the Crimean War 
and the East Indian mutiny,297 where these fine regiments were 
wiped out, every English officer wishes in vain that he had such 
old "lads" under his command again. Suffice it to say that this 
column (the one to the east, on the Russians' right wing) seems, 
after a weak attempt at a bayonet attack, to have been forced to 
give way by the fire even of the irregular line. The other column 
advanced against the 7th regiment, soon was engaged in immobile 
musketry combat, and persisted in that for a long time without 
deploying, naturally suffering enormous losses in the process. 
The three English battalions in the middle advanced on the 
battery, whose fire seems to have been slow and did not hold up 
the attackers. When they were close enough to rush the guns, the 
battery fired a salvo, limbered up and went off. A 7-pounder 
howitzer was found in the trench; a 32-pounder with only three 
a Engels gives the English word "lads" in brackets after the corresponding 
German word.— Ed. 

=====第310页=====
284 Frederick Engels 
horses harnessed to it was stopped by Captain Bell of the 23rd 
regiment and brought back. The English occupied the outer breast­
work of the epaulement and remained assembled to the right and 
the left. The Vladimir regiment now approached, but, instead of 
driving into the confused mass with the bayonet, they let 
themselves get into a firefight again and came to a halt. Under the 
fire of the English, who were still extended along a much longer 
front, the dense column would probably have shared the fate of 
the Kazan regiment—when the signal to retreat was sounded 
twice in succession among the English and repeated twice all along 
the line; the troops began the retreat at some points, and then 
generally, in part calmly but in part in complete disorder. The 
four battalions engaged here lost 46 officers and 819 men 
altogether. 
The second line (Cambridge) had been slow in coming up and 
during this entire action had just crossed the river and stayed 
under the cover of the above-mentioned ledge. Now it went 
forward for the first time. The centre battalion of the brigade on 
the right, the Royal Scots Fusiliers, advanced at first, but its left 
wing was overrun by the fugitives of the light division pressing 
back, its right wing could not resist the fire of the Vladimir 
regiment, and this battalion too, left without any timely support, 
fell back in disorder. It was at about the same time that the French 
attack had come to a standstill and the column of eight battalions 
was forming against Canrobert. 
This instant, when everything was going badly for the allies, is 
just the right moment for Mr. Kinglake to treat us to a miracle 
that can only find a parallel in the 1001 Nights, and lets Lord 
Raglan appear in hitherto unsuspected glory. We would pass this 
circumstance by if it had not in point of fact had a certain effect 
on the course of the battle and if it had not been given a certain 
significance by the fact that Kinglake is speaking here as an 
eyewitness, though an extremely inexpert one. 
As the English line started moving to cross the river, Raglan 
rode across the Alma with his staff at the point where the English 
and French lines met and up a hollow on the far side of the river, 
without being molested by any more than a couple of sniper shots. 
He soon found before him a dome-shaped hill, which he ascended 
and from which he could see the entire length of the Russian 
formation against the English, and could even detect their 
reserves. As strange as it may seem that the general of an 
attacking army should station  himself,  without any protection, on a 
hill on the enemy's flank, the fact is confirmed by many witnesses 

=====第311页=====
Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 285 
and cannot be called into doubt. But Kinglake, not content with 
stationing his hero just in front of or in the extension of the 
enemy flank, transfers the hill in question behind the enemy front, 
between the latter and the Russian reserves, and from that point 
has Lord Raglan paralyse the entire Russian army by his mere 
appearance. On this point, the text of the book is not a whit more 
melodramatic than the map, on which a red star representing 
Lord Raglan, 1,200 paces in front of the English right wing, in the 
midst of the green Russian columns, which immediately show him 
respect as "Lord Zeus of the thundercloud", directs the battle. 
This hill, whose exact location we cannot be expected to clarify 
here,  but which is in any case not where Kinglake puts it—this hill 
did indeed provide a good position for artillery, and Raglan sent 
for guns at once, as well as for infantry. Somewhat later, two guns 
came up, at about the same time as the battery was captured by 
the English. One of these guns is said to have dispersed the 
Russians' main reserve (which, according to Kinglake, was only 
1,100 paces away!), the other attacked the flank of the battery 
defending the bridge on the Sevastopol road. After a few shots 
this battery, which had been under the frontal fire of superior 
artillery (18 guns) for a long time, limbered up and thus the way 
was opened up for Evans's division to cross [the  river].  That 
division slowly pushed back the Russian infantry, which, for the 
most part, fought in dispersed order here, and, followed by the 
England division, whose artillery combined with Evans's, brought 
its guns into play on the first ridge of hills. 
In the meantime, further to the left, the Cambridge division was 
engaged in the decisive action. Of the three Guards battalions on its 
right wing, the centre one, the Scots Fusiliers, had advanced too 
soon and had been thrown back in disorder. Now the Grenadier 
Guards on the right and the Coldstream Guards on the left went 
forward in line against the epaulement, which the Vladimir 
regiment had retaken; between them was the interval of the 
battalion front that should have been occupied by the Scots 
Fusiliers but was now only covered more or less by the remnants 
of that battalion and of the light division, now reassembling to the 
rear. To the left of the Coldstream, the three Highlands battalions 
of Colin Campbell, also in line, advanced in perfect order in 
echelons from the right wing. 
Opposite the Grenadier Guards were the two left Kazan 
battalions, which had already been driven back by the fire of the 
7th regiment, and the two left Vladimir battalions, which now 
advanced towards the gap between the Grenadiers and the 

=====第312页=====
286 Frederick Engels 
Coldstreams. The Grenadiers came to a halt, wheeled the left 
flank back a little, and stopped the column immediately with their 
fire. In a short time, of course, the column was so shaken by the 
fire of the line that even Prince Gorchakov, who commanded the 
Russian right wing, could no longer get them to attack with the 
bayonet. A slight change in the front by the English Grenadiers 
brought the column under the fire of their entire line; the column 
wavered and fell back, as the English advanced. The two other 
Vladimir battalions were exchanging fire with the Coldstreams 
meanwhile, after the Scottish brigade finally drew level with them. 
The four Suzdal battalions posted on the Russian extreme right 
wing now came closer to the point of decisive action, the battery 
breastwork, but during this flanking march suddenly came under 
the fire of the Scottish lines and fell back without offering any 
serious resistance. 
General Kwizinski, chief of the 16th division, was now in 
command of the Russian right wing after Prince Gorchakov had 
withdrawn because of a fall when his horse was shot under him. 
The English line formation was so new to him that it deprived him 
of all judgment as to the strength of his enemy. In his 
memorandum, which Kinglake had, he says himself that he saw 
the English advance in three overlapping lines (these were 
evidently the three Scottish echelons) and had to give way before 
such superior forces after the attacks of the four Vladimir 
battalions had been repulsed. It is sufficient to say that the four 
Uglich battalions only advanced as far as was necessary to gather 
up the fugitives; the artillery and cavalry were not used any 
further, and the Russians went into retreat unmolested by the 
English, who wanted to spare their cavalry. The Cambridge 
division lost some 500 men. 
Here then the 6 battalions of the Cambridge division, supported 
by the remnants of the light division, a total of 11 battalions, were 
in action at the decisive moment (the two left-wing battalions of 
the light division did not advance even later) against the twelve 
Kazan, Vladimir and Suzdal battalions of the Russians; and if we 
add the 4 Uglich battalions, whose actual participation in the fight 
is highly problematical, they engaged 16 Russian battalions and 
routed them completely after a very brief combat. 
The author even asserts that the entire action of the infantry in 
the ranks did not last more than 35 minutes; at any rate, the 
outcome was completely decided towards four o'clock. How are we 
to explain these swift successes against at least equal, perhaps 
stronger masses of infantry in a strong defensive position? 

=====第313页=====
Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma 287 
The English were certainly not commanded in the best possible 
way. Apart from the fact that Evans did not make the slightest 
attempt to attack the enemy's left flank but limited himself to a 
lustreless frontal action, it must be clear to everyone that the Duke 
of Cambridge did not do what he should have done as commander 
of the second line. When the first line had stormed the battery 
breastworks, the second was not there to back it up; it only arrived 
after the first had been thrown back, and so it had to do the work 
over again. But as soon as any English leader came up against the 
enemy and had no definite orders to the contrary, he attacked—if 
possible, in cooperation with adjacent troops—and that gave each 
of the two main assaults the decisiveness that assured success. 
The Russians, on the other hand, showed great uncertainty in 
their leadership. It is true that Menshikov was unfortunate enough 
to be far away from the crucial point during the short period of 
decision; but neither Gorchakov nor Kwizinski, according to their 
own accounts, took any steps whatsoever to meet the attack with 
energy. The first attack was launched by the 4 Kazan battalions 
against five English [battalions] and failed; the second, again by 4 
battalions (Vladimir), likewise failed; we do not hear of any serious 
attack by the 4 Uglich battalions, and the 4 Suzdal battalions 
allowed themselves to be surprised by enemy fire during their 
flanking march. The Volhynia regiment, in the main reserve, does 
not seem to have been ordered forward at all. The artillery soon 
fell silent, and the cavalry did nothing at all. Whether it was fear 
of responsibility, or orders not to risk the army, in any event on 
the English wing the Russians did not act with the energy and 
vigour that alone can guarantee victory to the weaker side either. 
There certainly was another cause, however, that facilitated the 
English victory. The Russians fought in deep, thick columns, the 
English in line. The Russians suffered enormous losses from 
artillery fire, the English very little up to the grape-shot range. 
When the masses of infantry came close to one another, only the 
most vigorous pressing home of a bayonet attack could save the 
columns from the murderous fire of the lines, but everywhere we 
see the attack bog down and end as a fire-fight. What then? If one 
deploys under enemy fire, no one can tell how that will turn out, 
and if one remains in a column—one rifle firing against four 
enemy ones—the column is certain to be routed. This was the 
outcome in every single case on the Alma. More than that. The 
column, once under fire, could never again be brought to the 
decisive charge; the firing line could in every case. Both adver­
saries—  Russians and English — were notoriously poor in open-

=====第314页=====
288 Frederick Engels 
order fighting; accordingly, the battle was decided exclusively by 
the masses; unless we wish to assume, with Kinglake, that the 
English are sort of demigods, we shall have to admit that in more 
or less open terrain the line has significant advantages over the 
column for both attack and defence. 
The entire recent military history of the English....3 
Written in late June 1863 Printed according to the original 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Published in English for the first 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XII, time 
Part II, Moscow, 1935 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 

=====第315页=====
289 
Frederick Engels 
ARTILLERY NEWS FROM AMERICA 298 
That the American Civil War, given the inventive spirit of the 
nation and the high technical level of engineering in America, 
would lead to great advances and usher in a new epoch in the 
technical side of warfare was only to be expected. The battle 
between Monitor and Merrimac? to which the Allgemeine Militär-
Zeitung again returned, b has justified this expectation. We now 
have some new facts to put on record. 
Although the final outcome was in favour of the turret ship, the 
battle between the Monitor and the Merrimac still did nothing to 
decide the question of which class of battleships was superior: 
turret ships or broadside battery ships. A short while ago,c 
however, a battle took place which will, to all appearances, settle 
the matter once and for all, and which we are all the more pleased 
to examine since it is, to our knowledge, hardly known in England 
and France, and not at all in Germany. 
The Confederates had had a commercial steamer of Scottish 
construction, the Fingal, armoured with 4-inch deal, 4-inch oak 
and 4-inch iron, in the harbour of Savannah. The iron plating 
a See this volume, p.  213.—  Ed. 
b Engels probably means the article "Verlauf und Bedeutung des dies­
jährigen Feldzugs in Nordamerika" (Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, No. 41, October 11, 
1862) and the editorial note to the article "Der Angriff auf Charleston am 7. April 
1863"  in the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, No. 20, May 16,  1863.—  Ed. 
c On June 17,  1863.—  Ed. 

=====第316页=====
290 Frederick Engels 
consisted of two layers of 6" wide and 2" thick slabs, the bottom 
layer horizontal and the top layer vertical, secured with strong 
bolts.  After the fashion of the Merrimac the armour plating was 
laid aslant or roof-like over the ship', though flattened out on top, 
so that the ship resembled a lopped-off pyramid. It carried 4 
six-inch broadside and two 7-inch pjvot cannons (fore and aft). 
The Atlanta, as the ship was called, came sailing down the 
Savannah River early one morning and soon ran into the two 
blockade ships, two turret ships, the Weehawken and the Nahant, 
which immediately headed for her. (For our description of the 
battle, we follow the report in the New York Harper's Weekly of 
July ll.a) The Atlanta opened the engagement by firing three 
shots at the Weehawken, which came closer without firing and then 
replied with solid shells of 440 lbs (English) from her 15-inch 
Dahlgren gun.* The first shot went right through both sides of the 
Atlanta and laid low about 40 men partly with the splinters, partly 
with shock. Among the latter was a lieutenant, who afterwards said 
that he had not been able to stand up for ten minutes. The second 
shot smashed through the iron cover of a gun port, killing or 
injuring 17 men. The third shell smashed the upper section of the 
armoured bridge on the upper deck, killing both pilots and 
knocking down the two helmsmen. The fourth hit the edge, where 
the side of the ship meets the deck, and seems to have bounced 
off without causing any damage. The fifth went through the 
funnel just as the Atlanta was hoisting the white flag to surrender, 
* The Dahlgren gun is a comparatively short gun of some 12-14 calibre length. 
Its external shape was determined by Dahlgren (now admiral in command of 
Charleston) in the following way: at equal distances from one another, holes of rifle 
calibre were drilled perpendicularly on the axis of the bore from the outside, and 
loaded with rifle bullets, while the gun was loaded and fired as usual. The initial 
velocity of the individual bullets was established in the normal way and taken as a 
measure of the pressure of the explosion gases at the corresponding spot on the 
wall of the gun barrel. The corresponding abscissas were drawn on the axis of the 
bore as ordinates, and the curve connecting these indicated the external shape of 
the gun. Guns constructed on this principle are very thick at the breech and in the 
region of the trunnions, and only taper sharply towards the muzzle. They look 
rather like a soda water bottle. They are smoothbored and are cast hollow, over a 
hollow plug through which cold water runs during cooling. This cooling from 
inside gives the guns such strength—even in cast iron—that it is possible to cast 
guns of 15" and even 20" bore which are able to withstand 500 shots with a 
powerful charge without danger. Initially intended only for hollow shells, they have 
subsequently been strengthened so that solid shells can be fired from them, too. 
These reinforced guns are called Columbiads. 
a The report was entitled "The Capture of the Rebel Iron-clad Atlanta by the 
Weehawken captain Rodgers".— Ed. 

=====第317页=====
Artillery News from America 291 
before the Nahant, which had just arrived on the scene, could even 
fire a single shot. In a quarter of an hour it was all over. 
Yesterday the writer of this article visited the English Channel 
fleet lying in Liverpool harbour. There were the Warrior, the Black 
Prince, the Royal Oak, the Defence, the Resistance—all of them 
battleships with broadside guns (smoothbore 68-pounders, 8" 
calibre and 110 lb Armstrong, 7" calibre) armoured with 18-24" 
timber and 472-5" iron; undeniably the most beautiful and 
powerful armoured fleet now afloat, which, its draught permitting, 
could steam unmolested in between any European coastal forts, as 
these are at present  armed,  and into the harbour behind them. But 
how would the best of these ships fare against one of these 
American turret ships with its 440 lb gun? To judge by the trials 
made by the English themselves, a much smaller calibre is 
sufficient to pierce their sides; what havoc would a 440 lb shell 
not wreak in their innards? One single hit on the waterline would 
be bound to sink the ship, since a leak like that cannot be plugged. 
At the sight of these splendid ships, each one of which must have 
cost close on £1 million sterling, including the experiments, one 
cannot help thinking that all of them were already condemned 
and completely outdated. 
Henceforth, it would seem to be an absolute necessity to equip 
battleships with the heaviest calibres that a ship can carry. These 
guns,  however, cannot be broadside guns; the largest ship can only 
carry a few of them, and these have to be positioned in the middle 
of the ship. But this is only possible with turret ships, and for this 
reason turret ships will, from now on, constitute the decisive 
strength of any navy. 
True,  the turret ships built hitherto have only been seaworthy in 
a certain qualified sense. This was because they were constructed 
in America for a specific purpose: for operations in shallow coastal 
waters. If they are built bigger and given a greater draught they 
will certainly prove at least as seaworthy as the broadside 
battleships, which still leave much to be desired on this score. But, 
even if we restrict ourselves to the experience we have at present, 
the following points are quite definite: 
1) Turret ships with heavy guns (10-15" calibre) are incompara­
bly the strongest ships both for defence proper and for offensive 
operations on neighbouring coasts. 
2) Armoured battleships with 272-5" iron plating and broadside 
guns of 8" calibre can be of great advantage for operations over a 
longer distance, against coasts, if one has coaling stations, and, 
above all, if one does not have to fight against turret ships. 

=====第318页=====
292 Frederick Engels 
3) For true mobile tactics on the open sea wooden ships 
continue to be the only ones suitable. They alone are able to hold 
enough provisions, coal and ammunition to carry their own base 
of operations around with them for several months; they alone are 
able to carry out the necessary repairs after a battle themselves. In 
India and China, for instance, armour-plated ships of any kind 
would be helpless, even in the hands of the English. 
What are the conclusions as far as Germany is concerned? 
1) Learn to cast guns of American calibre and build turret ships. 
Two such ships in the Elbe or Weser will keep the entire North 
Sea coast clear. Four of them in the Baltic will bring the sea under 
our control and, if necessary, force Copenhagen to capitulate; 
then no one will take the present Danish Navy seriously any-
longer. 299 Even if improvements are introduced making really 
seaworthy turret ships possible, the old ones will still remain the 
best harbour defence there is. They are cheap in any case. 
2) Broadside armoured ships of 6-7,000 tons like the English 
and French ones each cost as much as six turret ships, while two 
turret ships are sufficient to beat one of them. They are not worth 
the money. On the other hand, very fast screw steamers of 
moderate dimensions armoured with  2V2-3"  of thç very best (e.g. 
Styrian) iron plating and with a few guns, but heavy ones, can be 
of considerable service against the existing navies. They are able to 
evade the large, unwieldy armoured frigates and are well able to 
cope with a wooden ship of the line. 
3) For long-distance operations wooden ships—both sailing 
vessels and screw steamers—are indispensable. We already have 
the Chinese station300; it is bound to become more important 
every year. As long as we have no coaling station there, sailing 
vessels are the only ones that can be used; for the time being, they 
are sufficient too. Stations in the West Indies, on the east and west 
coasts of North and South America and in the Levant have long 
been needed; everywhere German trade must be protected and 
respect won for the name of Germany. Twenty-five per cent 
steamers to seventy-five per cent sailing vessels would be enough 
there. At home, however, many large wooden ships are of no use; 
in fact, there is now no point whatever in having ships larger than 
60-gun frigates, as the present-day ships of the line are outdated 
while those of the future have yet to be invented. 

=====第319页=====
Artillery News from America 293 
II 
According to established practice, when laying siege to fortified 
ramparts the breach batteries were placed on the crest of the 
glacis,  about fifty paces from the wall that was to be bombarded. 
When Montalembert's casemated works with uncovered stone walls 
were proposed,301 and especially when such uncovered masonry 
was used in many places in Germany, there was much discussion 
whether or not such stone walls could be breached even at a 
distance; as far as actual experiments are concerned, however, the 
only one known to us is that of Wellington in 1823, when a 
detached wall covered by a contregarde was breached at 500 and 
600 paces by indirect hits. The Crimean War only proved that 
stone-built coastal forts were safe against ships; Bomarsund302 only 
proved that the Russian government had been dreadfully swindled 
by the building contractors. The Italian War303 proved nothing, 
since it never came to siege operations. Until then one could 
assume that, with the artillery means available at the time, the 
uncovered stone walls of casemates could, in certain circumstances, 
make possible such superior firepower against siege batteries that 
it was worth its expense.3 The trials at Juliers have proved that 
rifled guns with percussion shells, even of a light calibre, are able 
to breach brick fortifications at 1,200 paces, even by an indirect 
hit. And in America things are now happening that have quite 
different lessons to teach us. 
During the attack on Port Pulaski (outside Savannah) General 
Gillmore (indisputably the foremost living American artilleryman) 
had only heavy Columbiads, smoothbore guns up to 15" calibre for 
solid shells and powerful charges.304  He set up his batteries 1,200 
paces away and turned the casemated fortification made of strong 
masonry into a heap of rubble in just a few days. Nevertheless, 
this experiment convinced him that at greater distances his guns 
would not be able to knock down stone-wall fortifications. 
Unfortunately, we have no data as to the charges, since all 
American reports are framed in an extremely superficial way; but 
it is obvious that Va sH'ot heavy charges are quite out of the question 
with such guns. 
Gillmore therefore demanded rifled guns of heavy calibre for 
the assault on Charleston, and got them. They were so-called 
Parrott guns, breech-loading guns with 4-7 grooves according to 
the calibre. The rifling is flat and has less twist than the 
Armstrong guns. The guns are of cast iron with a wrought-iron 
a Here Engels crossed out the words: "How do things stand now?"—Ed. 
21 — 1134 

=====第320页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
ring welded on above the breech which reaches as far as the 
trunnions, and are the same shape as the ordinary guns. 
Hundredweight for hundredweight they are said to cost exactly 
one quarter of what the heavy English Armstrongs cost. The shells 
were cylindro-ogival and had a coating of soft metal to be pressed 
into the rifling. 
With these guns Gillmore attacked Fort Wagner305  (see the plan 
of Charleston recently printed in the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung a). 
But this fortification, built out of light sand from the dunes, stood 
up to it. The bombproof covered shelters kept the garrison safe 
and several assaults were repulsed. It was necessary to mount a 
proper attack, and for this the heavy guns were too good. 
Gillmore therefore had them drawn up in three new batteries 
which he had set up against Fort Sumter, the latter lying in the 
middle of the harbour entrance. These batteries, one of which was 
in the swamp, were 3,300 to 4,200 yards (4,000 to  5,000  paces) 
away from Fort Sumter. 
Fort Sumter was built on an artificial island of special, very hard 
brick. The walls were 6-7' thick, at the base up to 12', the 
casemate arches and buttresses 8-9' thick. It had two floors of 
casemates and one floor of guns on the  roof,  which fired from the 
barbette. Its shape was that of a truncated lunette; it was chiefly 
the gorge and one of the flanks that were exposed to Gillmore's 
batteries. The fort contained 140 gun emplacements. 
The bombardment lasted for 8 days, from 16 to 23 August; 
from time to time the navy joined in, though without much 
success. But the rifled 200-pounders did their job. The gorge and 
flank walls fell first, and then the fronts taken à reversa At the end 
of the bombardment the fort was, as Gillmore put it, a shapeless 
mass of ruins. c All in all 7,551 shots were fired, of which  5,626 
were hits (at these enormous distances!); 3,495 of these hit the 
outer wall area, 2,130 the inner. After the walls had been 
subjected to fire for a while many shells went right through both 
of them. 
Gillmore also had a rifled 300-pounder but it burst on the 
seventh shot. The first six shells, however, are said to have gone 
through both walls and caused collapses of brickwork up to 20 feet 
high in places. 
a The plan was published as a supplement to the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, 
No. 20, May 16,  1863.—  Ed. 
h From the other side.— Ed. 
c Engels gives Gillmore's words in English, followed by the German transla­
tion.— Ed. 

=====第321页=====
Artillery News from America 295 
Understandably, the fort returned the fire on a small scale only. 
The batteries could not have provided any visible targets at a 
distance of half a German mile, even if there had been guns with 
such a range. As it was situated under the close fire of many 
Confederate batteries, no attempt was made to occupy it im­
mediately, but now that Fort Wagner and Cunnings.Point have 
fallen, this will probably already have happened.306 
From the same batteries Gillmore launched 15 incendiary bombs 
on to the town of Charleston—over one German mile away—and 
only discontinued the bombardment because, after such a long 
journey, his percussion shells, not landing on their noses, failed to 
explode. 
What should we in Germany make of all this shooting? What 
should we think of our uncovered stone-wall fortifications? What 
about the detached forts, 800-1,200 paces before the main 
rampart, which are supposed to protect the place against 
bombardment? What of the redoubts of the Cologne forts, the 
flanking gates of Coblenz, and what about Ehrenbreitstein? Our 
enemies, who are naval powers, will soon have enough rifled 
artillery of the very heaviest calibre, and railways to carry it are 
everywhere. On the other hand, as far as we know, the biggest 
rifled calibre yet introduced is that of the 24-pounder, roughly 
4 Va"—y veritable dwarf gun compared with what our enemies will 
pitch against us; and, if we had the same artillery in our 
casemates, it would not be possible to hit batteries  5,000  paces 
anyway. Our Rhine fortresses, however inadequately fortified the 
river line might be, have hitherto been our main strength against 
the first French attack; but what are they worth after experiences 
such as those described above? 
This is no time for reflection. We must act, and straight away. 
Any delay may cost us a campaign. Videant consules, ne quid 
respublica detrimenti capiat* 
Written in late September 1863. Section I 
first appeared in the collection, Friedrich 
Engels. 1820-1970. Referate, Diskussionen, 
Dokumente. Internationale wissenschaftliche 
Konferenz in Wuppertal vom 25.-29, AI ai 
1970, Hannover, 1971; the full available 
text was first published in: Marx and 
Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, 
Vol. 44, Moscow, 1978 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Let the Consuls see to it that the republic suffers no harm. (The traditional 
formula addressed by the Roman Senate to the Consuls in time of danger to the 
state.)—Ed. 

=====第322页=====
296 
Karl Marx 
[PROCLAMATION ON POLAND 
BY THE GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL SOCIETY 
IN LONDON]307 
The London German Workers' Educational Society?08 in agreement 
with an agent of the Polish national government,309 has authorised 
the undersigned committee to organise a collection of funds for 
Poland among the German workers in England, Germany, 
Switzerland and the United States. Even if only little material help 
can be given Poland in this manner, great moral assistance can be 
rendered. 
The Polish question is the German question. Without an 
independent Poland there can be no independent and united 
Germany, no emancipation of Germany from the Russian 
domination that began with the first partition of Poland.310 The 
German aristocracy long since recognised the Tsar as secret 
supreme sovereign. The German bourgeoisie looks on, silent, 
passive and indifferent, at the slaughter of the heroic nation which 
alone still shields Germany from the Muscovite deluge. Part of the 
bourgeoisie realises the danger, but is willing to sacrifice German 
interests to those of the individual German states, whose existence 
depends on the dismemberment of Germany and the maintenance 
of the Russian hegemony. Another section of the bourgeoisie 
regards the autocracy in the east as it does the reign of the coup 
d'etat3 in the west, as a necessary buttress of order. Finally, a third 
part is so absolutely obsessed by the important business of making 
money that it has completely lost understanding of and insight 
into major historical relations. The Germans of 1831 and 1832, by 
their open demonstration in support of Poland,311 at least forced 
the Federal Diet to take strong measures. Today Poland finds its 
a The reign of Napoleon III.— Ed. 

=====第323页=====
Proclamation on Poland 297 
most eager opponents, and hence Russia finds its most useful 
tools,  among the liberal masterminds of the so-called National 
Association.312 Everyone is free to decide for himself how far this 
liberal Russophilism is linked to the Prussian upper crust. 
In this fateful moment, the German working class owes it to the 
Poles,  to foreign countries and to its own honour to raise a loud 
protest against the German betrayal of Poland, which is at the 
same time treason to Germany and to Europe. It must inscribe the 
Restoration of Poland in letters of flame on its banner, since 
bourgeois liberalism has erased this glorious motto from its own 
flag. The English working class has won immortal historical 
honour for itself by thwarting the repeated attempts of the ruling 
classes to intervene on behalf of the American slaveholders by its 
enthusiastic mass meetings, even though the prolongation of the 
American Civil War subjects a million English workers.to the most 
fearful suffering and privations. 
If police restrictions prevent the working class in Germany from 
conducting demonstrations on such a scale for Poland, they do not 
in any way force them to brand themselves in the eyes of the 
whole world as accomplices in the betrayal, through apathy and 
silence. 
The undersigned committee requests that money be sent to Mr. 
Bolleter, the occupant of the Society's premises at 2 Nassau Street, 
Soho,  London. The expenditure of the money is controlled by the 
Society and public account thereof will be given as soon as the 
purpose of this collection permits. 
Bolleter, Berger, Eccarius, Krüger, 
Lessner, Limburg, Linden, Matzrath, 
Tatschky, Toups, Wolff 
Written in late October 1863 Printed according to the leaflet 
First published as a leaflet in 
London in November 1863 

=====第324页=====
298 
Frederick Engels 
THE ENGLISH ARMY 31 
In a detailed review of the small work by Pétrie and James, the 
Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung recently described the organisation of 
the English army, 3 and since then, in another article, the position 
of this army in the English state.b What remains is only to consider 
this army itself in its historical development in the last seventy 
years,  its present form, its materiel, its internal service organisa­
tion, its tactical training and its characteristic forms of combat. 
This is the purpose of the present lines. 
The English army is especially interesting to the military 
observer. It is the only one in the world that still keeps 
unbendingly to the old line tactics, at least in so far as it has never 
known columns within the range of infantry fire (except for 
actions in defiles). Not only does it fire in line, its bayonet attacks, 
too, are made only in line. Nonetheless—or perhaps precisely for 
that reason — it is undeniably the army that has suffered fewest 
defeats. In any event, it is worthwhile taking a closer look at the 
battle methods of such an army, particularly now, when, to the 
astonishment of the whole world, what was believed to be 
impossible has become possible: that England threatens to make 
war on us Germans.314 
a This refers to the review of the pamphlet Organization, composition and strength 
of the Army of Great Britain. (Compiled by Captain Martin Pétrie and Colonel James.) 
The review appeared in the literary supplement to the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, 
Nos.  34-39, August 22 and 29 and September 5, 12, 19 and 26, 1863, under the 
correspondent's sign  [16.].—  Ed. 
b "Die englische Armee und Verfassung", Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, Nos. 44-
46, October 31 and November 7 and 14,  1863.—  Ed. 

=====第325页=====
,Z £.£&„ Ay^y^ ^, ^i. ^/»..v^  *ytLLyp~~>  ^œ-' 
t/C**^.  ^^,  m4&....  ? />^^^«^^.  «^ s*^-sL~~y^~<. 
-y7 
First page of Engels's manuscript of "The English Army" 

=====第326页=====

=====第327页=====
The English Army 301 
We begin with the infantry, naturally. The robur peditum* is the 
chief strength and the pride of the English army. Ever since 
William Napier it has been an article of faith for all England that 
the massed fire of an English line is superior to that of any other 
troops, and that the British bayonet is irresistible, and true it is 
that the English, like other people, to be sure, owe their victories 
above all to their infantry. 
The English infantry has 3 Guards regiments with 7 battalions, 
109 line regiments, of which Nos. 1 to 25 have two battalions, No. 
60 (Rifles) 4 battalions, and the remainder only one battalion each. 
In addition, there is the Rifle Brigade with 4 battalions, making a 
total of 141 battalions. Whether there are one or two battalions in 
a line regiment is determined exclusively by requirements; as soon as 
circumstances permit, the second battalions of the first 25 
regiments will certainly be disbanded again. The promotion of the 
officers likewise takes place in the regiment, which often gives rise 
to absurd disarrangements, e.g. when, as at present, the first 
battalion of the 13th Regiment is stationed in Jamaica and the 
second in New Zealand. 
The reserve and elite troops are primarily the Guards and the 
eight Highland regiments, who have always honoured their 
reputation. Nine so-called "light" and 5 "fusilier" regiments count 
as light infantry, but differ in only a few respects from the 
[regiments of the] line, and only 8 rifle battalions are true light 
infantry. Regiments Nos. 101 to 109, formerly European regi­
ments of the East India Company, 315 serve only in India. 
Apart from these 141 battalions of British infantry, there are 
also various corps in the home country, to which we shall return 
later, and in the colonies: 
In North America: 1 battalion and 2 companies of 
British troops 1,350 men 
In the West Indies: 4 battalions of Negroes and 
mulattoes 3,700 " 
In St. Helena: 1 British battalion 560 " 
In Malta: native fortress artillery 640 " 
At the Cape of Good Hope: mounted rifles, 5/6 
Hottentots,  VÔ Europeans, mainly Germans and 
Swiss 900 " 
In Ceylon: 3 battalions of native rifles 1,460 " 
a Elite infantry.— Ed. 8,610 men 

=====第328页=====
302 Frederick Engels 
Finally, the native army in India, 151 battalions with a total of 
110,000 men. With few exceptions, these troops are commanded 
by British officers and their entire organisation is very similar to 
the English line. But the Indian army still retains many 
characteristics from the time of the East India Company; e.g., 
commissions cannot be bought there,316 at least not officially, 
although similar things are done indirectly there, too. 
On February 5 of this yeara there were 58 battalions of English 
infantry in India, 3 in China, 2 in Mauritius (Isle-de-France), 4 at 
the Cape, 12 in Canada and the other North American 
possessions, 1 in Bermuda, 2 in the West Indies, 10 in New 
Zealand (because of the war with the natives),317 5 in Gibraltar, 4 
in the Ionian islands, 5 in Malta, 42 in England and on the way 
home. Of the latter, there were 6 in London, 9 in the Aldershot 
camp, 318 10 in Portsmouth, Plymouth and Dover, 1 in Jersey, 2 in 
inland England, 2 in Scotland, 10 in Ireland, 2 on the way back 
home. We see from this what strong support the navy gives the 
army; without its protection and the rapid means of transportation 
it affords, these weak garrisons would be far from adequate. 
Where the navy can provide only slight protection, however, as in 
India and Canada, we find strong garrisons, and likewise so in the 
strategic positions in the Mediterranean, where it is necessary to be 
prepared for conflicts with European troops. 
It was formerly the rule to send the Guards out of the country 
only in case of war; but there are now two battalions in Canada. 
The total strength of the infantry on active service at the 
present time comes to 133,500 men; this averages 884 men per 
battalion, divided into 10 companies, each with a captain, a 
lieutenant, and an ensignb (equivalent to our second lieutenant). 
In addition, each battalion, with the exception of the Guards, has 
two depot companies for training recruits; 6 to 8 of these depots 
are combined into a depot battalion, of which there are 23, with a 
total strength of about 18,000 men. These depots are all in the 
home country, usually by or near the sea. Thus, the total strength 
of the English infantry is something over 150,000 men. 
a 1863.—  Ed. 
b Engels uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第329页=====
303 
il 
The officers are recruited from all the educated classes of the 
nation. Not much theoretical schooling is demanded of the 
aspirants; the prescribed examinations pose questions that would 
make a Prussian ensign smile. However, increasing efforts are 
being made to get young men from the military school at 
Sandhurst319 into the army, in particular by giving commissions as 
ensigns without purchase to those who come out top in the 
examinations. Not much is required by way of foreign languages, 
and the aspirant has great freedom of choice among a number of 
European and Indian languages; the mathematical requirements 
are extremely low; on the other hand, much more emphasis is laid 
on good, clear, simple expression in practical English composition 
than among us, where almost every German army writes its own 
kind of German, and not always good common sense German at 
that. In a country where the two principal parties are almost 
equally represented in the aristocracy, it goes without saying that 
no inquiry is made into political opinions; the greatest military 
family in England, the Napiers, consisted and consists almost 
entirely of Radicals. In general more stress is laid on manly 
character than on knowledge, and since the English officer can be 
certain that he will be sent to all corners of the world and will 
soon come under fire, it stands to reason that the English army 
cannot be, to the extent that many others can, an almshouse for 
people who are lacking in almost every physical and moral quality 
required in a soldier. This last, however, is the best guarantee of a 
good officer corps; for despite all the fine rules mentioned above, 

=====第330页=====
304 Frederick Engels 
nowhere is there more nepotism and family influence than in the 
English army. No one can get into the officer corps without 
influential connections, and no one gets promotion without 
money, unless he has the good fortune to have the man ahead of 
him killed in action. Here, too, there are honourable exceptions, 
of course; a certain shoemaker's son from- Glasgow died last year 
as Field Marshal Lord Clyde, after he had reconquered the India 
that had been lost; but poor Colin Campbell, to get that far, had 
to take part as an officer in the campaign against Buenos Aires as 
early as 1807,320 and in 1854, when he went to the Crimea, he was 
only a colonel. And without a distant relative, who commanded a 
regiment, he would never have become an officer. 
English officers form a very exclusive corps, especially in 
England  itself.  They even have a dialect or rather an accent of 
their own, as in Prussia, and have very little contact with the 
citizens of their garrison town. This isolation is enhanced by the 
circumstance that the tinmarried officers live in barracks (or 
rather a separate building in the barracks compound) and have to 
eat at the officers' mess. In a country where the army is under 
civilian jurisdiction for all offences that are not of a strictly 
military nature, this living together in barracks is a necessity. 
Young officers are punished severely for pranks in town that 
could bring them into conflict with the civilian authorities; as 
compensation, they have fairly broad freedom in the barracks 
themselves. Female visitors of all sorts come and go, there is heavy 
drinking and gambling, and the young gentlemen play the 
heartiest practical jokes on one another. If a sneak gets in among 
them, so much the worse for him. A few years ago these practical 
jokes, 3 carried to excess in some regiments, led to scandalous 
courts martial, and since then strict orders prohibiting them have 
been issued; actually, however, this sort of amusement is regarded 
with indulgence, so long as public scandal is avoided. The 
government contributes 25 pounds sterling per annum per 
company to the officers' mess, which should be decent but 
economical and never place officers with limited means in a 
position where they are compelled to spend more money than 
they can afford. Nonetheless, there are occasions enough to lay 
out money, and the usurers ruin as many young officers with bills 
and I.O.U.s as elsewhere. 
This way of life leaves its mark on the outward demeanor of the 
English officer. With civilians—although when off duty he 
Engels uses the English expression here: "practical jokes".— Ed. 

=====第331页=====
The English Army 305 
almost always wears civilian clothes—he is usually dignified and 
reserved; arrogant overbearing behaviour towards the citizens 
occurs as exceptions in such garrison cities as Portsmouth, or in 
marksmanship schools, where many officers are together and set 
the tone. In general, the officer has to show that he is "an officer 
and a gentleman"; at any time he can be called up before a court 
martial, discharged and even cashiered "for conduct unbecoming 
an officer and a gentleman", and no mercy is shown if an officer 
has caused a scandal by his behaviour in public, unless, of course, 
he resigns first. Cover-ups of scandalous public incidents, such as 
we know have occurred in Germany, are impossible in England, 
and the spirit of the army can only gain from that. 
The officers' right to wear civilian clothing off duty, unusual as 
it may seem to us Germans, has its excellent aspects, and England 
provides abundant proof that it has not the slightest ill effects on 
the military spirit of the officers. It should be noted, into the 
bargain, that in the main garrison towns, such as Chatham, 
Portsmouth, etc., where there is a good deal of military activity, 
the officers wear civilian clothing less frequently. 
The duel has disappeared entirely from the English army. The 
last duel involving officers took place twenty years ago between 
two brothers-in-law, a major and a lieutenant; the major was 
killed, and the lieutenant was acquitted by the jury because of the 
shocking provocation leading up to the affair. The ideas of 
honour that have been implanted in the English officer corps— 
and by no one more energetically than Wellington himself—are 
based on the fundamental principle that anyone who insults 
another without cause dishonours  himself,  not the person he has 
insulted; and that he can only restore his honour by making 
amends for his injustice so far as he is able. Anyone who is the 
first to insult a comrade is therefore liable to the charge of 
conduct unbecoming a gentleman, unless he makes amends, or if 
the insult is of such a nature that it cannot be amended, a court 
martial soon settles the matter. This way of thinking may seem 
strange enough in some circles, particularly the Prussian army, but 
it certainly has more common sense on its side than the 
fantastically exaggerated duel point d'honneur 3 of some people. 
That this is thoroughly consistent with the feeling of military 
honour is proved by the English officers themselves, who need 
fear no comparison in this respect. 
Advancement in the regiment is exclusively by seniority, coupled 
Point of honour.— Ed, 

=====第332页=====
306 Frederick Engels 
with purchase of rank, as follows: As soon as a vacancy occurs, the 
senior officer of the next lower rank has the choice of whether he 
will purchase the place or not; if he turns it down, which happens 
only because of lack of money, the choice goes to the next in 
seniority, and so forth. This purchase of commissions is without a 
doubt one of the worst institutions in the English army, something 
foreign soldiers will never reconcile themselves to. It is absurd and 
reprehensible, even if one allows all the mitigations that the 
English plead in its defence: that it enables younger officers to 
reach higher places more quickly, that it is an old-established 
custom, one hard to eradicate, etc. It is and remains a shame to 
the English army that it has not been able to supersede this 
system, and it undoubtedly does the greatest harm to the spirit of 
the officer corps that able officers must grow rusty in lower ranks 
because they have only their pay and no capital. 
The price of a commission as ensign (i.e. second lieutenant) is 
450 pounds sterling (3,000 thalers) in the line infantry; if the 
ensign wants to advance to lieutenant, he must pay a further 250 
pounds (1,700 thalers); for the captain's commission, 1,100 pounds 
more (7,030 thalers); major's commission, 1,400 pounds more 
(9,030 thalers); lieutenant colonel's commission, a further 1,300 
pounds (8,700 thalers). This commission is thus worth a grand 
total of 4,500 pounds sterling, or over 30,000 thalers, which the 
owner gets back from his successor when he advances to colonel. 
In the Guards and the cavalry the prices are still higher; there is 
no purchase of commissions in the artillery and the engineers. If 
the officer dies, all the capital invested is lost, and the next in 
seniority takes his place without purchase. From colonel on, 
purchase no longer applies; every lieutenant colonel.who has been 
on active service in that rank for 3 years, becomes a colonel by 
right. It is forbidden, under penalty of being cashiered, to pay 
more than the set price for a position as officer, but this happens 
very often. 
Since the requirements for the ensign's examination do not 
comprise any military knowledge, a special examination is set 
before advancing to lieutenant and captain, which is limited to 
practical service, service regulations, military law and drill. 
Theoretical attainments in tactics are not required. 
The officers in the Guards have higher rank: the ensign that of 
the lieutenant, the lieutenant that of the captain, the captain that 
of the lieutenant colonel. This causes a great deal of resentment in 
the line. 
Advancement of non-commissioned officers to officer rank 

=====第333页=====
The English Army 307 
occurs only in exceptional cases. In every battalion the bulk of the 
routine work falls on three officers: the adjutant, the quartermas­
ter, and the paymaster. Old dependable non-commissioned 
officers are frequently appointed to these posts, but they never get 
beyond the rank of lieutenant, which is granted them gratis. 
Otherwise, promotion to officer rank takes place rarely, for 
exceptional distinction in the face of the enemy. The nature of the 
English recruited army, which produces a very strong admixture 
of low and rough elements, the resulting tone prevailing among 
the troops and the discipline consequently required, makes it 
necessary for the officers to belong to a higher class of society 
than the soldiers, as a matter of course. Accordingly, the distance 
between officer and soldier is greater in England than anywhere 
else.  And, likewise, advancement upward from the ranks is made 
very difficult and will always remain a rare exception so long as 
the purchase of commissions, on the one hand, and the 
recruitment system, on the other, continue. For educated young 
men to enlist in the army as volunteers, to serve with the prospect 
of advancement, as so often happens in Prussia and France, is 
something that cannot occur in England; the nature of the troops 
is such that it would be generally believed that the young man 
took to the soldier's trade for quite different motives, about which 
he would prefer to remain silent. This makes it quite understanda­
ble that the English officer corps consists almost entirely of men 
who have been brought up as gentlemen, and that the mass of 
soldiers has more respect for officers who are from the outset 
their "natural superiors", as the saying goes in England. 
Correspondingly, the tone prevailing between officers and 
soldiers is cold and businesslike. The two classes are linked only by 
the bond of command and obedience. There are neither 
intimacies and jokes nor outbreaks of passion. Praise and blame 
are seldom communicated directly to the soldiers by the officers, 
and then only in the same calm businesslike voice. Naturally, this 
applies only to the official relationships in drilling, etc.; in private 
English officers can curse ... as to which their lads have plenty 
to say. 
One very peculiar institution in the English army is that an 
officer can have a double rank: a lower one in his regiment and a 
higher one in the army. This second rank, when it is conferred 
permanently and unconditionally, is known as brevet rank. Thus, 
a captain may be a brevet major or a brevet lieutenant colonel in 
the army; there have even been cases (especially with commanders 
of Indian irregular troops) where they have been only lieutenants 

=====第334页=====
308 Frederick Engels 
in their regiments but were majors in the army. Such a captain 
and brevet major performs the duties of a captain in his regiment, 
but counts as a staff officer for service in the garrison or camp. 
This higher rank can also be conferred for only a certain time or 
for a given colony or theatre of war. Thus, in the last ten years 
many colonels were named "brigadier generals" or even "major 
generals" for the duration of the Crimean War or of their stay in 
the Levant, and similarly in India. This system provides a way of 
promoting specially favoured or specially useful men to higher 
positions despite seniority; it is obvious, however, that it entails 
many unpleasantnesses and much confusion. In the Crimea, the 
English could never make it comprehensible to the French that a 
man can be a captain and a major at the same time. 
One of the rules for promotion is that no one can become 
captain who has not had two years of full service as an ensign and 
lieutenant, nor can any one become a major who has not been an 
officer for six years. 
The military training of officers who do not come from the 
Sandhurst school is conducted in platoon and company drill, just 
like that of the soldiers; it is only after examination before the 
battalion commander that they are released from drill and 
admitted to serve as officers. All the subaltern officers of a 
battalion are brought together into a unit under the command of 
a staff officer once a year before the spring training course of the 
battalion, and in this form, with rifle on shoulder, they go through 
the complete individual, platoon and company drill. No doubt this 
is usually done very superficially. 

=====第335页=====
309 
in 
As we know, the numbers of non-commissioned officers and 
privates are replenished by enlistment, and exclusively in Great 
Britain and Ireland. Only the 100th Regiment is recruited in 
Canada. The recruiting is under the adjutant general of the army 
and is conducted in two ways: In the first place, the individual 
regiments and depot battalions can take enlistments in their own 
garrisons. Secondly, apart from this, there is an organised recruiting 
service throughout the country, which is divided into 
nine recruiting districts for the purpose (England 4, Scotland 2, 
Ireland 3). Each district is under a supervisory staff officer 
(usually a brevet colonel) and, where necessary, is subdivided into 
smaller regions under lieutenants or captains.—All in all, the 
following are employed in this service: 8 staff officers, 9 adjutants, 
9 paymasters, 9 physicians, 11 recruiting subaltern officers (on 
half-pay), 8 sergeant-majors, 48 sergeants and an appropriate 
number of privates. In addition to this, the Guards also recruit, 
exclusively to boost their own ranks. Every recruit has the right to 
choose the corps he wants to join. The pious wish is expressed 
that every corps be recruited as far as possible in the county whose 
name it bears. Foreigners are to be taken in only with special 
permission, for which reason they are often passed through as 
"Scots". 
In wartime the militia must serve primarily as a seedbed for the 
line;  for a certain number of men passing over into the line from 
the militia (the number being set on each occasion) one officer of 
the militia regiment involved receives a commission in the line. 
22—1134 

=====第336页=====
310 Frederick Engels 
During the Indian Mutiny in 1857321 the authorities went so far as 
to give a commission as lieutenant colonel to every serving or 
retired staff officer who brought in 1,000 recruits. 
Every recruit or re-enlisted soldier receives his full equipment 
gratis and a bounty varying with the need for recruits but never 
less than 1 pound and very seldom more than 10 pounds sterling 
(67 thalers). It is often different for different arms; the largest 
amount is paid for engineers, since only the best men can be used 
there. The bounty is paid in part at the time of certification, but 
most of it is paid upon entering the regiment and after the recruit 
has been received by the commander of the regiment. This 
certification consists in having the recruit brought before the 
police magistrate not earlier than 24 hours after the recruitment 
and his stating under oath that he enlisted voluntarily and that 
there are no legal obstacles to his joining the army. 
For the cavalry, artillery drivers, engineers, service corps, and 
the infantry stationed in India, China, Australia and St. Helena, 
recruits are accepted between the ages of 18 and 25; for the rest 
of the artillery and infantry, from 17 to 25. The height is set as 
follows: 
Cavalry: cuirassier Guards: 5' 10" to 6' 
heavy dragoon regiments: 5' 8" to 5' 11" 
medium dragoons and lancers: 5' 7" to 5' 9" 
hussars: 5' 6" to 5' 8" 
Artillery: cannoneers: minimum 5' 7", if under 18 years 
of age, 5' 6" 
drivers: 5' 4" to 5' 6" 
mechanics: minimum 5' 6" 
Infantry: minimum 
Guards: 5' 8 V2" 
line 5' 6" 
But this minimum varies greatly; any serious danger of war 
compels the government to lower it at once, and even the 
circumstance that the reduction of the length of service from 12 to 
10 years will release very many soldiers in the near future was 
enough to induce the government a few weeks ago to reduce the 
minimum for the infantry to 5' 5". In general, here as elsewhere 
the measurements are increasingly being reduced, although, as 
might be expected, taller soldiers can always be obtained on 
average with a recruited army than with universal military service 
or conscription. It will be seen from the above figures that this 

=====第337页=====
The English Army 311 
applies in England, too; the figures can easily be converted to 
Rhenish measurements with sufficient accuracy if we deduct 2lU 
inches from 5' to 5' 6", and 2V2" from 5' 7" to 6'. 
In addition to the height, a minimum chest circumference is also 
set: from 5' 6" to 5' 8", 33 inches; [5'] 8" to [5'] 10", 34 inches; 
over 5' 10", 35 inches. Driver cannoneers, service corps soldiers 
and marksmen must always have 34" chest measurement. However, 
driver cannoneers will be accepted even if they do not fully meet 
these standards, provided that they are experienced in handling 
horses. 
Boys of at least 14 are enlisted as drummers and buglers with 
the permission of their parents. They receive no enlistment 
bounty. 
The length of service is 10 years for the infantry, 12 for the 
cavalry, artillery, engineers and service corps; at the end of the 
period the soldier can re-enlist for 11 years more in the infantry 
and 9 years in the other branches, if he is found to be still fit. At 
the end of this re-enlistment he can continue in the service on 
three months' notice. If the unit is abroad when the enlistment 
period expires, the officer commanding the station has the right to 
extend it up to two years. 
Every soldier with good conduct is, as a rule, permitted to buy 
himself out. The redemption amount is based on the time of 
service already rendered and the time remaining, on the conduct, 
etc., and is a maximum of 30 pounds in the cavalry, 20 pounds in 
the infantry, and for coloured soldiers in the colonial corps 12 
pounds. 
After 21 years of service every soldier is entitled to a pension. 
The amount of the pension is based on the length of service, his 
conduct and the physical infirmities incurred during service; for 
privates and non-commissioned officers it is at least 8 pence (6 
Sgr. 8 Pf.) and at most 3 shillings 6 pence (1 thaler 5 Sgr.) per 
diem. Under certain circumstances, pensions are granted for 
shorter service, too. 
The recruiting sergeants, with the soldiers assigned to them, 
usually stay in the worst districts of the big cities and keep their 
eyes chiefly on the public houses. They often parade through the 
streets with bands on their caps, to the accompaniment of some 
drummers and pipers, attract a crowd and try to fish in it. If the 
prey they are looking for is there, he is enticed into a pub as soon 
as possible and every kind of trick is put into play to get the victim 
to accept the symbolic shilling, which seals the contract. Once the 
new candidate for glory has taken the shilling, he can free himself 
22* 

=====第338页=====
312 Frederick Engels 
by paying "smart-money"3 of a pound sterling before a police 
magistrate. The law requires that the budding hero must declare 
before the magistrate, at least 24 hours later, that he is enlisting 
voluntarily and is firm in his decision. The assumption of the law, 
and quite a correct one, is that the recruit is not sober, as a rule, 
when he takes the shilling, and the purpose is to give him a 
chance to sober up. But it would have to be a poor sort of 
recruiting sergeant that would let his prey get away from him so 
easily. He and his men do not let the recruit out of their sight, 
and before he comes before the magistrate, spirits and beer have 
had a chance to do their work. The best of it is that a large part of 
the reckoning is usually paid by the recruit  himself,  the sergeant 
advancing the money freely against the bounty. Given these 
circumstances, it is naive, but prudent, for the regulations to say 
expressly: Only unmarried soldiers and drummers should be 
selected for recruiting duty, and only in cases of extreme necessity 
married sergeants, but in any case only healthy, vigorous men. 
Anyone who is not a good drinker is unsuited to this duty. 
One has the feeling of having been taken back quite into the 
eighteenth century when one sees this sort of recruiting. Despite 
the formal safeguards with which the law has surrounded this 
practice, it remains a fact that by far the largest part of the 
"English army entirely made up of volunteers" enters into that 
institution most unwillingly; whether for their own eventual good 
on the whole, is another question. 
It is clear enough what sections of the nation come into the 
army in this manner. To a large extent, the army, like our 
recruited armies of former days, remains a refugium peccatorum,b in 
which the larger and better part of all the adventurous elements 
of the people are brought together and are restrained by an 
exacting course of training and very strict discipline. As a result, 
the English army, so far as its moral and intellectual character is 
concerned, is far below all those that are formed by conscription 
(even with substitution) or by universal military service without 
substitution. Only the French Foreign Legion322 and those other 
French corps formed chiefly from substitutes, such as the 
Zouaves,'23 can be put on anything like a par with it; although it 
cannot be denied that the entire French army, by the increasing 
preference shown for the career soldier in the rank and file, is 
a Engels gives the term "smart-money" in brackets after the corresponding 
German word.— Ed. 
b Refuge of sinners.— Ed. 

=====第339页=====
The English Army 313 
coming closer and closer to the character of the English army. But 
even the French remplaçant* is far better educated and has better 
manners than the rough, wild lads from the dregs of the big cities 
who set the tone in English barracks. An educated young man 
can still enter the French army as a volunteer to serve for 
advancement, without the training time as common soldier being 
too intolerable for him; in England, a man would have to be out 
of his mind to do that. As proud as the Englishman is of his army 
as a whole, he is equally contemptuous of the individual common 
soldier; even in the lower orders of society it is still rather 
discreditable to be enlisted or to have a soldier as a relative. In 
general, the quality of the recruits has undoubtedly improved a 
great deal in the last ten years. An effort is made to get as much 
information as possible on the antecedents of the recruits and 
steer clear of definitely bad characters. The heavy enlistments that 
were made necessary by the Crimean War and the Indian Mutiny 
soon exhausted the degenerate class from which the army had 
filled its ranks as a rule during the long period of peace. Not only 
had the height requirements to be reduced (down to 5' 3" for the 
infantry at one point), but the soldier's life had to be made more 
attractive and steps had to be taken to improve the tone in the 
barracks, so that the more reliable members of the working class 
could also be drawn into the sphere of recruitment. An additional 
factor was the shortage of suitable candidates for the many new 
positions as non-commissioned officers (in the Crimean War the 
battalions were raised to almost double strength). It was also 
realised that warfare like Wellington's in Spain, 324 with the 
inevitable looting of all the captured fortresses, is no longer 
suitable in the Europe of today. The press took up the cause of 
the soldiers, and it soon became the rule among senior officers to 
extend philanthropy to the troops. Steps were taken to make life 
more agreeable for the soldiers, to provide them with facilities 
for recreation and activities in the barracks or camp, and to 
keep them away from the pubs. Thus, especially in the last seven 
years and for the most part by private subscription, libraries, 
reading rooms, clubrooms with all kinds of games, soldiers' clubs, 
etc., have been set up. In the camps some land has been assigned 
to the soldiers for gardens, where possible, as the French do; 
experiments have been made with theatrical performances and 
lectures; and from time to time exhibitions have been arranged of 
various small pieces of art works, etc., that they have produced. All 
a Substitute.— Ed. 

=====第340页=====
314 Frederick Engels 
these things are still in their infancy but are becoming more and 
more general. They are extremely necessary. During the campaigns 
in the Crimea and in India the recruits were undoubtedly of a much 
higher level than previously, since both wars were very popular 
among the masses of people. The tone of the army has improved 
considerably. Contact with the French soldiers in the Crimea also 
played a part. The job now is to keep that spirit up, so that even 
during a long period of peace it will be possible to obtain recruits of a 
similar high level and not be limited again exclusively to the 
disorderly elements of the population which are always the first to 
apply in peacetime. 
These last, nonetheless, still constitute the larger part of the 
army, and all the arrangements are made accordingly. An English 
barracks with its auxiliary buildings and courtyard is surrounded 
by high walls on all sides, usually with only one gate. There is a 
separate building for the officers' quarters, and one or more for 
the soldiers. Where the soldiers' quarters have windows on the 
street, this part of the building is usually secured, in recent 
installations, by a deep ditch with a strong iron fence along its 
outer edge. In large cities, especially in the case of militia barracks, 
which include an armoury (the militia is called into service for only 
4 weeks in the year), the entire street front of the building has 
loopholes instead of windows, and the corners of the wings are 
provided with turrets for flanking fire—proof that uprisings of 
workers are not considered as so unlikely. The soldier spends his 
life in this huge barracks prison, with the exception of his time 
off. The admission of civilians is strictly supervised and the entire 
structure is carefully guarded against view from the outside, so 
that the soldier may be kept under maximum control and 
separated from civilians. Here there is none of the easy association 
between citizens and soldiers that is so common in Germany, or 
ease of entry into the barracks for all people, and to ensure that 
no lasting relationships are formed, the garrisons are shifted every 
year, as a rule. 
The most common disciplinary offences can be readily inferred 
from the character of the army. They are drunkenness, absence 
without leave after roll-call, theft from comrades, fighting, 
insubordination and actual acts of violence against a superior. 
Minor offences are punished summarily by the battalion command­
er. He has the exclusive power of punishment but can delegate 
the power to company commanders, up to three days detention in 
barracks. His own power of punishment extends to: 1) imprison­
ment up to 7 days, with or without solitary confinement, with or 

=====第341页=====
The English Army 315 
without hard labour; soldiers given this sentence have the right to 
appeal from the battalion commander to a court martial: 
2) imprisonment in a dark cell (black-holea) for up to 48 hours; 
3) detention in barracks for up to a month, during which the 
prisoner must perform all his service and in addition any extra 
work imposed on him by the commander; confinement to barracks 
also entails punitive drill with full pack for up to 14 days; the 
punitive drill must not last for more than an hour at a time but 
may be repeated up to four times daily. In cases 2) and 3) the 
commander may grant an appeal to a court martial. Solitary 
confinement or the black-hole are to be reserved, so far as 
possible, for cases of drunkenness, brawling and insolence towards 
superiors, and in serious cases may be combined with confinement 
to barracks, but in such a way that the entire period of arrest does 
not exceed one month. 
As we can see, an English battalion commander has means 
enough at his disposal to keep order among his wild young 
fellows. If these means do not suffice, a court martial provides the 
remedy, the rebellious fellow getting the cat-o'-nine-tails as a last 
resort. This is one of the most barbarous instruments of 
punishment that exists: a short-handled whip with nine long, hard, 
knotted thongs. The offender, stripped to the waist, is tied to a 
three-cornered frame and the strokes are delivered with the 
utmost force. Even the first stroke breaks the skin and draws 
blood. After a few strokes the whip and the flogger are changed 
in order not lo let up on the delinquent. The doctor is of course 
always present. Fifty strokes of this kind always make a long 
recovery in hospital necessary. And yet there are often men who 
endure these fifty strokes without a cry of pain, since it counts as 
more shameful to show pain than to earn the strokes. 
Twelve years ago the cat was still used very frequently, and up 
to 150 strokes were ordered. If I am not mistaken, the regimental 
commander could hand out a certain number of strokes summari­
ly until that time. Then the number was limited to 50 strokes and 
the power to order them given exclusively to courts martial. 
Finally, after the Crimean War, and particularly at the urging of 
Prince Albert, the Prussian division of the soldiers into two 
classes was introduced and it was decided that only soldiers who 
had already been put into the second class for previous offences 
and had not got back into the first class by virtue of a year of 
faultless service could be given corporal punishment for a fresh 
a Engels gives the English term.— Ed. 

=====第342页=====
316 Frederick Engels 
offence. This distinction does not apply in the face of the enemy; 
there any common soldier is subject to flogging. In 1862, 126 men 
were flogged in the army, 114 of them being given the highest 
legal number of 50 strokes. 
In general, it will be seen that both the need and the desire to 
use the whip have greatly declined, and since the same causes are 
still operative in the army, it is to be presumed that this will 
continue to be the case and that the cat will be used increasingly as 
an exceptional, extreme method of deterrence, reserved for the 
worst cases in the face of the enemy. For it has been realised that 
appeals to the soldiers' feeling of honour are more effective than 
degrading punishments, and on that subject the entire English 
army says with one voice that a flogged soldier is never worth 
anything after that. Nonetheless, complete abolition of the cat will 
not come so soon in England. We all know how strong the 
prejudices in favour of corporal punishment have been and, to 
some extent, still are, even in armies that are made up of much 
better elements of society than the English; and in a recruited 
army such an extreme instrument of terror is still more excusable 
than elsewhere. However, the English are certainly right in 
holding that, if there is to be corporal punishment, it should be 
used only as a last resort, but in that case very severely. The 
eternal mild canings that are still given in many armies, including 
German armies, unfortunately, and which can only have the effect 
of weakening the fear of that punishment...3 
Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XII, 
Part II, 1935 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. 

=====第343页=====
317 
Frederick Engels 
THE STRENGTH OF THE ARMIES IN SCHLESWIG 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE MANCHESTER GUARDIAN 
Sir, 
There are most absurd reports afloat as to the relative strength 
of the contending armies in the Danish war.325 It is generally 
supposed that the Danes are outnumbered in the proportion of 
one Dane to at least three Germans. To show how little this is in 
accordance with facts, I propose to give a detailed statement of the 
strength of each army, as far at least as its infantry is concerned; 
for as to cavalry and artillery it would at present be very difficult 
to get precise information. 
Before the outbreak of hostilities, the Danes had the following 
troops in Schleswig, viz.: 
Battalions 
First Division; Commander, Lieutenant-General Gerlach: 
1st Brigade, 2nd and 22nd Infantry Regiments 4 
2nd Brigade, 3rd and 18th Infantry Regiments 4 
3rd Brigade, 17th and 19th Infantry Regiments 4 
Second Division; Major General Du Plat: 
4th Brigade, 4th and 6th Infantry Regiments 4 
5th Brigade, 7th and 12th Infantry Regiments 4 
6th Brigade, 5th and 10th Infantry Regiments 4 
Third Division; Major General Steinmann: 
7th Brigade, 1st and 11th Infantry Regiments 4 
8th Brigade, 9th and 20th Infantry Regiments 4 
9th Brigade, 16th and 21st Infantry Regiments 4 
Total B attalions 36 

=====第344页=====
318 Frederick Engels 
Or, at 800 men for a battalion (the full complement is 
870 men and officers), say 28,800 men 
Cavalry, 4 V2 regiments, at 560 men 2,500 " 
Artillery, about 3,000 " 
Total Danish forces 34,300 men 
Exclusive of several battalions, both of line and reserve, which 
were sent to Schleswig in the first days of February, but as to 
which it has been impossible to ascertain any particulars. 
The Austrians have sent to the seat of war the sixth army corps, 
consisting of the following troops: 
General Gondrecourt's Brigade: 
Infantry Régiment, King of Prussia 3 
Ditto Baron Martini 3 
Chasseur Battalion, No. 18 1 
General Nostitz's Brigade: 
Infantry Regiment, King of the Belgians 3 
Ditto Grand Duke of Hesse 3 
Chasseur Battalion, No. 9 ; 1 
General Thomas's Brigade: 
Infantry Regiment, Count Coronini 3 
Ditto Prince Holstein 3 
A Chasseur Battalion, number not stated 1 
General Dormus's Brigade: 
Two Infantry Regiments and one battalion of Chasseurs, 
numbers and names not stated 7 
Total battalions 28 
Or at 800 men per battalion (which is a high estimate 
for the present organisation of the Austrian army) 22,400 men 
Cavalry, about 2,000 " 
Artillery, about 2,600 " 
Total, about 27,000 men 
The Prussians have sent the following contingent: 

=====第345页=====
The Strength of the Armies in Schleswig 319 
I.—Combined army corps of Prince Frederick Charles 
Sixth Division: Battalions 
11th Brigade, 20th and 60th Regiments 6 
12th Brigade, 24th and 64th Regiments 6 
Besides the 35th Light Infantry Regiment 3 
Thirteenth Division: 
25th Brigade, 13th and 53rd Regiments 6 
26th Brigade, 15th and 55th Regiments 6 
7th Chasseur Battalion 1 
2.—Division of Guards; General Mulbe: 
1st Brigade, 3rd and 4th Foot Guards 6 
2nd Brigade, 3rd and 4th Grenadier Guards 6 
Chasseurs of the Guard 1 
Total 41 
Or at 800 men per battalion , 32,800 men 
Cavalry 3,000 " 
Artillery 3,000 " 
38,800 " 
With Austrians 27,000 " 
Total allied army 65,800 men 
Or less than two allied soldiers to one Dane. If the strength of the 
Danish defences at the Dannevirke, at Düppel, and at Fridericia is 
taken into account, such a numerical superiority is not more than 
required to ensure success. It is almost precisely the same 
proportion of superiority which Wellington and Blücher, in 1815, 
had over Napoleon. 326 
Written after February 7, 1864 Reproduced from the newspaper 
First published in the Manchester  Guard­
ian. February 16, 1864 
Signed: F. E. 

=====第346页=====
320 
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
OBITUARY 
On May 9 of this year 
WILHELM WOLFF, 
of Tarnau, near Schweidnitz, Silesia, died in Manchester of a brain 
hemorrhage at the age of almost 55 years. He was Associate 
Editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne and deputy to 
the German National Assembly in Frankfurt and Stuttgart in 1848 
and 1849, and a private tutor in Manchester from 1853. 
Manchester, May 13, 1864 
Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, Ernst Dronke, 
Louis Borchardt, M.D., 
Eduard Gumpert, M.D. 
Written on May 13, 1864 
First published in Allgemeine Zeitung, 
No. 144, May 23, 1864, Supplement Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第347页=====
321 
Frederick Engels 
ENGLAND'S FIGHTING FORCES  AS  AGAINST GERMANY 
Manchester, June  27 
The incredible  is taking place: England  is threatening Germany 
with war.327 According  to the  United Service Gazette orders have 
already gone  out to the  depot  in Pimlico (London)  and the 
Arsenal  at Woolwich  to have  the  equipment  and  arms needed  for 
thirty thousand  men  ready  for  immediate  use, and we may  expect 
to hear  in a few  days' time that  the  Channel fleet  has  sailed  for the 
Sound  or the  Belts.3 
The Army  and  Navy Gazette informs  us of the  fighting forces 
available  to England  at the  moment.  It says,  in its  June  25 issue: 
"The naval force which we have at hand and which can weigh anchor immediately 
is as follows: 
Horse­
power Guns Tonnage Men 
Edgar, wooden ship 600 71 3,094 810 
Warrior, ironcased 1,250 40 6,109 705 
Black Prince, ironcased 1,250 41 6,109 705 
Prince Consort, ironcased 1,000 35 4,045 605 
Hector, ironcased 800 28 4,089 530 
Defence,  " 600 16 3,720 457 
Aurora, wooden frigate 400 35 2,558 515 
Galatea, 800 26 3,227 515 
Wolverene, wooden corvette 400 21 1,703 275 
Research, ironcased 200 4 1,253 135 
Enterprise,  " 160 4 993 121 
a The Great Belt and the Little Belt straits.— Ed. 

=====第348页=====
322 Frederick Engels 
Geyser, paddle-wheel 
wooden steam vessel 280 6 1,054 175 
Assurance, wooden 
steam vessel 200 4 681 90 
Salamis, paddle-wheel 
wooden steam vessel 250 2 ? 65 
Trinculo, wooden 
gunboat 60 2 268 24 
"In addition, in order to have special vessels of smaller draught for the shallow 
and narrow waters of the Baltic and the Danish coasts, the Admiralty has ordered 
the following ships to be made ready for sea: 
Horse-
power Guns Tonnage Men 
Cordelia, wooden corvette 150 11 579 130 
Fawn, " 100 17 751 175 
Racer, " 150 11 579 130 
'Moreover, the following new-built ships will be ready shortly: 
Horse-
power Guns Tonnage Men 
Achilles, ironcased 1,250 30 6,121 705 
Royal Sovereign, cupola 
ironcased ship 800 5 3,963 500 
Caledonia, ironcased 1,000 35 4,125 605 
Ocean, " 1,000 35 4,047 605 
"In addition there are the numerous ships of the steamer reserve, and finally 
those of the Coast Guard, including 15 gunboats of 60 horsepower and mounting 
two heavy pieces of ordnance." 
The latter, the Army and Navy Gazette believes, would be as 
troublesome to an enemy as blow flies to a horse; it would be 
impossible to shake them off. (As if the Prussians did not have 22 
such blow flies in the Baltic, too!) 
So much for the Army and Navy Gazette on the fleet. We were 
on board several ships of the ironclad fleet last yeara  and in 
addition have carefully followed their ups and downs and their 
test cruises. These have shown that none of these ironclads can 
hold the high seas in stormy weather; last winter the Prince Consort 
almost foundered in the Irish Channel during a storm, which all 
the wooden ships easily rode out. Thus, these ships are only usable 
in definite previously planned undertakings (sea battles or attacks 
against land fortifications), and will then have to return to port 
a See this volume, pp. 289-95.— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
England's Fighting Forces as against Germany 323 
each time. They are of no use for blockades, etc. Their armour is 
usually a 4'/2-irich rolled iron of varying quality and applied in 
varying ways; in every case with a wood backing two feet thick, 
even in the ships otherwise made entirely of iron. None of this 
armour resists the seventy-pound flat-nosed steel Whitworth shell, 
most of them not even the seventy-pound steel Whitworth bomb 
of the same form as the shell. Rifled guns are now being cast in 
Prussia with the bore of the old 48-pounders, which are more or 
less equivalent to the above-mentioned Whitworth cannon. Flat-
nosed cylindrical steel shells (without a conical point) from such 
guns will penetrate this armour, even if their rear half is hollow 
and carries an explosive charge. These explosive shells do not 
require a fuse (as Whitworth's tests have shown) when they are 
fired against iron armour; penetrating the armour produces so 
much heat that the shells become white-hot and the powder inside 
them is ignited. 
The armament of the ironclads usually consists of smooth-bore 
sixty-eight-pounders (eight-inch calibre) as broadside cannons and 
hundred-ten-pound Armstrongs (seven-inch calibre) as pivoted 
cannons on the bow and the stern. Some of these ships also had 
Armstrong forty-pounders and seventy-pounders on the broad­
side,  but it may be that these are being replaced by sixty-eight-
pounders. The old sixty-eight-pounder is a very respectable, solid 
and, for its calibre, manageable cannon, very effective up to at 
least two thousand paces and certainly the best cannon of the 
entire English fleet. On the other hand, the Armstrong breech-
loading guns are very unreliable, since the rifling grooves soon 
become obstructed with lead by reason of the faulty attachment of 
the lead coating of the shell, and in particular because the breech 
block is useless. It consists of a quadrilateral piece of iron inserted 
from above extending to somewhat below the bottom of the bore, 
and screwed into place and secured from behind. If we consider 
that in the seven-inch calibre the shell weighs 110 pounds and the 
breech block only 135 pounds, we shall see that, after a few shots, 
the powder residues will prevent the block from fitting closely and 
it must fly out and high in the air as soon as the explosion gases 
work on it from below. This happens regularly, so that these 
Armstrong guns, despite their otherwise good effectiveness, have a 
very bad reputation in the navy. 
The Royal Sovereign will carry five very heavy guns in her four 
cupolas or turrets; the nature of the ordnance is not yet known. 
Her armour has no wood backing. It remains to be seen whether 
this ship is of any value on the high seas. 

=====第350页=====
324 Frederick Engels 
The smaller ships, and the wooden ships in general, have as 
broadside guns mainly smooth-bore thirty-two-pounders 9 feet 6 
inches and 10 feet in length, very good cannon which can take 
charges of up to V3 the weight of the shell, which the 
sixty-eight-pounders do not, and which therefore have very sure 
aim, for their length. Still, even on heavy ships there are some 
light eight-inch bomb-shell guns on the broadsides. The pivot guns 
are either eight-inch smooth-bore of lighter or heavier construc­
tion or Armstrong guns firing long shells weighing 40, 70 or 110 
pounds. 
The draught of the large ironclads is at least 25 feet, so that 
they are on a par with ships of the line and very heavy frigates in 
this respect. This makes them useless in narrow and shallow 
waters, but they could serve in the deep channels of narrow creeks 
and estuaries to attack shore batteries and coastal forts. There they 
are dangerous if the cannon of the defence are too light and their 
shells are not made of steel. It is doubtful whether the Prussian 
rifled twenty-four-pounder could penetrate their armour with 
steel shells. The rifled forty-eight-pounder can do it, in any event, 
if its shell is of steel and flattened at the nose, if it has a charge of 
a sixth to a fourth of the shell weight and if the shot can be fired 
at from six to eight hundred paces. Rifled guns of from seven to 
eight inches, which we could have made so easily of Krupp cast 
steel, if emplaced at suitable points, even in small numbers, would 
soon enough make the heavy English ironclads narmless to our 
coasts. Only, the shell must be of steel and cylindrical, and must 
not have a conical or rounded nose so that it will catch the iron 
armour with its sharp edge even if the impact is oblique. 
Whitworth has penetrated the armour with such shells even at an 
angle of incidence of over fifty degrees. Further, with such heavy 
guns it is best to leave any experiments with breech-loading quite 
out of consideration; beyond a certain calibre they are certainly 
worthless, and there is no more time for protracted tests. 
So much concerning the navy; now let us hear what the Army 
and Navy Gazette can tell us about the available land forces: 
"Cavalry. 4th, 5th, 6th regiments of Guards Dragoons; 1st and 2nd (Dragoon); 
3rd, 4th, 8th (Hussar); 9th (Lancer); 10th, 11th, 12th, 13th, 14th, 15th, 16th 
(Hussar) regiments. Each has 650 men, including officers, a total of 10,700 men. 
"Artillery. Ten batteries of horse-artillery (six guns each), 26 field batteries 
(horse-borne) also of six guns each and 25 fortress batteries. In all, 216 field guns 
and 13,700 men. 
"Engineers. 20 companies and two train companies, in all 2,700 men. 
"Infantry. The first battalions of the 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 8th, 10th, 11th, 13th, 
14th, 24th, 26th, 29th, 31st, 32nd, 37th, 41st, 45th, 49th, 53rd, 58th, 59th, 60th, 

=====第351页=====
England's Fighting Forces as against Germany 325 
61st, 64th, 69th, 73rd, 74th, 75th, 83rd, 84th, 85th, 86th, 87th regiments; the 
second battalions of the 1st, 12th and 60th regiments. To this should be added the 
first battalions of the 21st, 39th, and 62nd regiments, now on the way from 
America, making a total of 39 battalions. Excluding the depot companies, about 780 
men per battalion are left ready to turn out, or a total force of 30,000 trained men. In 
addition, there are the depots of the entire army, a total of 18,000 men as first 
reserves, and finally the Guards (1,300 men of the cavalry and 6,000 infantry). 
"In all: cavalry 12,000; artillery 13,700; engineers 2,700; infantry 54,000. Grand 
total: 82,000 men. But in estimating the number of troops we could send into the field, 
we must first deduct the depots with 18,000 men and a further 25% for those not 
available for service, and those who must be employed at home. We should then have 
some 48,000 well-drilled and well-seasoned troops, ready to go anywhere and do 
anything, if properly aided by the auxiliary and administrative departments. A first 
reserve of recruits would come to about half this number. We do not know the actual 
strength of the militia assembled at the training which has just concluded, but it 
should be a larger number than in 1863, when it turned out 102.000 strong for 
inspection. Finally, the volunteers amount to about 160,000." 
This is what the Army and Navy Gazette reports. These statistics 
may suffice for today, since we plan to give your readers an exact 
report on the English forces on land anyway.328 However, your 
German troops should realise one thing: If they come up against 
Englishmen, they will be facing quite a different opponent than 
the brave, but badly-trained, slow Danes. 
Written on June 27, 1864 
First published in the Allgemeine Militär-
Zeitung, No. 27, July 6, 1864 
Signed: F. E. Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
23—1134 

=====第352页=====

=====第353页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第354页=====

=====第355页=====
329 
Karl Marx 
GROUND RENT 
1) We have already seen that 
in order to understand ground rent correctly two things must be 
distinguished from [...]a 
1) Firstly, the portion paid to the landowner for improvements 
made to the land, i.e. for the capital invested in and merged with 
it. This is the [...] interest. Whether I have invested 1,000 thalers 
in a cotton-machine or in [...] canals on the land is immaterial 
to the source of the income [...] I derive from these 1,000 
thalers. For that is and remains the interest on capital productively 
used. 
2) Secondly, the form which the ground rent [assumes] as a 
money rent. Supposing a plot of land brings in 20 thalers rent 
annually. Suppose further that the land[owner sells] this plot of 
land, i.e. that he sells the annual ground rent of 20 thalers. How is 
the purchase price of the ground rent or the plot of land 
[fixed?...] The land only has value in so far as these 20 thalers [...] 
are taken into account. 
The question thus is: 
How much capital must I pay the landowner [in order] to 
purchase an annual rent of 20 thalers? In other words the 
a Here and below leaders in square brackets indicate damaged or completely 
faded, illegible places in the manuscript. The words in square brackets have been 
inserted by the Editors.— Ed. 

=====第356页=====
330 Karl Marx 
question is: how large a capital is required to yield 20 thalers 
annually in our [...] social conditions? To answer this question I 
have to know the rate of interest in general and how much 
interest on average a capital of [...] 
If the rate of interest is 5% this means that the 100 thalers I 
invest bring in 5 thalers interest. The question is: 
If 100 thalers yield 5 thalers annually how large a capital must I 
have to produce 20 thalers annually? If 100 thalers bring in 
5 thalers annually, then 400 thalers yield 20 thalers interest 
Pa-
Thus,  if the rate of interest stands at 5%, the landowner will sell 
a plot of land that brings in 20 thalers p.a. for 400 thalers. In 
20 years the purchaser would have replaced his capital. 20x20 = 
400. 
Thus,  the farmer pays 20 thalers rent p.a., but the [purchaser] 
who has bought the land for 400 thalers receives 20 thalers rent 
p.a. In his eyes the 20 thalers which the farmer pays him are 
nothing but interest paid to him on the 400 thalers which he has 
laid out as the purchase price of the land. In many regions the 
capital invested in land may yield a lower interest than the capital 
invested in other branches of industry. It is therefore possible that 
capital invested in land may only bring in 272%> while if 
employed in trade or industry, it [...] In that event, a plot of land 
yielding [20 thalers] rent p.a. would be [sold] for 800 thalers 
instead of 400. [The purchaser] will then need 40 years to 
recover his capital. If a farmer pays out [...] rent of 20 thalers p.a. for 
a morgen 3 of land, it may very easily be that the landlord who 
receives these 20 thalers only [...] 2V2 thalers. 
[A high or] low level of ground rent bears no [relation to] the 
high or low interest which capital [...] on the purchase of the 
ground rent, i.e. of the land [...] 
[...] furthermore, that the land has a price, that it can be sold 
because there is such a thing as ground rent and not the other 
way round, i.e. that there is such a thing as ground rent because a 
price is paid for the land. 
[...] in general that the price of the land is [nothing] but 
capitalised ground rent. What is meant by capitalised ground rent} It 
means that I regard ground rent as the interest on the capital 
invested in the purchase of the land. The rent on a morgen of 
land may be 20 thalers; but for the man who buys the land the 20 
thalers can never be more than the 5 or 3 or 2 l/2%, i.e. the going 
German measure of land varying from 0.6 to 0.9 acres.— Ed. 

=====第357页=====
V 
v-^ y* »* 5»^1i^  -*• S°^ v 
*\t+— *«> 5-^H^^-Vi— w8-j*-%v-
Beginning of Marx's notes for a lecture on ground rent 

=====第358页=====

=====第359页=====
Ground Rent 333 
rate of interest on capital. If interest rates are 5%, I can recover 
my capital in 20 years. Thus, in order to capitalise the ground 
rent, i.e. to exchange it for capital, it must be multiplied by the 
number of years it takes, at the prevailing rate of interest, to 
replace the capital, to restore it to the lender. 
c) The sale of land presupposes ground rent and hence does not 
explain it. 
3) Thirdly. 
Ground rent is the annual sum paid to the landowner by the 
farmer or the manufacturer of the products of the earth. If a 
manufacturer, an industrial capitalist, is to invest his money in 
farming, it must bring him on average the same profits as any 
other industry. Otherwise no capitalist would cultivate the land. If 
the farmer, i.e. the manufacturer of farm produce, lays out a sum 
of 100 thalers annually to cultivate the land, to buy seed and 
manure, to make good the damage caused by the wear and tear to 
the instruments of labour or to replace them, to pay wages, etc., 
he will need to obtain 110 thalers from the sale of his produce, as 
interest and profit. Whatever the sale of his produce yields over 
and above 110 thalers goes to the landowner and constitutes the 
ground rent. Thus, if he obtains 120 thalers, the ground rent is 
equal to 10 thalers. Thus, ground rent is equal to the surplus of 
the market price of the produce of the land over its price of production. 
The price of production here includes the farmer's interest and 
profit. 
Where does this surplus of the market price of the produce of 
the land over its price of production come from? What is it that 
enables the manufacturer of farm produce, apart from receiving 
interest and profit, paying wages and meeting the other costs of 
production, also to pay ground rent to the man who leases the land 
to him? How does it come about that the selling price of farm 
produce is sufficiently high to yield a rent in addition to the 
wages, interest and profit—something which is not the case in 
other branches of industry? 
In the first place, it cannot be argued that this arises from the 
special productivity of agriculture or of the soil  itself.  Nor can it be 
said to stem from the fact that the land is limited in extent. To 
assert that agriculture is more productive than any other industry 
might mean nothing beyond the fact that in no other industry is it 
possible to extract more produce at the same cost. But, since the 
price of a product is governed basically by the cost of its 
production, this would imply that the price of farm produce 
should be lower than that of all the other products—a fact which 

=====第360页=====
334 Karl  Marx 
cannot possibly help to explain the surplus of its market price over the 
price of production. 
We come now to the question of the limited area of land.3 
Written in late 1861 
First published in: Marx-Engels Gesamtaus 
gäbe, Abt. II, Bd. 2, Berlin, 1980 
a The manuscript breaks off here.— Ed. Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第361页=====
335 
Karl Marx 
[BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES ON WILHELM WOLFF] 
1809, June 21. Born in Tarnau, Schweidnitz 3 District. 
1813.  Russians. 
1834-38. 4V2 years in Silberberg?™ "Casemate Wolf[f]" wishes to 
see his dying father, even if accompanied by a gendarme. Refused. 
1843-February 1846, in Breslau? 
1846. Wolff flees because of press prosecution. Article on 
uprising of Silesian weavers.c 
1846-48. Brussels. "Bureau de Correspondance". 331 Jailed in 
Brussels. (Arrested between February 26 and 28.) 
1848, April to June, in Breslau. 
1848, September, Cologne. Lupus presents himself [for  trial]. 332 
Warrant of arrest withdrawn. 
October 22, 1848. Warrant of arrest issued by Hecker. With­
drawn March 8, 1849. 
June 1848 to May 10, 1849, in Cologne. Thence to Frankfurt. 
May 26, 1849. Scene in German Parliament (Frankfurt).333 
1849, with Lupus already in Switzerland, warrant of arrest 
issued in connection with Rump in Stuttgart.334 
July 5, 1849, to Basle. Thence to Berne, interned. l3/4 of year 
teacher in Zurich. March 31, 1851, written order of expulsion 
from Zurich. (September 10, 1850 in Zurich. Lupus protests against 
being assigned to Lucerne Canton in consequence of Federal 
Council decision on refugees.) 
a Swidnica.— Ed. 
b Wroclaw.— Ed. 
c Wolff,  W., "Das Elend und der Aufruhr in Schlesien". In: Deutsches 
Bürgerbuch für 1845, Darmstadt, 1845.— Ed. 

=====第362页=====
336 Karl Marx 
June 4, 1851-1853. Arrival 3 in London. Stays about 2 years 
there. 
January 12, 1861. Prussian Amnesty Decree.335 January 4, 1862, 
application to the Prussian government. No answer for 5 months. 
Another application on June 4, 1862. August 1, 1862 Schweidnitz 
Municipal Council requires him to name his last place of residence 
in Prussia. 
September 5, 1862. Prussian government answers that amnesty 
implies resumption of investigation.15 
Written in late May and early June 1864 Printed according to the manu­
script First published in the journal Novaya i 
noveishaya istoriya, 1959, No. 4 Published in English for the first 
time 
3 Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  243.—  Ed. 

=====第363页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第364页=====

=====第365页=====
339 
[APPLICATION BY MARX FOR RESTORATION 
OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP] 336 
To the Royal Police President 
His Excellency Baron von Zedlitz-Neukirch 
Your Excellency, 
I hereby respectfully inform you that, on the strength of the 
Royal amnesty, I have returned to Prussia from London, where I 
have lived as a political refugee since 1849, with the intention of 
taking up residence here in Berlin to begin with. 
In this connection I respectfully request Your Excellency: 
1. on the basis of the Royal order of the amnesty337  and the law 
of December 31, 1842 (Ges. S. 15-18) a to issue a confirmation of 
my reintegration into the status of a Prussian subject, for which Your 
Excellency is the competent authority under § 5 of the aforesaid 
law, and 
2. to be good enough to forward to me the certificate 
mentioned in § 8 of the law of December 31, 1842, on the 
reception of newly-arrived persons (Ges. S. 5), to the effect that 
I have reported my entry into this community to the Royal police 
authorities; and I declare with respect to the latter that, upon 
request, I can show that I have fully independent means of 
subsistence through contracts as co-editor of the New-York Tribune, 
published in New York, as well as otherwise. 
To begin with, I have taken up residence with a friend of mine, 
a "Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer 
Unterthan ... Vom 31. Dezember 1842", Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen 
Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1843, No. 2.— Ed. 

=====第366页=====
340 Appendices 
Herr F. Lassalle, 13 Bellevuestr., and request that the two 
documents asked for be sent to me there. 
With best respects 
Your Excellency's devoted 
Dr Karl Marx 
Berlin, March 19, 1861 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, 
Moscow, 1959 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第367页=====
341 
[MARX'S STATEMENT ON THE RESTORATION 
OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]338 
To the Royal Police President 
His Excellency Baron von Zedlitz 
Your Excellency, 
I have the honour in reply to your letter of the 21st inst. to state 
that I am surprised that my letter of March 19 did not seem quite 
clear. In the words of my application, my request was: 
"on the basis of the Royal order of the amnesty and the law 
of December 31, 1842, to issue a confirmation of my reintegration 
into the status of a Prussian subject".3 
It is this application that appears not quite clear to Your 
Excellency and seems to contain a contradiction insofar as I 
referred therein to Your Excellency's being the competent 
authority to issue that confirmation, pursuant to § 5 of the law of 
December 31, 1842. 
Under the Royal order of amnesty "unimpeded return to the 
Prussian states" has been granted to all political refugees not 
condemned by military courts.0 
Since I am one of those refugees and am a native Prussian, with 
reference to which I attach for Your Excellency as official proof 
my birth certificate in the form of an extract from the Register of 
Civil Status of the City of Trier (May 7, 1818), moreover as I left 
the fatherland in 1849, up to which time I had lived in Cologne as 
editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, 339 and had not been 
prosecuted in actions in military courts, but only in several political 
press suits, which I drew upon myself in my aforesaid capacity as 
editor, it is clear therefore that I am included in the above-
mentioned amnesty. 
a See this volume, p. 339.— Ed. 
h "Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer 
Unterthan... Vom 31. Dezember 1842", Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen 
Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1843, No. 2.— Ed. 
24—1134 

=====第368页=====
342 Appendices 
At the same time, the foregoing provides Your Excellency with 
an answer to the particular questions that you addressed to me in 
your rescript. 
But it seems possible that another question may be raised. The 
Royal amnesty not only declares that pardon has been extended to 
those already convicted under the law and those not yet convicted, 
but at the same time grants refugees "unimpeded return to the 
Prussian states". 
Does this signify, apart from remission of the criminal penalty, 
that the status of a Prussian citizen, which they had lost by 
residing abroad for more than ten years, is likewise restored to the 
refugees? 
According to my interpretation and that of all jurists, according 
to the unanimous conception of public opinion and the entire 
press,  it does. And there are two arguments that prove this 
incontrovertibly. 
First, that the amnesty order guarantees not only remission of 
the penalty but also expressly "unimpeded return to the Prussian 
states". 
Secondly, because the entire amnesty would otherwise be a 
completely illusory one, only on paper. For, since all the refugees 
have lived abroad since 1848 and 1849, i.e., twelve years, this 
would mean that all of them have lost their status as Prussians, 
and if that status were not reinvigorated by the amnesty, the 
"unimpeded return" alleged to be granted would actually be 
granted to no one. 
Accordingly, there can be no doubt that, in spite of the loss of 
Prussian nationality due to an absence of ten years, this right is to 
be revived by the Royal amnesty. 
However, although this is my interpretation and that of the 
jurists, in practice only the interpretation of the authorities is 
decisive and provides an adequate basis for practical actions. 
How then will the Royal authorities please to interpret the Royal 
amnesty? 
Will they interpret it in the sense that the amnesty is an 
amnesty, and unimpeded return is unimpeded return? Or will 
they interpret it in the sense that the granting of unimpeded 
return impedes return and that the refugees are to remain 
deprived of the fatherland despite the decree? Upon unprejudiced 
consideration of the circumstances, Your Excellency cannot fail to 
see that this scepticism can hardly be regarded as totally 
unfounded. 
So much has been decreed in the last twelve years and so much 

=====第369页=====
Appendices 343 
astonishing interpretation has been referred to these decrees that 
by now no interpretation can any longer be regarded as positively 
sure nor can any interpretation be regarded as absolutely 
impossible. 
Accordingly, the only positively sure basis remaining on which 
practical steps can be taken seems to be the interpretation given by 
the authorities themselves to the particular individual. 
Will Your Excellency grant that, despite my loss of the status of 
a Prussian by virtue of the law, I have regained it through the 
Royal amnesty? 
That is the very simple and clear question that I wanted to, and 
had to, address to Your Excellency. 
I am all the more forced to do so, since I cannot bring my wife 
and children from London until this question is decided, for 
obviously I cannot be expected to undertake a problematical 
change of residence with my entire household and ;family and only 
thereafter engage in a contest which,, on the contrary, I should 
previously bring to a termination, if it is to be engaged in at all, 
before I take the costly step of moving and bring my wife and 
children back to the fatherland. 
My question is all the more justified as a very natural and 
simple one in view of the fact that Your Excellency yourself has 
raised the question in your letter of the 21st inst.: on what basis do 
I claim "not to have lost the status of a Prussian despite absence 
for ten years". 
Your Excellency will have seen from the foregoing the basis on 
which I rest my claim. 
The justification for my addressing my question to Your 
Excellency is found in § 5 of the law of December 31, 1842, which 
I have adduced. For, since, according to that, Your Excellency is 
the competent authority to grant naturalisation, so you are a 
fortiori3 the competent authority to explain interpretandoh whether 
by virtue of the amnesty I have regained the lost status of a 
Prussian. It is only in this sense that I have referred to § 5 of the 
law in question. 
Furthermore it is particularly appropriate for me to turn to 
Your Excellency with this question because it is in Berlin that I 
wish to take up domicile, my ability to do so depending on that 
confirmation as a legal condition, and hence Your Excellency, as 
chief of the police of this city, is the person on whose view in the 
a All the more certainly.— Ed. 
b By interpreting the law.— Ed. 
24* 

=====第370页=====
344 Appendices 
question posed the decision on the matter of residence will 
depend. 
It can surely not be in Your Excellency's interest, nor can it be 
expected of me, that I should wait three or four months or longer 
in complete uncertainty and with no possibility of taking practical 
steps to achieve my end until I receive notice, along with a 
definitive decision as to domicile, of what interpretation you give 
the Royal amnesty and whether thereby you will confirm my 
reinstatement as a Prussian or not. 
Such uncertainty, lasting for months, would be extremely damag­
ing to me in all my plans, arrangements and economic relationships. 
It is, of course, also my right to know whether the competent 
authority will or will not confirm that status for me, and that 
authority will not regard a refusal or postponement of a reply 
thereto as either legitimate or worthy of  itself. 
Accordingly, I freely, openly and loyally put this question to 
Your Excellency: 
whether or not you confirm that the Royal amnesty restores me 
to the status of a Prussian? 
and I look forward to an equally free, open and loyal reply. 
I am all the more eager to have this answer as soon as possible 
since only then will it be possible for me, in the most improbable 
case of an unfavourable decision, to appeal to the Chambers while 
they are still in session, during which, in any case, a proposal for 
an amnesty law evoked by doubts as to the interpretation of the 
amnesty order will be discussed, and since, on the other hand, I 
can stay here only for a short time now, as family affairs call me 
back to London. 
I therefore request Your Excellency kindly to let me have the 
requested open and definite answer by return of post, for only 
then will I be able to submit, in due form, my application for 
settlement in this city. 
I have the honour to remain, 
Your Excellency's obedient servant, 
Dr Karl Marx 
Berlin, March 25, 1861 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15,' script 
Moscow, 1959 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第371页=====
345 
[MARX'S STATEMENT ON THE REJECTION 
OF HIS APPLICATION FOR RESTORATION 
OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]340 
Berlin, April 6, 1861 
To His Excellency the Royal Police President 
Baron von Zedlitz, Knight p.p. 
Your Excellency, 
I have the honour to reply to your letter dated March 30 and 
received yesterday that the facts, referred to by Your Excellency, 
relating to my discharge from my Prussian citizenship in 1845 
cannot be fully known to Your Excellency, since otherwise Your 
Excellency's decision of March 30 would certainly not have been 
taken. 
The following facts and legal grounds will convince Your 
Excellency that the status of a Prussian cannot be denied me at the 
present time. 
1. In 1844, during my residence in Paris, an order for my arrest 
was issued by the Royal Governor of the Rhine Province, on the 
grounds of the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher edited by me, and 
was sent to the border police authorities to be carried out as soon 
as I set foot on Prussian soil. 
This placed me in the position of a political refugee from that 
time on. 
But the Royal Prussian government was not content with that. 
In January 1845 it obtained my expulsion from France from the 
Guizot ministry.3 
I went to Belgium. But the persecution of the Royal Prussian 
government followed me there too. Still on the pretext that I was 
a Prussian, which entitled the Prussian government to take steps 
concerning me via their embassies abroad, here too my expulsion 
was demanded by the Prussian government. 
a Marx left Paris for Brussels on February 3, 1845.— Ed. 

=====第372页=====
346 Appendices 
Prevented from returning to my fatherland by the order of 
arrest, the only thing left me of my nationality as a Prussian was 
the capacity for being persecuted; the only thing left me was to be 
persecuted and expelled everywhere abroad at the instance of the 
Prussian government. 
This made it necessary for me to deprive the Prussian 
government of that period of the possibility to persecute me 
further, and for this reason I asked in 1845 for that discharge 
from Prussian citizenship. 
Even at that time, it was not in the least my intention to give up 
my Prussian nationality. This can be formally  proved.  Anyone who 
gives up his nationality can only do that with the intention of 
getting himself admitted to another nationality. I have never done 
this. I have not had myself naturalised anywhere, and, when the 
provisional government of France offered me naturalisation in 
1848,  I refused it.341 
That application in 1845 for discharge from Prussian citizenship 
was therefore not, as Your Excellency writes in error, a surrender, 
"by my own free will", of my status as a Prussian, but merely a 
device, forced on me by extreme persecution, to free myself from 
the continuing device of this persecution. It was a pretext employed 
against another pretext, not at all a serious intention to give up my 
status as a Prussian. 
Your Excellency will see from the foregoing that it is impossible 
for you to rely on that proceeding in 1845. 
To try to rely on it would mean supporting the era of the worst 
absolutist persecutions of German writers, perpetuating them in 
their effects, and trying to take advantage of them. It would mean 
trying, on the basis of the political oppression of that period and 
the means thereby forced on me of saving myself from un­
bounded persecution, to deprive me of my Prussian nationality, 
which I never seriously intended to give up. 
Finally, with reference to the expulsion in 1849 mentioned by 
Your Excellency, I will remark by way of supererogation that I 
returned to Prussia immediately after March 1848a and took up 
my domicile in Cologne and was admitted as a citizen by the 
municipality of Cologne without further ado. To be sure, the 
Manteuffel ministry ordered my expulsion in 1849 as an alleged 
foreigner. But this action is one of the most illegal deeds of 
violence of that ministry and hence cannot in any way be adduced 
a Marx and Engels left Paris and returned to Germany about April 6, 
1848.—  Ed. 

=====第373页=====
Appendices  347 
as a decisive precedent,  and  even  at that time  I would  not  have 
yielded  to it had not a  number  of political press prosecutions 
forced  me to go  abroad,  as a  refugee, quite apart from that 
expulsion. 
After  the  foregoing explanations,  I regard Your Excellency  as 
just as unable  to wish  to rely  on those facts  as it is  objectively 
impossible  to deduce from them anything against  me. 
However, this  is also 
2. quite impossible because  of the  Royal decree  on the  amnesty. 
By it "unimpeded return  to the  Prussian states"  is assured  all 
political refugees. That  is, unimpeded return even  if they  had in 
the meantime legally lost their status  as Prussians. Unimpeded 
return, whatever  the way in  which they might have lost that status, 
whether  by the law itself3 as the  result  of absence  for ten  years  or 
by reason  of an  added verbal declaration  of withdrawal from 
Prussian citizenship.  The  amnesty does  not  distinguish between 
these  two  modes  of loss  of the  status  of a  Prussian. Neither does  it 
distinguish between  the  refugees  of 1848-49  and  those  of an 
earlier period;  it does  not  distinguish between those  who  lost  the 
rights  of native-born Prussians  as a  result  of the  conflicts  in 1848 
and those  who  lost them  as a  result  of the  political conflicts  of 
earlier years. 
"Unimpeded return"  is assured  all  political refugees, from 
whatever time their political conflicts  and the  resulting loss  of their 
rights  as native-born [Prussians]  may  date;  all these  are  thereby 
restored  to their previous rights  as native-born. 
Since  the  Royal amnesty does  not  distinguish whether those 
rights were lost  by virtue  of the law  itself because  of absence  for 
ten years  or because  of an  added declaration,  it is  absolutely 
impermissible  to try, by  interpretation,  to introduce  a limitation 
and a distinction into  the  Royal amnesty which  it never makes 
itself. 
Your Excellency will  be aware  of this firmly-established princi­
ple, that  an  amnesty  may  never  be interpreted restrictively. This 
principle  has  been consecrated  by the  jurisprudence  of all  times 
and all countries with unanimity like  no other principle.  If this  has 
been  the  inviolable principle  of every tribunal that  has had 
to apply  and  interpret amnesty decrees,  it must equally  be the 
principle  of administrative authorities when  it behoves them  to 
make this interpretation.  Any  restrictive interpretation would 
a This refers  to the  "Gesetz über  die  Erwerbung  und den  Verlust  der 
Eigenschaft  als  Preussischer Unterthan...  vom 31. Dezember 1842".—  Ed. 

=====第374页=====
348 Appendices 
signify: abbreviating the amnesty after the event and repealing it in 
part. 
This will certainly not be Your Excellency's intention. If I 
refrain from adducing the juridical materials on this matter that 
are at my disposal, the reason is that it will suffice to call Your 
Excellency's attention to the fact that any other interpretation of 
the Royal amnesty than mine would contain a restriction  thereof. 
Your Excellency will see from the foregoing that in fact 
everything comes down to whether, as I stated in my latest 
memorandum,3 the refugees are reintegrated into the status of 
native-born Prussians by the Royal amnesty, although all of them 
had lost the same under the law in view of their staying abroad for 
ten years without permission. If this is conceded, and Your 
Excellency yourself accepts this in your rescript dated March 30, it 
is a matter of total indifference if there has been, in addition to 
this legal loss of native-born status, which is set aside by the 
amnesty, a declaration by the individual in question in the past, 
and posing such a distinction would constitute an impermissible 
restriction of the amnesty. 
But this is the case not only because of the wording of the 
amnesty and of the favourable spirit in which amnesties must 
always be interpreted, but likewise 
3. in conformity with the legal nature of the situation under 
consideration. For in fact, what difference should it make to the 
Royal amnesty whether the rights as native-born, which the 
amnesty restores, as Your Excellency yourself does not dispute, 
were lost under the law itself or by reason of an added declaration 
on the part of the individual? As little as an individual declaration 
by a refugee of unwillingness to lose his status as a native-born 
Prussian, despite the law, would change his losing it under the law, 
just so little could that declaration either set this losing aside or 
reinforce it. The declaration by an individual that something 
should take place which would have taken place in any event by 
virtue of the law—discharge from Prussian citizenship—remains a 
déclaration surérogatoire, h a totally indifferent, superfluous declara­
tion, whose absence is no hindrance and whose presence is 
ineffectual. 
Your Excellency seems to wish to see a distinction in that the 
status of a Prussian was allegedly given up by me "of my own free 
will", whereas for the other refugees it was brought about 
a See this volume, pp. 341-44.— Ed. 
b Supererogatory declaration.— Ed. 

=====第375页=====
Appendices 349 
involuntarily by a ten-year absence. But this too is incorrect. 
Formally, the refugee's remaining out of the country for ten years 
likewise constitutes a voluntary abandonment of the status of a 
Prussian, for as a matter of fact none of the refugees was 
prevented from returning before this time had elapsed and 
presenting himself before the Prussian courts. Inasmuch as he did 
not do this, he voluntarily preferred to lose the status of a 
Prussian. The last day of the ten-year stay abroad without 
permission is thus completely the equivalent of a written declara­
tion to the Prussian government of a desire to relinquish Prussian 
citizenship. Since this absence is just as free an act of the will as a 
document addressed to the government, the same declaration was 
submitted by voluntas tacitaa on the last day of this ten-year 
absence by all the refugees as the one that you have in your files 
submitted by me in 1845. 
So far as form is concerned, there is just as voluntary a 
surrender of the rights of the native-born on the part of all the 
refugees as there is on mine. 
It is true that in point of fact those refugees were prevented 
from returning unless they wanted to expose themselves to the 
harm of arrest and a criminal procedure, and hence they were, in 
point of fact, under compulsion. But the same real compulsion 
was present in my case as well, as Your Excellency will have seen 
from Point 1. I too was, in point of fact, prevented in the same 
way from returning by the warrants of arrest that had been issued 
and I gave up the status of a Prussian only under exactly the same 
compulsion as.that under which the other refugees surrendered it 
on the last day of their ten-year absence. Indeed, I was also 
compelled to this ostensible surrender by the persecution extend­
ing into foreign countries. 
Thus,  whether Your Excellency takes the formal or the real side 
of the question into consideration, that affects me in precisely the 
same way as it does all other refugees, and if, as Your Excellency 
does not deny, the native-born status lost by ten-year absence has 
been restored to the refugees by the amnesty, it is equally restored 
to me despite the enforced disavowal, which is completely 
equivalent to this loss under the law. 
As has been shown, my having declared in writing that I desired 
to lose the status of a Prussian, which I had lost anyway by virtue 
of the law, this declaration, which is totally without effect after the 
a Tacit consent.— Ed. 

=====第376页=====
350 Appendices 
loss incurred lege ipsa," is not the essential point. It could at best 
only be seen as constituting a difference, although not a valid one, 
if I had assumed a new nationality elsewhere. This and only this 
would have been a voluntary action. The mere surrender of 
Prussian citizenship was enforced and would have taken place 
anyway lege ipsa. But I have never and nowhere had myself 
naturalised. Very many refugees did in fact do this. If even for 
these cases the Royal amnesty must be regarded as unconditionally 
sufficient grounds for granting them renaturalisation, in the event 
that they desire it, then in the case of  myself,  who have never 
taken out naturalisation in any other state, .the restoration of the 
# status of a native-born [Prussian] must of necessity be recognised as 
effected by the amnesty  itself. 
4. In the foregoing I have explained to Your Excellency that I 
have undoubtedly1' regained my status as a native-born Prussian, 
even if I had lost it in 1845, by virtue of the Royal amnesty. But 
an equally decisive ground for my claim is the circumstance that I 
have already won back my rights as a Prussian citizen by the decision of 
the Federal Diet dated March 30, 1848.c 
That decision declared that all the political refugees had the right 
to vote and to be elected to the German National Assembly who 
were to return to Germany and declare that they desired to 
regain the rights as citizens of the state. By this decision, which is 
binding on Prussia and towards which the Prussian government 
contributed, all political refugees were thus restored to their rights 
as citizens of the state in the state to which they had previously 
belonged or in the one in which they now wished to take it 
out. 
As a consequence of this decision I went from Paris to Cologne 
at once, there reassumed my rights as a citizen of the Prussian 
state,  obtained permission without difficulty from the Cologne City 
Council to take up domicile there and hence was undoubtedly in 
lawful possession from then on of the status of a native-born Prussian, 
which cannot in any way be altered by the unlawful coup, in 
violation of the Federal Diet's decision, of the expulsion attempted 
by the Manteuffel ministry. 
This fact of law is so decisive that it would be superfluous to 
add even a single word to it. 
a By the law  itself.—  Ed. 
b The word "undoubtedly" (jedenfalls) has been underlined in the manuscript, 
obviously by von Zedlitz. The margin has a note "not at all" (keineswegs). —Ed. 
c Cf. Protokolle der Deutschen Bundesversammlung vom Jahre 1848, Frankfurt am 
Main, 1848.— Ed. 

=====第377页=====
Appendices 351 
Your Excellency will be as convinced of this as I am and will 
equally regard it as not in the interest of the Prussian government 
to force me to appeal to the Federal Diet against a violation of its 
decisions by the Prussian government. It would be too contradic­
tory a position if Prussia, which continues to recognise the 
reactivated Federal Diet, should wish to change over to refusing to 
recognise the few scattered decisions of the unoriginal Federal Diet 
that were issued in the interest of the people and in a liberal 
direction. 
Such a procedure would be, juridically and politically, too 
exorbitant a monstrosity to be taken into consideration even 
tentatively. 
As Your Excellency will see, it is not even necessary for me to 
refer to the decision, independent of the Federal Diet decision, of 
the Preparliament,342  likewise recognised de facto by the Prussian 
government, according to which even those German refugees who 
had been naturalised in other countries in the interim were also 
entitled to reassume their previous rights as citizens. 
Pursuant to the decision of the Federal Diet dated March 30, 
1848,  to my removal to Cologne as a consequence  thereof,  and my. 
declaration to the Prussian ministry dated August 22, 1848,343 
which is in Your Excellency's files, I have therefore been once 
more in possession of the rights of a native-born Prussian since 
1848,  even if I did lose them in 1845. 
Accordingly, I am still in possession thereof today since, as Your 
Excellency yourself does not deny, the loss thereof which ensued 
by reason of the subsequent ten-year absence has been cancelled 
again by the present amnesty. 
Although the foregoing demonstration that I already am in 
possession of the rights of a native-born Prussian and require only 
recognition of that status is so clear and irrefutable I have, in 
returning to my fatherland, only a practical purpose in mind and 
not that of a fruitless juridical-theoretical conflict. 
If Your Excellency should, as it seems, conceive the relevant 
situation in such a way that I must first obtain a new 
naturalisation, that can and should be a matter of indifference 
to me provided that Your Excellency, since you are the 
competent authority to do this pursuant to § 5 of the law of 
December 31, 1842, declares your willingness to grant the 
naturalisation. Only then and only insofar can I yield up my 
already existing full right, if and insofar as Your Excellency 
prefers to issue a new naturalisation without difficulties. Up to 
that point I must maintain my rights and therefore request you, in 

=====第378页=====
352 Appendices 
this sense and reserving all rights, to treat this letter, in that case, 
also as a possible request to obtain a new naturalisation.3 
Your Excellency's obedient servant, 
Dr Karl Marx 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, script 
Moscow, 1959 Published in English for the first 
time 
a The rest is written in Marx's hand.— Ed. 

=====第379页=====
353 
[ANSWER TO MARX'S APPLICATION FOR RESTORATION 
OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]3 
In reply to your request dated April 6 of this year,h I inform 
you that the conviction that you are to be regarded as a foreigner 
is not in any way refuted even by the considerations stated therein. 
§ 20 of the law of December 31, 1842, on the acquisition and 
loss of the status of a Prussian subject rules that that status is lost 
at the issuance of the document waiving it.c Accordingly, neither 
the motive for your seeking that waiver nor whether you have 
obtained citizenship elsewhere is relevant. Further, you have not 
regained the status of a Prussian either in virtue of the Federal 
Diet's decision of March 30, 1848,d or by His Majesty's act of grace 
of January 12 erf What is determinant for the elections to the 
German National Assembly is not that decision but the order of 
April 11, 1848, which is not in your favour in any way. His 
Majesty's decree of January 12 cr. is an act of grace and hence 
relates only to remission or reduction of punishment (Art. 49 of 
the Constitution'). But the loss of the status of a Prussian is never 
incurred by a conviction and is therefore not cancelled by acts of 
grace. 
a Text on the envelope of the letter: "815. To Dr Carl Marx, Esq., Here, 13 
Bellevuestr. Today, immediately!".— Ed. 
h See this volume, pp. 345-52.— Ed. 
' "Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer 
Unterthan... Vom 31. Dezember 1842".— Ed. 
'' In Protokolle der Deutschen Bundesversammlung vom Jahre 1848, Frankfurt am 
Main, 1848.— Ed. 
e Currentis—oî this year.— Ed. 
f "Verfassungsurkunde für den Preussischen Staat. Vom 31. Januar 1850", in 
Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger, No. 32, February 2, 1850.— Ed. 

=====第380页=====
354 Appendices 
Consequently, the Police Presidium can only regard you as a 
foreigner. If you intend to apply for Prussian citizenship, it will be 
necessary for you, in order to meet the requirements prescribed in 
§ 7 of the law of December 31, 1842, to make your application in 
the customary manner at the suitable police precinct, and no 
assurance can be given you in advance as to the prospects of 
success. 
Royal Police Presidium 
von Zedlitz 
Berlin, April 10, 1861 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, 
Moscow, 1959 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第381页=====
355 
[MARX'S APPLICATION FOR NATURALISATION 
AND RIGHT OF DOMICILE IN BERLIN]344 
Official Opinion of the 33rd Police Precinct 
Done at Berlin, April 10, 1861 
Dr Karl Marx arrived here on March 1, 1861. After he had declared that he wished 
to settle here and obtain the status of a Prussian citizen by naturalisation, he gave the 
following information as to his personal situation: 
I was born on May 5, 1818, at Trier in the Prussian Rhine 
Province, profess the Evangelical religion and am legally competent 
according to the laws of my previous homeland. I have resided in 
England for the last twelve years, supported myself there by 
literary work and have not been aided by public relief funds. I have 
several times been under investigation because of political press 
prosecutions and refer to the existing files for my conduct. I have 
not applied to any other Prussian authority for naturalisation or 
domiciliation and have never been rejected in this respect. In this 
connection, I have been notified that failure to report an 
investigation made of me or my dependents as well as incorrect 
data concerning my situation in general, or failure to report an 
application for naturalisation made to another Prussian authority 
will entail the cancellation and the withdrawal of the certificate of 
naturalisation, that the decision as to my application for domicilia­
tion regardless of the declaration of the municipal authorities and 
acceptance of the filing fees, is made exclusively by the Royal Police 
Presidium, and I am therefore to refrain before obtaining the 
naturalisation and domiciliation certificates from any steps what­
soever to establish  myself. 
a The document is obviously incorrect here: Marx came to Berlin on March 17, 
1861.—  Ed. 

=====第382页=====
356 Appendices 
I have not yet rented any dwelling place of my own here—I have 
found lodging with Dr Lassalle, Bellevuestr. No. 13—and will 
support myself and my family by my literary work. 
My income comes to about 2,000 reichsthaler; neither I nor my 
wife have any property. 
With respect to my military status, I am already exempt from all 
service in the army because of my age. 
I have no decorations. 
I request: 
that the certificate of naturalisation be issued me and that I be 
permitted to take up residence here. 
Read aloud, accepted, signed. 
Dr Karl Marx 3 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, script 
Moscow, 1959 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a Marx's authentic signature is followed by the illegible signature of an 
official.— Ed. 

=====第383页=====
357 
[LETTER FROM MARX 
TO POLICE PRESIDENT VON ZEDLITZJ 
To His Excellency Herr von Zedlitz 
Royal Police President 
Your Excellency, 
I received your esteemed letter of April 10a last evening. 
Although in Your Excellency's last letterb you were of the 
opinion that because of the application in 1845 it would be of no 
effect in my case even if the amnesty should have cancelled the 
loss of the status of a Prussian due to absence for ten years, Your 
Excellency now, in view of my latest arguments, takes rather the 
opposite opinion that the amnesty, because as such it allegedly can 
only contain a pardon of penalties, cannot cancel the loss of the 
status of a Prussian, no matter for what reason that loss has ever been 
incurred. 
In order not to prejudice my rights, I am forced to remark that 
this letter, according to the legal opinion of the undersigned, 
would present 1) a partial annulment of the Royal amnesty, 2) a 
non-recognition of the Federal Diet and its decisions and hence a 
violation of the German constitutional principles, as laid down in 
the Federal Act,345 3) finally, an equally emphatic negation of all 
public law in Prussia. 
Mindful, however, of the practical purpose by which I am 
guided, J will not weary Your Excellency by a demonstration of 
these three legally unassailable theses, but agree, in the sense in 
which I expressed it to Your Excellency at the end of my last 
a See this volume, pp. 353-54.— Ed. 
b Of March 30,  1861.—  Ed. 
25—1134 

=====第384页=====
358 Appendices 
memorandum,3 to receive what is my right and what I must hold 
fast as such, even in the form of a new naturalisation from Your 
Excellency. 
Being compelled to leave here in haste because of news from my 
family, I applied early yesterday in this sense in omnern eventumh 
for the new naturalisation at the police precinct of my district.0 
At the same time, I respectfully inform Your Excellency that 
because of my departure I empower Mr. F. Lassalle, of this city, to 
receive the naturalisation certificate for me, to make and take note 
on my behalf of all the necessary applications and steps in this 
matter, and in general to exercise my rights to the same extent as 
is in my power. 
Respectfully requesting Your Excellency to kindly address the 
final decision to Mr. F. Lassalle, of this city, I remain, 
Your Excellency's obedient servant 
Dr Karl Marx d 
Berlin, April 11, 1861 
First published in: Marx and Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 15, script 
Moscow, 1959 . 
Published in English lor the lirst 
time 
a See this volume, p.  351.—  Ed. 
h In any event.— Ed. 
' See this volume, pp. 355-56. At this point there is a note in the margin of the 
manuscript, in an unknown hand: "This request of Marx has been refused." — Ed. 
d The signature is in Marx's hand.— Ed. 

=====第385页=====
359 
[POWER OF ATTORNEY GIVEN BY MARX 
TO FERDINAND LASSALLE FOR THE RESTORATION 
OF HIS PRUSSIAN CITIZENSHIP]1 
I hereby empower Mr. Ferdinand Lassalle of Berlin, on my 
departure from that city, to vindicate my rights in the matter, now 
pending before the Royal Police Presidium, relating to the 
recognition of my status as a Prussian, restored to me under the 
Royal Amnesty of January 12 of this year or, alternatively, the 
possible granting of new naturalisation and permission to reside in 
Berlin. I further empower him to submit applications, to lodge 
petitions and appeals with the Royal Prussian Government as also 
with the German Federal Diet, 346 and to avail himself of every 
right to which I am entitled, in the same measure to which I 
myself am entitled thereto. 
Berlin, April 12, 1861 
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, 
Moscow, 1934 Dr Karl Marx 
Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
The whole manuscript is written in Marx's hand.— Ed. 

=====第386页=====
360 
Frederick Engels 
TO THE DIRECTORATE OF THE SCHILLER INSTITUTE 
[Draft] 
I have the honour to enclose as Appendix I a copy of a 
communication from the Librarian which was handed to me not 
long since.348  When I took the liberty of making a few observations 
to Mr Stössel regarding certain expressions used therein, his reply, 
as I had expected, was that the communication was merely a copy 
of the set form laid down by the Literary Section of the 
Directorate. 
If, therefore, I now feel compelled to bring the said observa­
tions to the attention of the Directorate, I should first of all 
emphasise that these do not in any way apply to the substance of 
the communication as such. Everyone will, no doubt, subscribe to 
this last, to a strict adherence to the time limit prescribed for the 
loan of books, to the levying of "fines" should that limit be 
exceeded, and to the observance of the Institute's rules and 
regulations generally. What I am concerned with here is merely 
the tone of this document. That tone is so very different from that 
customary in correspondence between educated persons that I 
must confess I am not used to receiving such letters, nor, from 
what Mr. Stössel tells me, am I the first to have been struck by 
ihis. to put it mildly, uncouth form of address. 
Indeed, when 1 had read this missive, it was as though I had 
been suddenly transported home. It was as though, instead of a 
communication from the Librarian of the Schiller Institute, I were 
holding a peremptory summons from a German inspector of 
police ordering me, on pain of a heavy penalty, to make amends 
for some kind of violation "within 24 hours". The otherwise very 
innocuous uniform of the beadle who served this writ on me could 
not on this occasion but help to complete the illusion. 

=====第387页=====
Appendices 361 
Immediately after this incident I took occasion to reread the 
manifesto dated November 12, 1859, and issued, so to speak, as 
the programme of the incipient Schiller Institute. Seen alongside 
the afore-mentioned communication from the Librarian, that 
programme now appears in a somewhat peculiar light. In it we 
read that the Schiller Institute was intended to be such 
"that a young German ... should at once feel more at home here... find himself 
better looked after and provided for, both morally and intellectually ... and, above all, 
should return to the fatherland in no way estranged from it". 
No doubt, the bureaucratic style of such official communications 
is the very thing to make the recipient instandy feel that he is on 
his home ground, and to instil in him the belief that he is just as 
well if not "better looked after and provided for" than he would be 
at home, in the dear, old patriarchal police state, that great 
institution looking after and making provision for little children; 
nor, so long as such official communications continue to flourish, 
can there possibly be the remotest danger of any member of the 
Schiller Institute's becoming estranged from  the fatherland. Indeed if, 
once in a way, there should happen to be some member of the 
Schiller Institute who had not had occasion to become acquainted 
at home with the forms of bureaucracy and the imperious 
language of officialdom, the Schiller Institute would seem to offer 
him an excellent opportunity to do so; again, this presumably is 
the construction to be put upon the programme's undertaking that 
the Schiller Institute will help ensure 
"that even he of advanced years, who decides to return home and settle down 
there again, should, along with the German language and culture, also preserve and 
even develop to a higher degree, his capacity for public service as a German man and 
citizen". 
Indeed, it would hardly have occurred to many members that 
"the German spirit in the fullest sense of the term", for the 
nurturing of which the Schiller Institute was to be a rallying-point, 
should inter alia also comprise that spirit of bureaucracy in whose 
hands,  alas, almost all political power at home is still vested but 
against which the whole of Germany is fighting and over whkh, at 
this very moment, it is scoring victory after victory. This hectoring 
tone,  these categorical demands that an order be obeyed within 24 
hours are, at all events, out of place here, and if they entail, not a 
fortnight's imprisonment on a diet of bread and water, but the 
fearsome threat of a half-crown fine, then the effect is comical 
into the bargain. 
Among its members the Schiller Institute numbers not only 

=====第388页=====
362 Appendices 
Germans, but also Englishmen, Dutchmen and Danes, for whom 
this tone will certainly not have the ring of "home". I permit 
myself to ask what such members are likely to think of the 
"German spirit" upon receiving missives of this kind? 
It so happens that I myself do at present belong to the Literary 
Section of another society349 here which does not boast a librarian 
and, in similar cases, it often falls to me to send out circulars to 
members. I enclose herewith the customary form (Appendix  II),350 
not because of any pretence it might have to serve as a model, but 
rather because it may, perhaps, show that the same object can be 
attained without infringing on that deference which one educated 
person owes another. 
I repeat that while fortiter in rea is certainly most commendable, 
members would also seem to me to be entitled to some suaviter in 
modo.h  By all means, let the iron hand of the Literary Section 
descend on the head of every member, but let it also wear a velvet 
glove. And that is why I would request the Directorate to be so 
kind as to ensure that the Literary Section's official correspond­
ence with members should be rriodelled, not so much on orders 
issued by German administrative offices to those they administer, 
as on what is proper in correspondence between educated persons. 
Written about May 3, 1861 Printed according to the manu-
First published in: Marx and Engels, 
Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Published in English for the first 
Moscow, 1934 time 
a Firmness in doing what is to be done.— Ed. 
b Inoffensiveness in manner.— Ed. 

=====第389页=====
363 
[POWER OF ATTORNEY ISSUED BY MARX TO ENGELS 
TO TAKE OVER WILHELM WOLFF'S ESTATE] a 
23 May, 1864 
1, Modena Villas, Maitland Park, 
Haverstock Hill, London, N.W. 
My dear Sir, 
I hereby request you and give you full power to act as my 
representative at, and take all the necessary steps for, the 
execution of the will of our common friend, Wilhelm  Wolff. 
KARL MARX, Dr. Ph. 
First published in: Marx-Engels Gesamtaus- Printed according to the manu-
gabe, Dritte Abteilung, Bd. 3, 1930 script 
a The whole manuscript is written in Marx's hand. The address on the envelope 
reads:  "Fr. Engels, Esq. 6, Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Street, Manchester."—Ed. 

=====第390页=====

=====第391页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第392页=====

=====第393页=====
367 
NOTES 
1 Marx and Engels began to contribute to the New-York Daily Tribune in 1851 
(see Vol. 11, Note 2). 1861 and 1862 were the last two years of their work for 
the Tribune. With the outbreak of the US Civil War interest in European affairs 
in America declined. The Tribune cancelled its contracts with all its European 
correspondents except Marx, who was asked to reduce the number of his 
contributions from two to one a week. Between February 1861 and March 1862 
the paper published ten items by Marx and one by Engels. One appeared as a 
leading article, nine were marked "From an Occasional Correspondent" and 
one was marked "From Our Own Correspondent". Marx's final break with the 
newspaper occurred in the spring of 1862 (see Vol. 12, Note 1 and Vol. 39, 
Note 4). 
The theme and basic content of this article were suggested to Engels by 
Marx, who in a letter dated January 22, 1861 (Vol. 41 of the present edition) 
asked Engels to write on the Schleswig-Holstein question for the  NYDT.  Engels 
wrote the article on January 23. On the following day Marx sent it to New York 
by the steamer Anglo-Saxon. p. 3 
2 This refers to the secession of the Southern slave states from the North 
American Union in late 1860 and early 1861. The armed rebellion of the 
secessionist States in April 1861 marked the beginning of the US Civil War 
(1861-65). 
In 1850 popular disturbances occurred in several southern provinces of 
China and developed into a large-scale peasant war. The rebels (called 
Taipings) established a state of their own embracing a considerable part of 
China's territory. Its leaders put forward a Utopian programme for the 
transformation of feudal China into a military-patriarchal state based on the 
egalitarian principle in production and consumption. The movement, which 
was also anti-colonial, was weakened by inner divisions and the rise of an 
aristocracy among the Taipings. The rebellion was suppressed in 1864, mainly 
as a result of British and French intervention. p. 3 
3 Construction of the Suez Canal was begun in 1859 and completed in 1869. 
The Fortress of Gae'ta, the last stronghold of Francis II, King of the Two 
Sicilies (the Kingdom of Naples), was seized by the Piedmont troops on 
February 12, 1861, as a result of which the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies 
became part of the united Kingdom of Italy. p. 3 

=====第394页=====
368 Notes 
1 In July 1860 a pamphlet entitled MacMahon, King of the Irish appeared in 
France, where an anti-British campaign was in full swing. The pamphlet urged 
the Irish to end British rule and set up the French Marshal MacMahon, a 
descendant of Irish emigrants, as King of Ireland. Engels is probably referring 
to this pamphlet. p. 3 
5 The three preceding stages of the Danish-Prussian war of 1848-50 were: the 
period from the outbreak of hostilities on March 23, 1848 to the truce of 
August 26, 1848; the period from this truce to that of July 10, 1849, and finally 
the period from the second truce to the signing of the peace treaty in Berlin on 
July 2, 1850. p. 3 
6 This refers to the "liberal" course proclaimed by William, Prince of Prussia 
(King of Prussia from 1861), in October 1858 when he assumed the regency. 
Actually, not one of the reforms expected by the bourgeoisie was carried out. 
William's policy aimed at consolidating the Prussian monarchy and Junkerdom. 
p. 5 
7 At Magenta and Solferino the decisive battles of the 1859 Austro-Italo-French 
war were fought on June 4 and June 24 respectively. The Austrians were 
defeated on both occasions. p. 6 
8 On September 9, 1861 The Times (No. 24033) published a letter by the US 
Abolitionist writer Harriet Beecher Stowe to Lord Shaftesbury, the English 
philanthropist politician, urging Britons to give moral support to the North. 
p. 7 
9 The US Republican Party was formed in the north-eastern States in 1854 by a 
broad coalition of industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, farmers, workers and 
handicraftsmen in opposition to the Democratic Party. Its establishment 
reflected the antagonistic contradictions between the capitalism developing in 
the North and the system of slave labour prevalent in the South. The 
Republican Party, controlled by the Northern bourgeoisie, advocated the 
restriction of slavery to the Southern States, the free settlement of the Western 
Territories, and protectionist tariffs to stimulate the development of national 
industry. In 1860 Abraham Lincoln, the Republican candidate, was elected US 
President. He polled  1,866,352  votes as against  1,375,157  votes obtained by 
S. A. Douglas, the Democratic candidate (see Note 13). p. 8 
10 This refers to the Constitution of the Confederate States of America, adopted in 
Montgomery, Alabama, on March 11, 1861 at a congress of the seven 
secessionist states (Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi, South 
Carolina and Texas). The full text of the Constitution appeared in the New-York 
Daily Tribune, No. 6206, March 16, 1861. p. 8 
1 The Constitution, as formed for the United States, by the Federal Conventio7i, held at 
Philadelphia, in the year 1787... consolidated the rule of the bourgeoisie and 
planters in the form of a federal bourgeois republic. p. 8 
'- The Crittenden compromise, a project for the peaceful settlement of the 
North-South conflict, was submitted by Kentucky Senator Crittenden to the US 
Congress on Dei ember IS, I860.. It envisaged six amendments to the US 
Constitution calling, in particular, for a ban on slavery in states north of the 
36°3()'  boundary line fixed by the Missouri Compromise (see Note 14) and the 
legalisation of slavery south of that line. The project denied the Congress the 
right to abolish or alter the slave system in the Southern States. A special 

=====第395页=====
Notes 369 
Senate committee rejected the Crittenden compromise on December 22, 1860. 
p. 9 
13 In the mid-1850s, following the adoption of the Kansas-Nebraska Bill (see Note 
15), the US Democratic Party (founded in 1828) split up into two factions, 
Northern and Southern. Basically, both favoured the preservation and spread 
of slavery, but the Northern faction took a more flexible stand, declaring that 
the issue should be submitted to the US Supreme Court. The Southern faction 
urged the right of the Territories to make their own decisions on the matter, 
and pressed for the free importation of slaves into the Territories. The most 
reactionary among the Southern Democrats prepared the ground for the 
rebellion and the establishment of the separatist slaveholding Confederacy. 
p. 9 
4 The Missouri Compromise, embodied in the Act to Authorise the People of the 
Missouri Territory to Form a Constitution and State Government, was reached 
in 1820, after a period of bitter struggle waged in the US Congress and 
throughout the country between the supporters and opponents of slavery. The 
Missouri agreement laid down a boundary between the free and slaveholding 
states,,  outlawing slavery north of the 36°30' N line. The agreement was 
superseded by the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, adopted by the US Congress in 1854 
(see Note 15). p. 10 
5 The Kansas-Nebraska Bill (An Act to Organise the Territories of Nebraska and 
Kansas), passed by the US Congress in May 1854 after a fierce debate, granted 
the white population of Kansas and Nebraska, which were being admitted to 
the Union, the right to permit or prohibit slavery within their boundaries. The 
Bill abolished the frontier line laid down by the Missouri Compromise between 
the free and slaveholding states (see Note 14) and allowed every state to 
introduce slavery, regardless of geographical position. The adoption of the Bill 
gave rise to an armed struggle in Kansas between the supporters and 
opponents of slavery (see Note 18). p. 10 
6 This refers to a memorandum drawn up in October 1854 at the Belgian resort 
of Ostend by the US Minister to London Buchanan jointly with US diplomatic 
representatives in France and Spain. It recommended the US government to 
purchase or seize the island of Cuba, then in Spanish possession, with a view to 
extending slavery to it. It was not until March 1855 that the memorandum 
became public knowledge, causing indignation in the United States and abroad. 
p. 10 
7 The Black slave Dred Scott had lived for four years in the non-slave States of 
Illinois and Wisconsin. In 1848 he brought a lawsuit, claiming freedom. In 
1857 it was turned down by the US Supreme Court. The ruling implied that a 
slave remained the property of his master even in the free States—an example 
of the slaveholders' efforts to have slavery legalised throughout the country. 
p. 10 
8 Marx means the armed struggle in Kansas (1854-56) between the supporters 
and opponents of slavery sparked off by the Kansas-Nebraska Bill (see Note 
15). Despite the successes of the anti-slavery forces, Kansas fell under the sway 
of the pro-slavery faction, supported by the Federal government. However, the 
majority of the population continued the struggle and secured the admission of 
Kansas to the Union as a free state in 1861. p. 10 

=====第396页=====
370 Notes 
19 At the 1856 Presidential election, Buchanan, the Democratic candidate, polled 
1,838,169  votes, as against the  1,341,264  votes for Fremont, put up by the 
Republican Party, which was contesting a Presidential election for the first time 
(see Note 9). p. 10 
20 An ironical reference to the London press. The Illuminati were members of a 
secret Masonic society in Bavaria  ( 1776-84). p. 10 
21 A street in London, in which the Central Criminal Court is situated, p. 12 
22 In October 1859 an 18-strong group of insurgents (including five Blacks), led 
by John Brown, seized a government arsenal in Harper's Ferry, Virginia, in an 
attempt to provoke a slave uprising in the Southern states. The group was 
encircled and almost totally wiped out by regular troops. Brown was severely 
wounded. He was tried and hanged in Charleston. p. 13 
23 This refers to the protectionist tariff tabled in Congress by the Republican 
Justin Smith Morrill and passed by the Senate on March 2, 1861. It raised 
customs duties considerably. p. 14 
24 In November 1832 the South Carolina Convention nullified the 1828 and 1832 
Federal tariff acts, which imposed high import duties. The Ordinance of 
Nullification adopted by the Convention on November 24 proclaimed the 
resolve of the State's citizens to uphold their independence vis-à-vis the Federal 
government and threatened South Carolina's secession from the Union. 
President Andrew Jackson, with Congressional approval, sent troops to South 
Carolina, but, under pressure from the slaveholding planters, endorsed a 
compromise lower taiiff on March 2, 1833. South Carolina soon repealed the 
Ordinance of Nullification. p. 14 
25 In this article Marx probably used data he had received from Engels while 
staying in Manchester in the first half of September 1861. p. 17 
26 President Lincoln's blockade of the ports of the rebel States was imposed on 
April 19, 1861 and lifted in August 1865. During this period, the Northern 
navy detained 1,500 enemy vessels and seized 31 million dollars' worth of 
property. p. 17 
27 Between 1845 and 1847 potato blight was the occasion of widespread famine in 
Ireland. The poverty of the small tenants ruthlessly exploited by the big 
landowners made the mass of the population almost entirely dependent on a 
diet of potatoes grown on their own little patches. About one million people 
starved to death, and the wave of emigration caused by the famine swept away 
another million. Large areas of Ireland were depopulated. The deserted land 
was turned by English and Irish landlords into pastures. p. 20 
28 The New-York Daily Tribune carried the following editorial note on this article 
in the same issue: "An occasional correspondent in London furnishes us with a 
most interesting letter, printed this morning, concerning the London Times 
and the influence upon it of Lord Palmerston''. p. 21 
29 Catholic Emancipation—in 1829 the British Parliament, under pressure of a 
mass movement in Ireland, lifted some of the restrictions curtailing the political 
rights of the Catholic population. Catholics were granted the right to be elected 
to Parliament and hold certain government posts. Simultaneously the property 
qualification for electors was raised fivefold. The British ruling classes hoped 
that this manoeuvre would bring the élite of the Irish bourgeoisie and Catholic 

=====第397页=====
Notes 371 
landowners to their side and cause a split in the Irish national movement. 
The Reform Art passed by the British Parliament in June 1832 was directed 
against the political monopoly of the landed and finance aristocracy and 
enabled the industrial bourgeoisie to be duly represented in Parliament. The 
proletariat and the petty bourgeoisie, the main forces in the struggle for 
reform, remained disfranchised. 
The Bill repealing the Corn Laws was passed in June 1846. The English 
Corn Laws imposed high import duties on agricultural products in order to 
maintain high prices on the home market for the benefit of the landowners. 
Their repeal marked a victory for the industrial bourgeoisie, who favoured free 
trade. At the same time it had an adverse effect on Irish grain exports, 
aggravating Ireland's economic plight. 
The Stamp Tax was imposed on newspapers in Britain in 1711 as a means 
of raising state revenue and combating the opposition press. It made 
newspapers exceedingly expensive, thus placing them beyond the reach of the 
mass reader and reducing their circulation. In 1836 Parliament was forced to 
reduce the Stamp Tax, and in 1855 to abolish it. 
The Paper Duty, introduced in Britain in 1694, evoked widespread public-
protests in the mid-19th century as an obstacle for the reduction of the price of 
printed matter. It yielded the state about £1,400,000 annually. A campaign 
against the Paper Duty, waged over a number of years, led to its repeal in 
1861.  ' p. 21 
Glorious Revolution—the term used by bourgeois historians for the coup d'état of 
1688-89 that established a constitutional monarchy in Britain based on a 
compromise between the landed aristocracy on the one hand, and the bourgeoisie 
and new nobility on the other. p. 21 
This refers to John Aberdeen's Coalition Ministry of 1852-55 (the Cabinet of 
All the Talents), which included Whigs, Peelites and representatives of the Irish 
faction in Parliament. p. 23 
Owing to Palmerston's patronage, The Times' leading observer, R. Lowe, held 
the posts of Vice-President of the Board of Trade and Paymaster-General 
between 1855 and 1858, and was Vice-President of the Committee of the Privy 
Council for Education from 1859 to 1864. The Editor of The Times, Thomas 
Delane, was introduced by Palmerston to London's high society. p. 23 
In 1839 the British Parliament issued a Blue Book on Persia and Afghanistan 
(Correspondence Relating to Persia and Afghanistan) containing, among other 
documents, a number of letters by A. Burnes, the British representative in 
Kabul, on the British-Afghan war of 1838-42 (see Note 96). The letters had 
been selected and presented by the Foreign Office in such a way as to conceal 
Britain's part in provoking the war. Shortly before his death Burnes sent 
duplicates of his letters to London. Those not included in the Blue Book were 
published by his family [A. Burnes, Cabool, Being a Personal Narrative of a 
Journey to and Residence in That City, in the Years 1836, 7 and 8..., London, 
1842;  J. Burnes' Notes on His Name and Family (Including a Memoir of Sir 
Alexander Burnes), Edinburgh, 1851]. p. 23 
On May 8, 1852 representatives of Austria, Britain, France, Norway-Sweden, 
Prussia and Russia jointly with representatives of Denmark signed in London a 
protocol on the integrity of the Danish monarchy. It was based on a protocol 
establishing the principle of the indivisibility of the domains of the King of 
Denmark, including the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein, which was 

=====第398页=====
372 Notes 
adopted on July 4, 1850 and finally signed on August 2, 1850 by the 
above-mentioned participants in the London Conference (with the exception of 
Prussia). In the London Protocol the Tsar of Russia, being a descendant of 
Duke Karl Peter Ulrich of Holstein-Gottorp who reigned in Russia under the 
name of Peter III (1761-62), was referred to as one of the lawful pretenders to 
the throne of Denmark who had renounced their rights in favour of Duke 
Christian of Glücksburg, proclaimed successor to King Frederick VII. This 
created a precedent for the Tsar of Russia to claim' the Danish throne in the 
event of the extinction of the Glücksburg dynasty. p. 23 
35 In usum delphini (édition dauphine) means, literally, "for use by the Dauphin" 
and, figuratively, "abridged" or "distorted". The phrase was coined in 
connection with the publication in 1668, in the reign of Louis XIV, of an 
expurgated version of Latin classics for the heir to the French throne, p. 24 
30 The Mechanics' Institute in Bradford, West Riding, Yorkshire (founded in 
1825).  p. 26 
37 King William I of Prussia was Napoleon Ill's guest at Compiègne (France) 
from October 6 to 8, 1861. p. 27 
38 During the period in question, The Times had its editorial offices in Printing-
House Square, London. 
The Tuileries, a palace in Paris, was the residence of French monarch. In 
political parlance the Tuileries meant the French government. p. 27 
39 In September 1860 Captain Macdonald of the British Army, while travelling in 
Germany, was detained in Bonn for six days and fined by a court on charges of 
insubordination to the local authorities. p. 27 
40 This refers to the polemic pamphlet by Henri d'Orléans (the Duke d'Aumale) 
Lettre sur l'histoire de France, written in reply to a speech by Prince Napoleon 
made in the French Senate in the spring of 1861. On Napoleon Ill's orders, 
the pamphlet was confiscated and .the publisher fined and imprisoned, p. 28 
41 An allusion to Napoleon III, who in 1848, when in exile in Britain, volunteered 
for the Special Constabulary (a police reserve made up of civilians) which 
helped the police disperse a Chartist-organised workers' demonstration on 
April 10, 1848. p. 28 
42 During the American War of Independence (1775-83) France, in an attempt to 
weaken Britain, aided the latter's insurgent American colonies with money and 
arms.  The American liberation struggle was followed with special sympathy by 
France's democratic and liberal sections. The Marquis de La Fayette was 
prominent among the French volunteers fighting on the American side. He was 
also active in the French revolutions of 1789 and 1830. p. 29 
43 From the mid-19th century, France, like other European powers, sought to 
establish itself in China and Indochina. Between 1857 and 1860, the united 
forces of Britain and France inflicted a series of defeats on the Chinese. The 
imperial government was compelled to sign several treaties reducing China to a 
semi-colony. In 1858 Napoleon Ill's government in cooperation with Spain 
unleashed a colonial war in Indochina. It ended in 1862, with France seizing 
three eastern provinces of South Vietnam (Cochin-China).. p. 30 

=====第399页=====
Notes 373 
On July 21, 1861 the Union army was defeated by the Confederate forces on 
the Bull Run river near Manassas, Virginia, in the first major battle of the US 
Civil War. 
On August 10,  18(51,  the Union army, defeated at Wilson's Creek, was 
forced to abandon the town of Springfield, Missouri. p. 30 
This is Marx's first contribution to the Viennese liberal daily, Die Presse. Max 
Friedländer, an associate editor of Die Presse from 1856. was previously 
publisher of the bourgeois-democratic Neue Oder-Zeitung in Breslau, to which 
Marx contributed in 1855 as its London correspondent. In 1859 Friedländer 
invited Marx to write for Die Presse, a welcome opening to Marx, as his 
collaboration with the New-York Daily Tribune (see Note 1) was diminishing and 
he badly needed another source of income. Apart from that, owing to its 
anti-Bonapartist stance, Die Presse had a fairly large readership (30,000 
subscribers) which gave Marx a good opportunity for the propagation of his 
views in German) and Austria. However, it was not until September 1861 that 
he agreed to contribute, having first made sure that in the domestic sphere the 
paper opposed the government of Anton von Schmerling (a Liberal) as well as 
the reactionary forces (see Marx's letters to Engels of 28 September and 30 
October 1861 in Vol. 41 of this edition). 
Marx's articles for Die Presse, most of which were printed with the editorial 
subheading "From Our London Correspondent", dealt with key issues of the 
foreign and home policy of Britain, France and the United States and with the 
condition of the working class and the democratic movement in these countries. 
In his articles on military matters Marx, as a rule, drew on material supplied by 
Engels. He contributed to Die Presse for somewhat over a year, during which 
the paper published 52 articles signed by Marx (two of these were written 
jointly with Engels, and one bv Engels). Many of Marx's articles and reports for 
Die Presse  were not published. This was the main reason why, in late 1862, he 
stopped contributing to the paper. 
Marx presumably drafted the two articles "The North American Civil War" 
and "The Civil War in the United States" as early as June or July 1861, after 
receiving Friedländer's second request for contributions. In writing the articles 
Marx made use of data Engels sent him in a letter of June 12, 1861 (see Vol. 
41 of this edition). The text of the articles was finalised on October 20. An 
introductory editorial note to the first article read: "The war, of which the 
great North American Republic has been the seat for more than half a year, 
already begins to react on Europe. France, which loses a market for her 
commodities through these troubles, and Britain, whose industry is threatened 
with partial ruin through stagnation in the export of cotton from the slave 
states,  follow the development of the Civil W 7ar in the United States with 
feverish intensity. Though until recently Europe and, indeed, the Americans 
themselves still hoped for a peaceful solution, the war is assuming ever greater 
dimensions, spreading further and further over the vast territories of North 
America and, the longer it lasts, threatening this part of the world, too, with a 
crisis.  It will first seize and shake Britain and France, and the panic on the 
British and French markets will in like manner react on the rest of the 
European markets. Apart from the historical aspect, we ha\e, therefore, a very 
positive interest in getting our bearings with regard to the causes, the 
significance and the import of the transatlantic events. We have received from 
London a first communication on the North American Civil War from one of 
the leading German journalists, who knows Anglo-American relations from 
long years of observation. As events on the other side ol the ocean develop, we 
26—1 134 

=====第400页=====
374 Notes 
shall be in a position to present communications, deriving from the same 
competent pen, which will outline the salient features of the war." 
Marx's later articles for Die Presse were much shorter than "The North 
American Civil War" and "The Civil War in the United States". Following 
Friedländer's letter of October 25, 1861 asking Marx to send shorter articles, 
more suitable for a newspaper, his contributions did not, as a rule, exceed four 
handwritten pages. p. 32 
46 See Note 23. p. 33 
47 Marx means the 1831 campaign to prepare the Nullification in South Carolina, 
carried through in 1832 by US Vice-President John Caldwell Calhoun, an 
ideologist of slavery (see also Note 24). p. 33 
48 See Note 10. p. 33 
49 This refers to the fifteen slave states which, according to the plans of the 
secessionists, were to make up the Southern Confederacy. Initially the 
Confederacy included seven states: South Carolina, Mississippi, Florida, 
Alabama, Georgia, Louisiana and Texas. Later they were joined by Virginia, 
Arkansas, North Carolina and Tennessee. The remaining four—Missouri, 
Kentucky, Maryland and Delaware—declared themselves neutral. p. 33 
50 Faneuil Hall was donated to the city of Boston in 1742 by the merchant 
P. Faneuil. During the War of Independence (1775-83) patriotic meetings were 
held in the building, earning it the name of "the cradle of American liberty". 
p. 34 
51 The first Continental Congress, an assembly of representatives of Britain's 
thirteen North American colonies, was convened in September 1774. The 
second, convoked in May 1775, effectively was America's government until 
1787. 
A 1787 Congressional Ordinance stipulated that sections (Territories) of the 
Northwest area ceded by Virginia to the Union would be admitted to the Union as 
full-fledged states once their population had reached 60,000. All the US states 
except the original thirteen and Vermont, Kentucky, Maine, Texas, California 
and West Virginia initially had the status of Territories. p. 35 
52 For the Missouri Compromise see Note 14. p. 35 
53 See Note 17. p. 36 
54 Under the Fugitive Slave Act, passed by the US Congress in 1850 as a 
supplement to the 1793 law on the surrender of fugitive slaves, a slaveholder's 
evidence under oath, given to a competent official, was enough to establish his 
title to a runaway slave and for the latter's restitution, without a legal 
investigation, to his master. Every US common court of justice had special 
commissioners appointed for the express purpose of capturing slaves. A 
commissioner refusing to issue a warrant of arrest was liable to a $1,000 fine, 
and one responsible for a slave's escape had to pay his cost. Infringement of 
the Act was punishable by a $1,000 fine, six months' imprisonment and the 
payment of a $1,000 compensation for every fugitive. The Act caused a rise of 
the Abolitionist movement and became practically unenforceable even before 
the Civil War. It was repealed in 1864. p. 37 
55 This refers to the free homestead demand which became the motto of the mass 
anti-slavery Free Soil Party, formed in 1848 in connection with the struggle 
over the status of the lands seized from Mexico. The Free Soil Party later 

=====第401页=====
Notes 375 
merged with the Republican Party (see Note 9). The Free Soilers' demand was 
"no more slave states and no more slave territory". The Free Homestead Bill 
was first put to the vote in Congress in 1852, passed the House, but was 
rejected by the Senate. A Bill providing for the allotment of land to settlers at a 
moderate price (25 cents an acre) was at last adopted by Congress in 1860, but 
vetoed by President Buchanan. It was only after the secession of the Southern 
states (see Note 2) and the Republicans' victory in the 1862 election that the 
Homestead Act was passed. p. 37 
56 On the Ostend Manifesto see Note 16. p. 37 
,7 Chihuahua, Coahuila and Sonora—Northern states of Mexico that bordered on 
the USA. p. 37 
38 The import of slaves into the United States was banned under the 1787 US 
Constitution and Acts of Congress passed in 1808 and 1820. p. 37 
59 This refers to the "Old Northwest", i.e. the Northwest Territory formed by 
Congress in 1787 (the area north of the Ohio and west of the Mississippi). It 
embraced the area of what later became the states of Indiana, Illinois, 
Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio and part of Minnesota. p. 38 
60 Marx means the emigrant aid companies and societies formed, with the 
participation of the Free Soilers (see Note 55), in several Northern states in 
1854 and 1855 to promote the settlement of Kansas by free small farmers, and 
prevent the spread of slavery to new US Territories. They raised funds and 
recruited settlers, giving them financial aid and otherwise helping them start 
farms in Kansas. They also sent arms to keep at bay "border ruffians" from 
Missouri and the South. 
The aid movement attained maximum scope in the summer of 1856 in 
connection with the intensified armed struggle in Kansas (see Note 18). In July 
of that year the National Kansas Committee was formed at a congress in 
Buffalo. The aid societies' practical activity, limited as it was, exerted a strong 
influence on national public opinion and contributed to the consolidation of the 
forces that formed the Republican Party (see Note 9). It was not until January 
1861 that Kansas was granted the status of a free state. p. 38 
6! This article was prefaced in Die Presse with the following editorial note: "We 
have received another report from our London correspondent on the events in 
North America which presents the motives behind the policy of the secessionist 
South in an entirely new light. But let our reporter speak for  himself." 
Actually, however, as can be seen from Marx's letter to Engels of October 
30, 1861 (present edition, Vol. 41), Marx sent the article to Vienna together 
with his previous one, "The North American Civil War" (see Note 45). 
This article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, The Civil \Var in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp. 71-83.  p. 43 
6- This refers to the cessation, in 1837, of Great Britain's personal union with the 
Kingdom (originally, Duchy) of Hanover. Established in 1714, the union was 
dissolved because Victoria, who succeeded William IV on the British throne, was 
not eligible to the throne of Hanover as a woman. p. 43 
63 Germans accounted for 20 per cent of the white population in Texas in 1850. 
Most of them were political refugees who had been forced to leave Germany 
after the defeat of the 1848-49 revolution in Europe (they were called 

=====第402页=====
376 Notes 
"forty-eighters"). The majority of the German immigrants opposed slavery and 
secession, and stayed loyal to the Union government after the outbreak of the 
Civil War. p. 48 
61 In the winter of 1860-61 pro-Southern circles tried to wrest California from the 
Union by setting up a "neutral" Pacific Republic. The conspirators failed for 
lack of support within the state. p. 49 
65 See Note 59. p. 50 
66 New England—the area in the northeast of the USA (Maine, New Hampshire, 
Vermont, Massachusetts, Rhode Island and Connecticut) originally settled 
mainly by Puritans, in the seventeenth century. New England was the centre of 
the Abolitionist movement. p. 50 
b7 The Helots—peasants in ancient Sparta attached to the land and obliged to 
perform certain services for the Spartan landowners. Unlike slaves, they were 
the property of the state, and the landowners were not allowed to grant them 
freedom, sell them separately from the land or raise their annual payments. 
p. 50 
68 The Missouri proclamation, issued by General Fremont on August 31, 1861 
(published in the New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6366, September 1, 1861), 
called for the confiscation of the property of persons in Missouri supporting 
the Confederacy and proclaimed the emancipation of the rebels' slaves. Lincoln 
instructed Fremont to bring the proclamation into conformity with the 
Confiscation Act (passed by Congress on August 6, 1861, the Act only 
envisaged the liberation of slaves used by the rebels in the fighting) by deleting 
the passage on the emancipation. Fremont refused to comply and, in October 
1861,  was dismissed from his post as commander of the arm) in Missouri. 
p. 51 
69 In 1833, after an uprising of Black slaves in Jamaica, the British Parliament 
adopted an Act, which came into force on August 1, for the abolition of slavery 
throughout the British colonies. The slaveholding planters in the West Indies 
and other colonies were paid £20 million in compensation. p. 51 
70 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War in 
the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 83-87. p. 53 
71 Quakers (or Society of Friends) — a religious sect founded in England during the 
seventeenth-century revolution and later widespread in North America. Thev 
rejected the FLstablished Church with its rites, preached pacifist ideas and were 
noted for simple living. p. 54 
72 See Note 69. p. 51 
7:5 In 1844, Parliament passed an Act for the regulation of railways, which placed 
railway companies under government control, and an Act for the registration, 
incorporation and regulation of joint-stock companies, which made railway 
projects liable to registration by the Railway Department of the Board of Trade 
and endorsement by Parliament. The Acts intensified competition among 
railway companies, causing a veritable "railway mania", with the number of 
projects more than trebling within a short time. To complete the drawings on 
time,  companies lured away draftsmen and lithographers from each other, 
imported them by the hundred and made them work practically round the 
clock. Special clerks spied on rival companies and interfered with the deliver) 
of their documents, hiring away and hiding horses and denying the competitors 

=====第403页=====
Notes 377 
railway carriage. On the last day of registration, November 30, 1845, hundreds 
of clerks besieged the Railway Department of the Board of Trade, even 
throwing documents in through the windows. As a result, more than 600 
projects had been deposited by midday, when registration ceased. p. 55 
74 Here Marx has "16,200,711", the error occurs in The Economist, from which 
Marx reproduced this table. p. 58 
75 Marx means the attitude of the British government to the 1859-60 bourgeois 
revolution in Italy, which culminated in the establishment of a single Italian 
slate.  Worried by Napoleon Ill's hegemonic ambitions in Europe, Britain's 
i tiling circles favoured Italian unity under the aegis of the Sardinian dynasty. 
p. 59 
7li See Note 73. p. 59 
7/ The Société générale du Crédit Mobilier —a big French joint-stock bank founded 
by the Péreire brothers in 1852. It was closely associated with Napoleon Ill's 
government and, under the latter's protection, engaged in large-scale specula­
tion. It went bankrupt in 1867 and was liquidated in 1871 (see Marx's articles 
on Crédit Mobilier in Vol. 15 of the present edition). p. 61 
78 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War in 
the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp.  88-91.  p. 62 
79 The City—the central part of London. Leading banks and industrial, 
commercial, transport and insurance companies have their offices there. It is a 
synonym for the British financial oligarchy. p. 63 
80 An allusion to the coup d'état of December 2, 1851, which established the 
Second Empire in France. p. 63 
81 See Note 75. p. 64 
82 At the battle of Waterloo (June 18, 1815) the British and Prussian forces 
defeated the army of Napoleonic France. p. 64 
8:< Albion—the traditional name of the British Isles (without Ireland) since 
antiquity. The phrase "perfide Angleterre" (perfidious England) was coined by 
Bishop J.-B. Bossuet, the famous French theologian, who used it in a sermon in 
1652.  Napoleon quoted it when being taken into exile from Britain to St. Helena. 
p. 64 
84 See Note 23. p. 65 
85 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War in 
the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 92-97. p. 66 
86 After France had incorporated Savoy and Nice as a result of the 1859 
Austro-Italo-French war (see Note 303) Napoleon III made an attempt to seize 
a section of Swiss territory. On October 28, 1861 a French detachment invaded 
the Dapp valley in Vaud Canton and occupied the village of Cressonière. The 
Swiss government lodged a protest, which was supported by several European 
powers. Under an agreement signed in December 1862, part of the Dapp valley 
was ceded to France in exchange for an equal section of French territory. 
p. 66 
87 See Note 38. p. 66 
88 On October 31, 1861, the three powers concluded a convention on joint action 
against Mexico to overthrow the progressive Juarez government and turn the 

=====第404页=====
378 Notes 
Mexican republic into a colony of European powers. The pretext for this move 
was an Act of the Mexican Congress of July 17, 1861 suspending for two years the 
payment of interest on the country's foreign debt. The Palmerston 
government undertook to organise a punitive expedition. p. 67 
89 In November 1859 Spain, which was looking for colonies in Northern Africa, 
declared war on Morocco. The hostilities lasted until March 1860, bringing little 
success to the Spanish forces, which encountered stiff resistance from the 
freedom-loving Moroccans. Under the peace signed in April 1860 Spain 
received a monetary contribution and minor territorial concessions. 
St. Domingo, the eastern part of the island of Hispaniola (Haiti), a Spanish 
colony until 1821. proclaimed the independent Dominican Republic in 1844; was 
re-annexed by Spain after the pro-Spanish party gained the upper hand in St. 
Domingo and, in March 1861, proclaimed the country's "voluntary" incorpora­
tion in Spain's West Indian possessions. The Spaniards were finally driven from 
the country in 1865. p. 67 
90 Marx means the British government. St. James's Palace in London used to be a 
royal residence. p. 67 
91 The Holy Alliance—an association of European monarchs formed in 1815 to 
suppress revolutionary movements and preserve feudal monarchies in Euro­
pean countries. Their famous declaration laid down that the monarchs would 
"on all occasions and in all places, lend each other aid and assistance", while 
"regarding themselves towards their subjects and armies as fathers of families" 
(Art. I). p. 69 
92 In 1823, French Foreign Minister Chateaubriand attempted to organise an 
armed intervention against a number of Latin American countries with a view 
to restoring Spain's colonial domination there and expanding France's colonial 
possessions. The Spanish colonies were to become autonomous kingdoms ruled 
by Bourbon princes, including members of the French line. The plan failed 
mainly because of opposition from Britain and the USA, both of which sought 
to exploit the national liberation movement in the Spanish colonies in order to 
establish their influence there. p. 69 
93 The Monroe Doctrine—a set of principles proclaimed by US President James 
Monroe in his message to Congress on December 2, 1823. Originally intended 
to prevent a restoration of Spanish colonial rule in Latin America in connection 
with the threat of intervention by the Holy Alliance, the message described 
interference by European powers in the affairs of any state in the Western 
Hemisphere as "a manifestation of an unfriendly disposition toward the United 
States". Later the Monroe Doctrine was used to justify US striving for 
hegemony on the American continent. p. 69 
94 See Note 91. p. 74 
95 See Note 92. p. 77 
96 This refers to the first Anglo-Afghan war (1838-42), in which Britain sought to 
establish its colonial rule in Afghanistan. Both invasions of British troops, in 
1838 and 1842, failed. 
On the forged papers see Note 33. p. 78 
97 The immediate occasion of the Anglo-Persian war of 1856-57 was an attempt 
by Persia's rulers, in October 1856, to capture the Herat principality. The 
British government exploited it as an excuse for launching an armed 

=====第405页=====
Notes 379 
intervention against Afghanistan and Persia to establish its domination in that 
region. It declared war on Persia and sent troops to Herat, but the national 
liberation uprising in India (1857-59) compelled Britain to seek an accommoda­
tion with Persia. Under the peace treaty signed in Paris in March 1857, Persia 
renounced its claims to Herat. p. 78 
98 This article, date-lined Paris, was written by Marx in London. p. 79 
99 The  Physiocratic  school—a trend in bourgeois classical political economy that 
emerged in France in the 1750s. The Physiocrats held Nature to be the only 
source of wealth, and agriculture the only sphere of the economy where value 
was created. Although they underestimated the role of industry and commerce, 
the Physiocrats rendered an important service by shifting the search for the 
origins of surplus-value from the sphere of circulation to that of production, 
thereby laying the basis for the analysis of capitalist production. Advocates of 
large-scale capitalist farming, they showed the moribund nature of the feudal 
economy and thus contributed to the ideological preparation of the bourgeois 
revolution in France. Marx gave a critical analysis of the Physiocrats' views in 
the second chapter of the  Theories  of Surplus-Value  (see Vol. 34 of this edition). 
p. 80 
100 The  dynastic opposition—the group  of Odilon Barrot  in the  French Chamber  of 
Deputies during  the  July monarchy (1830-48).  It spoke  for  the liberal industrial 
and commercial bourgeoisie, which favoured moderate electoral reform  as a 
means  of  preventing revolution  and  preserving  the  Orleans dynasty.  p. 80 
101 Applaudite, amici! (Applaud, friends!)—with these words actors in ancient 
Rome concluded their performances. p. 81 
102 Drapeau blanc (white flag)  — France's national flag under the Bourbon 
monarchy (up to 1792) and during the Restoration period (1816-30). During 
the bourgeois revolution and the reign of Napoleon I (1792-1815), blue, white 
and red were France's colours. They were re-adopted in 1830 after the 
enthronement of the Orléans dynasty (the bourgeois July monarchy), p. 84 
103 Marx's article was published in the Foreign News column under the heading 
"America. (The Dismissal of Fremont). Our London Correspondent writes". 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels,  The Civil War in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp. 97-100. p. 86 
104 This refers  to the  United States' 1846-48  war  against Mexico.  It was provoked 
by the  slaveholding planters  and big  bourgeoisie  for  expansionist ends.  As a 
result  of the war, the US  appropriated almost half  of  Mexico's territory, 
including Texas, Upper California  and New  Mexico. Fremont, who  had  been 
exploring California from  the  early 1840s, joined  in the  fighting with his team. 
p. 86 
105 On the battle of Bull Run see Note 44. 
The battle of Ball's Bluff (northwest of Washington) was fought on October 
21, 1861. The Southern forces defeated several regiments commanded by 
General Stone ""which had crossed to the right bank of the Potomac and were 
left without reinforcements. 
The two battles revealed serious shortcomings in the organisation and tactics 
of the Northern army. p. 88 
106 First  published  in English  in:  Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels,  The  Civil  War 
in the  United States,  New  York, 1937, London, 1937,  pp.  100-05.  p. 89 

=====第406页=====
380 Notes 
07 The Anglo-US war, started in 1812, was caused by Britain's refusal to recognise 
the United States' sovereignty and by its attempts to re-establish its domination 
in North America. The US was provoked to declare war on Britain by the 
latter's unlawful seizures of US ships and seamen. The American armed forces 
had the support of the people, who saw Britain poised to restore the colonial 
system, and regarded this struggle as another war of independence. The land 
fighting in 1812-14 developed unfavourably to the Americans. Their naval 
operations were somewhat more successful. Considerable damage was caused to 
the British by the numerous US privateers. The US was also benefiting by 
Britain's involvement in the war against Napoleonic France. Despite the 
temporary capture of Washington in August 1814, Britain was forced, in 
December of that year, to conclude the Ghent peace treaty predicated on 
recognition of the prewar state of affairs. News of the peace reached the troops 
with considerable delay. Meanwhile they continued to fight. The hostilities 
ceased in January 1815, after the US forces had inflicted a devastating defeat 
on the British at New Orleans. p. 90 
08 This refers to France's wars against the various European coalitions between 
1792 and 1815, when Britain and France were involved in a bitter struggle for 
political and economic supremacy in Europe. In retaliation against Napoleon's 
Continental System (1806) which prohibited European countries from trading 
with Britain, the latter imposed its control over the maritime trade of the 
neutral states. Britain also had recourse to contraband trade and made a 
practice of seizing the ships of France and other countries on the high seas. 
p. 91 
09 Duns Scotus controversy—a method of pleading a case in scholastic disputes by 
juxtaposing a series of contradictory arguments ("pro et contra") which was 
widely applied by the mediaeval Scottish Nominalist philosopher Duns Scotus. 
p. 91 
10 Marx's article was preceded by the following editorial note: "If added proof 
were needed that no one would be more delighted by the Trent case erupting 
in a large-scale Anglo-American naval war than the Paris Cabinet, it is provided 
by the attitude of the official and semi-official Paris press. No sooner had the 
Patrie triumphantly informed its readers that the population of the Northern 
states was demonstrating in favour of vigorous opposition to any English 
demand for satisfaction, than, it was able to report no less bellicose actions from 
London. It writes, in particular, that a council of ministers held in London on 
November 30 decided to recognise the Southern states and accredit a chargé 
d'affaires with President Jefferson Davis, if the message Lord Lyons intended 
to hand to the Cabinet in Washington met with an unfavourable reception. The 
Patrie is not alone in doing its utmost to foment trouble. The Moniteur is acting 
in a similar fashion. It carries the following report from Southampton: 'It is 
held in Southampton that this event could have the direst consequences, which 
is also the view held generally. There is a great deal of sympathy for the 
Southern states in England, and this incident cannot fail to increase further the 
number of their supporters.' 
"So far there are no positive indications whatever as to how the French 
government intends to exploit the war that may arise between England and the 
American Union. But the Job's messages circulated from Paris at any rate 
prove that such a war would be most welcome to, and is indeed desired by, the 
Tuileries. France's attitude is a sign to the Cabinet of Saint James's and one can 
hardly assume that the latter is unaware of it. Significantly, too, with the 

=====第407页=====
Notes 381 
exception of the Morning  Post,  the London press, particularly The Times, takes a 
very moderate and cautious stand. Our London correspondent, who is well 
informed about the state of Anglo-American relations, has sent us an article 
dated November 29 which makes the Trent case appear far less dangerous to 
world peace than one was bound to assume on the basis of the first dispatches 
from London and the statements of Morning Post and the semi-official Paris 
papers. To begin with, our London correspondent throws light on the verdict of 
the laic officers of the Crown. He denies that in forcibly arresting Messrs Mason, 
Slidell and Co. the San Jacinto was, in any way, acting on the instructions of the 
Washington Cabinet, and brings the much discussed Liverpool indignation 
meeting down to its true significance. But let our correspondent speak for 
himself.  He writes:". 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, The Civil War in the United Stales, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp." 105-10. p. 92 
1 ' ' Prize courts are set up by belligerent countries in their ports to adjudge upon 
prizes, i.e. merchant ships and cargoes seized from the enemy and neutral 
countries. A special feature of prize jurisdiction is that the ruling is handed 
down by a court of the state that has captured the prize. Its principle is that the 
prize belongs to that state, unless the owners of ship and cargo can prove that 
the seizure was incorrect. p. 93 
"*-' Lloyd's is an insurance and shipping intelligence centre in London set up in the 
late 17th century by Edward Lloyd, the owner of a coffee-house where marine 
insurance deals were made. p. 95 
113 See Note 38. p. 96 
114 The Baitir (the Baltic Mercantile and Shipping Exchange, Limited) — an 
international freight and commodity market, so named after the mid-18th-
century Baltic Coffee-House, which was frequented by merchants trading with 
Baltic ports. p. 96 
115 The law of decisions, applied in Britain and some other countries, regards legal 
precedent as a source of justice. This principle underlies the entire judicial 
system of the Anglo-Saxon countries. 
The decision handed down by a court on a previous case is taken as an 
authoritative ruling in similar or analogous cases by courts of the same or lower 
instance. p. 97 
116 The Temple—two buildings, or ranges of buildings, occupied by two of the 
four inns of court in London (Inner Temple and Middle Temple), on the site 
of a monastic establishment of the Knights Templars. p. 99 
117 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 110-13. p. 101 
118 John Wilkes, whom Marx describes as a demagogue (i.e. a leader of a popular 
faction), was an English radical politician and journalist. In 1763, in his paper, 
The North Briton, he criticised King George Ill's speech from the throne, for 
which he was deprived of his seat in the House of Commons and outlawed. 
Forced to flee to France, he returned in 1768 and was four times elected to 
Parliament, but each time the Commons refused to recognise the vote. He was 
only admitted after his fifth election. Wilkes opposed the war against the North 
American colonies. 
The Wilkes case gas publicised in a series of letters that appeared between 

=====第408页=====
382 Notes 
1769 and 1772 in The Public Advertiser over the signature of Junius. The 
author, later established to be Sir Philip Francis, advocated Wilkes' rehabilita­
tion and the démocratisation of Britain's political system. In 1772 the letters 
appeared in book form. p. 101 
119 At the battle of Worcester on September 3, 1651 the English troops under 
Cromwell inflicted a crushing defeat on the Scottish royalist army under 
Charles II, after which the latter fled to France. The Republicans' victory at 
Worcester removed the threat of a Stuart restoration for several years. 
p. 102 
120 The Privy Council originated in England in the 13th century and initially 
consisted of members of the feudal nobility and higher clergy. As the King's 
highest consultative body, it played an important part in governing the state 
until the 17th century. As Parliament and the Cabinet established their 
ascendancy, the Privy Council's power declined, although formally it remains 
the supreme royal government body. p. 102 
121 In November 1845 Slidell was sent by President James Knox Polk to Mexico to 
negotiate the purchase by the US of New Mexico and Upper California. After 
the Mexican government's refusal to receive Slidell as a Minister Plenipoten­
tiary, the United States opened hostilities against Mexico (in April 1846) and 
captured the two territories. p. 103 
122 See Note 54. p. 103 
123 See Note 18. p. 103 
124 On the eve of the Civil War, the pro-Southern members of Buchanan's 
administration abused their powers to strengthen the South and weaken the 
North. Secretary of the Treasury Cobb helped the secessionists (see Note 2) 
with money and credits. Secretary of War Floyd had weapons and equipment 
shipped from Northern forts and arsenals to the South, financed the arming of 
the Southern militia with Congressional funds and transferred pro-Northern 
officers to remote garrisons. Secretary of the Navy Toucey placed a large 
number of warships at the disposal of the Southerners, and Secretary of the 
Interior Thompson took the plotters under his wing. p. 103 
125 Die Presse published this article with the following editorial introduction: 
"The Anglo-American quarrel has plunged the European business world, as 
well as the public at large, into a state of frantic agitation. There is a 
premonition of the dangers, of the crises and catastrophes, that an armed clash 
between the world's two biggest commercial and industrial nations, the two 
nations with the greatest business experience, would bring with it, a feeling 
bordering on certainty that Britain's power, tied up in a transatlantic conflict, 
would cease to be a pillar, a guarantee of European peace, that Italy would 
succumb entirely to the disastrous influence, indeed the sway, of Napoleon's 
policy, and that the tragic duel between Faust and Valentine, who wields the 
sword for Mephistopheles, would be resumed, though without the certainty 
that Valentine would be defeated this time. The whole of Britain is clamouring 
about the infringement perpetrated by the Americans, and international law, 
the treaties, are looming large in the English papers just now. But even granted 
that an infringement did take place, which is by no means an established fact, 
must it lead to war, as almost the whole of Britain maintains? Is there no 
possibility of a compromise, no milder method of releasing Messrs Mason, etc., 

=====第409页=====
Notes 383 
as demanded by Britain? Let us hope that a way out will be found. Even in 
Britain, the mediation party is already raising its voice; in the United States, the 
captain of the San Jacinto declares that he was acting entirely on his own 
responsibility when he arrested the Trent passengers, and as regards the 
message John Russell sent to Washington, we hear that it is almost begging the 
Washington Cabinet to display flexibility. Lastly, opinions are divided in the 
Ministries of London and Washington, and for all the sabre-rattling, we still 
believe that, unless Palmerston wants war at any price, unless he had already 
decided on war even before the Trent incident, the chances of a peaceful 
solution outweigh the danger of war. 
"The emphasis now placed in Britain on the legal aspect impels the Wiener 
Zeitung today to draw a conclusion which suggests itself to any reader of the 
Palmerston papers. 'Is it not like an old fairy-tale,' the Wiener Zeitung says, 
'when we hear people in Britain today talking of the binding principles of 
international law, of existing treaties, of positive Constitutional law, indeed of 
the word and letter of this or that stipulation which have to be upheld even 
with the sword? Formal right in its most immediate sense, defined by the 
nation's leading legal authorities, is being invoked; we can expect a reply 
formulated in similar terms. All of England is a party in this great lawsuit. It 
swears by its own good right and is prepared to avenge the infringement of 
that right, to stake its power and its blood for it; England appeals to the world 
and to history to back it with their verdict in the battle to uphold that right! 
With what feelings these enthusiasts of justice must have received the news 
from Turin that Rome has to be taken because it is essential for maintaining 
control over the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, and that Veneria will be invaded 
as soon as the army has been brought up to 300,000 men!!" 
"But is it really an established fact that international law, the letter of treaties 
and formal right are on Britain's side in the Trent affair? Weighty voices 
contest this view, and from our London correspondent we have received a 
communication today which exhaustively answers the above question." 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, The Civil War in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp. 113-20. p. 105 
26 "Last of the Englishmen"—paraphrase of the expression "last of the Romans" 
(Ultimus Romanorum), the traditional description of Brutus and Cassius, who 
conspired against Caesar and remained loyal to the ideals of early republican 
Rome at a time when the Roman Republic was in decline. p. 108 
127 Ghent peace—see Note 107. 
In 1842, Lord Ashburton and Daniel Webster conducted talks on behalf of 
Britain and the United States, which ended in the signing, on August 9, of a 
treaty laying down the frontier between the US and Britain's possessions in 
America, banning the slave trade and providing for the extradition of 
criminals. However, it contained no stipulation entitling Britain to search US 
ships suspected of slave trafficking. p. 112 
28 On December 6, 1861 The Times carried a letter on the Trent incident by the 
LIS General Winfield Scott. He urged a peaceful settlement of the conflict, 
saying the US wanted no war with Britain. 
Downing Street—the official residence of the Prime Minister of Britain. 
p. 114 

=====第410页=====
384 Notes 
1L'9 First published in English in: Political Affairs, New York, 1959, No. 2, 
pp. 17-18. p. 115 
150 Black contraband was, during the US Civil War, a designation for runaway slaves 
seeking refuge at Northern army camps. Contrary to the instructions of the 
Washington administration, some Northern generals refused, even in the early 
months of the war, to hand such Blacks over to their former masters on the 
grounds that, being the property of rebels, they must be regarded as military 
contraband. In the autumn of 1861 there was a massive influx of fugitive slaves 
at Fort Monroe, Louisiana. General Wool used the able-bodied Blacks as free 
labourers and withheld part of their earnings to support disabled and sick 
Blacks. p. 116 
1:51 The Democratic or Albany regency—the leading group of the Democratic Party in 
New York State. With its headquarters in Albany, the capital of New York 
State, it existed until 1854 and was the unofficial governing body of the US 
Democratic Party (see also Note 13). p. 116 
132 On November 19, 1861 the Nashville, a Confederate privateer, attacked the 
Unionist merchant ship Harvey Birch, arrested her crew, seized her cargo and 
burnt the ship. On November 21, the Nashville, with the consent of the British 
authorities, took cover in the port of Southampton. She was overtaken there by 
the Unionist cruiser Tuscarora, which was watching the movements of pirate 
ships.  Not wishing to be accused of a breach of neutrality, the British 
authorities on February 3, 1862 ordered both ships to leave port, but detained 
the Tuscarora for 24 hours to enable the Nashville to escape. p. 117 
1:53 At the beginning of January 1861, Fernando Wood, Mayor of New York City, 
proposed that in the event of disunion New York should constitute itself a free 
city and retain commerce with both sections. p. 117 
134 Empire City was a popular name for New York, the largest city in the Union. 
New York State, then the most populous, richest and politically most powerful 
State of the USA, was called the Empire State. p. 118 
135 During the debate on the Kansas-Nebraska Bill, May 19 and 20, 1856 (see Note 
15) the Republican Senator Charles Sumner made a speech ("The Crime 
against Kansas") exposing the slave-owners' schemes in Kansas and deriding 
the pro-slavery posture of Senator A. R. Butler of South Carolina. On May 22, 
the latter's nephew, slave-owning Congressman P. S. Brooks, attacked Sumner 
in the Senate, causing him serious bodily harm. It was only in 1859 that 
Sumner was able to return to politics. p. 118 
136 The Cooper Union—a higher educational establishment in New York, founded 
in 1859 by the philanthropist Peter Cooper, a manufacturer and inventor. 
p. 118 
137 From 1849 to 1861, the Dominican Republic (in the West Indian island of 
Hispaniola, or Haiti), which had freed itself from Spanish domination in 1821, 
was, owing to a succession of coups d'état, alternately governed by a 
pro-Spanish party and one favouring union with the neighbouring state of 
Haiti. Spain re-annexed the republic at the invitation of President P. Santa Ana 
in 1861, but had to withdraw its troops in 1865, following an anti-Spanish 
uprising. p. 119 
138 The Court of Exchequer, one of England's oldest courts, initially dealt mainly 
with financial matters. In the 19th century it became one of the country's 

=====第411页=====
Notes 385 
highest judicial bodies. In 1875 the Court of Exchequer was merged in the 
High Court of Judicature. p. 120 
;i9 The Lord Chief Baron was one of the Barons of the Exchequer, the six judges to 
whom the administration of justice was committed. The title became obsolete in 
1875 when the Court of Exchequer was merged in the High Court of Judicature. 
p. 123 
140 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War in 
the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 120-23. p. 124 
141 Marx refers to the Déclaration réglant divers points de droit maritime, signée ... à 
Paris, le 14 avril 1856, which banned privateering and safeguarded the 
merchant shipping of neutral states against attack by the belligerents. 
p. 124 
4L> The principles of armed neutrality were first formulated in a declaration by 
Catherine II of February 28 (March 11), 1780, during the War of American 
Independence. It proclaimed the right of neutral states to carry on trade with 
belligerent ones and the inviolability of enemy property (except war 
contraband) that was under a neutral flag. The declaration, supported by Austria, 
Denmark, Holland, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Portugal, Prussia and 
Sweden, provided the basis for the first Armed Neutrality (1780-83). 
In 1800, when Britain was at war with Napoleonic Prance, the second 
Armed Neutrality was formed by Denmark, Prussia, Russia and Sweden. 
p. 124 
4:1 The Manchester School—a trend in political economy reflecting the interests of 
the industrial bourgeoisie. It favoured free trade and non-interference by the 
state in the economy. The Free Traders' stronghold was Manchester, where the 
movement was led by textile manufacturers Richard Cobden and John Bright. 
In the early 1860s the Free Traders joined the Liberal Party. Speaking for the 
industrial bourgeoisie that strove to end the cotton monopoly of the Southern 
slave states, they opposed Britain's intervention in the US Civil War on the side 
of the South. p. 125 
44 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States. New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 123-27. p. 127 
''"' Marx uses the term ironically. The I'ietists were adherents of a mystical 
Lutheran trend that arose in Germany in the 17th century. It placed religious 
feeling above dogma and was opposed to the rationalist philosophy of the 
Enlightenment. Nineteenth-century pietism was distinguished by extreme 
mysticism and hypocrisy. p. 128 
"' "7VM/\  English minister"—an ironic reference to Lord Palmerston based on a 
passage from Lord Russell's speech in the House of Commons on June 20, 
1850.  Referring to Pahnerston, he said: "So long as we continue the 
government of this country, I can answer for my noble friend that he will act 
not as the Minister ... of any other country, but as the Minister ol England." 
On June 25. 1850. Palmerston, then Foreign Secretam, addressing the 
Commons, quoted the Latin phrase "civ is romanus sum" ("I am a Roman 
citizen") saving that just as this formula ensured general respect and prestige to 
I he citizens of ancient Rome, so British citizenship should guarantee  t he-
personal security and property of British subjects everywhere. The British 
bourgeoisie enthusiastically applauded this statement. p. I2N 

=====第412页=====
386 Notes 
147 Low Churchmen—members of the Church of England who assigned a low place 
to the episcopate and priesthood and to matters of ecclesiastical organisation. 
p. 128 
148 The Whig war—the Crimean war (1853-56) which was started by the Aberdeen 
Coalition Cabinet (see Note 31). p. 129 
149 penny paper—a new type of cheap, mass-circulation daily that emerged in 
Britain after the lifting of the Stamp Tax (see Note 29) in 1855. The penny 
papers mainly carried sensational news and scandal. p. 129 
150 An allusion to the war-mongering campaign launched by Napoleon III in 
January 1859 in connection with the preparations for the Austro-Italo-French 
war. Marx and Engels described these events in detail in their articles "The 
War Prospect in Europe", "The Money Panic in Europe" and "Louis 
Napoleon's Position" (see present edition, Vol. 16, pp. 154-57, 162-70). 
p. 130 
151 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 128-30. p. 131 
152 See Note 107. p. 132 
153 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 130-33. p. 134 
154 The "peace party" means the Free Traders or the Manchester School (see Note 
143).  p. 135 
155 An allusion to Palmerston who, taking advantage of the Italian revolutionary 
Orsini's attempt on the life of Napoleon III, tabled a Conspiracy Bill in 
Parliament in February 1858 to facilitate the extradition of political refugees 
living in Britain. The Bill was voted down and the Palmerston Cabinet was 
forced to resign. p. 135 
156 7 hjs refers to an incident during the Anglo-French-Chinese war (the second 
Opium War) of 1856-60. In June 1859 a British squadron, reinforced by one 
US and two French warships, attempted to seize the Dagha fortifications on the 
Peiho River. The attempt was repulsed, the attackers suffering heavy losses. 
p. 136 
1;1/ On December 26, 1861 the US government decided to release Mason and 
Slidell, the Confederate emissaries arrested on board the steamer Trent. In 
early January 1862, Mason,Slidell and their secretaries were brought to an English 
steamer. When informed of this, Russell declared that the British government was 
satisfied and considered the Trent incident closed. p. 137 
158 See Note 108. p. 138 
159 See Note 132. p. 139 
160 During his stay in London in 1850, Julius Haynau, an Austrian marshal 
notorious for his cruel repressive measures against participants in the 
revolutionary movement in Hungary and Italy, visited the brewery of Barclay, 
Perkins 8c Co., was physically attacked by its indignant workers and was forced 
to flee. The workers' action was warmly approved by the people of London. 
p. 140 
lßl Order in Council—in Great Britain, an order issued by the sovereign on the 
advice of the Privy Council (on the latter see Note 120). p. 141 

=====第413页=====
Notes 387 
u'2 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United  States,  New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 134-36. p. 143 
1('3 The suppression of Seward's message is here compared to the tendentious 
selection of documents in the Blue Book on Persia and Afghanistan published 
in 1839, when Palmerston was Foreign Secretary (see Note 33). On the Afghan 
war see Note 96. p. 144 
164 first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United  States,  New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 136-39. p. 145 
165 See Note 38. p. 147 
166 See Note 143. p. 147 
167 See Note 73. p. 149 
108 first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United  States,  New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 139-43. p. 153 
169 Anti-Jacobin war—see Note 108. 
Catholic Emancipation—see Note 29. 
Reform Bill (Act)—see Note 29. 
Corn Laws—see Note 29. 
The Ten Hours' Bill, limiting the working day for women and children to 
ten hours, was passed by the British Parliament on June 8, 1847. 
The war against Russia—the Crimean war (1853-56). 
Conspiracy  Bill—see Note 155. p. 153 
170 See Note 23. p. 154 
171 The  knife-and-fork question  was a plank of the social programme of Chartism. It 
was first put forward as a slogan by J. R. Stephens in his speech at a Chartist 
meeting in Kersall Moor, near Manchester, on September 24, 1838 (published 
in The Northern Star, No. 46, September 29, 1838). 
The People's  Charter,  which contained the Chartists' demands, was published 
in the form of a Parliamentary Bill on May 8, 1838. It contained six points: 
universal suffrage (for men of 21 and over), annual parliaments, vote by ballot, 
equal electoral districts, abolition of the property qualification for MPs, and 
payment of MPs. Petitions urging the adoption of the People's Charter were 
turned down by Parliament in 1839, 1842 and 1848. p. 154 
172 See Note 69. p. 155 
173 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 144-47. p. 157 
174 See Notes 107, 108, 127. p. 157 
175 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 147-50. p. 160 
176 See Note 23. p. 161 
177 The British East India Company, founded in 1600, enjoyed monopoly rights in 
trade with India, China and other Asian countries for a long time. In India, it 
also maintained an army and performed administrative functions. It was one of 
the principal initiators of colonial expansion and oppression. After the 1857-59 
popular insurrection in India the British government changed the form of 
colonial administration. In 1858 the East India Company was liquidated and 
the administration of India was transferred to the Crown. p. 162 

=====第414页=====
388 Notes 
178 The Anglo-French commercial treaty, concluded in January 1860, envisaged the 
reduction and partial lifting of tariffs for British and French goods. Under the 
March 1860 Turin treaty, the Kingdom of Sardinia ceded Savoy and Nice to 
Napoleon III in compensation for France's help in freeing Italy from Austrian 
rule.  p. 162 
179 Die Presse published this article, marked "From Our London Correspondent", in 
the Feuilleton section. Max Friedlander had asked Marx to write for this section, 
too, in his letter of January 7, 1862. p. 163 
180 pirs t published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 150-55. p. 167 
lsi Magna Charta Libertatum —the charter signed by King John of England on June 
15, 1215 under pressure from his insurgent barons supported by knights and 
townspeople. It restricted the king's rights, mostly to the benefit of the barons, 
and contained certain concessions to the knights and towns. Even in the 19th 
century, the British bourgeoisie regarded it as the mainstay of the Constitution­
al system. p. 168 
1S- This refers to the Déclaration réglant divers points de droit maritime (see Note 141). 
p. 169 
18S On the intervention in Mexico see Note 88. p. 169 
1S4 Under the peace treaty concluded after the 1859-60 Spanish-Moroccan war (see 
Note 89) the town of Tetuan was to remain under Spanish occupation until 
Morocco had paid out the entire contribution imposed by Spain. p. 170 
ls' 1 he last article by Marx to be published in the Neic-York Daily Tribune. Engels' 
last contribution to the Tribune—an article on the progress of the US Civil War 
written on about March 7, 1862 at Marx's request (see Note 194) — was not 
published by that newspaper. p. 172 
18(1 An allusion to the debates on the Trent incident in the British Parliament and 
in the press (see this volume, pp. 89-114, 127-48). p. 177 
|ST First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The C'ivil  War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 155-60. p. 178 
,ss "Ehe young Napoleon" was the name given to George McClellan by his 
Democratic supporters. McClellan was the first American general to become 
commander-in-chief at the early age of 34. p. 178 
]<S'J Fabian tactics—dilator) tactics, so named alter the Roman general Fabius, 
surnamed Cunctator ("the Delayer"), who adopted this tactic against Hannibal 
in 217 B.C., during the Second Punic War-. p. 179 
''-'" West Point, near New York, is the site of a United States Military Academy. 
Founded in 1802, it was the only higher' military educational establishment in 
the IS in the mid- 19th century. The complete isolation of the cadets from the 
external world fostered elitist and caste tendencies within the officer- corps. 
p. 179 
l"1 On the battles of Matrassas and Ball's  Bluff,  see Notes 44 and 105. p. 180 
'''-' First published irr English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 160-64. p. 182 
'"'"' See Note Ml. p. 185 

=====第415页=====
Notes 389 
194 On March 7, 1862 Engels wrote the first part of an article on the progress of 
the US Civil War for the New-York Daily Tribune at Marx's request. It is 
possible that on March 18 he wrote the second, concluding part (see Marx's 
letters to Engels of March 3 and 15, and Engels's letters to Marx of March 5 
and 8, 1862 in Vol. 41 of this edition). However, the Tribune did not publish 
this article (see Note 185). Engels made use of the first part for his article "The 
War in America" published in The Volunteer Journal, for Lancashire and Cheshire, 
March 14, 1862 (see present edition, Vol. 18, pp. 530-34). The text intended 
for the New-York Daily Tribune was translated by Marx into German. He 
added more recent data and sent the text to Die Presse. In this volume the 
article is given according to Die Presse. The beginning and the end of the 
section published in The Volunteer Journal and included in this article are 
indicated in footnotes. The version from Die Presse was first published in 
English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. The Civil War in the United States, 
New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 164-77. p. 186 
195 See Note 44. p. 187 
196 At Jemappes (November 6, 1792) and Fleurus (June 26, 1794) the French 
revolutionary army defeated the forces of the first coalition of European 
counter-revolutionary monarchies. At the battles of Montenotte, Castiglione 
and Rivoli, during the 1796-97 Italian campaign, the French army defeated the 
Austrian and Piedmontese forces. p. 187 
197 See Note 105. p. 189 
198 See Note 7. p. 192 
199 The cordon system, devised by the Austrian Field Marshal F. Lassy and broadly 
applied in Western Europe in the 18th century, called for the even distribution 
of the forces along the line of hostilities. p. 193 
200 At the battles of Millesimo and Dego (Northern Italy), fought between April 13 
and 15, 1796, Bonaparte's army defeated an Austrian contingent attached to 
the Piedmontese troops, and an Austrian force sent to its  relief.  Following this, 
the French inflicted a series of defeats on the Piedmontese army, compelling 
the King of Piedmont to conclude a separate peace. p. 193 
201 This refers to the occupation of Paris by the troops of the Sixth Coalition 
(Britain, Prussia, Russia, Sweden and other states) on March 31, 1814 and the 
deposition of Napoleon I on April 2, 1814. p. 193 
202 A reference to Russia's war of liberation against Napoleonic France's aggression 
in 1812. p. 194 
203 An ironic allusion to the trial in Paris during summer 1861 of the eminent 
banker Jules Isaak Mirés, who was accused of fraudulent stock exchange 
practices. The trial revealed the complicity of high-ranking officials of the 
Second Empire in scandalous financial machinations. 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, The Civil War in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp. 177-79. p. 196 
204 See Note 88. p. 196 
205 Marx means the occupation of Rome by French troops in July 1849, which 
continued until 1870, and the stationing of French troops in Athens and 
27—1134 

=====第416页=====
390 Notes 
Constantinople during the Crimean war (1853-56). In October 1860, British 
and French troops occupied Peking. p. 196 
206 Durin g the second Opium War (1856-60) unleashed by Britain and France to 
impose crippling new terms on China, the British and French interventionist 
forces under General Montauban in October 1860 seized Peking, the Chinese 
capital, and plundered and burnt down Yüanmingyüan, the famous summer 
residence of the Ch'ing emperors, the greatest treasure-house of Chinese art. 
The plundered property was valued at tens of millions of francs. An 
incalculable number of valuables were barbarously destroyed. p. 196 
207 On July 17, 1861 the Mexican Congress decreed a two-year suspension of 
payments on foreign debts, which was exploited by Britain, France and Spain 
as a pretext for launching an intervention in Mexico (see Note 88). To avoid 
war, the Mexican government of Benito Pablo Juarez in November 1861 
repealed the July 17 decree and agreed to satisfy the claims of the three 
powers. p. 196 
208 The conference of British, French and Spanish representatives in Orizaba, 
Mexico, held on April 9, 1862, was to outline a plan for the three 
interventionist powers' further action in Mexico. However, serious disagree­
ments came to light, with the French representative refusing to negotiate with 
the Mexican government and declaring the preliminary peace treaty, concluded 
in La Soledad on February 19, 1862,' null and void. The British and Spanish 
representatives declared that France was interfering in Mexico's internal affairs 
and their countries therefore refused to participate further in the intervention. 
Soon after the Orizaba conference, the British and Spanish troops were 
withdrawn from Mexico. p. 198 
209 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 180-83. p. 199 
210 New Orleans was surrendered on April 29, 1862, shortly after the fall of the 
forts protecting the approaches to the city from the Mississippi. The Northern 
troops entered New Orleans on May 1. p. 199 
211 Reuter, Havas, Wolff—news agencies in Britain, France and Germany, p. 199 
212 por  the Anglo-US war of 1812-14 see Note 107. 
Saragossa achieved fame with its part in Spain's national liberation struggle 
against Napoleon's troops. It resisted a siege in 1808, and held out for two 
months against another one the following year, but fell on February 21, 1809. 
Moscow was the heart of the nationwide resistance in Russia to Napoleon's 
invasion in 1812. The battle fought on September 7 at Borodino, near Moscow, 
largely predetermined the collapse of Napoleon's aggressive plans. p. 199 
213 The Crescent City—New Orleans, so called because the older part of the city 
was built within a bend of the Mississippi. p. 200 
214 Fj rst published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 183-85. p. 202 
215 The Act to prohibit the importation of slaves into any port or place within the 
jurisdiction of the United States, which came into force on January 1, 1808 (see 
Note 58), did not ban the slave trade within the territory of the United States. This 
trade, carried on between the slave states of the South and Southwest, was mostly 
confined to the coastal cities of the South. The ban on the importation of slaves 
from without was accompanied by an expansion of the internal slave trade, with 

=====第417页=====
Notes 391 
the Southern states of Maryland, Virginia and North Carolina supplying large 
numbers of slaves for sale. p. 203 
216 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 185-90. p. 204 
217 See Note 44. " p. 205 
218 This refers to the battles fought at Smolensk, August 16 to 18, and Borodino, 
September 7, 1812 in the course of Russia's liberation war against aggression by 
Napoleonic France. p. 207 
219 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 191-94. p. 209 
220 The Ionian Islands had been a British protectorate from 1815. The 1848-49 
revolt of the islands' Greek population, to which Marx refers, aimed at union 
with Greece. It was brutally crushed by the British. p. 209 
221 Ryots—hereditary lessees of state-owned lands in India. Here Indian 
peasants. p. 209 
222 The various Landlord and Tenant Bills envisaging easier terms for the tenants, 
first submitted to the British Parliament in the 1850s, were stubbornly resisted by 
the big landowners. In 1860 a half-hearted Landlord and Tenant Act was adopted 
which failed to solve the problem. Marx discussed the Act in his articles "From the 
Houses of Parliament.— Bulwer's Motion.— The Irish Question" and "General 
Simpson's Resignation.— From Parliament" (see present edition, Vol. 14, pp. 
340-43 and 470-71). p. 210 
223 Saguntum was a town in ancient Spain. Allied with Rome, it was attacked and 
seized after an eight-month siege by Hannibal's troops in 219 B.C. The people 
of the town rejected all proposals for surrender and immolated themselves. 
p. 210 
224 Statute law—a system of legal regulations based on the statutes, or Acts, of the 
British Parliament. p. 210 
225 ln the wake of the Irish national liberation uprising of 1798 the British 
Parliament, on Castlereagh's initiative, passed a series of acts in 1801 placing 
Ireland in a state of siege and suspending the Habeas Corpus Act, under which 
persons under arrest had to be brought before a court and presented with 
formal charges. p. 210 
226 Shortly after the December 2, 1851 coup d'état in France Palmerston, then 
British Foreign Secretary, approved of Louis Bonaparte's usurpation of power 
in a conversation with the French Ambassador to London. He did so without 
previously notifying the Cabinet, which led to his resignation in December 
1851,  although in principle the British government took a view identical to 
Palmerston's and was the first in Europe to recognise the Bonapartist regime. 
p. 211 
227 Zouaves was the name given to some French infantry regiments originally 
recruited from among the Berber tribe of the Zouaves in Algeria. p. 211 
228 The article was published with the editorial superscription "Our London 
correspondent writes:". p. 213 
229 An allusion to the mania for spiritualist practices that swept Europe, especially 
Germany, in the early 1850s. p. 216 

=====第418页=====
392 Notes 
230 See Note 2. p. 216 
231 In the early seventeenth century China was invaded by the Manchu tribes, 
which put the country under the rule of the Ch'ing dynasty (1644-1912). 
p. 216 
232 The Opium wars—aggressive wars waged against China by Britain, 1840 to 
1842,  and by Britain and France, 1856 to 1860. p. 216 
233 See Note 21. p. 221 
234 First published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 195-98. p. 223 
235 Marx means the 1856-57 Anglo-Persian war (see Note 97). p. 225 
236 jn  writing this article, in early August 1862, Marx drew on factual material 
contained in a letter to him by Engels of July 30, 1862. At the time, Marx and 
Engels differed to a degree in assessing the prospects of the US Civil War. Cf. 
the above-mentioned letter by Engels with Marx's letter to him of August 7, 
1862 (present edition, Vol. 41). 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, The Civil War in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp. 198-201.  p. 226 
237 See Note 54. p. 227 
238 The Homestead Act, adopted by the Lincoln Administration under popular 
pressure, was one of the revolutionary measures that turned the scales in the US 
Civil War in favour of the North. It provided a democratic solution to the 
agrarian problem by making available, for the nominal charge of $10, 160 acres 
of state-owned land to every US citizen and every person declaring that he 
wanted to become one. The land became the farmer's property after five years 
of cultivation, or earlier, if he paid $1.25 per acre. p. 228 
239 The Federal District of Columbia, comprising the US capital Washington and 
its environs, is an independent administrative unit. The abolition of slavery in 
the US capital had been one of the principal demands of the anti-slavery forces 
ever since the War of Independence (1775-83). The Act for the release of 
certain persons held to service or labour in the District of Columbia, passed on 
April 16, 1862, set free 3,000 Blacks, the government undertaking to pay $300 
in compensation for every released slave to the former owner. p. 228 
240 Under a law passed in Pennsylvania on March 1, 1780, all slaves born there 
after the passage of that law were to become free at the age of 28. 
p. 228 
241 Liberia—a West African republic formed in 1847 on the basis of settlements 
set up by the American Colonisation Society to encourage emigration of free 
Blacks from the United States. 
Haiti—a state in the western part of Hispaniola (Haiti) Island, a republic 
since 1859. 
The establishment, in June 1862, of diplomatic relations with the Black 
republics of Liberia and Haiti, which by then had been recognised by other 
states,  was a victory for the Abolitionists. At the same time, the Act to authorise the 
President of the United States to appoint diplomatic representatives to the 
Republics of Haiti and Liberia, respectively, aimed at encouraging the emigration 
of Blacks from the United States to these countries. The establishment of colonies 

=====第419页=====
Notes 393 
of free Blacks outside the US, a plank of Lincoln's programme, was emphatically 
opposed by revolutionary Abolitionists. p. 229 
242 This article, except for the passage relating to Garibaldi (p. 232), was first 
published in English in: Karl Marx, On America and the Civil War, New York, 
1972,  pp. 213-14. p. 230 
243 In a "Letter to the Bishop of Durham" published on November 4, 1850, 
Russell, then Prime Minister, attacked "Papal usurpation" in connection with a 
Bull of Pope Pius IX in which he claimed the right to appoint Catholic bishops 
and archbishops in England. For details see Marx's exposé "Lord John Russell" 
(present edition, Vol. 14, pp. 371-93). 
In a message of October 27, 1860 to Sir James Hudson, British minister in 
Turin, Russell, who was Foreign Secretary at the time, condemned the attitude 
of Austria, France, Prussia and Russia and approved of Southern Italy's union 
with the Kingdom of Sardinia and of the policy of Victor Emmanuel II, who 
exploited the Italian people's revolutionary movement for his own dynastic 
ends.  The message also said that peoples were entitled to depose their rulers, 
which was a sally against Napoleon III. p. 231 
244 Firs t published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 201-29. p. 233 
245 See Note 69. p. 233 
246 Chambers of  commerce,  in the USA, are regional associations of businessmen. The 
Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York, set up in 1768, is the oldest. 
p. 234 
247 The Whig party in the USA (1834-54) spoke for the Northern bourgeoisie and 
the Southern planters economically linked with it. It opposed the strengthening 
of Federal power and favoured protective tariffs and industrial development in 
the South, as well as in the North. Whig candidates won twice at Presidential 
elections, in 1840 (William H. Harrison) and 1848 (Zachary Taylor). Composed of 
motley elements, the party disintegrated in the early 1850s, the Northern Whigs 
flocking to the new Republican Party (see Note 9) in 1854, and the "cotton Whigs" 
joining the pro-slavery Democratic Party (see Note 13). p. 235 
248 A reference to the Seven Days' Battle (June 25-July 1, 1862) fought on the 
approaches to Richmond, by the river Chickahominy whose marshy banks were 
unsuitable for military operations. It ended in the retreat of the Northern army 
commanded by McClellan. p. 235 
249 This refers to events connected with Garibaldi's military campaign in 
July-August 1862 aimed at freeing Rome from Papal rule and French 
occupation (see also p. 232 of this volume). Under pressure from Napoleon III, 
the King of Italy, Victor Emmanuel II, sent troops against Garibaldi. On 
August 29 Garibaldi was seriously wounded in a skirmishing action near 
Aspromonte and taken prisoner. He was kept under arrest for a long time. 
The attack on Italy's national hero caused indignation in many countries, 
including Britain. p. 236 
250 The 1494 Italian campaign of King Charles VIII of France ushered in a series 
of wars for possession of Italy and hegemony in Europe between France on the 
one hand and Spain and the Holy Roman Empire on the other. Fought mostly 
on Italian soil, these wars were brought to an end in 1559 by the peace of 

=====第420页=====
394 Notes 
Cateau-Cambrésis, where two treaties were concluded. France renounced its 
claims to Italian possessions. Spain's supremacy in the Italian peninsula was 
consolidated and Italy's political fragmentation hardened. p. 236 
251 According to Roman tradition, the patrician general Manlius Capitolinus was 
awakened at night by the cackling of the geese sacred to Juno just in time to 
repulse an attack on the Capitol by the Gauls. Later he sided with the plebeians 
against the patricians and was accused of seeking to establish a dictatorship. For 
the trial, a place was chosen from which no one could see the Capitol that 
Manlius had saved. He was sentenced to death and hurled down from the 
Tarpeian rock. p. 236 
252 An allusion to the February 1848 revolution in France. p. 237 
253 There were three partitions of Poland (1772, 1793 and 1795) by Prussia, tsarist 
Russia and Austria (which did not take part in the second one). As a result of 
the third partition the Polish state ceased to exist. p. 237 
254 Praetorians—a privileged section of the army in imperial Rome, originally the 
generals' guards; in a figurative sense, mercenary troops propping up a system 
of government based on brute force. p. 237 
255 This refers to the second Great Exhibition, held in London from May to 
November 1862. p. 239 
256 The article is based on data sent to Marx by Wilhelm Wolff from Manchester in 
a letter written between September 10 and 12, 1862. It reveals the demagogic 
nature of the 1861 political amnesty in Prussia (see Note 257) and was rather 
widely read in Germany. The article appeared in the Barmer Zeitung and was 
reprinted in the Niederrheinische Volks-Zeitung and the Märkische Volks-Zeitung. 
p. 243 
257 In connection with the enthronement of King William I of Prussia, an amnesty 
was granted on January 12, 1861 ("Supreme Decree on Amnesty for Political 
Crimes and Transgressions, January 12,  1861",  Königlich-Preußischer Staats-
Anzeiger, January 13, 1861) guaranteeing all political refugees unhindered 
return to the domains of the Prussian state. p. 243 
258 xhis refers to the Frankfurt Parliament or the German Assembly, which opened 
in Frankfurt am Main on May 18, 1848. It was convened to unify the country 
and draw up a Constitution. The liberal deputies, who were in the majority, 
turned the Assembly into a virtual debating club. At the decisive moment of the 
revolution, the liberal majority condoned the counter-revolutionary forces. In 
spring 1849, the liberals left the Assembly after the Prussian and other 
governments had rejected the Imperial Constitution that it had drawn up. The 
remainder of the Assembly moved to Stuttgart and was dispersed by the 
Württemberg forces on June 18. Marx calls it the Rump by analogy with the 
remainder of the Long Parliament after it had been purged by Cromwell 
during the English Revolution of the 17th century. p. 244 
259 Marx means legal advisers on the staff of government bodies. p. 244 
260 An  aj]usion to the resignation of Palmerston's Cabinet in February 1858 over 
the Commons' rejection of his Conspiracy Bill (see Note 155). p. 246 
261 This refers to the rise of the Chartist movement in the summer and autumn of 
1842 in connection with the aggravation of the economic crisis in the spring of 

=====第421页=====
Notes 395 
that year. In early August 1842, workers downed tools at a firm in 
Staleybridge, near Manchester, the strike soon spreading to the country's main 
industrial areas. The workers' initial demands were economic, but the strike 
rapidly grew into a political struggle for the Charter. It was only by bringing in 
the army that the ruling classes were able to quash the strike. Government 
repressions followed, and the Chartist movement subsided for a time. A slight 
improvement of business was a contributing factor. These events were 
described in detail by Engels in The Condition of the Working-Class in England 
(present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 520-23). p. 246 
Die Presse published this article with the following editorial introduction: "The 
defeat at Hagerstown of the Confederate forces that had invaded Maryland 
from Virginia across the Potomac, a defeat which compelled them to pull back 
to Virginia, and President Lincoln's September 22 Proclamation, which 
abolishes slavery as of January 1, 1863, constitute a turning-point in the North 
American events. Our London correspondent, whose judgment is not biased by 
the language of the English papers, which are almost without exception 
sympathetic to the South and the cause of slavery, has the following to say 
about the new situation in North America:". 
Marx discussed the problems dealt with in the article in his letters to Engels 
of September 10 and October 29, 1862 (see present edition, Vol. 41). 
The article was first published in English in Political Affairs, No. 2, 1959, 
pp. 18-21.  p. 248 
The Confederates' offensive in Maryland launched on September 4, 1862 
ended in their defeat at Antietam Creek near Sharpsburg on September 17. 
p. 248 
The Confederate forces that invaded Kentucky on September 12, 1862 were 
defeated by Unionist troops at Perryville on October 8. p. 248 
The Great West—the western states of the USA. The Western fanners decided 
the outcome of the struggle against slavery in the Civil War (1861-65). 
p. 249 
This refers to rhe Confederates' successful advance into Kentucky in early 
September 1861, which resulted in Kentucky's joining the Confederacy in 
December. p. 249 
Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation, published on September 22, 1862, declared 
all Black slaves in the rebellion-ridden areas free as of January 1, 1863. All 
Blacks were granted the right to enrol in the army and navy. The 
emancipation of the Blacks, carried out under popular pressure after a series 
of military setbacks, marked the adoption of revolutionary methods of warfare 
by the North. At the same time, the Proclamation was half-hearted and 
inconsistent, since it withheld emancipation from slaves in areas controlled by 
the Federal forces. p. 250 
One of Lincoln's occupations as a young man was splitting fence rails, which 
earned him the nickname of Rail Splitter among his Republican supporters 
during the 1860 Presidential campaign. Lincoln was.a member of the House of 
Representatives (not a Senator) from 1847 to 1849. p. 250 
The revolutionary events in Greece, from February 1862 onwards, were a 
reaction to the country's exceedingly grave economic position, the aftermath of 
the Anglo-French occupation of 1854-57. The struggle, headed by the national 
bourgeoisie, was directed against foreign domination of the economy and 

=====第422页=====
396 Notes 
political life. On October 22, 1862 the Athens garrison mutinied and was 
supported by the city's entire population. A provisional government was 
formed which proclaimed the deposition of King Otho (Othon) of Bavaria. 
However, in June 1863, Britain, France and Russia, Greece's protectors under 
the 1832 convention, signed a protocol enthroning Prince William of Denmark 
as King of Greece under the name of George I of the Hellenes. 
Veillard was a French businessman connected with the organising commit­
tee of the Great Exhibition in London (see Note 255). His bankruptcy, 
announced in September 1862, shortly before the closure of the Exhibition, 
caused a sensation in the press. p. 252 
270 Marx set forth the basic ideas of this article in his letter to Engels of October 
29, 1862. In his reply (Nov. 5) Engels agreed with Marx's overall assessment of 
the Southerners' defeat in Maryland and his other statements, but was more 
critical of the Northerners' policy (see present edition, Vol. 41). 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, The Civil War in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, 
pp. 206-10. p. 256 
271 On the battles of Antietam Creek and Perryville see Notes 263 and 264. 
p. 257 
272 This passage is based on inaccurate reports published, e.g. in the New-York 
Daily Tribune of October 20, 1862. Actually, it was in July 1863 that Morgan's 
detachment was beaten and Morgan taken prisoner. p. 257 
273 At the battle of Corinth (Mississippi), fought on October 3 and 4, 1862, the 
Unionist forces under General Rosecrans defeated the Confederates com­
manded by generals Van Dorn, Price and Lovell. p. 257 
274 In 1845-47 there was famine in Ireland due to the ruin of farms and the 
pauperisation of the peasants. Although blight had caused a great shortage of 
potatoes, the principal diet of the Irish peasants, the English landlords 
continued to export food from the country, condemning the poorest sections of 
the population to starvation. About a million people starved to death and the 
new wave of emigration caused by the famine swept away another million. As a 
result, large areas of Ireland were depopulated and the deserted land was 
turned into pasture by the Irish and English landlords. p. 257 
275 The War of Independence (1775-83)—the revolutionär) liberation war against 
Britain of its thirteen North American colonies which culminated in the 
establishment of the independent United States of America. p. 258 
276 See Note 107. p. 258 
277 This article was published in the column "America" with the editorial note: 
"Our London correspondent writes on the 7th inst.:". Since the editors of the 
present publication have no access to the Confederate newspapers used by 
Marx, the quotations from them have been retranslated from the German. 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx, On America and the 
Civil War, New York, 1972, pp. 227-29. p. 260 
278 See Note 273. p. 260 
279 This refers to the Confederates' abortive attempt, on October 20, 1862, to 
recapture Nashville, surrendered at the end of February. p. 260 
280 At Bethel (near Hampton, Virginia) a five-hour battle was fought on June 10, 
1861,  with the Southerners carrying the day. 

=====第423页=====
Notes 397 
On the battle of Bull Run, near Manassas, see Note 44. p. 261 
281 As a political or constitutional principle states' rights may be found in the Tenth 
Amendment to the Constitution adopted in 1791: "The powers not delegated 
to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the states, are 
reserved to the states respectively or to the people." p. 262 
282 xhis article was included in a large editorial review, "Peace Prospects in America", 
published on November 23, 1862. The article was introduced by the following 
editorial note: "As regards the latest election in the Northern states of the Union, 
to which so much importance is attached in Paris and London, we present here an 
account from our London correspondent, who is well informed on American 
affairs:". 
Marx outlined the basic content of this article in a letter to Engels of 
November 17, 1862 (see present edition, Vol. 41). 
The article was first published in English in: Karl Marx, On America and the 
Civil War, New York, 1972, pp.  230-31.  p. 263 
283 xhis refers to the Congressional elections in the Northern states and the 
election of the Governor of New York State, both held on November 4, 1862. 
The Republicans won in most states, but lost a considerable number of votes to 
the Democrats in New York and the Northwest. The New York governorship 
went to Democrat Horatio Seymour. p. 263 
284 See Note 247. p. 264 
285 Marx means the French government's message to the governments of Britain 
and Russia of October 30, 1862 calling for joint action by the three powers to 
impose a ceasefire, lift the blockade and open the Southern ports to European 
trade. Britain and Russia rejected this proposal for interference in the internal 
affairs of the United States. p. 265 
286 xhis article was published by Die Presse in the column "America", with the 
editorial note: "Our London correspondent writes:". 
It was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The 
Civil War in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 210-14. 
p. 266 
287 During their invasion of Maryland, the Southern troops under General 
T. J. Jackson on September 15, 1862, after three days' fighting, seized Harper's 
Ferry, an important town on the Potomac with a garrison of 10,000 and a large 
arsenal, burned down all the government buildings and withdrew four days 
later. p. 267 
288 jrirst  published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, The Civil War 
in the United States, New York, 1937, London, 1937, pp. 214-17. p. 270 
289 xhe cruiser Alabama was built and fitted in England under a Confederacy 
contract. On June 23, 1862, soon after she was launched, Charles Francis 
Adams, the US envoy to London, lodged a protest with the British government. 
Nevertheless, the latter allowed the cruiser to sail to the Azores, where she was 
armed. Between 1862 and 1864 the cruiser destroyed about 70 North 
American ships. The talks with the British government on compensation for 
the damage caused by the Alabama and other privateers built in England lasted 
until 1872, ending in the signing of an agreement obliging Britain to pay $15.5 
million to the USA. p. 270 
290 An allusion to Lincoln's Emancipation Proclamation (see Note 267). p. 271 

=====第424页=====
398 Notes 
291 Marx's letter was written in connection with the publication in the Berliner 
Reform, on April 10, 1863, of a note giving a distorted account of Marx's 
negotiations with Lassalle on the joint publication of a newspaper during 
Marx's stay in Berlin in the spring of 1861 (see his letter to Engels of May 7, 
1861 in Vol. 41 of the present edition). The Editors of the Berliner Reform 
introduced the letter with the words: "We have received the following note 
from Karl Marx in London:". p. 273 
292 yhis work was intended for the Darmstadt weekly Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, to 
which Engels contributed from August 1860 to July 1864. His articles for the 
weekly written between 1860 and 1862 (they were signed F. E.) dealt with the 
Volunteer movement in Britain. In the present edition they are in Volume 18, 
as are his articles written for the Volunteer Journal, for Lancashire and Cheshire. 
Of Engels's articles for the AMZ written in 1863 and 1864, only one, "England's 
Fighting Forces as against Germany", was published in the weekly (see this 
volume). Three more articles remained in manuscript. 
The present one deals with A. W. Kinglake's book The Invasion of the 
Crimea, published in the first half of 1863. As can be seen from Engels's letters 
to Marx of June 11 and 24 (present edition, Vol. 41), Engels was very critical of 
the book, especially of Kinglake's description of the battle of the Alma. It was 
probably then that he decided to write a critical review of the book. 
Apparently, he worked on the article "Kinglake on the Battle of the Alma" 
until the end of the month. It exists in the form of a rough draft, which has 
reached us incomplete. The end of section I and the beginning and end of 
section II (pages 5, 6 and 9 of the manuscript) are missing. The manuscript 
breaks off on page 17. Page 1 bears the initials "F. E.". The article was not 
finished and not sent to the AMZ, presumably because Engels discovered in the 
weekly's literary supplement (Nos. 15, 23 and 24, April 11, and June 6 and 13) 
a critical review of Kinglake's book by another writer, marked "5" (its 
conclusion appeared in Nos. 30 and 31, on July 25 and August 1, 1863). 
The battle of the Alma took place on September 20, 1854. The Russian 
forces were commanded by A. S. Menshikov, and the numerically superior 
forces of the French, British and Turks by Saint-Arnaud and Raglan. It was the 
first battle after the Allies' landing in the Crimea (at Eupatoria) on September 
14. The defeat and withdrawal of the Russian troops opened up the way to 
Sevastopol for the Allies. Engels described the battle in his article "Alma" 
written for the New American Cyclopaedia (see present edition, Vol. 18). 
p. 274 
293 In the preface to his book Kinglake says he had, in manuscript English 
translation made by a Russian officer (whom he does not name), the following 
memoirs of Russian generals that had fought on the Alma: 
O. Kwizinski, "More Details on the Alma", Letter to the Editor of the Russki 
invalid (Russki  invalid,  No. 84, April 12, 1856); 
P. Gorchakov, "Remarks on the Article 'More Details on the Battle of the 
Alma', published in Russki  invalid,  No. 84" (Russki  invalid,  No. 101, May 8, 
1856); 
V. Kirjakow, "More Details on the Battle of the Alma" (Russki  invalid, 
No. 136, June 21, 1856). p. 274 
294 See Note 82. P- 274 
295 In 1849, the Bavarian Palatinate, along with Saxony, Prussia and Baden, was a 
centre of the struggle in defence of the Imperial Constitution adopted by the 

=====第425页=====
Notes 399 
Frankfurt National Assembly on March 27, 1849 and rejected by the King of 
Prussia and other German monarchs. Engels fought in the ranks of the 
Baden-Palatinate insurgents against the Prussian troops, but sharply criticised 
the political and military blunders of the petty-bourgeois leaders of the uprising. 
He described these events in The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution 
and Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Germany (present edition, Vols. 10 and 
11). p. 277 
296 See Note 227. p. 279 
297 This refers to the national liberation uprising of 1857-59 against British rule in 
India. It flared up among the Sepoy units of the Bengal army (the Sepoys were 
Indian mercenaries commanded by British officers) and spread to vast regions 
of Northern and Central India. Peasants and poor artisans from the towns took 
an active part in the movement, but the leaders were, as a rule, local feudal 
lords.  The uprising was defeated because of communal differences among the 
insurgents and the military and technical superiority of the British. p. 283 
298 xhis article, intended for the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung, was not published in 
that paper. Each of the two sections of the manuscript bears the superscription 
"F. E.", in keeping with the paper's practice of giving only the contributors' 
initials. In all probability, Engels wrote the article in September 1863, since he 
mentions military events in the USA which took place in late August and news 
of which could not have reached Europe until the next month. In Europe, an 
armed conflict was brewing between the states of the German Confederation 
and Denmark in which other European powers could get involved, including the 
Bonapartist Second Empire, which was claiming the left bank of the Rhine. The 
first section of the article is, in content, a sequel to Engels' article "The American 
Civil War and the Ironclads and Rams", published in Die Presse at the beginning 
of July 1862 (this volume, pp. 213-15). p. 289 
299 Engels means the possibility of war between the German Confederation and 
Denmark in connection with the aggravation, in the latter half of 1863, of the 
German-Danish dispute over the duchies of Schleswig and Holstein which, 
though populated mostly by Germans, were subject to the Danish Crown. 
During the 1848-49 revolution, an anti-Danish national liberation movement 
spread in the duchies which was, however, suppressed. The London protocol of 
May 8, 1852 on the integrity of Denmark, signed by Austria, Britain, Denmark, 
France, Russia and Sweden, declared the duchies to be associated with the 
Danish Crown in personal union. Prussia's ruling circles were seeking the 
duchies' union with Germany as the first step towards establishing a united 
Germany under Prussia's aegis. The constant attempts of Denmark's ruling 
classes fully to subject the duchies by depriving them of their autonomy 
provided Prussia with a pretext for starting war preparations, ostensibly acting 
on behalf of the German Confederation. In February 1864, Prussia and Austria 
opened hostilities against Denmark, which ended in the latter's defeat. The 
Vienna peace treaty of October 30, 1864 proclaimed Schleswig, Holstein and 
Lauenburg co-possessions of Austria and Prussia, thus setting the stage for 
disputes between the two. p. 292 
300 Presumably an allusion to the rights obtained by Prussia, Mecklenburg-
Schwerin, Mecklenburg-Strelitz, the Hanseatic towns and other member states 
of the German Customs Union under the treaty with China signed in Tientsin 
on September 2, 1861 and ratified in Shanghai on January 14, 1863. It granted 
German subjects the same privileges as had been secured by the British and 

=====第426页=====
400 Notes 
301 French as a result of the Anglo-Franco-Chinese war of 1856-60 (extraterritori­
ality, the right of trade and anchorage in a number of ports,etc.)- At the time, 
German firms were trading in Hong Kong and other open Chinese ports. 
p. 292 
Engels discusses Montalembert's fortification system in greater detail in the 
article "Fortification", written for the New American Cyclopaedia (present 
edition. Vol. 18). p. 293 
30~ The hostilities in the Bomarsund Strait (off the Aland Islands in the Baltic) 
during the Crimean war were described by Engels in the two articles "The 
Capture of Bomarsund" written for the New-York Daily Tribune (present 
edition, Vol. 13) and in the article "Bomarsund" written for the New American 
Cyclopaedia (present edition, Vol. 18). p. 293 
303 The Italian war—the war of France and the Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont) 
against Austria, which lasted from April 29 to July 8, 1859. It was unleashed by 
Napoleon III who, under the pretext of "liberating" Italy, sought to seize new 
territories and consolidate his regime at home. The Italian liberal bourgeoisie 
hoped in the course of the war to unify Italy under the Savoy dynasty ruling in 
Piedmont. Napoleon III, however, was worried by the scope of the Italian 
national liberation movement against the Austrian oppressors and, after several 
victories by the Franco-Piedmontese forces, concluded a separate peace treaty 
with Austria in Villafranca on July 11, behind Sardinia's back. France obtained 
Savoy and Nice, Lombardy was annexed to Sardinia, while Venetia remained 
under Austrian rule. p. 293 
304 General Gillmore bombarded Fort Pulaski, held by the Confederates, on April 
10 and 11, 1862. As Engels says further in the article, the information at his 
disposal was unreliable. Actually, Gillmore used rifled, not smoothbore, guns at 
Fort Pulaski. p. 293 
305 port Wagner, which covered Fort Sumter, was first bombarded by the Unionists 
on July 10, 1863. The regular siege and bombardment of the fort began on 
July 18. The Confederates evacuated it on the night of September 6. 
p. 294 
306 port Sumter covered the approaches to Charleston from the sea. The Unionist 
forces, commanded by Dahlgren, attempted to seize it on September 8, 1863, 
after the bombardment described by Engels. Their landing having failed, the 
Unionists abandoned their plan for capturing Charleston from the sea. It was not 
taken until February 1865. p. 295 
307 The Proclamation on Poland was written by Marx at the request of the German 
Workers' Educational Society in London (see Note 308), which had set up a 
committee to raise funds for the participants in the Polish uprising of 1863-64. 
The Proclamation was first published in English in: Karl Marx, Surveys from 
Exile, Vol. 2, Harmondsworth, 1973, pp. 354-56. p. 296 
308 The German Workers' Educational Society in London was founded in February 
1840 by Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll and other members of the League of the 
Just (an organisation of German craftsmen and workers, and also of emigrant 
workers of other nationalities). After the League of the Just was reorganised 
into the Communist League in the summer of 1847, the latter's local 
communities played the leading role in the Society. During various periods of 
its activity, the Society had branches in working-class districts in London. In 

=====第427页=====
Notes 401 
1847 and 1849-50, Marx and Engels took an active part in its work, but on 
September 17, 1850, they and a number of their followers withdrew because 
the Willich-Schapper adventurist sectarian faction had temporarily increased its 
influence in the Society, causing a split in the Communist League. In the 1850s, 
Marx and Engels resumed their work in the Educational Society, which existed 
until 1918, when it was closed down by the British government. p. 296 
309 This refers to the Central National Committee, which in January 1863 headed 
the national liberation uprising in the parts of Poland held by Tsarist Russia. 
Though inspired by the striving to end tsarist oppression, the 1863-64 uprising 
also reflected the crisis of feudal relations in the Kingdom of Poland. At the 
beginning of the uprising the National Committee announced a programme of 
struggle for Poland's independence and put forward a number of democratic 
agrarian demands. In May 1863, the Committee assumed the name of National 
Government. However, its inconsistency and indecision, in particular its failure 
to abolish the privileges of the big landowners, alienated the peasants, the 
majority of whom stayed away from the uprising. This was one of the main 
causes of its defeat. The movement was, by and large, crushed by the Tsarist 
government in the autumn of 1863, though some units of the insurgents 
continued the struggle until the end of 1864. p. 296 
310 See Note 253. p. 296 
311 Under the impact of the July 1830 revolution in France and the 1830-31 
uprising in Poland, there was an upsurge of opposition feeling almost in all the 
states of the German Confederation in 1831-32. On May 27, 1832, a political 
demonstration by members of the South German liberal and radical 
bourgeoisie took place at the castle of Hambach, in the Bavarian Palatinate. As 
well as demanding Constitutional reforms and urging German unity, the 
participants in the "Hambach Festival" hoisted the Polish national flag in 
solidarity with the fighting Poles. In retaliation, the reactionary Federal Diet, 
the central body of the German Confederation, in June and July 1832 adopted 
six articles banning political demonstrations of any kind, introducing strict 
censorship of the press and severer punishment for political crimes, and calling 
for other repressive measures. The articles evoked widespread protests. 
p. 296 
312 The National Association was formed at a congress of bourgeois liberals from 
different German states meeting in Frankfurt am Main on September 15 and 
16, 1859. The Association's aim was the union of Germany under Prussia's 
aegis.  It was disbanded in November 1867. p. 297 
313 Engels presumably conceived this article in late 1863, after reading a series of 
items on the organisation of the British army in the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung 
published between August and November. He, for his part, intended to review 
the British army's development and contemporary condition. He must have 
started work on the article at the end of 1863 and written part of the text in 
early 1864. The article was not published in the paper. The manuscript consists 
of seven sheets covered with writing on both sides and numbered by the 
author. The end is missing. The first page is superscribed "F. E.", as in other 
manuscripts by Engels intended for the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung (see Notes 
292 and 298). p. 298 
314 An allusion to the demarches of the British government (its messages of 
November 25 and December 31, 1863) in connection with the aggravation of 
the German-Danish dispute after the death of King Frederick VII of Denmark 

=====第428页=====
402 Notes 
on November 15, 1863 and the promulgation of a new Constitution proclaiming 
the final incorporation of Schleswig and Holstein into the domains of the Danish 
monarch (see Note 299). p. 298 
315 The British East India Company was set up at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century. It had the monopoly of trade with the East Indies and played a 
decisive part in establishing the British colonial empire. The Company was 
liquidated in 1858, during the 1857-59 national liberation uprising in India (see 
Note 297). Marx characterised the Company in his article "The East India 
Company.— Its History and Results" (present edition, Vol. 12). p. 301 
316 The sale of officers' commissions in Britain originated at the end of the 
seventeenth century and was later legalised by Royal sanction. In 1719-20, an 
official rate was introduced, which was repeatedly modified in later years. The 
system existed until 1871. p. 302 
317 An allusion to the wars the British had waged from 1843 against New Zealand's 
indigenous Maori population, who had inflicted a series of defeats on the 
colonial troops. It was not until 1872 that the British succeeded in pushing the 
Maoris back to the most infertile lands, thus dooming them to starvation. 
p. 302 
318 Aldershot—a military camp about 50 miles from London set up as a drill 
ground in 1855, during the Crimean war. p. 302 
319 The military school at Sandhurst, some 50 miles from London, was established in 
1802.  It trained officers for the infantry and cavalry. p. 303 
320 In 1806, a British expedition led by General Beresford and Captain Popham 
was sent to capture Buenos Aires, which belonged to Spain, then an ally of 
Napoleonic France. Meeting with no serious resistance from the Spanish 
colonial forces, Beresford's detachment seized the city, but was encircled and 
compelled to surrender by patriotic Argentine militias. Another British 
expedition, sent to the mouth of the River Plate in 1807, also failed. 
p. 304 
321 See Note 297. p. 310 
322 The French Foreign Legion, formed in 1831, was recruited mainly from criminal 
and other déclassé elements of foreign extraction living in France. 
The substitution system was for a long time practised in the French army. It 
was a privilege for the propertied classes, allowing them to buy themselves out 
of military service by hiring substitutes. The practice was banned during the 
French Revolution but legalised again by Napoleon I. Under a law passed in 
1853,  substitutes were selected mainly by the authorities and the payment for 
them contributed to a special "army donation" fund. The substitution system 
was abolished in 1872. p. 312 
323 See Note 227. p. 312 
324 This refers to the Peninsular, or Spanish, war (1808-14) fought by Britain 
against Napoleonic France on Spanish and Portuguese territory. Meanwhile, 
the Spanish and Portuguese peoples were fighting a war of independence 
against France. p. 313 
325 See Note 299. p. 317 
326 Engels means the battle of Waterloo (see Note 82). p. 319 

=====第429页=====
Notes " 403 
327 See Note 314. p. 321 
328 No such report by Engels appeared in the Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung. 
p. 325 
529 Marx wrote these notes in late May and early June 1864, after Wilhelm Wolff's 
death on May 9. He intended to write a detailed biography of  Wolff,  one of his 
closest friends and associates, and collected data on his life. However, the 
project failed to materialise. In 1876, Engels carried it out, in part, by writing 
an extensive article titled "Wilhelm  Wolff",  which appeared in the journal Neue 
Welt, Nos. 27, 28, 30, 31, 40-45 and 47 (see Vol. 24 of the present edition). 
p. 335 
330 Silberberg was the prison in Silesia to which Wolff was confined for being a 
member of a student association and for "crimes against His Majesty, the King 
of Prussia". He was nicknamed Casemate Wolf for his article "Die Kasemat­
ten", describing the slums of Breslau, which was published in the Breslauer 
Zeitung, No. 271, on November 18, 1843, and caused a public outcry. 
p. 335 
331 The Bureau de Correspondance, set up by the German democratic journalist 
Sebastian Seiler (later a member of the Communist League) in Brussels in 
1845,  gathered, translated and forwarded to German newspapers news items 
and articles from the British, French and Belgian press, giving them, as far as 
possible, a Social-Democratic tendency, a fact later noted by Engels in his article 
"Wilhelm  Wolff"  (present edition. Vol. 24). The Bureau maintained close links 
with the Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee established by Marx 
and Engels. In October 1847, when Seiler for unknown reasons withdrew from 
the Bureau, it was headed by Wolff and Louis Heilberg. p. 335 
332 Following the imposition of martial law in Cologne on September 26, 1848, 
publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung was suspended and a number of its 
editors (Engels,  Wolff,  Bürgers and others) were charged with sedition. To 
evade arrest Wolff went into hiding in Dürkheim, Palatinate, but soon secretly 
returned to Cologne and resumed his work with the newspaper. p. 335 
333 Addressing the Frankfurt National Assembly (see Note 258) on May 26, 1849, 
Wolff,  a deputy for Silesia, demanded the outlawing of Archduke John (the 
Imperial Regent) and his Ministers as the worst traitors to the nation (see 
Engels's article "Wilhelm  Wolff"  in Vol. 24 of the present edition). 
p. 335 
334 See Note 258. p. 335 
335  See  Note 257. p. 336 
336 In connection with the amnesty granted by the Prussian government (see Note 
257) Marx, during his stay in Berlin, March 17 to April 12, 1861, submitted an 
application to the Prussian government requesting the restoration of his 
Prussian citizenship (on his earlier steps in this matter see Vol. 7, pp. 407-10). 
With the working-class movement on the rise and a revolutionary crisis brewing 
in Germany, Marx probably wished to resume his political activity in Germany 
when the time was ripe for it. Marx's applications, published in the Appendices 
to this volume, were written for him by Ferdinand Lassalle and signed by 
Marx. His request was refused by the Berlin Police President and, in November 
of the same year, by the Prussian Minister of the Interior. p. 339 

=====第430页=====
404 Notes 
337 See Note 257. p. 339 
338 xhis document exists in two versions: a rough draft, written in Lassalle's hand, 
and a clean copy written in an unknown hand. The latter bears Marx's 
signature and, also in his hand, the inscription "Berlin, March 25,  1861".  It 
also bears notes by a police officer. p. 341 
339 Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Démocratie —organ of the proletarian 
revolutionary democrats during the German revolution of 1848-49, published 
under Marx's editorship. All the editors were members of the Communist 
League. As a rule, Marx and Engels wrote the editorials formulating the 
newspaper's stand on the most important questions of the revolution. 
The consistent revolutionary line of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, its militant 
internationalism and political accusations against the government displeased its 
bourgeois shareholders in the very first months of the paper's existence; its 
editors were persecuted by the government and attacked in the feudal-
monarchist and liberal-bourgeois press. Persecution by the legal authorities and 
police was intensified after the counter-revolutionary coup in Prussia in 
November and December 1848. 
In May 1849, when the counter-revolution went over to the offensive 
throughout Germany, the Prussian government expelled Marx from Prussia on 
the grounds that he was not a Prussian citizen. Because of Marx's expulsion 
and the stepped-up repressions against other editors, the Neue Rheinische 
Zeitung had to cease publication. Its last issue (No. 301), printed in red ink, 
came out on May 19, 1849. In their farewell address to the workers, the editors 
stated that "their last word will everywhere and always be: emancipation of the 
working class!" (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 467). p. 341 
340 The Statement exists in three versions: one penned by Lassalle and two others, 
which are copies made by an unknown person. One of the fair copies bears the 
words, in Marx's hand, "Your Excellency's obedient servant, Dr. Karl Marx". It 
also bears von Zedlitz's refusal, in his hand, which was copied by a clerk and sent 
to Marx (see this volume, p. 353). p. 345 
341 After the February 1848 revolution in France, F. Flocon, a member of the 
provisional government of the French Republic, in an official message of 
March 1 informed Marx that the Guizot government's January order on the 
expulsion of Marx from Paris had been rescinded and he invited Marx to 
return to France. p. 346 
342 The Preparliament (Preliminary Parliament), which met in Frankfurt am Main 
from March 31 to April 4, 1848, consisted of representatives of the German 
states,  most of them constitutional monarchists. The Preparliament passed a 
resolution to convoke an all-German National Assembly and produced a draft 
of the "Fundamental Rights and Demands of the German People". Although 
this document proclaimed certain rights and liberties, including the right of 
all-German citizenship for the residents of all German states, it did not touch 
the basis of the semi-feudal absolutist system in Germany. p. 351 
343 See the article "The Conflict between Marx and Prussian Citizenship" in Vol. 7 
of the present edition, pp. 407-10. p. 351 
344 This document is a handwritten form with the blanks filled in, presumably at 
Marx's dictation, in an unknown hand. In the present edition these insertions 
are indicated by italics. p. 355 
345 This refers to the German Federal Act (Bundesakte—Verordnung über die zu 

=====第431页=====
Notes 405 
bildende Repräsentation des Volks. Vom 22sten Mai 1815) adopted by the 
Congress of Vienna on June 8, 1815. The Act proclaimed the formation of a 
German Confederation consisting initially of 34 independent states and four 
free cities. The Federal Act hardened the political disunity of Germany and 
preserved the absolutist feudal regime in the German states. p. 357 
346 The Federal Diet (Bundestag)—the central body of the German Confederation 
(see Note 345) which consisted of representatives of the German states and 
held its sessions in Frankfurt am Main. Having no actual power, it nevertheless 
served as an instrument of monarchist feudal reaction. The formation in 1867 
of the North German Confederation under Prussia's hegemony put an end to 
the German Confederation and the Diet. p. 359 
347 The Schiller Institute in Manchester was set up in November 1859 in connection 
with the centenary of Friedrich Schiller's birth. Its founders intended it as a 
cultural and social centre for Manchester's German community. Initially Engels 
took no part in the Institute's activities as it bore the stamp of Prussian 
bureaucracy and pedantic formalism. In July 1864, after the Institute's rules 
had been amended, Engels became a member of its Directorate, and eventually 
its chairman. In these capacities he gave much of his time to the Institute and 
exerted an important influence on its activities. p. 360 
348 Engels means the following communication: 
"Manchester, May 2, 1861 
"Mr. Engels 
is herewith requested, in keeping with § 34 of the Supplementary Regulations, 
to return No. 14, V. Vogt, Altes und Neues, 2ter Bd., to the Library within 24 
hours. 
"The fine amounts to l/7d. Failure to comply with this request within 24 
hours entails an increase of this sum by 2/6d. 
Yours sincerely, 
By authorisation of the Directorate, 
V. Stössel, Librarian" 
p. 360 
349 This may refer to the Athenaeum Club, whose members were mostly men of 
letters and scholars. Athenaeum clubs existed in London, Manchester and other 
English cities. p. 362 
;i5° Appendix II has not been preserved. p. 362 

=====第432页=====
40Ö 
NAME INDEX 
A 
Adams, Charles Francis (1807-1886) — 
American diplomat and politician, 
Republican, Minister to England 
(1861-68).—89, 95, 97, 113, 143-44, 
146, 156 
Adams, John (1735-1826)—American 
statesman and diplomat, a leader of 
the moderate bourgeoisie during the 
American War of Independence 
(1775-83); first envoy in London 
(1785-88); second President of the 
United States (1797-1801).—8 
Albert (1819-1861) —Prince Consort of 
Queen Victoria of Great Britain 
(1840-61).—315 
Alexander of Macedon (Alexander the 
Great) (356-323 B.C.)—general and 
statesman of antiquity.— 271 
Almonte, Juan Nepomuceno (1804-
1869) — Mexican statesman and gen­
eral; supported the French interven­
tion in Mexico in 1862-67.—224. 
Anderson, Robert (1805-1871) — 
American army officer, general from 
May 1861; during the Civil War 
fought on the side of the Northern­
ers; commander of the garrison in 
Fort Sumter (December 1860-April 
1861).—34 Anichkov, Viktor Mikhailovich (1830-
1877) — Russian army officer and 
military writer.—275-76, 282 
Ariosto, Lodovico (1474-1533) — Italian 
poet of the Renaissance, author of 
L'Orlando furioso.— 64 
Armellini, Carlo (1777-1863) — member 
of Triumvirate of the Roman Repub­
lic (1849).—237 
Armstrong, William George, Baron of 
Cragside from 1887 (1810-1900) — 
English inventor, noted for his inven­
tion of a special type of rifled can­
non.—220, 291, 293-94, 323, 324 
Ashburton, Alexander Baring, Baron 
(1774-1848) —English banker and 
politician; was close to Tory; co-oper­
ated with US commercial circles.— 
112, 157 
Ashworth, Henry (1794-1880) —British 
manufacturer and politician; Free 
Trader; a founder of the Anti-Corn 
Law League; M. P.—160 
Atherton, Sir William (1806-1864) — 
British lawyer, Solicitor-General 
(1859-61), Attorney-General  (1861-
63).—92,  96, 98, 105, 127, 135, 138 
Aumale, Henri Eugène Philippe Louis 
d'Orléans, duc d' (1822-1897) —son 
of Louis Philippe, King of the 

=====第433页=====
Name Index 407 
French; took part in the conquest of 
Algeria in the 1840s; author of anti-
Bonapartist pamphlets.— 28 
Aurelle de Paladines, Louis Jean Baptiste 
d' (1804-1877)—French general; took 
part in the Crimean war (1853-56); 
in 1854-55 commanded a brigade.— 
278, 279 
B 
Ballantine, William (1812-1887) — 
British lawyer.—121, 164-66 
Bancroft, George (1800-1891) — 
American historian, diplomat and 
politician, Democrat; author of the 
History of the United States in ten 
volumes; was on the side of the 
North during the Civil War.—118 
Baring, Thomas (1799-1873) — 
financier, head of a banking house in 
London, Tory M. P.; Chancellor of 
the Exchequer (1852 and 1858).—30 
Bazancourt, César Lécat, baron de (1810-
1865) — French military writer, 
Bonapartist.— 280 
Bazley, Sir Thomas, Baronet (1797-
1885) — English manufacturer and 
politician, Free Trader; a founder of 
the Manchester Anti-Corn Law 
League; Chairman of the Manchester 
Chamber of Commerce (1845-59), 
M.P.—160-62 
Beales, Edmond (1803-1881) —English 
lawyer, radical; a member of the 
English Emancipation Society, which 
supported the Northerners during 
the US Civil War; President of the 
Reform League (1865-69).—155 
Beauregard,  Pierre Gustave Toutant 
(1818-1893)—American general; 
took part in the war against Mexico 
(1846-48); commanded the Southern 
troops in Virginia (1861-beginning of 
1862) and Mississippi (1862), later in 
Charleston (September 1862-ApriI 
1864);  bombarded and captured Fort 
Sumter on April  12-13,  1861.—33, 
200, 204-06, 207, 226 Bell,  Sir George (1794-1877) —British 
army officer; in 1854-55 fought in 
the Crimean War (1853-56).—284 
Bennett, James Gordon (1795-1872) — 
American journalist; adhered to the 
Democratic Party; founder and pub­
lisher of the newspaper New-York 
Herald;  during the Civil War came 
up for a compromise with Southern 
slave-owners.—181,  263 
Bentinck, G. W.  P.— British parliamen­
tary figure, Tory.—183 
Berger —German refugee in Britain; a 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; was 
on the committee raising funds for 
Polish insurgents during the Polish 
uprising of 1863-64.—297 
Berkeley, George Cranfield (1753-1818) — 
British admiral, Tory M. P.—141 
Bernard,  Simon François (1817-1862) — 
French politician, Republican; emi­
grated to Britain after the defeat of 
the revolution (1848); was accused by 
the French Government of being an 
accomplice in Orsini's attempt on the 
life of Napoleon III; acquitted by the 
British Court.— 245 
Berry, Hiram Gregory (1824-1863) — 
American general; fought in the US 
Civil War on the side of the Northern­
ers; commanded a brigade (1862-
beginning of 1863), and then a divi­
sion of the Potomac Army.— 206 
Bethell,  Richard,  1st Baron Westbury 
(1800-1873) —British lawyer and 
politician, Liberal; Lord Chancellor 
(1861-65).—167 
Billault, Augustin Adolphe Marie (1805-
1863) — French politician and lawyer; 
an Orleanist and after 1849 a 
Bonapartist; Minister of the Interior 
(1854-58 and 1859-60).—79, 80 
Birney, David Bell (1825-1864) — 
American general, Abolitionist; com­
manded a brigade of the Army on 
the Potomac during the Civil War 
(1862).—206 

=====第434页=====
408 Name Index 
Blücher, Gebhard Leberecht von, Prince 
of Wahlstatt (1742-1819) —Prussian 
field marshal-general; took part in 
wars against Napoleonic France.— 
319 
Bolleter, Heinrich —German refugee in 
London, member of the German 
Workers' Educational Society in Lon­
don and subsequently of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1864-65); was on the committee 
raising funds for Polish insurgents 
during the Polish uprising of 1863-
64; owner of a small restaurant in 
Soho where the workers used to 
meet.—297 
Bonaparte, Joseph (1768-1844)—the eld­
est brother of Napoleon I; King of 
Naples (1806-08) and Spain (1808-
13).—268 
Bonaparte, Louis—see Napoleon III 
Bonaparte, Prince Napoleon Joseph Charles 
Paul (1822-1891)—son' of Jérôme 
Bonaparte, cousin of Napoleon III; 
commanded a division in the Crimea 
in 1854; known under the nicknames 
of Plon-Plon and the Red Prince.— 
28, 237, 278, 279, 281, 282 
Borbon, Francisco de Paula Antonio de 
(1794-1865)—uncle of Isabella II, 
Queen of Spain.— 119 
Borchardt, Louis—German physician, 
one of Engels' acquaintances in Man­
chester.—320 
Bosquet, Pierre (1810-1861) —French 
general, marshal from 1856; com­
manded a division and then a corps 
in the Crimea (1854-55).—278 
Bouat—French general; in 1854, com­
manded a brigade during the 
Crimean war (1853-56).—278, 
279 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in France 
(1589-1792, 1814-15 and 1815-30).— 
69, 77 
Bourbons—royal dynasty in Spain 
(1700-1808, 1814-68, 1874-1931 and 
since 1975), in the Kingdom of Naples (1735-1805, 1814-60), and 
in Parma (1748-1802, 1847-59).— 
69, 77 
Bragg, Braxton (1817-1876)—American 
general; in 1862 commanded the 
Southern Army in Kentucky during 
the Civil War.—256, 257 
Breckinridge, John Cabell (1821-1875)— 
American statesman, Democrat; Vice-
President (1857-61); in 1860 was 
nominated for the presidency; a 
leader of the rebellion of Southern 
slave-owners; general of the South­
ern army during the Civil War; 
Secretary of War for the Confedera­
cy (1865).—35, 41, 47, 48, 227 
Bright, John (1811-1889)—English 
manufacturer and politician, a leader 
of the Free Traders and a founder of 
the Anti-Corn Law League; M. P. 
(from 1843); leader of the Left wing 
of the Liberal Party from the early 
1860s; held several ministerial 
posts.—96, 108-09, 130 
Brooks, Preston Smith—Southern slave­
owner, member of the US Congress 
from the South Carolina.—118 
Brougham and Vaux, Henry Peter, 1st 
Baron (1778-1868) —British states­
man, lawyer and writer, Whig; Lord 
Chancellor (1830-34); from the 1850s 
was not active in politics.— 231 
Brown, George (1790-1865) —British 
general; in 1854 commanded a divi­
sion during the Crimean war  (1853-
56).—281,  283 
Brown, John (1800-1859) — American 
farmer, a revolutionary leader in the 
Abolitionist movement; in 1855-56 
fought against slave-owners in Kan­
sas; tried to organise an uprising of 
Negro slaves in Virginia in 1859; was 
put on trial and executed.—13 
Brownson, Orestes Augustus  (1803-
1876)—American theologian, Demo­
crat; published several magazines; 
championed the preservation of the 
Union during the Civil War.— 51 

=====第435页=====
Name Index 409 
Bruce, Frederick William Adolphus (1814-
1867) — British diplomat, ambassador 
in Peking (1858-65).—216 
Bruce, J. P.—an agent of the Con­
federacy.—261 
Brutus (Marcus Junius Brutus) (c. 85-42 
B.C.) — Roman politician, Republi­
can, an organiser of the conspiracy 
against Julius Caesar.—201, 230, 238 
Buccleuch, Walter Francis Montagu Doug­
las Scott, Duke of (1806-1884)— 
British aristocrat, Tory; held the 
posts of Lord Privy Seal (1842-46) 
and Lord President of the Council 
(1846).—220-22 
Buchanan, James (1791-1868) — 
American statesman, Democrat; Sec­
retary of State (1845-49); Minister to 
London (1853-56); President of the 
USA (1857-61); pursued a policy in 
the interests of slave-owners.— 11, 
12, 35, 37, 38, 47, 51, 86, 103, 126, 
181, 186, 261 
Buell, Don Carlos (1818-1898) — 
American general; fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Northerners; 
commanded an army in Tennessee 
and Kentucky (1862).—178, 188, 
192, 257 
Bunch, R.—British consul in Charleston 
(1861-62).—184 
Burdett, Sir Francis (1770-1844) — 
British Radical and later Tory politi­
cian, member of the House of Com­
mons.—167 
Burnside, Ambrose Everett (1824-1881) — 
American general, Republican; com­
manded the Northern army on the 
Potomac during the Civil War 
(November 1862-January 1863).— 
118, 268 
Butler, Benjamin Franklin (1818-
1893)—American politician and gen­
eral, Democrat; during the Civil War 
commanded the expeditionary 
Northern Army which occupied New 
Orleans; military Governor of New 
Orleans (1862).—210, 211 C 
Caesar, Gaius Julius (c. 100-44 B.C.) — 
Roman general and statesman.—27 
Calhoun, John Caldwell (1782-1850)— 
American statesman, a leader of the 
Democratic Party; Secretary of War 
(1817-25); Vice-President (1825-32); 
Senator (1832-43, 1845-50); Secretary 
of State (1843-45).—13, 40, 76 
Cambridge, George William Frederick 
Charles, Duke of (1819-1904) —British 
general; commanded a division in the 
Crimean war (1854); Commander-in-
Chief of the British Army (1856-
95).—281,  284, 285, 286-87 
Cameron, Simon (1799-1889) — 
American politician, Republican, 
Senator; Secretary of War in Lin­
coln's Cabinet (1861-January 1862).— 
115, 116, 118, 178, 181 
Campbell, Sir Colin, Baron Clyde from 
1858 (1792-1863)—British general, 
field marshal since 1862; fought in 
the Crimean war (1853-56); Com­
mander-in-Chief of the British Army 
which suppressed the Indian mutiny 
(1857-59).—285, 304 
Campbell.—94 
Canning, George (1770-1827)—British 
statesman and diplomat, Tory; 
Foreign Secretary (1807-09, 1822-27), 
Prime Minister (1827).—69, 77, 
170 
Canrobert, François Certain (1809-
1895) — French general, Marshal of 
France from 1856; Senator, Bonapart-
ist, an active participant in the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851; com­
manded a division in the Crimean 
war in 1854; Commander-in-Chief of 
the French Army (September 1854-
May 1855).—278-79, 282, 284 
Carnarvon, Henry Howard Molyneux Her­
bert, Earl of (1831-1890) —British 
statesman, Conservative, Secretary 
for the Colonies (1866-67 and 1874-
78).—211 

=====第436页=====
410 Name Index 
Carnot, Lazare Nicolas Marguerite  (1753-
1823)—French mathematician; politi­
cal and military leader of the French 
Revolution, Jacobin; member of the 
Directory (1795-97), War Minister 
during the Consulate.— 80 
Cass, Lewis (1782-1866)—American 
statesman, general and diplomat; 
Democrat; Secretary of War  (1831-
36), Minister to France (1836-42); 
Secretary of State (1857-60).—51 
Cassagnac—see Granièr de Cassagnac, 
Bernard Adolphe 
Cassius (Gains Cassius Longinus) (d. 42 
B.C.)—Roman politician and gener­
al, Republican, people's tribune; to­
gether with Brutus organised the 
assassination of Julius Caesar.—238 
Castlereagh, Robert Stewart, Marquis of 
Londonderry, Viscount Castlereagh 
(1769-1822)—British statesman, 
Tory; Chief Secretary for Ireland 
(1799-1801), Secretary for War and 
the Colonies (1805-06, 1807-09) and 
Foreign Secretary (1812-22).—210 
Cathcart, Sir George (1794-1854) — 
British general; commanded a divi­
sion in the Crimean war (1854).— 
281 
Catherine II (1729-1796) —Empress of 
Russia (1762-96).—124 
Cato (Marcus Porcius), Cato the Elder 
(234-149 B.C.) —Roman statesman 
and writer, upheld aristocratic 
privileges; censor in 184 B.C.—  27, 
133, 209 
Cato (Marcus Porcius Cato Uticensis) 
(95-46 B.C.)—great grandson of 
Cato the Elder, Roman statesman, 
head of aristocratic Republican Party, 
people's tribune (62 B.C.) praetor in 
54 B.C.. After Caesar's victory at 
Thapsus (46 B.C.) he stabbed himself 
in Utica.—207 
Cecil, Robert Arthur Talbot Gascoyne, 
Viscount Cranborne, Marquis of Salis­
bury (1830-1903)—British statesman, 
Conservative M.P.; held the posts of Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary 
several times.—185 
Cesena, Amédée Barthélémy Gay et de 
(1810-1889) —French journalist, 
Bonapartist during the Second Em­
pire,  editor-in-chief of Le Con­
stitutionnel (1852-57).—79 
Charles II (1630-1685)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1660-85).—221 
Charles VIII (1470-1498)—King of 
France (1483-98).—236 
Chartres, Robert Philippe Louis Eugène 
Ferdinand d'Orléans, duc de (1840-
1910)—Louis Philippe's grandson; 
took part in the Civil War on the side 
of the Northerners (1862).—28-31 
Chateaubriand, François René, vicomte de 
(1768-1848)—French writer, states­
man and diplomat; supported the 
policy of the Holy Alliance; Foreign 
Minister (1822-24).—69, 77 
Cheetham, John (b. 1802) — British manu­
facturer, Liberal politician.—161 
Chernyshev, Alexander Ivanovitch (1786-
1857) — Russian general and states­
man; fought in the wars against 
Napoleonic France; Minister of War 
(1832-52).—207 
Ch'lng—Manchurian dynasty of the 
Chinese emperors (1644-1911).—216 
Clarendon, George William Frederick Vil-
liers, 4th Earl of, 4th Baron Hyde 
( 1800-1870) — British statesman, Whig, 
later Liberal; Lord Lieutenant 
of Ireland (1847-52), Foreign Secre­
tary (1853-58, 1865-66, 1868-70).— 
125, 169 
Clyde—see Campbell, Sir Colin 
Cobbett, William (1762-1835) —British 
politician and radical writer.—139 
Gobden, Richard (1804-1865) — 
English manufacturer, a leader of the 
Free Traders and founder of the 
Anti-Corn Law League.—108-09, 130, 
240 
Cochrane, John (1813-1898)—American 

=====第437页=====
Name Index 411 
army officer and politician, Congress­
man from the Republican Party's 
Left wing (1857-61); fought on the 
side of the Northerners in the Civil 
War; brigadier-general from 1862.— 
115, 116^ 118 
Colborne, Sir John, 1st Baron Seaton 
(1778-1863)—general, Governor of 
the Ionian Islands (1843-49).—209 
Colomb, Friedrich August von (1775-
1854) — Prussian army officer, subse­
quently general; fought against 
Napoleonic France.—207 
Coningham, William (b. 1815)—English 
liberal M.P.; took part in the anti-
interventionist meeting in Brighton 
in December 1861.—134, 135 
Cooper, James Fenimore (1789-1851) — 
American novelist.— 88 
Cooper, Peter (1791-1883) —American 
manufacturer, inventor, philanthro­
pist; founded Cooper Union in New 
York City (1857-59) for the advance­
ment of science and art.—118 
Cousin- M ontauban, Charles Guillaume 
Marie Apollinaire Antoine, comte de 
Palikao (1796-1878)—French gen­
eral. Bonapartist; commanded the 
Anglo-French expeditionary force 
during the second Opium war in 
China (1856-60).—196 
Cowen, Joseph (1831-1900)—British 
politician and radical journalist; sup­
ported the Chartists; an organiser of 
the meeting in defence of Garibaldi 
in Newcastle in September 1862.— 
236, 237 
Cowley, Henry Richard Charles Wellesley, 
1st Earl of (1804-1884) —British dip­
lomat, ambassador at Paris (1852-
67).—175,  176 
Crampton, Sir John Fiennes Twisleton, 
Baronet (1805-1886) —British dip­
lomat, ambassador at Madrid (1860-
69).—175 
Crittenden, John Jordan (1787-1863) — 
American lawyer and statesman, 
Senator from the Whig Party, a Unionist member of Congress  (1861-
63); advocated a compromise with 
Southern slave-owners.—9 
Cromwell, Oliver (1599-1658)—leader 
of the English Revolution, Lord Pro­
tector of England, Scotland and Ire­
land from 1653.—179 
Croswell, Edwin (1797-1871) — 
American journalist and politician; in 
the 1830s-40s a leader of the Demo­
cratic Party in New York State; gave 
up politics in the mid-1850s.—116 
Cucheval-Clarigny, Philippe Athanase 
(1821-1895)—French journalist, 
Bonapartist; contributed to the news­
paper La Patrie and other periodi­
cals;  held leading posts on the edito­
rial boards of Le Constitutionnel and 
Le Pays.— 79 
Cugia—a general.—232 
Cunard,  Sir Samuel, Baronet (1787-
1865)—British shipowner, founder 
of a steamship company which car­
ried mail between Britain and the 
USA.—93 
Curtis, Samuel Ryan (1807-1866)— 
American army officer and politician, 
general since 1861; Congressman 
from the Republican Party (1857-61); 
commanded the Northern troops in 
Arkansas and Missouri in 1861-62 
during the Civil War.—13, 227 
D 
Dahlgren, John Adolphus Bernard (1809-
1870)—American navy officer and 
military inventor; supported the 
Northerners during the Civil 
War.—290 
Dante, Alighieri (1265-1321) —Italian 
poet.— 242 
Dauglish John (1824-1866) —English in­
ventor in bread-baking, physician.— 
254, 255 
Davis, Charles Henry (1807-1877) — 
American navy officer, admiral from 
1863;  fought in the Civil War on the 

=====第438页=====
412 Name Index 
side of the North; commanded the 
Mississippi fleet (1862).—215 
Davis, Jefferson (1808-1889)—American 
politician, Democrat; fought in the 
war against Mexico (1846-48); Secre­
tary of War (1853-57); an organiser 
of the rebellion of the Southern 
slave-owners; President of the Con­
federacy (1861-65).—8, 13, 47, 114, 
117, 207, 234, 249, 261, 262, 270 
Demosthenes (384-322 B.C.)—Greek 
orator and politician; Athens leader 
of the Anti-Macedonian Party; cham­
pion of democracy in slave-owning 
society.—87 
Derby, Edward Geoffrey Smith Stanley, 
Earl of (1799-1869)—English states­
man, Tory leader; Prime Minister 
(1852,  1858-59, 1866-68).—168-71, 
239, 240 
Dickinson, Daniel Stevens (1800-1866) — 
American lawyer and politician, 
Senator (1844-51), a leader of the 
Democratic Party (1840s); supported 
the Northerners during the Civil 
War.—116 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Earl of Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881) — British statesman and 
author, a Tory leader; a founder and 
ideologist of the Conservative Party; 
Chancellor of the Exchequer (1852, 
1858-59, 1866-68); Prime Minister 
(1868,  1874-80).—23, 113, 168-70, 
183, 221, 222 
Dix, John Adams (1798-1879)— 
American politician and general; 
Democrat of the North, Senator; 
commanded the Northern army in 
Maryland and Virginia (1861-63).— 
115 
Dormus—Austrian general; com­
manded a brigade of the Sixth Army 
Corps (1864).—318 
Douglas, Stephen Arnold (1813-1861) — 
American politician, a leader of the 
Democratic Party of the North; 
championed a compromise with the 
Southern slave-owners; Chairman of 
the Committee on Territories in the 
Senate (1847-58); author of Kansas-Nebraska Bill (1854); candidate to 
the presidency (I860).—10, 35, 37, 
38, 41 
Dronke, Ernst (1822-1891)—German 
journalist; at first a "true socialist", 
in later years a member of the 
Communist League and an editor of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung; emi­
grated to England after the 1848-49 
revolution; supporter of Marx and 
Engels.— 320 
Dudley, T. H.— US consul at Liverpool 
(1862-63).—270 
Dunlop, Alexander Colquhoun-Stirling-
Murray (1798-1870)—British lawyer 
and politician, Liberal M.P.—  23, 24 
Duns Scotus, John (c. 1265-c. 1308) — 
Scottish mediaeval scholastic 
philosopher, Nominalist.— 91 
Du Plat —Danish major-general; com­
manded Second Division of the Dan­
ish Army (1864).—317 
E 
Eccarius, Johann Georg (1818-1889)— 
German tailor, prominent figure in 
the German and international work­
ing-class movement; member of the 
League of the Just and later of the 
Communist League; member of the 
General Council of the First Interna­
tional; subsequently took part in the 
British trade union movement.— 297 
Eilet, Charles (1810-1862)—American 
engineer and military inventor; 
fought in the Civil War on the side of 
the Northerners.— 214 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895).—291, 
293, 295, 299, 317, 320, 360-62, 363 
England,  Sir Richard (1793-1883) — 
British general, commanded a divi­
sion (1854) during the Crimean 
war.—281,  285 
Ericsson, John (1803-1889) — American 
engineer and military inventor, 
Swede by birth.—213, 258 

=====第439页=====
Name Index 413 
Essex, Robert Devereux, 3rd Earl of  (1591-
1646)—British general and politi­
cian, member of the Presbyterian 
Party; Commander-in-Chief of the 
Parliamentary army (1642-45) during 
the English Revolution.—179 
Eustis, George (1828-1872)—American 
diplomat, Congressman, Slidell's sec­
retary.— 90 
Evans, Sir George de Lacy (1787-1870) — 
British general and politician; Liberal 
M.P.; fought in the Crimean war 
(1853-56).—281-83, 285, 287 
F 
Fabius (Quintus Fabius Maximus Ver­
rucosus Cunctator) (c. 275-203 B.C.)— 
Roman general who defeated Hanni­
bal by avoiding a full-scale battle; for 
his delaying tactics he was nicknamed 
Cunctator.—179 
Farragut, David Glasgow (1801-1870)— 
American naval officer, admiral; 
fought in the Civil War on the side 
of the Northerners; commanded a 
squadron during the seizure of New 
Orleans (April 1862).—201, 215 
Fitzgerald,  Sir William Robert Seymour 
Vesey (1818-1885) —British states­
man, Tory M.P.; Under-Secretary of 
State for Foreign Affairs (1858-59); 
Governor of Bombay (1866-72).— 
224 
Flahaut de la Billarderie, Auguste Charles 
Joseph, comte de (1785-1870) — French 
diplomat, ambassador to London 
(1860-62).—174, 175 
Floyd,  John Buchanan (1806-1863) — 
American statesman, Democrat; Gov­
ernor of Virginia (1849-52); Secre­
tary of War (1857-60); fought in the 
Civil War on the side of the South­
erners.—192, 261 
Forcade-Laroquette, Jean Louis Victor 
Adolphe de (1820-1874) —French 
statesman, Bonapartist, Minister of 
Finance (1860-61).—80 Forster, William Edward (1818-1886) — 
British manufacturer and politician, 
Liberal M.P.—26, 183, 184 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867) —French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist; Minister of 
Finance (1849-52, 1861-67).—61, 63, 
79-81,  83, 84 
Francis (Francesco) II (1836-1894) — 
King of Naples and Sicily (1859-60).— 
69 ' 
Francis (Franz) Joseph I (1830-1916) — 
Emperor of Austria (1848-1916).—6 
Francis, Sir Philip (1740-1818) —British 
journalist and radical politician; au­
thor of pamphlets against absolutist 
rule of George III; the probable 
author of the Letters of Junius.—101 
Frederick VII (1808-1863) —King of 
Denmark (1848-63).—3 
Frederick Charles (1828-1885) — Prussian 
prince, general, subsequently field 
marshal-general.—319 
Fremont, John Charles (1813-1890)— 
American traveller and politician, 
Left-wing Republican; took an active 
part in the conquest of California 
during the Mexican war of 1846-48; 
candidate to the presidency (1856); 
commanded the Northern troops in 
Missouri (up to November 1861) and 
Virginia (1862) during the Civil 
War.—10, 39, 51, 86-88, 115, 116, 
118, 180 
G 
Galilei, Galileo (1564-1642) — Italian 
physicist and astronomer, founder of 
mechanics.— 249 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807-1882) — 
Italian revolutionary, Democrat; in 
the 1830s and 1840s took part in the 
revolutionary movement in South 
America; chief organiser of the de­
fence of the Roman Republic in 
April-June 1849; in the 1850s and 
1860s headed the struggle of the 

=====第440页=====
414 Name Index 
Italian people for national liberation 
and the unification of the country.— 
3, 232, 236-38, 252 
Garrison, William Lloyd (1805-1879) — 
American journalist and public fig­
ure; a leader of the Abolitionist 
movement in the USA, founder of 
the American Anti-Slavery Society 
(1833);  advocated revolutionary 
methods of struggle for the liberation 
of Negroes during the Civil 
War.—233 
George III (1738-1820)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1760-1820).— 
101 
Gerlach—lieutenant-general; com­
manded the First Division of the 
Danish Army (1864).—317 
Gibson, Thomas Milner (1806-1884) — 
British politician and statesman, Free 
Trader and later Liberal; President 
of the Board of Trade (1859-65 and 
1865-66).—109, 113 
Gillmore, Quinsy Adams (1825-1888) — 
American general and military 
engineer; fought in the Civil War on 
the side of the Northerners.— 293-95 
Gilpin, Charles (1815-1874) —British 
politician, Free Trader; held a port­
folio in Palmerston's cabinet (1859-
65).—147 
Gladstone, William Ewart (1809-1898) — 
British statesman, Tory and later 
Peelite; leader of the Liberal Party 
(1868-1894); Chancellor of the Ex­
chequer (1852-55 and 1859-66); 
Prime Minister (1868-74, 1880-85, 
1886,  1892-94).—109, 113, 221, 262, 
270 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832)—German poet.—158, 210 
Gondrecourt—general; commanded a 
brigade of the Sixth Army Corps of 
the Austrian Army (1864).—318 
Gorchakov, Pyotr Dmitrievich, Prince 
(1785-1868) — Russian general; com­
manded a corps (1854) during the 
Crimean war (1853-56).—286, 287 Grandguillot, Alcide Pierre (1829-
1891) — French journalist, Bonapart-
ist; from 1859 was editor-in-chief of 
Le Constitutionnel and in 1863-65 of 
Le Pays.— 79, 80 
Granièr de Cassagnac, Bernard Adolphe 
(1806-1880)—French journalist and 
politician, Orleanist until the 1848 
revolution, subsequently Bonapartist; 
deputy to the Legislative Corps dur­
ing the Second Empire; contributed 
to Le Constitutionnel.— 79 
Grant, James (1802-1879)—British radi­
cal journalist and writer, editor of 
the newspaper The Morning Adver­
tiser (1850-71).—128 
Grant, Ulysses Simpson (1822-1885)— 
American general and statesman, Re­
publican; commanded the Northern 
troops in Kentucky and Tennessee in 
1861-62; commander-in-chief from 
March 1864, Secretary of War (1867-
68), President of the USA (1869-77).— 
190, 192-93 
Gregory, William Henry (1817-1892)— 
Irish politician; was close to Liberals, 
M.P.—182-85, 211 
Grey, Sir George (1799-1882) —British 
Whig statesman; Home Secretary 
(1846-52, 1855-58, 1861-66) and Col­
onial Secretary (1854-55).—253 
Griffiths, J.  O.—British  lawyer.—166 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and states­
man; virtually directed home and 
foreign policy of France from 1840 
to the February revolution of 1848.— 
345 
Gumpert, Eduard (d. 1893)—German 
physician in Manchester, friend of 
Marx and Engels. — 320 
H 
Halleck, Henry Wager (1815-1872) — 
American general, moderate Republi­
can; commander of the Mo. Depart­
ment (November 1861-March 1862) 

=====第441页=====
Name Index 415 
and the Mississippi army (March-July 
1862);  Commander-in-Chief of the 
Northern Army (July 1862-March 
1864).—115,  178, 180, 188, 190, 192, 
200, 206, 227, 267 
Halliwell—owner of a cotton mill in 
Yorkshire.— 241 
Hanover, House of—English royal 
dynasty (1714-1901).—101 
Harvey—British consul in Ningpo 
(China) in the early 1860s.—216-18 
Hautefeuille, Laurent Basele (1805-
1875) — French lawyer, Bonapartist; 
author of works on international 
maritime law.—185 
Havas, Charles (1785-1858) —French 
journalist, founder of the French 
news agency Agence Havas.— 199 
Havelock, Henry (1795-1857) —British 
major-general; took part in the 
Anglo-Afghan war (1838-42) and the 
Anglo-Sikh war (1845-46); suppressed 
the national liberation uprising in 
India (1857).—136 
Haxthausen, August Franz Ludwig Maria, 
Baron von (1792-1866) — Prussian of­
ficial and writer; author of works on 
the agrarian system and the peasant 
commune in Russia.— 276 
Haynau, Julius Jacob, Baron von (1786-
1853)—Austrian general; took part 
in suppressing the 1848-49 revolu­
tion in Italy; commanded the Aus­
trian troops in Hungary (1849-50); 
initiated violent repressions against 
Hungarian revolutionaries.—140 
Hecker—Prussian official.— 335 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher.— 251 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856) — German 
revolutionary poet.—105 
Heintzelman, Samuel Peter (1805-
1880) — American general; took part 
in the Civil War on the side of the 
Northerners; commanded a corps of 
the army on the Potomac (1862).— 
205-06 Helm,  Charles John (1817-1868)—US 
General Consul in Habana (1858-61); 
represented the interests of the Con­
federacy from July 1861 to the end 
of the Civil War.—93 
Hennessy, John Pope (1834-1891) —Irish 
conservative politician, M.P.— 24 
Hodasevich (Chodasiewicz),  R.—  Russian 
army officer; served in the Tarutino 
infantry regiment; fought in the Cri­
mean war (1853-56); author of A 
Voice from within the Walls of Sebas-
topoi—  275,  277 
Hohenzollerns—dynasty of Brandenburg 
electors (1415-1701), Prussian kings 
(1701-1918) and German emperors 
(1871-1918).—27 
Homer—semi-legendary epic poet of 
ancient Greece, author of the Iliad 
and the Odyssey.—193, 227 
Hooker, Joseph (1814-1879)—American 
general, Abolitionist, Republican; 
first commanded a corps of the 
Northern army on the Potomac 
(1862) and then the whole army 
(January-June, 1863).—268 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus)— 
(65-8 B.C.) —Roman poet.—182, 220 
Hudson, Sir James (1810-1885)—British 
diplomat, envoy in Turin  (1851-
63).—231 
I 
Isabella II (1830-1904) —Queen of 
Spain (1833-68).—118 
Isturiz, Francisco Javier de (1790-
1871) — Spanish politician, Liberal; 
took part in the War of Independ­
ence (1808-14) and the bourgeois 
revolution of 1820-23; Foreign Minis­
ter (1836, 1846-47) and Prime Minis­
ter (1858); envoy in London (1848, 
1858-62).—172-74 
Ives, Malcom—American journalist, 
Democrat; contributed to the New-
York Herald from the late 1850s.— 
181 

=====第442页=====
416 Name Index 
J 
Jackson, Andrew (1767-1845) — 
American general and statesman, 
founder of the Democratic Party 
(1828);  during the Anglo-American 
war (1812-15) defeated the British 
army near New Orleans; President of 
the USA (1829-37).—14, 33, 86 
Jackson, Claiborne Fox (1806-1862) — 
American politician, Democrat, Gov­
ernor of the Missouri state (1860-
61).—46 
Jackson, Thomas Jonathan (1824-1863)— 
American general; commanded the 
Southern troops in Virginia  (1861-
63); was nicknamed Stonewall Jack­
son after the battle at Bull Run (July 
1861).—227, 249 
James, Henry (1803-1877)—British army 
officer, chief of the topographical-
statistical department in the War 
Ministry (1857-70).—298 
Jameson, Charles Davis (1827-1862) — 
American general; fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Northerners; 
commanded a brigade of the North­
ern army on the Potomac  (1861-
62).—206 
Jecker, Jean Baptiste (c. 1810-1871)— 
Swiss banker; became citizen of 
France in 1862; was close to the ruling 
circles of Bonapartist France; assisted 
the French intervention in Mexico; 
shot by Paris communards as a hos­
tage.—197, 225 
Jefferson, Thomas (1743-1826) —US 
statesman and author, Enlightener; 
leader of democratic circles during 
the War of Independence; President 
of the USA (1801-09).—8, 10, 34, 91, 
102, 155, 234 
Jennison, C. R.—American army of­
ficer, Abolitionist, colonel of the 
Northern Army during the Civil 
War.—116 
Johnson, Andrew (1808-1875) — 
American statesman, Democrat, Gov­
ernor of the Tennessee (1853-57 and 1862-65), Senator; supported the 
Northerners during the Civil War, 
Vice-President (March-April 1865); 
President of the USA (1865-69); pur­
sued a policy of compromise with 
Southern planters.—46 
Johnson, Samuel (1709-1784)—British 
writer and linguist; compiler of Eng­
lish explanatory dictionary (1755).— 
108 
Joinville, François Ferdinand Philippe 
Louis Marie d'Orléans, prince de (1818-
1900)—son of Louis Philippe; emi­
grated to England after the victory of 
the February 1848 revolution; fought 
in the US Civil War on the side of the 
Union (1862).—28-31 
Juarez, Benito Pablo (1806-1872) — 
Mexican statesman; fought for na­
tional liberation; leader of the Liber­
al Party during the Civil War (1858-
60) and the intervention in Mexico 
(1861-67); President of Mexico  (1861-
72).—68,  118, 197 
Junius—see Francis, Sir Philip 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis) (b. c. 
60 A.D.-d. c. 140) — Roman satirist 
and poet.—83, 84, 219 
K 
Kearny, Philip (1814-1862)— 
American general; fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Northerners, 
commanded units of the Northern 
army on the Potomac (1861-62).— 
206, 268 
Kent, James (1763-1847)—American 
lawyer and politician, professor of 
the Columbia College.—90, 106 
Kinglake, Alexander William (1809-
1891)—British historian and politi­
cian, Liberal M. P. (1857-68).—224, 
274-77,  282-88 
Kirjakov, Vastly Yakovlevich—Russian 
general, during the Crimean war 
commanded a division  (1854).—  278-
80 

=====第443页=====
Name Index 417 
Krüger —German refugee in Britain, 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; was 
on the committee raising funds for 
insurgents of the Polish uprising of 
1863-64.—297 
Hutchinson —family of musicians.—180 
Kwizinski (Kvitsinsky), Onufry Aleksan-
drovich (1794-1862) — Russian gener­
al; during the Crimean war com­
manded a division (1854).—286, 287 
L 
Lafayette, (La Fayette), Marie Joseph Paul 
Ives Roch Gilbert Motier, marquis de 
(1757-1834)—French general; took 
part in the American War of Inde­
pendence (1775-83); prominent fig­
ure in the French Revolution, a 
leader of the moderate constitutional­
ists (Feuillants); participated in the 
July revolution of 1830.—29 
Landseer, Sir Edwin Henry (1802-
1873)—English painter.—163-66 
Laroquette— see Forcade-Laroquette 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864) — 
German writer and lawyer, petty-
bourgeois socialist; founder of the 
General Association of German 
Workers (1863); initiator of the op­
portunist trend within the German 
Social-Democratic movement.—  340, 
356, 358, 359 
Layard,  Sir Austen Henry (1817-1894) — 
British archaeologist and politician; 
Liberal M.P.—135, 224 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874) — French journalist and politi­
cian, a petty-bourgeois Democrat 
leader; editor of La Réforme; Minis­
ter of the Interior in the Provisional 
Government (1848); deputy to the 
Constituent and Legislative assem­
blies (leader of the Montagnards); 
emigrated to England after the dem­
onstration of June 13,  1849.—  80 
Lee, Robert Edward (1807-1870) — American general; took part in the 
war against Mexico (1846-48); sup­
pressed the uprising of John Brown 
(1859);  during the Civil War com­
manded the Confederate Army in 
Virginia (1862-65); Commander-in-
Chief of the Southern army from 
February to April 1865.—256 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, Baron von 
(1646-1716)—German philosopher 
and mathematician.—163 
Lessner, Friedrich (1825-1910) — 
prominent figure in the German and 
international working-class move­
ment, member of the Communist 
League and later of the General 
Council of the First International; 
took part in the 1848-49 revolution; 
was prosecuted at the Cologne com­
munist trial in 1852; friend and 
comrade-in-arms of Marx and En-
gels.—297 
Levingood—US citizen from Georgia; 
refused to serve in the army of the 
Confederacy.— 261 
Levy, Joseph Moses (1812-1888)—a 
founder and publisher of the English 
newspaper The Daily Telegraph.—129 
Lewis, Sir George Cornewall (1806-
1863)—British statesman; Whig; Sec­
retary to the Treasury (1850-52), 
Chancellor of the Exchequer (1855-
58), Home Secretary (1859-61) and 
Secretary for War (1861-63).—109, 
113, 253 
Limayrac, Paulin (1817-1868) — French 
journalist, Bonapartist; contributed 
to La Patrie and Le Pays; editor-in-
chief of Le Constitutionnel  (1861-
68).—79,  80 
Limburg,  W. —German  shoe-maker; 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; was 
on the committee raising funds for 
insurgents of the Polish uprising 
(1863-64); member of the General 
Council of the First International 
(1868-69).—297 
Lincoln, Abraham (1809-1865)— 

=====第444页=====
418 Name Index 
American statesman, a leader of the 
Republican Party, President of the 
USA (1861-65); under the influence 
of the masses, carried out important 
bourgeois-democratic reforms during 
the Civil War, thus making possible 
the adoption of revolutionary 
methods of warfare; was shot by an 
agent of slave-owners in April 
1865.—8,  9, 13, 34, 35, 42, 51, 67, 
72, 77, 86-87, 126,  178-81,  199, 227, 
228, 231, 233-35,  248-51,  258, 264, 
266-67,  269, 271 
Linden—German refugee in Britain, 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; was 
on the committee raising funds for 
insurgents of the Polish uprising in 
1863-64.—297 
Lindsay, William Schaw (1816-1877)— 
English shipowner and merchant, 
Free Trader, member of the House 
of Commons.—184 
Louis XIII (1601-1643) —King of 
France (1610-43).—87 
Louis XVI (1754-1793) —King of 
France (1774-92); guillotined during 
the French Revolution.— 80 
Louis Napoleon—see Napoleon III 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850)—Duke of 
Orléans, King of France (1830-48).— 
63, 80, 84 
Lourmel, Frederic Henri Lenormand de 
(1811-1854) — French general; dur­
ing the Crimean war commanded a 
brigade (1854).—278, 279 
Lovejoy, Owen (1811-1864)—American 
clergyman and politician; Abolition­
ist, Congressman (1857-64).—155 
Lovell, Mansfield (1822-1884) — 
American general; fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Southerners; 
was in command at New Orleans 
(1861-April 1862).—200 
Lowe, Robert, 1st Viscount Sherbrooke 
(1811-1892) — British statesman and 
journalist, contributor to The Times; 
Whig and later Liberal M. P.; Chan­cellor of the Exchequer (1868-73); 
Home Secretary (1873-74).—21, 128 
Lucan (Marcus Annaeus Lucanus) (39-
65 A.D.)—Latin poet.—207 
Lützow, Ludwig Adolf Wilhelm, Baron 
von (1782-1834) — Prussian army of­
ficer, later general; took part in wars 
against Napoleonic France.— 207 
Lyons, Richard Bickerton Pemell, 2nd 
Baron and 1st Earl Lyons (1817-
1887)—British diplomat, ambassador 
in Washington (1858-65).—96, 131, 
146 
M 
Macaulay, Thomas Babington, Baron 
(1800-1859)—English historian and 
politician, Whig M.P.; as member of 
the Supreme Council of India (1834-
38) took part in drafting a penal 
code for India, which was adopted in 
I860.—179, 266 
McClellan, George Brinton (1826-
1885) — American general and big 
railway businessman; was close to the 
Democrats; championed a compro­
mise with Southern slave-owners; Com­
mander-in-Chief of the army of the 
Northerners (November 1861-March 
1862) and Commander of the army 
on the Potomac (March 1862-
November 1862); candidate to the 
presidency (1864).—178-81, 193, 
205-07,  226-27, 234-35, 265, 266-69 
McCook, Alexander McDowell  (1831-
1903) — American general; fought in 
the Civil War on the side of the 
Northerners; commanded a corps in 
Kentucky (Î862) — 257 
Macdonald—British army officer, ar­
rested in Bonn and charged with 
insubordination to local authorities 
(September I860).—27 
MacFarland—American diplomat, sec­
retary of George Mason.— 90 
MacMahon, Marie Edmé Patrice Maurice, 
comte de, duc de Magenta (1808-
1893) — French general and politi-

=====第445页=====
Name Index 419 
cian, marshal, Bonapartist; a butcher 
of the Paris Commune.—3 
Madison, James (1751-1836) — American 
statesman; played a prominent part 
in the American War of Independ­
ence (1775-83), Secretary of State 
(1801-09), President of the USA 
(1809-17).—112 
Magoffin, Beriah (1815-1885)— 
American lawyer and politician; 
Democrat of the South; Governor of 
the Kentucky (1859-62).—47 
Manlius (Marcus Manlius Capitolinus)— 
Roman patrician, general, consul 
(392 B.C.).—236 
Mann, Ambrose Dudley (1801-1889)— 
American diplomat; commissioner of 
the Confederacy in London  (1861-
62).—91,  100, 129, 138, 155, 182-84 
Manteuffel, Otto Theodor, Baron von 
(1805-1882)—Prussian statesman, 
Minister of the Interior (November 
1848-November 1850); deputy to the 
First and Second Chambers (1849); 
Prime Minister (1850-58).—346, 350 
Marquez, Leonardo (b.c. 1820) — Mexi­
can general, a leader of the Con­
servative Party and head of the 
1857 counter-revolutionary mutiny 
against the Liberal government; in 
1862-67 supported the French inter­
ventionists and Maximilian, their pro­
tégé emperor (from 1864).—68, 118 
Martin, Sir Samuel (1801-1883) — 
British lawyer, member of the Treas­
ury Court (1850-74).—165 
Marx, Eleanor (1855-1898) —Karl 
Marx's youngest daughter.— 343 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881) —Karl Marx's wife.—343, 356 
Marx, Jenny (1844-1883) —Karl Marx's 
eldest daughter.— 343 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883).—17, 25, 26, 
32, 63, 77, 84, 95, 97, 105, 142, 143, 
172, 196, 232, 252, 271, 273, 320, 
329, 332, 333, 339-62, 363 Marx, Laura (1845-1911)—Karl Marx's 
second daughter.—343 
Mason, George (1725-1792)—American 
politician; played a prominent part in 
the American War of Independence 
(1775-83); author of the Virginia 
Declaration of Rights (1776), which 
contained a number of bourgeois-
democratic freedoms.—101, 102 
Mason, James Murray (1798-1871) — 
American politician, big slave-owning 
planter, Chairman of the Senate 
commission on foreign affairs; advo­
cate of secession; commissioner of 
the Confederacy in London (1862-
65).—90-92, 97-98, 100, 101-03, 107, 
108, 109, 110, 127, 135, 137, 140, 
142, 154, 155, 158, 168, 182-84 
Matzrath—German refugee in Britain, 
member of the German Workers' 
Educational Society in London; was 
on the committee raising funds for 
insurgents of the Polish uprising in 
1863-64.—297 
Maximilian Habsburg (Ferdinand Max­
imilian Joseph) (1832-1867)— 
Austrian archduke, Governor-
General in Italy (1857-59); pro­
claimed emperor of Mexico by French 
interventionists (1864); in 1867 was 
shot by Mexican republicans.— 176 
Maynard—American army officer, 
agent of the Southerners during the 
Civil War.—180 
Mazzini, Giuseppe (1805-1872)—Italian 
revolutionary, bourgeois democrat, 
head of the Provisional Government 
of the Roman Republic (1849); an 
organiser of the Central Committee 
of European Democracy in London 
in 1850; in the early 1850s sought 
support of the Bonapartists but later 
opposed them.—154, 237, 245 
Mége Mouriès, Hippolyte (1817-1880) — 
French chemist.— 254 
Mejia, Tomas (c. 1815-1867) — Mexican 
general, American Indian by birth; 
took part in the counter­
revolutionary mutiny against the Lib-

=====第446页=====
420 Name Index 
eral government in 1857; supported 
the French interventionists and their 
protégé emperor Maximilian (1862-
67); was shot by Mexican republi­
cans.—  68 
Menill—American army officer; fought 
in the Civil War on the side of the 
Northerners.— 206 
Menshikov, Alexander Sergeyevich, prince 
(1787-1869)—-Russian general and 
statesman; Commander-in-Chief of 
the Russian army and navy in the 
Crimea (1853-55).—279, 287 
Merivale, Herman (1806-1874)—British 
economist and statesman, Liberal; 
Under-Secretary of State for the Col­
onies (1848-59); Under-Secretary for 
India (1859-74).—259 
Mikhail Nikolayevich (1832-1909)— 
Russian Grand Duke, fourth son of 
Emperor Nicholas I of Russia.— 282 
Milner Gibson—see Gibson, Thomas 
Milner 
Miramon, Miguel (1832-1867) — 
Mexican general; a leader of the 
Conservative Party; led the counter­
revolutionary mutiny against the Lib­
eral government (1857); head of the 
insurgents' government (1859-60); 
supported French interventionists 
and their protégé Maximilian in 1862-
67; was shot by Mexican republi­
cans.—197 
Mirés, Jules Isaak (1809-1871) —French 
banker, owner of several newspapers; 
was put on trial on a charge of 
stock-exchange machinations  ( 1861  ).— 
196-98 
Mitchel, Ormsby Mac Knight (1809-
1862) — American astronomer, gener­
al of the Northern army in 1861-62, 
during the Civil War.— 200 
Moir—captain of the Trent.—138 
Mole, Louis Mathieu, comte  (1781-
1855)—French statesman, Orleanist, 
Prime Minister (1836-37, 1837-39); 
deputy to the Constituent and Legis­lative Assemblies during the Second 
Republic—79 
Monroe, James (1758-1831)—American 
statesman, President of the USA 
(1817-25); issued a declaration (1823) 
formulating the principles of US 
foreign policy, known as the Monroe 
doctrine.—69, 77 
Monroe, John  F.—  Mayor of New Or­
leans (1862).—201 
Montagu, Lord Robert (1825-1902) — 
British politician, Conservative 
M.P.—23,  24,  220-21,  223-25 
Montalembert, Marc René, marquis de 
(1714-1800) — French general, mili­
tary engineer; elaborated a new for­
tification system largely used in the 
nineteenth century.—293 
Montauban— see Cousin-Montauban, 
Charles Guillaume Marie-Apollinaire 
Antoine, comte de Palikao 
Montgomery, Alfred. —164 
Morgan, John Hunt (1825-1864) — 
American army officer; fought in the 
war against Mexico (1846-48) and in 
the Civil War on the side of the 
South.—257 
Morny, Charles Auguste Louis Joseph, due 
de (1811-1865) — French politician, 
Bonapartist, deputy to the Legislative 
Assembly (1849-51); an organiser of 
the coup  d'état  of December 2, 1851; 
Minister of the Interior (December 
1851-January 1852); President of the 
Corps législatif (1854-65), helped to 
organise French intervention in Mex­
ico, half-brother of Napoleon III.— 
225 
Morrill, Justin Smith (1810-1898) — 
American politician, Republican, 
Congressman from Vermont (1855-
67); author of law on protectionist 
tariffs (1861).—14, 15, 33, 65, 154, 
161 
Mozart, Wolfgang Amadeus (1756-
1791)—Austrian composer.—43 
Mulbe—commander of the Guards divi-

=====第447页=====
Name Index 421 
sion of the Prussian army in 1864.— 
319 
Murat, Napoleon Lucien Charles, prince 
(1803-1878) — French politician, Bona-
partist, cousin of Napoleon III.— 
237 
Murphy, Thomas—British envoy in 
Mexico (1858-62).—118 
N 
Napiers—family of hereditary military 
in Britain.—303 
Napier, William Francis Patrick (1785-
1860) — British general and military 
historian.— 299 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821) — 
Emperor of the French (1804-14 and 
1815).—83,  84, 141, 188, 196, 268, 
319 
Napoleon HI (Charles Louis Napoléon 
Bonaparte) (1808-1873)—nephew of 
Napoleon I, President of the Second 
Republic (1848-51); Emperor of the 
French (1852-70).—5, 6, 27-30, 66, 
67, 70-72, 79-85, 99, 105, 113, 130, 
135, 174, 196, 211, 224, 225, 232, 
236-37,  245, 264-65 
Napoléon —see Bonaparte, Prince 
Napoléon Joseph Charles Paul 
Newman, Francis William (1805-1897) — 
English professor of philology and 
writer, radical.— 270 
Newton—member of Newcastle (Eng­
land) council; presided at the meet­
ing in defence of Garibaldi (Sep­
tember 1862).—236, 238, 245 
Nicholas I (1796-1855) — Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—209 
Nichols.—155 
Nostitz— commanded a brigade of the 
Sixth Army Corps of the Austrian 
army (1864).—318 
O 
Oldham, Williamson Simpson  (1813-
1868)—American lawyer and politi­cian, Democrat; took part in the 
rebellion of Southern slave-owners; a 
member of the Confederacy Con­
gress.-—  262 
Orsini, Felice (1819-1858) —Italian 
democrat, Republican; executed for 
his attempt to assassinate Napoleon 
III.—238,  245, 246 
Oudinot, Nicholas Charles Victor  (1791-
1863) — French general, Orleanist; in 
1849 commanded troops dispatched 
against the Roman Republic.— 237 
P 
Palmer, Roundell, 1st Earl of Selborne 
(1812-1895) —British statesman, Peel-
ite, later Liberal, Lord Chancellor 
(1872-74 and 1880-85).—92, 96, 98, 
105, 127, 135, 138, 185 
Palmer, William (1824-1856)—English 
physician; to receive insurance 
money he poisoned his wife, brother 
and friend, for which he was sen­
tenced to death by hanging.—  96, 129 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Vis­
count (1784-1865) — British states­
man; at the beginning of his career 
Tory, from 1830 Whig; Foreign Sec­
retary (1830-34,  1835-41,  1846-51), 
Home Secretary (1852-55) and Prime 
Minister (1855-58, 1859-65).—18, 21-
26, 66, 68, 71, 72, 74-78, 95-97, 103, 
105, 107, 108-09, 111-14, 125-30, 
134, 136, 138-40, 142, 144, 145-47, 
170, 197-98, 209, 211, 225, 239, 240, 
270 
Paris, Louis Philippe Albert d'Orléans, 
comte de (1838-1894) —head of the 
Legitimist Party in France and claim­
ant of the French throne. In 1862 he 
served as captain with the US Civil 
War volunteers under General G.B. 
McClellan; author of Histoire de la 
guerre civile en Amérique. — 27-31 
Parrott, Robert Parker (1804-1877) — 
American naval officer, inventor of a 
type of cannon widely used in the 
USA during the Civil War.—293 
7428—1134 

=====第448页=====
422 Name Index 
Parsons, Lucie—mistress of Charles II, 
King of Great Britain and Ireland.— 
221 
Patterson, Robert (1792-1881)— 
American businessman, general of 
the Northern army at the beginning 
of the Civil War; after the battle at 
Bull Run (July 1861) was removed 
from the command.— 180 
Péreire, Isaac (1806-1880)—French 
banker, Bonapartist, deputy to the 
Corps  législatif;  in 1852, together with 
his brother Emile Péreire, founded 
the joint-stock bank Crédit Mobilier, 
author of works on credit.—  62, 81 
Péreire, Jacob Emile (1800-1875) — 
French banker, adhered to the Saint-
Simonists (1825-31), later a Bonapart­
ist; a founder and director of the 
Crédit Mobilier.— 62, 81 
Persigny, Jean Gilbert Victor Fialin, comte 
de (1808-1872)—French statesman, 
Bonapartist; an organiser of the coup 
d'état  of December 2, 1851; Minister 
of the Interior (1852-54, 1860-63).— 
61, 62, 79, 80 
Pétrie, Martin (1823-1892)—British 
army officer, author of works on 
organisation and equipment of Euro­
pean armies.— 298 
Peza-y-Peza, Carlos—took part in the 
counter-revolutionary mutiny in 
Mexico (1858-60); Finance Minister 
in the insurgent government.—197 
Phillimore, Sir Robert Joseph (1810-
1885)—British lawyer, Liberal con­
servative, M.P. (1852-57); expert on 
international law.— 106, 108 
Phillips, Wendell (1811-1884)— 
American public figure and politi­
cian, a leader of the revolutionary 
wing of Abolitionist movement dur­
ing the Civil War; President of the 
American Anti-Slavery Society (1865-
70); in the 1870s joined the labour 
movement; championed the founda­
tion of an independent labour party; 
joined the First International 
(1871).—233-35 Pierce, Franklin (1804-1869)—Amer­
ican statesman, Democrat; President 
of the USA (1853-57); pursued a 
policy in the interests of slave­
owners.—86, 103, 181 
Pindar (c. 518-c. 442 B.C.)—Greek poet, 
famous for his odes.—160, 250 
Pitt, William (1759-1806)—British 
statesman, Tory, Prime Minister 
( 1783-1801,  1804-06).— 153 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
(1792-1878)—Pope (1846-78).—237 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C.)—Greek phi­
losopher.—200 
Plon-Plon—see Bonaparte, Prince 
Napoléon Joseph Charles Paul 
Plutarch (c. 46-c. 127)—Greek writer and 
philosopher.—133 
Polk,  James Knox (1795-1849)— 
American statesman, Democrat, Pres­
ident of the USA (1845-49); an 
organiser of the war against Mexico 
(1846-48).—86, 103 
Pollock, Sir Jonathan Frederick  (1783-
1870)—British statesman, Lord Chief 
Baron of the Exchequer (1844-66).— 
123 
Pope, John (1822-1892)—American 
general, Republican; fought in the 
Civil War; in 1862 commanded a 
Northern army on the Mississippi 
and then in Virginia.—180, 268 
Potter, Edmund—British manufacturer 
and politician, Free Trader; at the 
early 60s Chairman of the Manches­
ter Chamber of Commerce, M.P.— 
160-61 
Pratt, Frederick Thomas—English lawyer, 
author of works on international 
maritime law.— 91 
Price, Sterling (1809-1867)—American 
general, Governor of Missouri  (1853-
57); fought in the Civil War on the 
side of the Southerners; commanded 
troops in Missouri, Arkansas, Ten­
nessee and Mississippi in 1861-62.— 
180, 260 

=====第449页=====
Name Index 423 
Prince of Prussia—see William I 
R 
Raglan, Lord Fitzroy James Henry Somer­
set, Baron (1788-1855)—British field 
marshal, Commander-in-Chief of the 
British forces in the Crimea (1854-
55).—274, 280, 282, 284, 285 
Rattazzi, Urbano (1808-1873)—Italian 
statesman, representative of liberal-
monarchical bourgeoisie, Minister of 
the Interior in the Kingdom of Sar­
dinia (1855-58 and 1859-60), head of 
the Italian government (1862 and 
1867).—232 
Renée, Lambert Amédée (1808-1859)— 
French journalist, Bonapartist, from 
1857 held leading posts on the 
editorial boards of Le Constitutionnel 
and Le Pays. —79 
Reno,  Jesse Lee (1823-1862)—American 
general; fought in the Civil War on 
the side of the Northerners; com­
manded a corps in Virginia and 
Maryland (1862).—268 
Reuter, Paul Julius (1821-1899)— 
founder and head of the telegraphic 
agency in London (from 1851).— 
199, 212 
Reynolds, George William MacArthur 
(1814-1879)—British politician and 
journalist, founder of Reynolds's News­
paper (1850).—11 
Ricasoli, Bettino (1809-1880)—Italian 
statesman, representative of the liber­
al-monarchical bourgeoisie, head of 
the Italian government (1861-62 and 
1866-67).—232 
Richelieu, Armand Jean Du  Plessis,  duc de 
(1585-1642)—French statesman dur­
ing the period of absolutism, Car­
dinal.—87 
Rosecrans, William Starke (1819-1898) — 
American general, during the Civil 
War commanded Northern troops in 
Mississippi and Tennessee (1862-
63).—257 Roselius, Christian (1803-1873)— 
American lawyer and politician, 
Whig, professor of Louisiana Univer­
sity; championed preservation of the 
Union.—48-49 
Rothschilds—dynasty of bankers with 
banks in many European countries.— 
30, 61 
Rule.—237 
Russell, John Russell, 1st Earl (1792-
1878)—British statesman, Whig 
leader, Prime Minister (1846-52, 
1865-66), Foreign Secretary (1852-53, 
1859-65).—43,  67, 72, 74, 75, 96, 
113, 130, 139, 144, 145-47, 169, 
172-76,  211, 224, 225, 230, 231, 236, 
237, 245, 270 
Russell, Sir William Howard (1820-1907) 
—English journalist, correspond­
ent of The Times in Washington 
(1861-62).—117 
Rutherford—English pastor, participant 
in the meeting in defence of Garibal­
di in Newcastle (September 1862).— 
238 
S 
Saffi, Aurelio (1819-1890)—Italian 
writer and member of the national 
liberation movement; Mazzini's com­
panion-in-arms; participant in the 
1848-49 revolution in Italy; member 
of the triumvirate of the Roman 
Republic; emigrated to England in 
1851.—237 
Saint-Arnaud, Armand Jacques Achille 
Leroy de (1801-1854)—Marshal of 
France, Bonapartist; an organiser of 
the coup d'état of December 2, 1851; 
War Minister (1851-54), Command­
er-in-Chief of the French Army in 
the Crimea (1854).—278, 280 
Schaper, Justus Wilhelm Eduard von 
(1792-1868)—Prussian official, Lord-
Lieutenant of the Rhine Province 
(1842-45).—345 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, drama-
7428» 

=====第450页=====
424 Name Index 
tist, historian and philosopher.—  81, 
181 
Scott, Dred (c. 1810, according to other 
sources, 1795-1858)—American Ne­
gro slave; tried in vain to free himself 
from slavery through American 
courts (1848-57).—10, 36 
Scott, William, Lord Stowell (1745-
1836)—English lawyer, Tory; expert 
on international maritime law; 
member of the Admiralty Court 
(1798-1828).—90, 98, 106 
Scott, Winfield (1786-1866)—Ameri­
can general; took part in the Anglo-
American war of 1812-15, Command­
er-in-Chief of the US Army  (1841-
November 1861).—114 
Serrano y Dominguez, Francisco, conde de 
San Antonio, duque de la Torre (1810-
1885)—Spanish general and states­
man; Minister of War (1843); took 
part in the coup  d'état  in 1856; 
Foreign Minister (1862-63), Prime 
Minister (1868-69, 1871, 1874) and 
Regent (1869-71).—172-75 
Seward,  William Henry (1801-1872) — 
American statesman, a Right-wing 
leader of the Republican Party; Gov­
ernor of the New York state (1838-
42); Senator from 1849; candidate to 
the presidency (1860); Secretary of 
State (1861-69); advocated a com­
promise with Southern slave-own­
ers.—86,  87, 91, 100, 125, 131, 
139-41,  143, 144, 146-47, 157 
Seymour, Horatio (1810-1886) — 
American politician, a leader of the 
Democratic Party of the North; Gov­
ernor of the New York state  (1853-
55, 1863-65); advocated a compro­
mise with Southern slave-owners dur­
ing the Civil War.—263, 266 
Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, Earl 
of (1801-1885) —British politician, 
head of the parliamentary group of 
Tory philanthropists in the 1840s; 
from 1847 a Whig.—7, 128 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616) — English poet and dramatist.—163, 
200-01,  230, 238 
Shee, Sir William (1804-1868)—Irish 
lawyer and Liberal politician; 
member of the House of Com­
mons.—121 
Shelley, John Villiers (1808-1867)— 
British statesman, Free Trader, M.P.— 
220 
Sherman, Thomas West (1813-1879)— 
American general; fought in the Civil 
War on the side of the Northerners; 
commanded the expeditionary army 
in South Carolina and Florida (Oc­
tober 1861-March 1862).—115, 178 
Sibley, Henry Hopkins (1816-1886) — 
American general; took part in the 
Civil War on the side of the Southern­
ers; commanded the Department of 
New Mexico (1861-62).—262 
Singleton, Otho Robards (1814-1889)— 
American politician, Democrat in the 
South, member of the Congress of 
the USA and in 1861-65 of the 
Confederacy Congress.—13 
Slidell, John (1793-1871)—American 
politician, member of the Senate 
Commission for Foreign Affairs; ad­
vocate of secession; commissioner of 
the Confederacy in Paris (1862-65).— 
90-92,  97-104, 107, 108, 109, 110, 
127, 135, 137, 140, 142, 154, 155, 
158 
Smith,  Caleb Blood (1808-1864) — 
lawyer, Congressman, Secretary of 
the Interior under Lincoln  (1861-
62).—115 
Smith,  Gerrit (1797-1874)—American 
public figure and politician, an active 
member of the Anti-Slavery Society, 
a leader of the revolutionary wing of 
Abolitionist movement.— 233 
Sophocles (c. 497-406 B.C.) —Greek 
dramatist.— 79 
Spence, James—English merchant, 
Chairman of the Interventionist 
meeting in Liverpool (November 
1861),  repeatedly came out in de-

=====第451页=====
Name Index 425 
fence of Southern slave-owners dur­
ing the Civil War.—93-95 
Spratt—participant in the Congress of 
Southern states in Montgomery (Feb­
ruary 1861).—34 
Stanton, Edwin McMasters (1814-
1869) — American lawyer and states­
man, Democrat; opposed slavery; At­
torney-General (1860-61); Secretary 
of War (January 1862-68); cham­
pioned revolutionary methods of 
struggle against Southern slave­
owners.—178, 180, 181, 226, 227, 
261,  267 
Steadman—Chairman of the anti-
interventionist workers' meeting in 
London (January 1862).— 154 
Steinmann —major-general, commander 
of the third division of the Danish 
army (1864).—317 
Stephens, Alexander Hamilton (1812-
1883) — American politician, Demo­
crat, participant in the rebellion of 
Southern slave-owners; Congressman 
(1843-59); Vice-President of the Con­
federacy (1861-65).—8, 34 
Stephenson, Robert (1803-1859) —English 
engineer and politician, Tory M.P.— 
149,  151 
Stevens, Ebenezer—inventor of a dough-
making machine.— 254 
Stevens, Edwin Augustus (1795-1868) — 
American businessman, engineer and 
inventor; suggested the use of armour 
for battleships.— 213 
Stich —official in a department of the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs in 
Breslau. — 243 
Stone, Charles Pomeroy (1824-1887) — 
American general; commanded the 
Northern troops in Virginia (1861); 
after the defeat at Ball's Bluff (Oc­
tober 1861) arrested on suspicion of 
high treason; released in August 
1862.—180, 189 
Stössel —librarian in the Schiller society 
in Manchester (1861).—360 Stowe, Harriet Elizabeth Bcecher  (1811-
1896) — American writer, authoress 
of the novel Uncle Tom's Cabin, or 
Life Among the Lowly; was active in 
the Abolitionist movement.— 7, 9, 10 
Stowell—see Scott, William 
Stuart, William—British diplomat, Brit­
ish minister at Washington (June-
November 1862).—230, 231 
Stubbs—owner of a private firm in 
London engaged in commercial es­
pionage.—121-23 
Sumner, Charles (1811-1874) — 
American politician; a Left-wing 
leader of the Republican Party, 
Senator from 1851; Chairman of the 
Senate Commission for Foreign Af­
fairs'  (1861-71); advocate of the 
revolutionary methods of struggle 
against Southern slave-owners; after 
the Northerners' victory in the Civil 
War campaigned for granting politi­
cal rights to Negroes.—118, 203 
T 
Tatschky—member of the German 
Workers' Educational Society in Lon­
don; was on the committee raising 
funds for insurgents during the Pol­
ish uprising of 1863-64.— 297 
Taylor, John Edward—editor-in-chief of 
the newspaper Manchester Guardian 
(1861-72).—317 
Temple, Sir William (1628-1699) — 
British diplomat and politician; the 
private counsellor of William III, 
Prince of Orange.—103, 140 
Thackerey, William Makepeace  (1811-
1863) — English writer, author of The 
Yellowplush Papers.—138-41 
Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-1877) — 
French statesman and historian, 
Prime Minister (1836, 1840); head of 
the Orleanist monarchist party after 
1848;  organised the suppression of 
the Paris Commune.— 79, 274 
Thomas, Lorenzo (1804-1875) — 
29—1134 

=====第452页=====
426 Name Index 
adjutant-general and brigadier gen­
eral; fought in the Civil War on the 
side of the Northerners.— 88 
Thomas—general, commander of a 
brigade of the Sixth Army Corps of 
the Austrian Army (1864).—318 
Thouvenel, Edouard Antoine (1818-
1866)—French diplomat, ambassador 
to Turkey (1855-60), Foreign Minis­
ter (1860-62).—67, 72, 80, 176, 
224 
Toombs, Robert (1810-1885)—American 
politician, Democrat; State Secretary 
of the Confederacy (1861); general 
of the Southern army during the 
Civil War.—13, 40 
Toups—member of the German Work­
ers' Educational Society in London; 
was on the committee raising funds 
for insurgents during the Polish up­
rising (1863-64).—297 
Tremenheere, Hugh Seymour (1804-
1893)—English official and journal­
ist; was member of several govern­
ment commissions inspecting the 
workers' labour conditions.—253, 
254 
Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, baron de 
l'Aulne (1727-1781)—French states­
man and economist, Physiocrat, Di­
rector-General of Finance (1774-
76).—80,  81 
Turner, James Aspinall (1797-1867) — 
English cotton manufacturer, Presi­
dent of the Manchester Commercial 
Association, member of the House of 
Commons.—  94, 160 
U 
Urquhart, David (1805-1877) —British 
diplomat, writer and politician; Tory 
M.P. (1847-52).—108, 109 
V 
Vaillant, Jean Baptiste Philibert, comte 
(1790-1872) —Marshal of France, Senator, Bonapartist, War Minister 
(1854-59).—80 
Vallandigham, Clement Laird (1820-
1871)—American politician, a leader 
of Democrats in the North; Con­
gressman (1858-63); advocate of 
slave-owners.—264 
Van Dorn, Earl (1820-1863)— 
American general; took part in the 
Civil War on the side of the Southern­
ers; commanded the Southern 
troops in Mississippi (1862).—260 
Vattel, Emerich von (Emer de Vattel) 
(1714-1767)—Swiss lawyer and dip­
lomat in Saxon service, theoretician 
of international law.—108 
Veillard—French merchant.—252 
Véron, Louis Desire (1798-1867)— 
French journalist and politician, up to 
1848 Orleanist, then Bonapartist; 
owner and publisher of Le Con­
stitutionnel (1844-52).—79 
Victor Emmanuel II " (Vittorio 
Emanuele II) (1820-1878)—King of 
Piedmont (Sardinia) (1849-61), King 
of Italy (1861-78).—61 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901).— 
92, 105-07, 112, 138, 167, 211 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19 
B.C.)—Roman poet.—28, 129 
W 
Walewski, Alexandre Florian Joseph Colon-
na, comte (1810-1868)—French 
statesman, son of Napoleon I and 
Polish countess Marie Walewska; took 
part in the Polish insurrection of 
1830-31;  emigrated to France after 
its suppression; French Foreign 
Minister (1855-60).—80 
Walker, John (1732-1807)—English 
linguist, author of works on pho­
netics and grammar.—108 
Walker, Leroy Pope (1817-1884) — 
American politician, Democrat in the 

=====第453页=====
Name Index 427 
South; Secretary of War in the Con­
federacy (1861); general of the 
Southern army.— 34 
Walker, Timothy (1806-1856)— 
American lawyer, author of works on 
law.—106 
Walsh, Sir John Benn, 1st Baron Ormath-
waite (1798-1881) — British politician, 
Tory M.P.—211 
Washington, George (1732-1799)— 
American statesman; Commander-in-
Chief of the American Army during 
the War of Independence (1775-83), 
first President of the USA (1789-
97).—8,  34, 101, 155, 250 
Webster, Daniel (1782-1852)—American 
statesman, a leader of the Whigs, 
State Secretary (1841-43 and 1850-
52).—112, 157 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of 
(1769-1852)—British general and 
statesman, Tory; commanded the 
British forces in the wars against 
Napoleon I (1808-14, 1815); Com­
mander-in-Chief (1827-28, 1842-
52); Prime Minister (1828-30).— 
305, 313, 319 
Weydemeyer, Joseph (1818-1866)— 
prominent figure in the German and 
American working-class movement; 
adopted scientific communism under 
the influence of Marx and Engels 
and became a member of the Com­
munist League; took part in the 
1848-49 revolution in Germany; 
emigrated to the USA after the 
defeat of the revolution; Colonel of 
the Northern army during the Civil 
War; was the first to propagate 
Marxism in the USA.—257 
Wheaton, Henry (1785-1848) — 
American lawyer and diplomat, au­
thor of works on international law.— 
106, 108 
White, James—British parliamentary 
figure, Liberal; took part in the 
anti-interventionist meeting in 
Brighton in December 1861.—134, 
136 Whitney, Eli (1765-1825)—American 
inventor of a ginning machine.— 
54 
Whitworth, Joseph (1803-1887)—English 
manufacturer and military inventor. 
—323,  324 
Whynne—participant in the anti-
interventionist workers' meeting in 
London (January 1862)—155 
Wilberforce, William (1759-1833)— 
British public figure and politician, 
philanthropist, M.P.; campaigned 
against slave-trade and slavery in 
British colonies.—157 
Wilkes, Charles (1798-1877)—American 
navy officer and traveller; took part 
in the Civil War on the side of the 
Northerners; captain of the battle­
ship San Jacinto (1861), captured J. M. 
Mason and J. Slidell from the British 
ship Trent.—92, 93, 99, 101, 107, 110, 
112, 139, 141, 146 
Wilkes, John (1727-1797)—British jour­
nalist and politician, radical M.P.; 
author of pamphlets against the ab­
solutist regime of George III.—101 
Wilkes, Washington (c. 1826-1864)— 
English radical journalist, an editor 
of The Morning Star.—137 
William I (Wilhelm I) (1797-1888)— 
King of Prussia (1861-88), German 
Emperor (1871-88).—5, 6, 27 
Williams—English navy officer, rep­
resentative of the Admiralty on 
board the Trent in 1861.—92, 95, 
96 
Wilson, Henry (1812-1875)—American 
politician, Senator (1855-73), sup­
ported the policy pursued by Presi­
dent Lincoln.—118 
Wilson, James (1805-1860)—British 
economist and politician, Free 
Trader, founder and editor of The 
Economist.— 162 
Wolff,  Wilhelm (Lupus) (1809-1864) — 
German proletarian revolutionary, 
29* 

=====第454页=====
428 Name Index 
teacher, prominent in the Commu­
nist League; an editor of the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung (1848-49); friend 
and associate of Marx and Engels. — 
243-44, 320, 335, 363 
Wolff—member of the German Work­
ers' Educational Society in London; 
was on the committee raising funds 
for insurgents of the Polish uprising 
(1863-64).—297 
Wood—English worker; took part in 
the anti-interventionist meeting in 
Brighton (December, 1861).—134-35 
Wood,  Fernando (1812-1881) — 
American politician, Congressman, a 
leader of Democrats in the North; 
Mayor of New York (1854, 1856, 
1859 and 1861); championed a com­
promise with the Southern slave­
owners during the Civil War.—117, 
263 
Wool, John Ellis— (1784-1869) — 
American general, Abolitionist; com­
manded the Northern troops in 
Virginia during the Civil War 
(August 1861-May 1862).—115 
Wyke, Sir Charles Lennox (1815-1897) — 
British diplomat, minister plenipoten­
tiary (1860-61) and special represen­
tative in Mexico (1862-63).—176, 
224-25 
Achilles (Gr. Myth.) — hero of Homer's 
Iliad;  in Greek mythology, one of the 
Greek leaders in the Trojan War; 
Achilles was mortally wounded with 
an arrow in his heel — the only vul­
nerable spot on his body.—193, 227 
Cassandra (Gr. Myth.)—daughter of 
Priam, King of Troy (Homer's Iliad), 
a prophetess whose prophecies no­
body believed though they always 
came true.— 246 
Don Juan (Don Giovanni)—the title 
character in Mozart's opera.—43 Y 
Yancey, William Lowndes (1814-1863) — 
American politician, Democrat in the 
South, commissioner of the Confed­
eracy in London (1861-62).—91, 100, 
129, 138, 155, 182-83 
Yates—participant in the anti-
interventionist workers' meeting in 
London (January 1862).—154 
Z 
Zamacona, Manuel de—Mexican Foreign 
Minister (1861).—197 
Zedlitz-Neukirch, Constantin (b. 1813) — 
Prussian official, Polizei-Präsident of 
Berlin.—339-54, 357-58 
Zollicoffer, Felix Kirk (1812-1862) — 
American journalist, Congressman; 
took part in the Civil War on the side 
of the Southerners; commanded 
Southern troops in Tennessee and 
Kentucky (1861-62).—189 
Zuloaga, Félix (1814-1876)—Mexican 
general, a leader of the Conservative 
Party and a leader of the counter­
revolutionary rebellion against the 
Liberal government (1857); head of 
the insurgent government (1858-
59).—197 
Ezekiel (Bib.) — prophet of the Old Tes­
tament.—240 
Jenkins—name which came to personify 
flattery and servility.—114, 128 
Jeremiah (Bib.) — a prophet who in his 
Lamentations mourns the destruction 
of Jerusalem.— 65 
John Bull—the title character in John 
Arbuthnot's The History of John Bull 
(1712);  the name is used to personify 
England.—24, 73, 138, 140, 163, 252 
Jupiter (Jove)—supreme god of the INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 

=====第455页=====
Name Index 429 
Romans, corresponding to the Greek 
god Zeus.—103, 146, 285 
Leporello—a character from Mozart's 
opera Don Giovanni: Don Juan's 
servant.—43 
Leviathan (Bib.) — a sea monster.— 82 
Macbeth—the title hero in Shakes­
peare's tragedy.— 238 
Mephistopheles—the Devil in Goethe's 
tragedy Faust.—210 
Munchausen, Baron—character from 
German humorous adventure stories 
collected into book form by the 
German writer Rudolf Erich Raspe 
(second half of the 18th century) and 
published in English as the hero's 
recollections; main character of Karl 
Immermann's novel Munchausen, eine 
Geschichte in Arabesken (1838).—109 
Nemesis (Gr. Myth.) — goddess of re­
tributive justice.— 238 
Oedipus (Gr. Myth.) — King of Thebes 
who solved the enigma of the 
Sphinx's riddle and saved Thebes 
from the monster; hero of Sophocles' 
tragedies Oedipus Rex (Tyrannus) and 
Oedipus at  Colonus.—  79 
Posa Marquis—a character in Schiller's 
tragedy Don Carlos, a noble-minded 
and freethinking courtier who tried 
to influence the despotic King.— 81 Rodomonte—a character in Ariosto's 
poem L'Orlando furioso, a boastful 
knight.—64, 114, 274 
Teiresias—3. character in Sophocles' 
tragedy Oedipus Rex, a prophet.—79 
Thomas—according to Biblical tradi­
tion, an apostle of Christ who re­
fused to believe his resurrection and 
was called the doubting Thomas.— 
200 
Ugolino—a character in Dante's La 
Divina Cormnedia (Inferno, Canto 
XXXIII); being confined by Pisan 
bishop Ruggieri in the "Hunger 
Tower" together with his sons and 
grandchildren, Ugolino,seeking salva­
tion from death, ate the dead bodies 
of his children. The prototype of the 
character was a real historic person — 
Ugolino della Gherardesca, count 
Donoratico, the tyrant of Pisa (d. in 
March 1289).—242 
Yellowplush—character in Thackerey's 
The Yellowplush Papers published in 
1837-38;  Yellowplush came to per­
sonify the lackey in English litera­
ture.—138-41 
Zeus—see Jupiter 

=====第456页=====
430 
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
Abolitionist Demonstrations in America (this volume, pp. 233-35) 
— Abolitionistische Kundgebungen in Amerika. In: Die  Presse,  No. 239, August 
30, 1862.—267 
American Affairs (this volume, pp. 178-81) 
— Amerikanische Angelegenheiten. In: Die Presse, No. 61, March 3, 1862.— 
226, 233, 267 
[Application by Marx for Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship] (this volume, 
pp. 339-40) 
— [Antrag von Marx auf Wiederherstellung seiner preussischen 
Staatsbürgerschaft,] Berlin, March 19, 1861, manuscript.— 341 
The British Cotton Trade (this volume, pp. 17-20) 
In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6405, October 14, 1861.—59 
The Civil War in the United States (this volume, pp. 43-52) 
— Der Bürgerkrieg in den Vereinigten Staaten. In: Die Presse, No. 306, 
November 7, 1861.—42, 248 
The Conflict Between Marx and Prussian Citizenship (present edition, Vol. 7, 
pp. 407-10) 
— Der Konflikt zwischen Marx und der preussischen Unterthanenschaft. In: 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung, No. 94, September 5, 1848.—  350-51 
The Crisis in England (this volume, pp. 53-56) 
— Die Krise in England. In: Die Presse, No. 305, November 6, 1861.—  63 
A Criticism of American Affairs (this volume, pp. 226-29) 
— Zur Kritik der Dinge in Amerika. In: Die Presse, No. 218, August 9, 
1862.—233,  248, 267 
English Humanity and America (this volume, pp. 209-12) 
— Englische Humanität und Amerika. In: Die Presse, No. 168, June 20, 
1862.—226 
[Marx's Statement on the Restoration of His Prussian Citizenship] (this volume, 
pp. 341-44) 

=====第457页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 431 
— [Erklärung von Marx zur Frage der Wiederherstellung seiner preussischen 
Staatsbürgerschaft], Berlin, March 25, 1861, manuscript.—348 
A Meeting for Garibaldi (this volume, pp. 236-38) 
— Ein Meeting für Garibaldi. In: Die Presse, No. 256, September 17, 
1862.—245 
The News and its Effect in London (this volume, pp. 95-100). In: New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6462, December 19, 1861.—112 
The Opinion of the Newspapers and the Opinion of the People (this volume, pp. 127-30) 
— Die Meinung der Journale und die Meinung des Volkes. In: Die Presse, 
No. 359, December 31, 1861.—105 
Marx, Karl and Engels, Frederick 
The American Civil War (this volume, pp. 186-95) 
— Der amerikanische Bürgerkrieg. In: Die Presse, Nos. 84, 85, March 26, 27, 
1862.—226 
The Situation in the American Theatre of War (this volume, pp. 204-08) 
— Die Lage auf dem amerikanischen Kriegsschauplatze. In: Die Presse, 
No. 148, May 30, 1862.—226, 267 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Anitschkof, [V. M.] Der Feldzug in der Krim. Erster Theil. Die Schlachten an der Alma, 
bei Balaklawa und bei Inkerman, Berlin, 1857.—274-77, 282 
Ariosto, L. L'Orlando furioso. —64, 114, 274 
Atlas historique et topographique de la guerre d'Orient, en 1854, 1855 et 1856, Paris, 
1859.—278,  280 
Bazancourt, C. L. de. L'expédition de Crimée jusqu'à la prise de  Sebastopol.  Chroniques 
de la guerre d'Orient. The first edition in two volumes appeared in Paris in 
1856.—280 
Beecher Stowe, H. E. [Letter to Lord Shaftesbury.] In: The Times, No. 24033, 
September 9, 1861.—7 
Bentinck, G. W. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1862.] In: The 
Times, No. 24188, March 8, 1862.—183 
Bible 
The Old Testament 
Genesis.— 252 
The Lamentations of Jeremiah.— 65 
Ezekiel.—240 
Bragg, B. Address to the People of the Northwest, Head-Quarters C. S. Army in 
Kentucky, Bardstown, Ky., September 26,  1862.—  256 
Burdett, F. [Speech in the House of Commons on February 12, 1811.] In: Hansard's 
Parliamentary Debates, First Series, Vol. XVIII, London, 1812.—168 
Calhoun, J. C. [Speech in the Senate on February 19, 1847.] In: Congressional Globe: 
New Series: Contaning Sketches of the Debates and Proceedings of the Second Session of 
Twenty-Ninth Congress, Washington, 1847.—13 

=====第458页=====
432 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Cameron, S. [Speech to Soldiers.] "Washington, Thursday, Nov. 14,  1861".  In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No.  6433,  November 15, 1861.—115 
Carlyle, Th. Oliver Cromwell's Letters and  Speeches,  with elucidations. The first edition 
in three volumes appeared in 1845.—179 
Carnarvon, H. H. M. [Speech in the House of Lords on June 13, 1862.] In: The 
Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.—211 
Cecil, R. A. T. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1862.] In: The 
Times, No. 24188, March 8, 1862.—185 
Cobden, R. [Address to the House of Commons on August 1, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24314, August 2, 1862.—239-40 
Cochrane, J. [Message to Soldiers.] "Washington, Thursday) Nov. 14,  1861".  In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No.  6433,  November 15, 1861.—115 
Cooper, J. F. The Pathfinder.— 88 
Croswell, E. [Open Letter.] "New York, Nov. 20,  1861".  In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6441, November 25, 1861.—116 
Dante Alighieri. La Divina Commedia.— 242 
Derby, E. G. [Speech in the House of Lords on February 6, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24163, February 7, 1862.—168-71, 239-40 
Disraeli, B. [Speech in the House of Commons on February 6, 1862.] In: The 
Times, No. 24163, February 7, 1862.—168-69 
Douglas, S. A. [Statement made at a reception in Washington on August 19, 1859.] 
In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5720, August 23, 1859.—37-38 
Dunlop, A. M. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 19, 1861.] In: The 
Times, No. 23885, March 20, 1861.—23, 24 
Fitzgerald, W. R. [Speech in the House of Commons on July 15, 1862.] In: The 
Times, No. 24299, July 16, 1862.—224 
Forster, WT. E. "On the Civil War in America." In: The Times, Nc. 24054, October 
3, 1861 [a lecture].—26 
— [Speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24188, March 8, 1862.—183, 184 
Fould, A. "Memoire à l'Empereur, lu en séance du Conseil privé et du Conseil des 
ministres, aux Tuileries, le 12 novembre  1861".  In: Le Moniteur universel, 
No. 318, November 14, 1861.—79, 83 
— Pas d'assignats! Paris,  1848.—  80 
Gladstone, W. E. [Speech in Newcastle on October 7, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24372, October 9, 1862.—262, 270 
Goethe, J. W. von. Faust.— 158, 210 
Gorchakov, P. "Remarks on the Article 'More Details on the Battle of the Alma' 
published in the Russki  invalid,  No. 83." In: Russki  invalid,  No. 101, May 8, 
1856.—274, 287 
Gregory, W. H. [Speeches in the House of Commons:] 
— May 28, 1861. In: The Times, No. 23945, May 29, 1861.—182, 211 

=====第459页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 433 
— March 7, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24188, March 8, 1862.—182, 183 
— June 13, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.—211 
Harvey. [Letter to Mr. Bruce.] In: The Times, No. 24274, June 17, 1862.—216-18 
Hautefeuille, L. B. Le droit maritime international devant le parlement britannique. In: 
Revue contemporaine, 2 e série, tome 27, Paris, 1862.—185 
— Nécessité d'une loi maritime pour régler les rapports des neutres et des belligérants. 
In: Revue contemporaine, 2 e série, tome 25, Paris, 1862.—185 
— Le règlement du 31 janvier 1862 sur l'asile maritime dans les ports de la 
Grande-Bretagne. In: Revue contemporaine, tome 25, Paris, 1862.—185 
Haxthausen, A. Studien über die innern Zustände, das Volksleben und insbesondere die 
ländlichen Einrichtungen Russlands, Dritter Theil, Berlin,  1852.—  276 
Hegel, G. W. F. Vorlesungen über die Aesthetik. The first edition in three volumes 
was published by H. G. Hotho in Berlin in 1835.—250-51 
Heine, H. Neuer Frühling.— 105 
Hennessy J. P. [Speech in the House of Commons on July 2, 1861.] In: The Times, 
No. 23975, July 3, 1861.—24 
Hodasevich, R. A Voice from within the Walls of Sebastopol: A Narrative of the 
Campaign in the Crimea, and of the Events of the Siege, London, 1856.—  275,  277, 
279 
Horace (Quintus Horatius Flaccus). De Arte Poetica.—128, 182 
— Epistolarum.— 220 
[Jefferson, Th.] Memoirs, Correspondence, and Private Papers of Thomas Jefferson, Late 
President of the United States, Vols. I-IV, London, 1829.—10, 91 
Jennison, [C. R.] [Speech to Soldiers.] "Camp Jennison. Kansas City, Tuesday, Nov. 
12, 1861".  In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 1861.—116 
Johnson, S. A Dictionary of the English Language, in which the words are deduced from 
their originals and illustrated in their different significations by examples from the best 
writers. To which are prefixed a history of the language and an English grammar. The 
first edition in two volumes appeared in London in 1755.—107-08 
Junius [Francis, Sir Philip]. Letters. In: The Public Advertiser, 1769-1772.—101 
Justitia. "To the Editor of The Times". In: The Times, No. 24104, November 30, 
1861.—99 * 
Juvenalis. Satirae.—  83, 84, 219 
Kearney, Ph. [Letter to O. S. Halstead, Jr., August 4, 1862.] In: New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6719, October 16, 1862.—268 
Kent, J. Commentaries on American Law. The first edition in four volumes appeared 
in New York in 1826-30.—90, 106 
Kinglake, A. W. The Invasion of the Crimea; its Origin, and an Account of its Progress 
down to the Death of Lord Raglan, Edinburgh and London, 1863, Vols. I-II. The 
book came out in eight volumes.— 274-88 
— [Speech in the House of Commons on July 15, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24299, July 16, 1862.—224 
Kiryakov, V. "More Details on the Battle of the Alma". In: Russki  invalid,  No. 136, 
June 21. 1856.—274, 280 

=====第460页=====
434 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Kvitsinsky, O. "More Details on the Battle of the Alma" (Letter to the Editor of the 
Russki invalid). In: Russki  invalid,  No. 84, April 12, 1856.—  274,  287 
Layard, A. H. [Speeches in the House of Commons:] 
— March 31, 1854. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, Third Series, Vol. 
CXXXII, London, 1854.—135 
— July 15, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24299, July 16, 1862.—224 
Leibniz, G. W. Nouveaux essais sur l'entendement humain. The first edition 
appeared in Amsterdam and Leipzig in 1765.—163 
Lincoln, A. [Letter to Fremont of September 11, 1861.] In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6380, September 15, 1861.—51 
Lindsay, W. S. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24188, March 8, 1862.—184-85 
A Liverpool Merchant. "To the Editor of The Economist". In: The Economist, 
No. 957, December 28, 1861.—132 
Lovejoy, O. [Speech in the House of Representatives on January 14, 1862.] In: The 
Times, No. 24153, January 27, 1862.—155 
Lowe, R. "The Part of The Times in the Government of the Country." In: The Free 
Press, No. 8, August 7, 1861.—21 
Lucan (Marcus Aeneus Lucanus). Pharsalia {De hello civili). Libri I-X.—207 
Macaulay Th. B. Critical and Historical Essays Contributed to the Edinburgh Review. 
The first edition in three volumes appeared in 1843.—179, 266 
Mason, J. M. [Statement urging the separation of the South.] In: New-York Times, 
October 14, 1856.—103 
— [Speech in the Senate on March 11, 1861.] In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6202, March 12, 1861.—103 
Monroe, J. F. [Epistle to Commodore Farragut, D. G. of April 26, 1862.] In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6576, May 2, 1862.—201 
Montagu, R. [Speeches in the House of Commons:] 
— June 18, 1861. In: The Times, No. 23963, June 19, 1861.—23-24 
— July 15, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24299, July 16, 1862.—224-25 
Mozart, W. A. Don Giovanni. Opera in two acts. Libretto by Lorenzo Da Ponte. —43 
Napoleon III (Charles Louis Napoléon Bonaparte) [Message to A. Fould.] In: Le 
Moniteur universel, No. 318, November 14,  1861.—  79 
Newman, F. W. [To the editor of The Morning Star.] In: The Morning Star, 
November 29, 1862.—270 
Orléans, H. d'. Lettre sur l'histoire de France adressée au prince Napoléon, Bruxelles, 
1861.—28 
Palmer, R. [Speech in the House of Commons on March 7, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24188, March 8, 1862.—185 
Palmerston, H. J. [Speeches in the House of Commons:] 
— July 16, 1857. In: Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates,  Third Series, Vol. CXLVI, 
London, 1857.—78, 225 

=====第461页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 435 
— February 6, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24163, February 7, 1862.—170 
— June 13, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.—211 
— July 30, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24312, July 31, 1862.—239 
Pétrie, M., James, H. Organization, composition and strength of the Army of Great 
Britain, London, 1863.—298 
Phillimore, R. Commentaries upon International Law. The first edition in four 
volumes appeared in London in 1854-1861.—106, 107 
Plato.  Gorgias.—  200,  220 
Pratt, F. Th. Law of Contraband of War: with a Selection of  Cases  from the Papers of the 
Right Hon. Sir Geo. Lee... and an Appendix, containing Extracts from Treaties, 
Miscellaneous Papers, and Forms of  Proceedings.  With the Cases to the Present Time. 
The first edition appeared in London in 1856.—91 
Roselius, C. [Speech in the State Convention of Louisiana at New Orleans on 
March 21, 1861.] In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6217, March 29, 1861.—48, 
49. 
Russell, J. [Despatch addressed to the British Minister at Turin.] "Foreign-Office, 
Oct. 27". In: The Times, No. 23769, November 5, I860.—231 
— [Letter to W. Stuart.] "Foreign-office, July 28, 1862". In: The Times, 
No. 24323, August 13, 1862.—230 
— "To the Right Reverend the Bishop of Durham. Downing Street, Nov. 4". 
In: The Times, No. 20640, November 7, 1850.—231 
— [Speech in Newcastle on October 14, 1861.] In: The Times, No. 24064, 
October 15, 1861.—43 
— [Speeches in the House of Lords:] 
— February 6, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24163, February 7, 1862.—169 
— June 13, 1862. In: The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 1862.—211 
Saint-Arnaud, A. de. Au quartier general à Alma. Champs de bataille d'Alma, le 21 
septembre 1854. In: Le Moniteur universel, No. 280, October 7, 1854.—280 
— Au quartier général à Aima. Champs de bataille d'Alma, le 22 septembre  1854. In: 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 281, October 8,  1854.—  280 
Schiller, Fr. von. Das Lied von der Glocke.— 181 
— Don Carlos, Infant von Spanien.— 81 
Scott, W. [Letter on the Trent affair.] "Hôtel Westminster, Paris, Dec. 2". In: The 
Times, No. 24109, December 6, 1861.—114 
Seward, W. H. [Speech at Rochester on October 25, 1858.] In: New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 5466, October 28, 1858.—87 
Shakespeare, W. Julius Caesar.— 230 
— King Henry IV.—  200,  201 
— Macbeth.— 238 
Singleton, O. [Speech in the House of Representatives on December 19, 1859.] In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 5822, December 20, 1859.—13 
Sophocles. Oedipus Rex.— 79 
Spence, J. The American Union; its Effect on National Character and Policy, with an 
Inquiry into Secession as a Constitutional Right, and the Causes of the Disruption, 
London, 1861.—93, 95 

=====第462页=====
436 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Stephens, A. H. [Speech in Savannah on March 21, 1861.] In: New-York Daily 
Tribune, No. 6215, March 27, 1861.—8, 34 
Stephens, J. R. [Speech at the Chartist meeting of September 24, 1838, at Kersall 
Moor.] In: The Northern Star, No. 46, September 29, 1838.—153-54 
Sumner, C. [Speech before the Young Men's Republican Union of New York, 
November 27, 1861.] In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6444, November 28, 
1861.—118 
Thackerey, W. M. The Yellowplush Papers.—138-41 
Thomas, L. [Report on the investigation of General Fremont's activity, September 
21, 1861.] In: New-York Daily Tribune. No. 6419, October 30, 1861.—88 
Thousand and One Nights.— 284 
Vattel, [E.] de. Le Droit des gens ou principes de la loi naturelle. Appliqués à la Conduite 
et aux Affaires des Nations et des Souverains. Ouvrage qui conduit à developer les 
véritables Intérêts des Puissances. The first edition in two volumes appeared in 
Leyden in 1758.—108 
Véron, L. Mémoires d'un bourgeois de Paris, Vols. I-VI, Paris, 1853-1855.— 79 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro).  Aeneid.—  28, 129 
Walker, J. A critical pronouncing dictionary, and expositor of the English language... 
To which are prefixed principles of English pronunciation; rules to be observed by the 
natives of Scotland,  Ireland,  and London, for avoiding their respective peculiarities: 
and directions to foreigners for acquiring a knowledge of the use of this dictionary: the 
whole interspersed with observations, etymological, critical and grammatical..., London, 
1861.—108 
Walker, T. Introduction to American Law: designed as a First Book for Students. The 
first edition appeared in Philadelphia in 1837.—106 
Walsh, J. B. [Speech in the House of Commons on June 13, 1862.] In: The Times, 
No. 24272, June 14, 1862.—211 
Wheaton, H. Elements of International Law, Boston, 1857.—106, 108 
Wilkes, Ch. Narrative of the United States Exploring Expedition During the Years 1838, 
1839, 1840, 1841, 1842. Vols. I-V, Philadelphia, 1845.—101 
— Western America, including California and Oregon, with Maps of those Regions, 
and of "The Sacramento Valley", Philadelphia, 1849.—101 
William I. [Speech to the Chambers on January 14, 1861.] In: The Times, 
No. 23832, January 17, 1861.—5 
Wolff,  W. "Das Elend und der Aufruhr in Schlesien". In: Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 
1845, Darmstadt, 1845.-334 
Yankee Doodle (popular American song).— 206 
DOCUMENTS 
Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Nine Months ended September 30, 
1860. In: The Economist, No. 897, November 3, 1860, Supplement.— 59 
Accounts relating to Trade and Navigation for the Nine Months ended September 30, 

=====第463页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 437 
1861.  In: The Economist, No. 949, November 2, 1861, Supplement.—58-59, 
63-64 
An Act for amending and further continuing, until the 24th day of June, 1801, two acts, 
passed in that part of the United Kingdom called  Ireland,  in the thirty-ninth and 
fortieth years of the reign of his present majesty, for the suppression of the rebellion 
which still exists within that kingdom, and for the protection of the persons and 
properties of his majesty's faithful subjects within the same  [1801].—  210 
An Act for the amendment and better administration of the laws relating to the poor in 
England and Wales [1834].—246 
An Act for the release of certain persons held to service or labor in the District of Columbia 
[1862].—228 
An Act to amend an act,  entitled,  "An Act to provide further for the public defence" 
[1862].—261 
An Act to Amend the Laws Relating to the Importation of Corn  [1846].—  53, 160 
An Act to  amend,  and supplementary to, the Act entitled "An Act respecting Fugitives from 
Justice, and Persons escaping from the Service of their Masters", approved February 
twelfth, one thousand seven hundred and ninety three  [1850].—  37-38,  103, 227 
An Act to authorize the people of the Missouri territory to form a constitution and state 
government, and for the admission of such state into the Union on an equal footing with 
the original states, and to prohibit slavery in certain territories [1820].—10, 36, 37 
An Act to authorize the President of the United States to appoint diplomatic representatives 
to the Republics of Hayti and Liberia, respectively  [1862].—  229 
An Act to confiscate the property of Rebels for the payment of the expenses of the present 
rebellion, and for other purposes  [1862].—  234 
An Act to continue, until the 24th day of June, 1801, an act, made in the last session of 
parliament of  Ireland,  intituled "An act to empower the lord lieutenant, or other chief 
governor or governors of  Ireland,  to apprehend and detain such persons as he or they 
shall  suspect  for conspiring against his majesty's person and government"  [1801].—  210 
An Act to enable Boards of Guardians of certain Unions to obtain temporary Aid to meet 
the extraordinary Demands for Relief therein  [1862].—  239 
An Act to Organize the Territories of Nebraska and Kansas [1854].—10, 35-37, 38-39 
An Act to prohibit the importation of Slaves into any port or place within the jurisdiction of 
the United States, from and after the first day of January, in the year of our Lord one 
thousand eight hundred and  eight.—  202-03 
An Act to provide for the government of the territory north west of the River Ohio 
[1789].—35-36 
An Act to secure Freedom to all Persons within the Territories of the United States 
[1862].—228 
An Act to Secure Homesteads to Actual Settlers on the Public Domain, and to Provide a 
Bounty for Soldiers in lieu of Grants of the Public Lands  [1862].—  228 
An Act to suppress insurrection, to punish treason and rebellion, to seize and confiscate the 
property of Rebels, and for other purposes  [1862].—  228 
Allerhöchster Gnaden-Erlass wegen politischer Verbrechen und Vergehen, 12. Januar 1861. 

=====第464页=====
438 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
In: Königlich-Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger, January 13, 1861, Zweite Ausgabe. — 
243, 334, 339-44,  347-51,  353, 357, 359. 
The Boundary Treaty to settle and define the Boundaries between the Territories of the 
United States and the  Possessions  of her Britannic Majesty in North America, for the 
final suppression of the African Slave Trade, and for giving up of Criminals, fugitives 
from justice, in certain cases [1842].—112 
Buchanan, J., Mason, J. Y., Soulé, P. "Aix La Chapelle, October 18, 1854" 
[Message to W. L. Marcy, US Secretary of State.].—10, 37-38 
Butler, B. F. A Proclamation [May 15, 1862]. In: The Times, No. 24272, June 14, 
1862.—210 
The Constitution, as formed for the United States, by the Poederal Convention, held at 
Philadelphia, in the year 1787, with the resolves of Congress, and of the Assembly of 
Pennsylvania thereon, Philadelphia, 1787.—8, 36-37, 41, 102, 250. 
Constitution of the Confederate States of America. In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6206, March 16, 1861.—8, 48, 50, 260-61 
Convention, conclue à Londres, le 31 octobre 1861, entre l'Espagne, la France et la 
Grande-Bretagne pour combiner une action commune contre le Mexique. — 67, 169, 
224 
Convention entre la Grande-Bretagne et le Maroc relative à un emprunt à faire à Londres 
par le Maroc; signée à Tanger, le 24 octobre 1861.—170 
Correspondence Relating to Persia and Afghanistan, London,  1839.—  23, 78 
Correspondence relating to the Works under the Thames Embankment Bill, and to plans for 
facilitating the passage and traffic or opening better communication between Whitehall 
and Bridge Street, London, 1862.—219, 220 
Correspondence Respecting the Affairs of Mexico. Presented to both Houses of 
Parliament by Command of Her Majesty, 3 parts, London, 1862.—172, 224 
Davis,  J. To the Congress of the Confederate States. "Richmond. Nov. 18,  1861".  In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6441, November 25, 1861.—114 
Déclaration réglant divers points de droit maritime, signée par les Plénipotentiaires 
d'Autriche, de France, de la Grande-Bretagne, de Prusse, de Russie, de Sardaigne et de 
la Porte Ottomane, à Paris, le 16 avril 1856.—124-26, 168, 185 
Frederik, R. Proclamation du roi de Danemark relative à l'organisation de la monarchie 
danoise y compris les Duchés de Schleswig, de Holstein et de Lauenbourg, signée le 28 
janvier  1852.—  3 
Fremont, J. C. Proclamation. "Headquarters of the Western Department, St. Louis, 
Aug. 31,  1861".  In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6366, September 1, 
1861.—51,  86, 115 
Fugitive Slave Act—see An Act to  Amend,  and supplementary to, the Act entitled "An 
Act respecting Fugitives from Justice...". 
Gesetz über die Erwerbung und den Verlust der Eigenschaft als Preussischer Unterthan, so 
wie über den Eintritt in fremde Staatsdienste. Vom 31. Dezember 1842. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, Berlin, 1843, 
Nr. 2.-339, 341, 343-44, 347, 348, 350, 351, 353 

=====第465页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 439 
Halleck, H. W. [Report to E. M. Stanton, Secretary of War.] "Headquarters of the 
Army, Washington, October 28, 1862". In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6740, 
November 10, 1862.—267 
Homestead Act—see An Act to Secure Homesteads... 
[Jackson, A.] President Jackson's proclamation against the Nullification Ordinance of 
South Carolina, December 11, 1832, N.p. [1832].—14, 33 
Joint Resolution for annexing Texas to the United States [1845].—48 
Kansas Nebraska Bill—see An Act to Organize the Territories of Nebraska and Kansas 
Lincoln, A. The Inaugural Address [March 4, 1861], In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6196, March 5, 1861.—34 
— A Proclamation [April 15, 1861]. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6231, April 
15, 1861.—34 
— "Executive Mansion, Washington, July 1, 1862." [Ordinance on the 
Enlistment of 300,000 recruits.] In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6628, 
July 2, 1862.—227 
— [Address to the Representatives and Senators of the Border Slaveholding 
States, July 12, 1862.] In: New-York Daily Tribune, No.  6643,  July 19, 
1862—227 
— A Proclamation [September 22, 1862]. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6699, 
September 23, 1862.—249, 251, 266, 269 
Madison, J. To the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States 
[Washington, June 1, 1812].—112 
Magna Charta Libertatum.— 168 
McClellan, G. B. [Order, Enjoining on His Officers and Soldiers Obedience to the 
President's Proclamation of Freedom.] "Headquarters Army of the Potomac. 
Camp near Sharpsburg, Md., Oct. 7, 1862." In: New-York Daily Tribune, 
No. 6713, October 9, 1862.—266 
Missouri Compromise—see An Act to authorize the people of the Missouri territory... 
Order in Council. At the Court at the Queen's  Palace,  the 11th of November, 1807, present, the 
King's most Excellent Majesty in Council.—141 
An Ordinance for the government of the territory of the United States, north-west of the 
river Ohio, New York, 1787.—35 
Ostend Manifesto—see Buchanan, J., Mason, J. Y., Soulé, P. "Aix La Chapelle..." 
Papers relating to the foreign relations of the United States, transmitted to Congress, with 
the annual message of the President..., Washington, 1861.—125-26. 
Papers Relating to Mexican Affairs. In: The Times, No. 24168, February 13, 
1862*1—172-77 
Population of the United Kingdom according to the Census of 1861. In: The Times, 
No. 23992, July 23, 1861.—53 
The Portfolio; Diplomatic Review (new series), London, 1844, Vol. Ill, No. XI: 
Annexation of the Texas, a Case of War between England and the United 
States.—  75-76 

=====第466页=====
440 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Protokolle der Deutschen Bundesversammlung vom Jahre 1848, Frankfurt am Main, 
1848.—350-51,  353 
Report Addressed to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, 
Relative to the Grievances Complained of by the Journeymen Bakers; with Appendix of 
Evidence, London, 1862.—253-55 
[Report of the Investigating Commission called by the Government to investigate the 
conduct of certain officers connected with, and the circumstances attending the 
abandonment of Maryland Hights and the surrender of Harper's Ferry.] In: 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6740, November 10, 1862.—267 
Traité de commerce entre la France et la Grande-Bretagne, signé à Paris, le 23 janvier 
I860; suivi de deux articles additionnels signés à Paris, le 25 février et le 27 juin de la 
même année. — 162 
Traité signé à Londres, le 8 Mai 1852, entre le Danemark d'une part, et l'Autriche, la 
France, la Grande-Bretagne, la Russie et la Suède de l'autre part, relatif à l'ordre de 
succession dans la monarchie  danoise. — 23 
Treaty between the United States of America and Her Majesty the Queen of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and  Ireland,  for the Suppression of the African Slave-Trade. 
Concluded at Washington, April 7, 1862. In: New-York Daily Tribune, No. 6572, 
April 28, 1862.—202-03, 229 
A Treaty of Peace and Amity between his Britannic Majesty and the United States of 
America; signed at Ghent, December 24, 1814.—112 
Verfassungsurkunde für den preussischen Staat. Vom 31. Januar 1850. In: Preussischer 
Staats-Anzeiger, No. 32, February 2,  1850.—  353 
Verhandlungen des Deutschen Parlaments, Frankfurt am Main,  1848.—  350 
Verordnung über die zu bildende Repräsentation des Volks. Vorn 22sten Mai 1815. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten, No. 9 (Ausgegeben zu 
Berlin den 8ten Juni  1815).—  357 
Victoria, R. A Proclamation [May 13, 1861]. In: The Times, No. 23933, May 15, 
1861.—92, 105, 106-07, 126, 138 
— A Proclamation [December 4, 1861]. In: The Times, No. 24108, December 5, 
1861.—112 
— [Speech from the Throne on the opening of Parliament, February 6, 1862.] 
In: The Times, No. 24163, February 7, 1862.—167. 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS 
PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung 
— No. 41, October 11, 1862: Verlauf und Bedeutung des diesjährigen Feldzugs in 
Nordamerika. — 289 
— No. 20, May 16, 1863: Der Angriff auf Charleston am 7. April 1863.— 289 
— No. 20, May 16, 1863: Charleston Hafen.— 294 
— Nos. 34-39, August 22, 29, September 5, 12, 19, 26, 1863 (Literaturblatt): 
[review of the pamphlet] Pétrie, M., James, H. Organization, composition and 
strength of the Army of Great Britain, London,  1863.—  298 

=====第467页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 441 
— Nos. 44-46, October 31, November 7, 14, 1863: Die englische Armee und 
Verfassung. —298 
The Army and Navy Gazette, June 25, 1864: London, Saturday, June 25, 1864.—  321-
22, 324-25 
Berliner Reform, No. 83, April 10, 1863: Wie wir hören, ist Lassalle... — 273 
Calcutta Price Current, August 7, 1861 [On the glutting of the Indian market with 
cotton manufactures].—18-19 
The Daily News, November 28, 1861 [Concerning the Trent  affair].—  96 
— No. 4890, January 11, 1862: As the rising of the sun after a night of troublous 
watchings...—143 
The Daily Post, No. 2061, January 13, 1862: The Cute Yankees.—157-58 
The Economist, No. 370, September 28, 1850: Cotton Growing in Jamaica.— 54 
— No. 370, September 28, 1850: Cultivation of Cotton.—54 
— No. 371, October 5, 1850: Cultivation of Cotton in the West Indies.— 54 
— No. 372, October 12, 1850: Cotton Planting in Jamaica.— 54 
— No. 845, November 5, 1859: Harper's Ferry.—13 
— No. 852, December 24, 1859: The Impending Crisis in the Southern States of 
America.—13 
— No. 853, December 31, 1859: English Sympathy with the Slavery Party in 
America.—13 
— No. 941, September 7, 1861: The Probable Continuance of the American 
Conflict.—14, 17 
— No. 942, September 14, 1861: American Complaints against England.— 7-9, 
11-12,  12-13,  14, 33 
— No. 943, September 21, 1861: The Last Movements of the Northern and the 
Southern Confederation.— 26 
— No. 944, September 28, 1861: English Feeling towards America.— 25 
— No. 947, October 19, 1861: The Case of Mexico.— 69 
— No. 948, October 26, 1861: Paris, Thursday.—63-64 
— No. 949, November 2, 1861: Motives of the Federalists in Coercing the 
Secessionists.—60 
— No. 949, November 2, 1861: Why Gold does not Go to France and Why it Has a 
Tendency to Go to America.— 64 
— No. 949, November 2, 1861: The Board of Trade Returns.—57-58, 59, 63, 
64 
— No. 951, November 16, 1861: The Constitutional Change in France.— 85 
— No. 954, December 7, 1861: The Effect of an American War upon English 
Commerce.— 111 
— No. 957, December 28, 1861: The Board of Trade Tables.—132 
— No. 957, December 28, 1861: Operation of a War with America on 
England.—132 
— No. 961, January 25, 1862: Shall the Blockade Be Respected?—158 
— No. 994, September 13, 1862: Distress and Relief in Lancashire.—241 
The Examiner, No. 2798, September 14, 1861: Mrs. Stowe on the American War.— 7, 
9-10, 14, 33 
The Free Press, No. 10, October 2, 1861: The Projected Intervention in Mexico.—  67, 
71-74 
— No. 12, December 4, 1861: We must bombard New York. Such were...—109 
— No. 12, December 4, 1861: Public Opinion on the "San Jacinto" Affair.—109 
30—1134 

=====第468页=====
442 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 1, January 1, 1862 [Excerpts from documents on maritime law].—148 
The Globe and Traveller, January 11, 1862 [Report on Adams' communication of 
Seward's dispatch to the British government].—144 
Harper's Weekly, July 11, 1863: The Capture of the Rebel Iron-clad "Atlanta" by the 
"Weehawken" captain Rodgers.—290 
Journal des Débats, November 6, 1861: France, Paris, 3 novembre. —73-74 
The London Gazette, No. 22589, January 14, 1862: Foreign Office, January 14, 1862. 
Copies of  Correspondence  with Her Majesty's Minister in the United States.—145, 146 
The Mark Lane Express and Agricultural Journal, No. 1599, August 18, 1862: Review 
of the British Corn Trade during the Past Week.—231 
Mobile Advertiser and Register, October 10, 1862 [Report on the losses of the 42nd 
Alabama  regiment].—  260 
Le Moniteur universel, No. 309, November 5, 1861: Bulletin.—67, 73 
The Morning Chronicle, November 28, 1861 [On the Trent affair as a casus 
belli].— 96 
The Morning  Herald,  November 28, 1861 [On the Trent affair as a casus belli].— 
96 
The Morning  Post,  No. 27440, November 28, 1861: The Government of  the United States 
has taken a step...—89, 91, 97-98 
— No. 27442, November 30, 1861: We are glad to be able to inform our 
readers...—  113 
— No. 27448, December 7, 1861: The principal intelligence conveyed by the 
Edinburgh...—114 
— No. 27460, December 21, 1861: In the present state of the public mind...—139, 
143, 144, 146. 
— No. 27476, January 10, 1862: We have it in our power to state...—144, 146 
The Morning Star, November 28, 1861 [Concerning the Trent  affair].—  96 
— January 14, 1862: [Article on the suppression of Seward's dispatch].—144 
— September 30, 1862: [Concerning the ineffectiveness of "official charity"].— 
246 
— November 22, 1862 [On the record of the Lincoln Administration].— 269 
New-York Daily Tribune, No. 4955, March 7, 1857: The Dred Scott Case Decided.— 
10, 36, 41 
— No. 5171, November 16, 1857: The Great Swindle.— 38 
— No. 5720, August 23, 1859: Douglas Sure of the  South.—  38 
— No. 5950, May 19, 1860: The Platform.—11, 39 
— No. 6098, November 9, 1860: Columbia, S. C. Thursday, Nov. 8, I860.— 35 
— No. 6231, April 15, 1861: How the War News Is Received.— 34 
— No. 6308, July 4, 1861: The Knoxville (Tenn.) Whig...—46 
— No. 6329, July 26, 1861: Jefferson City, Thursday, July 25, 1861.—46 
— No. 6381, September 16, 1861: Mr. Cass is reported to have  said...—  51 
— No. 6401, October 9, 1861: From "Brownson's Review" for October.—51 
— No. 6434, November 16, 1861 [Report in the column "From Europe"].—69 
— No. 6435, November 18, 1861: The Capture of Mason and Slidell.—105-08 
— No. 6438, November 21, 1861: Hatteras Inlet, N.C., Nov. 18, 1861.—116 
— No. 6444, November 28, 1861: It is certainly an indicative and important 
fact...—118 
— No. 6444, November 28, 1861: The Sentiment of the Cooper Institute Meeting 

=====第469页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 443 
Last Night.—118 
— No. 6445, November 29, 1861: Instructions to Gen. Sherman.—115 
— No. 6462, December 19, 1861 [Report in the column "Great  Britain"].—  68 
— No. 6507, February 11, 1862: War Department, Washington, Feb. 10, 
1862.—181 
— No. 6508, February 12, 1862: "The Washington Star", in an article...—180 
— No. 6517, February 22, 1862: Movements of the Manassas  Rebels.—  205 
— No. 6575, May 1, 1862: From Fortress Monroe.— 201 
— No. 6576, May 2, 1862: Washington, Thursday, May 1, 1862.—201 
— No. 6577, May 3, 1862: Senate. Washington, May 2,  1862.—  203 
Le Nord,  No. 337, December 3, 1861: Résumé politique.—114 
Revue des deux Mondes, tome 35, Paris, October 15, 1861: Chronique de la 
quinzaine. — 83 
Reynold's Newspaper, No. 620, June 29, 1862: The Duke of Buccleuch Stops the 
Wa>—221-22 
The Saturday Review, No. 307, September 14, 1861: Mrs. Beecher Stowe's Wounded 
Feelings.—7, 8, 12, 33 
— No. 320, December 14, 1861: Unblessed Peacemakers.—130 
The Standard, November 28, 1861 [On the Trent affair as a casus belli].— 296 
The Times, No. 21704, April 1, 1854: To whatever quarter...—135 
— No. 23530, January 31, 1860: Manchester Chamber of Commerce.—160 
— No. 23833, January 18, 1861: Frankfort-on-the-Main, Thursday.— 5 
— No. 23903, April 10, 1861: New York, March 26.-36, 45-48 
— No. 23926, May 7, 1861: The tone in which the outrage on Captain 
Macdonald...—28 
— No. 23928, May 9, 1861: We trust we have now heard the last of the 
discussion...— 27 
— No. 23963, June 19, 1861: We are at last enjoying a Summer...— 24 
— No. 24032, September 7, 1861: Southampton, Friday.—12 
— No. 24033, September 9, 1861: Few have pretended to give...—33 
— No. 24049, September 27, 1861: The assurance, in spite of the denial of the 
"Patrie" ...—67-69, 74-77 
— No. 24056, October 5, 1861: The time is now approaching...— 24 
— No. 24057, October 7, 1861: The popularity of a Government with those who are 
subject to its control...—27, 28 
— No. 24058, October 8, 1861: The King of Prussia is  welcomed to  Compiègne... — 27, 
28 
— No. 24059, October 9, 1861: It is, perhaps, a mistake to attribute great 
importance...—27, 28 
— No.  24061,  October 11, 1861: Paris, Thursday, Oct. 10, 7  a.m.—  27, 28 
— No. 24062, October 12, 1861: Perhaps there is no position which an erring 
mortal...—29-30 
— No. 24080, November 2, 1861: To those who concern themselves with French 
politics...—63,  65 
— No. 24083, November 6, 1861: Some of our middle-aged readers may  recollect  the 
time...—66, 72 
— No. 24083, November 6, 1861: Paris, Tuesday, Nov. 5, 7 A.M.—72 
— No. 24085, November 8, 1861: In a very short time the long-threatened 
intervention of European Governments...— 74-77 
— No.  24091,  November 15, 1861: The hour of reckoning has at length overtaken 
France...—80 

=====第470页=====
444 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 24093, November 18, 1861: The extraordinary frankness of M. Fould...—82-
84 
— No. 24093, November 18, 1861 [Report in the column "Money-Market and 
City Intelligence"].—85 
— No. 24102, November 28, 1861: Liverpool, Wednesday.—93 
— No. 24102, November 28, 1861: It requires a strong effort of self-restraint to 
discuss...—89-91,  97, 98, 100, 127 
— No. 24103, November 29, 1861: Wherever two or three men met together 
yesterday...—92 
— No. 24109, December 6, 1861: Mr. Bright on America.—109 
— No.  24111,  December 9, 1861: Washington, Nov. 22.—115 
— No. 24115, December 13, 1861: Washington, Nov. 29—117 
— No. 24119, December 18, 1861: Court of Exchequer, Dec. 17.—121-23 
— No. 24122, December 21, 1861: Let those who believe...—129 
— No. 24130, December 31, 1861: England and America. Paris, Dec. 30.—131 
— No. 24138, January 9, 1862: New York, Dec. 27, Evening.—145 
— No. 24139, January 10, 1862: New York, Dec. 28.—141 
— No. 24140, January 11, 1862: A turn of the wheel, which the American Cabinet 
has managed to make as sudden as possible...—140 
— No.  24141,  January 13, 1862: Southampton, Jan. 12.—143 
— No. 24143, January 15, 1862: Mr. Gilpin, M. P.; and Lord Henley, M. P., on 
America and England.—147-48 
— No. 24144, January 16, 1862: The true and just instinct of the House of 
Commons last session taught them to feel that...—147 
— No. 24144, January 16, 1862: The following additional correspondence...—146 
— No. 24157, January 31, 1862: Indian Import Duties and the American 
Question.— 160-62 
— No. 24159, February 3, 1862: Court of Exchequer, Feb. 7.—164-66 
— No. 24188, March 8, 1862: The demand which Mr. Gregory makes...—183 
— No. 24244, May 13, 1862: The spirit in which the fall of New Orleans has been 
met...—200 
— No. 24287, July 2, 1862: That Blue Book which has just emanated...—220 
— No.  24331,  August 22, 1862: New York, Aug. 8.-233, 234 
— No. 24333, August 25, 1862: It must tend to relieve...—240 
— No. 24338, August 30, 1862: Blackburn, Aug. 27.—240 
— No. 24340, September 2, 1862: Blackburn, Aug. 30.—240 
— No. 24343, September 5, 1862: Wigan, Sept. 3.—240 
— No. 24349, September 12, 1862: Stockport, Sept. 8.— 240 
— No. 24352, September 16, 1862: Ashton-under-Lyne, Sept.  13.—  240 

=====第471页=====
445 
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Allgemeine Militär-Zeitung —a newspaper published as the organ of the German 
Officers' and Soldiers' Society from 1826 to 1902, first in Darmstadt and later 
in Leipzig; Engels contributed to it in 1860-64.—289, 294, 298 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a conservative daily founded in 1798; it was published in 
Augsburg in 1810-82.—298 
The Army and Navy Gazette—an official weekly published by the British War Office 
in London from 1860 to 1939 under various titles.—321-22, 324-25 
Barmer Zeitung —a German liberal daily published in Berlin from 1834 to 
1931.—244 
Berliner Reform—a Berlin daily (1861-68); organ of German petty-bourgeois 
democracy.—274 
Brownson's Quarterly Review—American Catholic journal; appeared under various 
titles in Boston in 1838-42 and in 1844-55, and in New York in 1856-65 and in 
1872-75.—51 
Calcutta Price Current—Indian weekly published under various titles from 
1818.—18 
Cobbett's (Weekly) Political Register—a radical weekly published in London from 
1802 to 1835; it came out under various  titles.—  22 
Le Constitutionnel —a daily published in Paris in 1815-70; it voiced the views of the 
monarchist bourgeoisie (the Thiers party) during the 1848 revolution and those 
of the Bonapartists after the 1851 coup d'état. — 79 
Courrier du Dimanche —an anti-Bonapartist weekly published in Paris in 1858-66.— 
75 
Dagbladet—Danish conservative daily published in Copenhagen from  1851.—  5 
Daily Dispatch—American newspaper published in Richmond (Virginia) in 1850-
1903;  it voiced the views of slaveholders in the 1850s and 1860s.— 201 
Daily Express—American newspaper published in Petersburg (Virginia) in 1852-69; 
it voiced the slaveholders'  views.—  201 

=====第472页=====
446 Index of Periodicals 
The Daily Intelligencer—American newspaper speaking for the slaveholders; it was 
published in Atlanta (Georgia) in 1854-71.—201 
The Daily News—a liberal daily of the British industrial bourgeoisie published in 
London in 1846-1930.—96, 130, 139, 143, 144 
The Daily Post—British newspaper representing the industrial and commercial 
bourgeoisie; it was published in Liverpool in 1855-79.—157-58 
The Daily Telegraph—a newspaper published in London since 1855; took a liberal 
stand in 1850s; after its merger with The Morning  Post  in 1937, it came out as The 
Daily Telegraph and Morning Post.—  89, 96, 129, 199 
Day Book—American daily voicing the views of the slaveowners in the 1850s and 
1860s; it was published in Norfolk (Virginia) in 1857-80.—201 
Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher —a German-language yearbook published in Paris 
under the editorship of Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge; only the first issue, a 
double one, came out in February 1844. The issue carried several works by 
Marx and Engels. —345 
Dispatch—see Daily Dispatch. 
The Economist. Weekly Commercial Times, Bankers' Gazette, and Railway Monitor: a 
Political, Literary, and General Newspaper—an economic and political weekly 
published in London since 1843, mouthpiece of the big industrial bourgeoisie; 
appeared with various subtitles.—7-9, 11-14, 17, 25, 33, 54, 57-60, 63-64, 69, 
85, 111, 132,  140-41,  158-59, 241 
The Evening Post—a daily published under various titles in New York in 
1801-1934; organ of the Republican Party from 1856.—230 
The Evening Standard—see The Standard. 
Evening Star—American daily published in Washington from 1852.—179 
The Examiner—a liberal weekly published in London in  1808-81.—  7, 9-10, 15, 33, 
130 
Express—see Daily Express. 
The Free Press. Journal of the Foreign Affairs Committees—a journal on questions of 
foreign policy opposing the Palmerston government; it was published by David 
Urquhart and his supporters in London from 1855 to 1865 (weekly until April 
1858 and later monthly) and was renamed Diplomatic Review in 1866; the 
journal carried several works by Marx.—  21, 67, 68, 109, 148 
The Gardeners' Chronicle and Agricultural Gazette—an agricultural weekly published 
in London since  1841.—  231 
Gazette—see The London Gazette. 
The Globe—see The Globe and Traveller. 
The Globe and Traveller—a daily published in London in 1803-1921; Whig until 
1866,  later Conservative.—129, 144 
Harper's Weekly. A Journal of Civilisation—American weekly published in New York 
in 1857-1916.—290 
Herald—see The Morning  Herald. 

=====第473页=====
Index of Periodicals 447 
Intelligencer—see The Daily Intelligencer. 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires —a daily published in Paris from 1789 to 
1944;  spoke for the moderate Orleanist opposition after the 1851 coup 
d'état.— 73-74 
Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper—a liberal paper founded in 1842; appeared in London 
under various titles in 1843-1931.—121, 123 
The London Gazette—British government newspaper published twice a week since 
1665;  appeared under the title of The Oxford Gazette in 1665-66.—145, 146 
Macmillan's Magazine—a liberal magazine published in London in 1859-1907.— 
130 
The Manchester Guardian—Free Traders' newspaper founded as a weekly in 
Manchester in 1821; a daily since 1857; organ of the Liberal Party since the 
middle of the 19th century.—241, 317, 319 
The Mark Lane Express and Agricultural Journal, etc.—British weekly voicing the 
views of the commercial bourgeoisie; appeared under various titles in London 
in 1832-1929.—231 
Mobile Advertiser and Register—American newspaper published in Mobile (Alabama) 
in 1862-63.—260 
Le Moniteur universel —a daily published in Paris in 1789-1901; appeared under this 
title from 1811 and was an official government publication in 1799-1869.—67, 
73, 79, 83, 280 
The Morning Advertiser—a daily published in London from 1794; it voiced the 
views of the radical bourgeoisie in the 1850s.—96, 128-29 
The Morning Chronicle—a daily published in London in 1770-1862; Whig in the 
1840s, Peelite in the early 1850s, and Conservative afterwards.—96, 97, 129 
The Morning Herald—a conservative daily published in London in 1780-1869.—90, 
96, 113, 129, 139, 199, 259 
The Morning Post—a daily founded in London in 1772; in the mid-19th century, 
organ of the pro-Palmerston Right-wing Whigs; merged with The Daily Telegraph 
in 1937 to form The Daily Telegraph and Morning Post.—67, 71, 73, 74, 89, 91, 
95-98,  113, 114, 128, 138-40, 143-44, 146, 175, 199, 259 
The Morning Star—a daily, of the English Free Traders published in London in 
1856-69.—96, 97, 130, 139, 143, 144, 240, 246, 269, 270 
Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Organ der Démocratie —a daily newspaper of the German 
revolutionary-proletarian democrats during the 1848-49 German revolution; it 
was published in Cologne under Marx's editorship from June 1, 1848 to May 
19, 1849 with an interval between September 27 and October 12, 1848; Engels 
was also one of its editors.—  243,  320, 341-42 
Newcastle Daily Journal—British conservative paper founded in 1832; it came out 
under this title from 1861 to 1920.—245-46 
Newcastle Journal—see Newcastle Daily Journal. 
New-York Daily Tribune—newspaper founded by Horace Greeley, published in 
1841-1924; organ of the US Left-wing Whigs till the mid-1850s, later voicing 

=====第474页=====
448 Index of Periodicals 
the views of the Republican Party. Marx and Engels contributed to it from 
August 1851 to March 1862. The paper had several special issues, among them 
the New-York Semi-Weekly Tribune and the New-York Weekly Tribune, which 
printed articles by Marx and Engels as well.—6, 10, 11, 13, 16, 20, 26, 31, 
34-39,  41, 46, 48-49, 51, 61, 68, 69, 78, 88, 100, 103-08, 114-16, 118, 142, 177, 
180, 181, 201, 205, 227, 228, 266, 267, 339-40 
The New-York Herald—US daily published in 1835-1924; it favoured compromise 
with the slaveowners of the South during the Civil War.—12, 25, 87, 181 
The New-York Times—a Republican daily founded in 1851.—103 
Le Nord.  Journal International—Russian semi-official daily published in Paris and 
Brussels in 1855-92 and 1894-99.—114 
The Observer—a Conservative weekly published in London since 1791.—130 
La Patrie —French daily published in Paris from 1841, organ of the monarchist 
bourgeoisie represented by the Party of Order in 1850; it took a Bonapartist 
stand after the coup d'état of December 2, 1851.—67, 69, 71, 72, 79, 114, 131, 
140 
Le Pays. Journal de l'Empire —a daily founded in Paris in 1849; it was a semi-official 
newspaper of Napoleon Ill's government in 1852-70.—27, 29, 79, 140 
Post—see The Morning Post. 
Die Presse —a liberal daily published in Vienna in 1848-96; opposed Bonapartism, 
published articles and news reports by Marx in 1861 and 1862.—42, 52, 56, 65, 
70, 81, 85, 88, 91, 94, 104, 109, 116, 119, 123, 126, 130, 133, 136, 144, 148, 
152, 156, 159, 162, 166, 171, 181, 185, 195, 198, 201, 203, 208, 212, 215, 218, 
222, 225, 226, 229, 232, 233, 235, 238, 242, 247, 248, 251, 255, 259, 262, 265, 
267-68,  269, 272 
Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger —newspaper published in Berlin from 1819, semi-official 
organ of the Prussian government until April 1848; the paper changed its title 
several times.—353 
Punch, or the London Charivari—a liberal comic weekly founded in London in 
1841.—128 
Revue contemporaine —a fortnightly published in Paris in 1851-70; represented the 
Party of Order during the Second Republic; took a Bonapartist stand after the 
coup d'état of December 2, 1851.—185 
Revue des deux Mondes —a literary and political fortnightly published in Paris since 
1829.—83 
Reynolds's Newspaper. A Weekly Journal of Politics, History, Literature and General 
Intelligence—a radical newspaper published by George Reynolds in London 
from 1850; appeared under various titles; was closely connected with the labour 
movement supporting the Chartists in the early  1850s.—11,  138, 154, 221-
22 
Richmond Enquirer—American newspaper which came out under various titles and 
with different intervals in Richmond (Virginia) in 1804-77.— 260 
Richmond Examiner—American daily published in Richmond (Virginia) from 1848 
to 1866; appeared under various titles.—261-62, 271-72 
Richmond Whig—American newspaper which came out under various titles in 

=====第475页=====
Index of Periodicals 449 
Richmond (Virginia) in 1824-88; it had daily, semi-weekly and weekly 
issues.— 260 
The Saturday Review—see The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art. 
The Saturday Review of Politics, Literature, Science and Art—a Conservative weekly 
published in London in 1855-1938.—7, 8, 12, 33, 130, 140, 250, 259 
The Spectator—British weekly published in London since 1828, first Liberal and 
later Conservative.—15-16, 130 
The Standard—British Conservative daily founded in London in  1827.—  90, 96, 
113, 129, 199, 200 
Star (London)—see The Morning Star. 
Star (Washington)—see Evening Star. 
Stubbs' Weekly Gazette and List of Creditors—British weekly founded in 1853; 
published by Stubbs and Co, it carried lists of insolvents.—121 
The Sun—a liberal daily published in London in 1798-1876.—96 
Telegraph—see Daily Telegraph. 
The Times—a conservative daily founded in London in 1785.—5, 11, 12,  21-31,  33, 
36, 43, 45-48, 53, 63, 65-69, 72, 74-76, 80, 82-85,  89-93,  95-100, 103, 112, 113, 
115, 117, 121-23,  127-31,  135, 138, 140, 141, 143, 145-47, 155, 156, 159-62, 
164-76,  182-85,  199-201,  210, 211, 216-18, 220, 224-25, 230, 231, 233-34,  239-41, 
250, 259, 260, 262, 270. 
Tribune—see New-York Daily Tribune. 
The World—  US daily published in New York in 1860-1931.—51 

=====第476页=====
450 
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Aesthetics—250-51 
Amnesty— 243-44 
Ancient Egypt—120 
Ancient Rome—40-41 
Ancient  World—  209-10 
See also Ancient Rome 
Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42—23, 78 
Anglo-French-Chinese war of 1856-60— 
30, 196 
Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1860— 
162 
Anglo-Persian war of 1856-57—78, 225 
Anglo-US war of 1812-14 
— general points—90, 94, 111-12, 
132, 140-41,  157, 184-85, 199, 
258 
— Ghent Peace, Treaty of 1814 — 
112 
Annexation—68 
Aristocracy, nobility, English—22, 240, 
241 
Army—124, 226, 303-07, 312-16 
— Austrian—193, 318 
— Danish —317-19 
— English—274-75, 283, 287-88, 313-
15 
— French—83, 84, 178-79, 186-87, 
312-13 
— German  —303,  305, 314, 316 
— Prussian—304, 305, 315-16, 
318-19 
— Russian—275-77, 287-88 
_ US—178-79, 186-88, 258, 289-92 See also Art of war; Artillery; Military 
science; Navy; War, wars 
Artillery— 289-95 
Art of war—110, 188-95, 204-05, 274-
75, 287-88, 298-99 
Australia—  58, 64, 83, 132, 162 
Austria—3,  5 
See also Army (Austrian); Austro-Italo-
French war of 1859; 
Austro-Italo-French war of 1859—5-6, 29-
30, 89, 130, 192, 293 
B 
Balance of payments—63-65 
Balance of trade—63-65 
Bengal—  19 
Blacks 
— slave labour—20, 39-40, 44, 50, 
54, 227 
— slave trade—10,37-40,157,202-03, 
263 
— in USA—10,  12-13,  20, 32, 36-40, 
44-49,  50-51,  54, 203, 258 
— in West  Indies—51,  54 
See also Slave trade; US Civil War 
(1861-65) 
Bonapartism—  83, 84, 296 
Bourgeoisie, English—  21, 22, 109, 162, 
168, 241 
— its pseudo-humanity—209-12 
Bourgeoisie, French—81, 83, 84 
Bourgeoisie, German—296-97 

=====第477页=====
Subject Index 451 
C 
California 
— gold mines—83, 86, 101 
Chauvinism 
— and war—64 
China—18,  19, 111, 216, 218, 292 
See also Anglo-French-Chinese war of 
1856-60; Taiping uprising of 1850-64 
Civilisation—125 
Colonial wars—78 
Colonial wars of  Great  Britain—see Anglo-
Afghan war of 1838-42; Anglo-French-
Chinese war of 1856-60; Anglo-Persian 
war of 1856-57 
Corruption— 84 
Cosmopolitanism—108 
Craft, craftsmen—  252-53,  255 
Crimean war of 1853-56—29-30, 124, 
138, 153, 199, 274-88, 293 
Cuba—10, 37 
D 
Danish war of 1864—317-19 
Democratic Party (USA)  —9-11,  35-36, 
37-39,  41-42, 116, 227, 249, 263-64, 
266, 268-69 
Denmark— 3-6, 23, 292 
See also Danish war of 1864; Lan­
guage (Danish); Schleswig-Holstein 
Dictatorship, counter-revolutionary 
— military—48, 80-81 
Division of labour 
— and individuality—163 
— and interests—22 
— its development—22, 120, 163 
E 
Economic crises 
— overproduction as main form of 
manifestation of crises—161-62 
— and market situation—161-62 
— crisis of 1846-47—160-61 
— crisis of 1857-59—160-61 
Emigration 
— as social phenomenon —  53, 259 
— political emigration—341, 346-47 — English—259 
— German—335-36, 341-42, 244, 
346-47,  350-51 
— German in England—320, 336 
— German in USA—48, 50 
— Irish in USA—53, 259, 263-64 
England (Great Britain) 
— general points—163, 219 
— history—21-23, 53, 101-02, 141-
42, 153, 246 
— England in the 1860s —53-56, 
143-44, 167-68, 171, 209 
— economy—53-61, 63-65, 111, 
149-52,  160-62, 231 
— cotton crisis ("dearth of cotton") 
in early 1860s—17-20, 53-56, 59-
60, 62, 63, 111, 153-54, 157, 
160-62,  239-40 
— social and political system—21, 
22, 102, 125, 163,  219-21,  246, 
303-04 
— legislation—153, 239, 245-47 
— Electoral Reform Bill of 1832 — 
21, 153 
— Catholic Emancipation law of 1829 
— 21, 153 
— colonial policy—67-68, 77-78, 162, 
210 
— foreign policy, diplomacy—21-23, 
71, 108-09, 124-26, 153, 154, 167, 
169-70, 172-73, 246 
— press, bourgeois—21-31, 105, 
128-30, 138-39, 230-31 
— and France—29, 61, 64, 69-70, 
196, 211 
— and Italy—59, 64, 236-38, 245-46 
— and Latin American states—69, 77 
— and Mexico—67-78, 113-14, 169-
70, 172-77, 196-98 
— and Morocco—170 
— and Spain—169-70, 173, 176-77 
— and Switzerland—66, 72 
— and the United States of America 
(US Civil War)—17, 18, 19-20, 
24-26,  29, 32, 43, 55-60, 63-65, 
89-100, 105-06, 114, 125-27, 129-
34, 135-43, 145-47, 153-56, 157-
61, 169, 182-85, 202-03, 211, 230-
32, 239-40, 241-42 
See also Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42; 
Anglo-French-Chinese war of 1856-60; 
Anglo-French commercial treaty of 1860; 

=====第478页=====
452 Subject Index 
Anglo-Persian war of 1856-57; Anglo-
US war of 1812-14; Aristocracy, nobili­
ty, English; Army (English); 
Bourgeoisie, English; Crimean war of 
1853-56; Emigration (English); Factory 
legislation; Language (English); Lon­
don; Manchester School; Navy (En­
glish);  Parliament, British; Poor laws; 
Tories (England); Whigs (England); 
Working  class  in Great Britain; Working-
class movement in Great Britain 
Europe—5-6, 21 
See also Language (European lan­
guages) 
F 
Factory legislation 
— Ten Hours' Bill—153 
Foreign and domestic policy—23, 37 
France 
— economy—30-31, 62-63 
— on eve of bourgeois revolution of 
18th cent.—80 
— Restoration—69, 77 
— July monarchy—84 
— Second Empire (1830-48)  —80-81, 
83, 211-12 
— industry—83 
— railways—83 
— agriculture—62, 65, 83 
— trade—30-31, 62, 63-64, 83 
— finances—30-31,  61-63,  79-85, 
196 
— banks—30-31, 61, 62 
— Crédit Mobilier— 61, 62-63 
— financial and economic policy— 
61-63,  80-81,  83 
— home policy—30-31, 83-85, 111 
— corruption of ruling circles—83-
84 
— policy of manoeuvring between 
antagonistic classes—83, 84 
— public works—83, 84 
— press—28-29, 79, 105-11 
— monarchist factions—28-29 
— bourgeoisie—83-84 
— the masses — 29 
— working class—83, 84 
— growth of opposition senti­
ments—84-85 — foreign policy of France during 
Second Empire—3, 29-30, 66-67, 
71-72,  173-74, 196 
— Bonapartism and wars —  29-30, 
83-84,  111, 224-25 
— and Crimean war—see Crimean 
war of 1853-56 
— and England—27-31, 64, 66-67, 
111, 174-75, 196, 224-25, 264-65 
— and Greece—196 
— and Italy—29-30, 162, 196, 245 
— and Prussia—27-28 
— and  Spain—71,  169, 174-75 
— and Switzerland—66, 72 
— and USA—29-31, 111, 196, 
264-65 
— colonial policy of the Second Em­
pire—29-31 
— and Turkey as object of colonial 
expansion — 196 
See also Anglo-French-Chinese war of 
1856-60; Anglo-French commercial trea­
ty of 1860; Army (French); Austro-
Italo-French war of 1859; Bonapartism; 
Bourgeoisie, French; Mexican expedition 
of 1861-67; Napoleonic wars; Navy 
(French); Paris 
Free Trade movement—162 
G 
German Confederation (1815-66) 
— Federal Diet—296,  350-51,  357 
German Worker's Educational Society in 
London (1840-1918)—296-97 
Germany—58, 64 
See also Army (German); Bourgeoisie, 
German; Emigration (German, Ger­
man in England, German in USA); 
German Confederation; Hanover; Lan­
guage (German) 
Great Britain—see England (Great 
Britain) 
Greece—252 
Ground rent—329-33 
H 
Haiti— 229 
Hanover—43 
Holy Alliance 

=====第479页=====
Subject Index 453 
— its history—68-70, 77, 169-70 
— its counter-revolutionary role—74 
I 
India 
— general features—18-19, 55-56 
— British colonial domination—18-
19, 55-56, 209, 291-92, 301, 302 
See also Bengal; Indian Mutiny of 
1857-59; Language (Indian lan­
guages) 
Indian Mutiny of 1857-59—309-10, 313 
Ireland—19-20, 21, 53, 153, 210 
See also Emigration—Irish in USA 
Italian war of 1859—see Austro-Italo-
French war of 1859 
Italy 
— economy —  59, 61, 64 
— Savoy and Nice—162 
— and England—59, 64, 236-38, 
245-46 
— and France  —29-30,  196, 245 
— and Prussia—5-6 
— question of Italy's unification and 
Second Empire—5-6, 236-38, 245 
See also Austro-Italo-French war of 
1859 
J 
Jurists—49 
L 
Language 
— written—4 
— Danish—4 » 
— English —303 
— European languages—303 
— German—4, 303 
— Indian languages—303 
Law—  244,  347 
Legislation— 244 
Liberia— 229 
London—117, 219-21 
M 
Manchester School—125 
Mexican expedition of 1861-67 — general description—67-68, 74-
78, 113, 114, 170, 173, 174-76, 
196-98,  211-12, 224 
— convention on joint intervention 
in Mexico (1861) —67, 71-74, 
169-70, 173-74, 175-76 
— and England—67-78, 113-14, 
169-70, 172-77, 196, 197-98, 
223-25 
— and France—67, 69-75, 174-75, 
196-98,  224, 225 
— and Spain—67, 71, 72, 75, 169, 
172-74, 176-77 
— and USA—67, 72, 77-78, 196 
Mexico—  36, 68-70, 75-77, 169-70, 
196-97 
See also Mexican expedition of 1861-67 
Military science 
— military history—186, 274, 287-88 
Morocco—168, 170 
N 
Napoleonic wars—  91, 93, 138-39, 312-14 
Navy 
— English  —132,  292, 302, 321-24 
— French—83, 292 
— US—125-26, 132, 213-15, 258, 
289-92 
Needs— 253 
Neutrality (in international relations) — 
124-25,  147-48, 157 
New Orleans—199-200 
New York—117-18, 263-64 
Vice—162 
O 
Orient— 216 
P 
Paris—193 
Parliament, British—  78, 153, 167-68, 
221, 223 
Patriotic War of 1812 (Russia)—193-94, 
199, 206-07 
Philanthropy (bourgeois) —  54, 125, 246 
Pietism—128 
Plantations—44 
Plebeians, plebs 

=====第480页=====
454 Subject Index 
— in ancient Rome—40-41 
Poland,  Polish question—  224,  237, 296-97 
Politics—154, 216, 249-50 
Poor laws—  239,  246 
Potato blight in Ireland—19-20, 53 
Privateering—124, 125-26, 132, 270 
Profession— 163 
Public opinion 
— and state policy—29, 73, 84-85, 
100, 174, 178 
— and press—9, 21-25, 127-29, 137-
40, 155-56, 163 
— miscellaneous points—27-28, 72, 
73, 114, 117-18, 137, 158-59 
Punic wars 
— Second Punic War (218-201 
&.C.)—210 
Punishment— 246 
R 
Reform 
— political and social reforms as 
concessions by ruling class to the 
masses—153 
Republican Party (USA)—8, 10-13, 35, 
38-39,  41, 42, 86-87, 118, 139, 
263-64 
Russia (Russian Empire)—124, 147-48 
See also Army (Russian): Crimean war 
of 1853-56; Patriotic War of 1812 
(Russia) 
S 
Schleswig-Holstein 
— Schleswig-Holstein question — 3-6 
— London Protocol, ' 1852 —23 
See also Danish war of 1864 
Scholasticism in Middle Ages — 91 
Scotland—53 
Slavery 
-— general points—50 
— slave-owning mode of produc­
tion— 50 
— slave labour—44, 50, 87 
— slave labour of Blacks—32, 36-38, 
39-40,  44-48, 87, 203, 258 
See also Blacks; Slave trade; United 
States of America 
Slave trade—10, 38-40, 157, 202-03 
See also Blacks; Plantations; Slavery Speculation (business) 
— in England  —55-56,  60, 63 
Spiritualism— 216 
State, the—216 
Suez Canal—3 
Switzerland 
— foreign policy—66, 72 
Syria—3 
T 
Taiping uprising of 1850-64—3, 216-18 
Tories (England)—145, 263 
Traditions, English— 219 
U 
US Civil War (1861-65) 
— general description, results, sig­
nificance—7-9,  10-11,  30, 44, 49-
51, 100, 115-16, 186-87, 226-29, 
248, 289-90 
— causes of war, Southern planters' 
rebellion, secession of Southern 
States—8-11,  12-15, 30, 32-44, 
49, 60-61,  103-04, 186, 260-61 
— situation in the border States and 
Territories—44-52, 116, 203, 
227-29,  248-49, 251, 257, 258 
— opposing forces—186-88, 213-15, 
226-29,  257-58, 261-62 
— progress of hostilities—30, 33, 
45-46,  48, 86, 88,  178-81,  186-94, 
199-201,  204-08, 212, 213-14, 
226-29,  233-35, 248-49, 256-58, 
260, 263-64, 267-69,  289-91, 
293-95 
— and revolutionary émigrés —188 
— policy of Union goverment, its 
aims and tasks—33-34,  50-51,  77, 
91, 97, 99-100, 110-12, 115, 139-
41, 143, 144, 155, 178, 181, 186-
87, 226-29, 251, 266-68, 270 
— inconsistent policy of Northern 
bourgeoisie, attempts at compro­
mise with South—8,9,11-12,33-35, 
50-52,  86-88, 115-16, 117-18, 179-
81, 186-87, 226-27, 233, 257, 263-
67, 268-69 
— "constitutional" conduct of war— 
228, 257 

=====第481页=====
Subject Index 455 
— revolutionary conduct of war— 
180, 227, 228, 250, 251 
— slavery issue—7-8,  30-31,  34, 
44, 49-51,  86, 115, 116, 118, 
203, 228, 229, 234-35, 264, 
268-69 
— Southern Confederacy, its poli­
cy—43,  45, 47-50, 55, 91, 99-100, 
110, 116, 127, 147, 186, 201, 
207-08,  227, 251, 256, 260-62, 
270-72 
— and US economy—18, 64-65, 
132, 183-85 
— and working class—50 
— and England—18, 23-26, 43, 59, 
60, 62, 69-70, 76-77, 90-93, 95, 
96, 105-08, 111-14, 117, 125-32, 
137-40, 141-42, 154, 159, 168-69, 
182-85,  211-12, 230-32, 239-40, 
249, 252, 262, 270 
— Anglo-US Treaty against Slave 
Trade (April 7, 1862)—202-03, 
229 
— threat of Anglo-US war—89-93, 
95-101,  105, 106-09, 110, 111-12, 
114, 125-26, 127-28, 129-30, 132-
33, 137, 147-48, 157 
— and English bourgeoisie and its 
press—7-9, 10-16, 17, 23-26, 29-
33, 42, 55,  59-61,  65,  89-91, 
95-99,  100, 105, 107-14, 116, 117, 
127-34, 137, 147-48, 154,  157-61, 
182-85,  199-201, 210, 230-32, 
233-35,  239-41,  249-50, 260, 
268-70 
— and English working class—17, 
29, 127-29, 130, 131-32, 134-38, 
140, 142, 143-44, 153-56, 161, 
239-42,  246, 297 
— and France—28-31, 65, 69-70, 91, 
99, 111, 113-14, 126, 131, 158, 
185, 211-12, 249, 264-65 
— and European states—114, 146-
48, 188, 212 
— popular reaction in Europe—29, 
30, 110 
— miscellaneous points—29, 210-11 
US-Mexican war of 1846-48—86, 103 
United States of America 
— general points—10, 11, 289-90 
— territory, population  —10,  36-37, 
42, 44-50, 59-60 — immigration, its role—188, 259 
— industry—18, 44, 54, 187, 252-53 
— railways—271 
— home and foreign trade—17-18, 
19-20,  53-55, 57-59, 64-65, 111, 
131-33,  138, 231-32 
— protectionism—14-15, 25, 32-33, 
53-55,  65, 138 
— South (economic area)—32, 37-
40, 43-44, 48-52, 263 
— Northwest (economic area)—10, 
38-39,  41-42, 228,.256 
— border States—43-49, 50-52, 87 
— Territories—35-38, 41-42, 46-47, 
49-50,  269 
— agriculture, agrarian relations— 
17, 19-20, 37-38, 39-40, 51-53, 
263-64 
— Homestead Bill—228 
— slave-owning economy in South, 
its crisis—19-20, 39-40,  50-51, 
54 
— Black slaves—32, 36-38, 39-40, 
50, 54 
— slave trade—10, 11-12, 37-38, 
202-03,  229, 263 
— social and political system — 9, 10, 
34-38,  40-42, 44, 45, 102-03 
— "poor whites"—13-14, 40-42, 
207-08 
— Constitution  —8,  10, 13, 34, 102, 
250 
— oligarchy of slave-owners — 8-10, 
11-14,  29, 30, 37-38, 40-42, 45, 
49, 54, 257 
— bourgeois parties—263-64 
— free soil measures—37 
— domestic policy—35-39 
— Missouri Compromise of 1820 — 
10, 35, 37 
— Kansas-Nebraska Bill of 1854 — 
10, 36-39 
— Abolitionism—11-12, 14, 51, 227, 
230, 233-35, 263-65, 268-69, 
271 
— John Brown's uprising" of 
1859—13 
— question of abolition —  37-42,  51-
52, 228, 250, 251, 257-58, 263-64, 
266-67 
— machinery, inventions—54, 254 
— literature—7 

=====第482页=====
456 Subject Index 
— foreign policy—37-39, 69-70, 78, 
125-26,  229 
— Monroe Doctrine—69, 77 
— expeditions against States of Cen­
tral America—37 
— and Cuba—37 
— and England—76, 157, 229 
— and France—29, 67-68, 75-78, 
126, 157 
— and Mexico—37, 67-69, 75-77, 
86, 103 
— and Spain—67-68, 76-77 
See also Anglo-US war of 1812-14; 
Army (US); Blacks (in USA); Califor­
nia; Democratic Party (USA); Navy 
(US);  New York; Republican Party 
(USA);  US Civil War (1861-65); US-
Mexican war of 1846-48; War of Bri­
tain's North American colonies for inde­
pendence, 1775-83 
V 
Villafranca preliminary peace treaty 
(1859)—see Austro-Italo-French war of 
1859 W 
War, wars—  84, 111, 124-25, 226-27, 
258 
See also Anglo-Afghan war of 1838-42; 
Anglo-French-Chinese war of 1856-60; 
Anglo-Persian war of 1856-57; Anglo-
US war of 1812-14; Austro-Italo-French 
war of 1859; Colonial wars; Crimean 
war of 1853-56; Danish war of 1864; 
Napoleonic wars; Punic wars; US Civil 
War (1861-65); US-Mexican War of 
1846-48; 
War of Britain's North American colonies 
for independence, 1775-83—29, 101 
Wars of First French Republic (late 18th-
early 19th  cent.)—91,  93, 138, 153, 
187, 193, 230 
Whigs (England)—129, 145 
Working class in Great Britain—153-56 
Working-class movement in Great Britain 
— general points—153 
— in the 1860s—134, 137-38, 142, 
153-56,  159, 245, 297 
— movement to prevent intervention 
against USA during Civil War— 
134, 137-38, 142, 153, 154, 155-
56, 297 
— popular demonstrations, meet­
ings—153,  154, 245 

=====第483页=====
