MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 4
Marx and Engels 1844-45
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_4.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:19]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
4 
Marx and Engels 1844-45
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me4.htm [09/12/2010 14:26:25]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-948-8 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
Contents 
Preface XV 
K. Marx and F. Engels. The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. 
Against Bruno Bauerand Company 5 
Foreword 7 
Chapter I. "Critical Criticism in the Form of a Master-Bookbinder", or Criti­
cal Criticism as Herr Reichardt  (by Engels) 9 
Chapter II. "Critical Criticism" as a "Mill-Owner", or Critical Criticism as 
Herr Jules Faucher  (by Engels)  12 
Chapter III. "The Thoroughness of Critical Criticism", or Critical Criticism 
as Herr J. (Jungnitz?)  (by Engels) 17 
Chapter IV. "Critical Criticism" as the Tranquillity of Knowledge, or "Critical 
Criticism" as Herr Edgar 19 
1) Flora Tristan's Union Ouvrière  (by Engels)  19 
2) Béraud on Prostitutes  (by Engels) 20 
3) Love  (by Marx) 20 
4) Proudhon  (by Marx) , 23 
Characterising Translation No. 1 24 
Critical Comment No. 1 31 
Critical Comment No. 2 34 
Characterising Translation No. 2 38 
Critical Comment No. 3 39 
Characterising Translation No. 3 43 
Critical Comment No.4 48 
Characterising Translation No. 4 % 50 
Critical Comment No. 5 51 
Chapter V. "Critical Criticism" as a Mystery-Monger, or "Critical Criticism" 
as Herr Szeliga  (by Marx) 55 
1) "The Mystery of Degeneracy in Civilisation" and "The Mystery 
of Rightlessness in the State" 56 
2) The Mystery of Speculative Construction 57 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
3) "The Mystery of Educated Society"  61 
4) "The Mystery of Probity and Piety" 69 
5) "Mystery, a Mockery" 72 
6) Turtle-Dove (Rigolette) 75 
7) The World System of the  Mysteries  of Paris 76 
Chapter VI. Absolute Critical Criticism, or Critical Criticism as Herr Bruno 78 
1) Absolute Criticism's First Campaign  (by Marx) 78 
a) "Spirit" and "Mass" 78 
b) The Jewish Question No. 1. The Setting of the Questions 87 
c) HinrichsNo. 1. Mysterious Hints on Politics, Socialism and Philosophy 90 
2) Absolute Criticism's Second Campaign 92 
a) Hinrichs No. 2. "Criticism" and "Feuerbach". Condemnation of Philosophy (by Engels) 92 
b) The Jewish Question No. 2. Critical Discoveries on Socialism, Jurisprudence and Politics 
(Nationality)  (by Marx) 94 
3) Absolute Criticism's Third Campaign  (by Marx) 99 
a) Absolute Criticism's Self-Apology. Its "Political" Past 99 
b) The Jewish Question No. 3 106 
c) Critical Battle against the French Revolution 118 
d) Critical Battle against French Materialism 124 
e) Final Defeat of Socialism 134 
f) The Speculative Cycle of Absolute Criticism and the Philosophy of Self-Consciousness 136 
Chapter VII. Critical Criticism's Correspondence 144 
1) The Critical Mass  (by Marx) 144 
2) The "Un-Critical Mass" and "Critical Criticism" 148 
a) The "Obdurate Mass" and the "Unsatisfied Mass"  (by Marx) 148 
b) The "Soft-Hearted" Mass "Pining for Redemption" (byEngels) 151 
c) Grace Bestowed on the Mass  (by Marx) 154 
3) The Un-Critically Critical Mass, or "Criticism" and the "Berlin 
Couleur"  (by Marx) 154 
Chapter VIII. The Earthly Course and Transfiguration of "Critical Criti­
cism", or "Critical Criticism" as Rudolph, Prince of Geroldstein (by Marx) 162 
1) Critical Transformation of a Butcher into a Dog, or Chourineur 163 
2) Revelation of the Mystery of Critical Religion, or Fleur de Marie 166 
a) The Speculative "Marguerite" 166 
b) Fleur de Marie 168 
3) Revelation of the Mysteries of Law 176 
a) The Maître d'école, or the New Penal Theory. The Mystery of Solitary Confinement 
Revealed. Medical Mysteries 176 
b) Reward and Punishment. Double Justice (with a Table) 188 
c) Abolition of Degeneracy Within Civilisation and of Rightlessness in the State ^.. 190 
4) The Revealed Mystery of the "Standpoint" 191 
5) Revelation of the Mystery of the Utilisation of Human Impulses, 
or Clémence d'Harville 193 
6) Revelation of the Mystery of the Emancipation of Women, or 
Louise Morel 195 
7) Revelation of Political Economic Mysteries 196 
a) Theoretical Revelation of Political Economic Mysteries 196 
b) "The Bank for the Poor" 197 
c) Model Farm at Bouqueval 199 
8) Rudolph, "the Revealed Mystery of All Mysteries" 201 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
Chapter IX. The Critical Last Judgment  (by Marx) 210 
Historical Epilogue 211 
F. Engels. Continental Socialism 212 
F. Engels. Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still 
in Existence 214 
F. Engels. Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany 229 
F. Engels. Speeches in Elberfeld •. 243 
February 8, 1845 243 
February 15, 1845 256 
K. Marx. Draft of an Article on Friedrich List's Book Das nationale 
System der politischen Oekonomie  265 
I. General Characterisation of List 265 
II. The Theory of Productive Forces and the Theory of Exchange 
Values 277 
III. From Chapter Three. The Problem of Land Rent 286 
IV. Herr List and Ferner  290 
F. Engels. The Condition of the Working-Class in England. From Personal 
Observation and Authentic Sources 295 
To the Working-Classes of Great-Britain 297 
Preface 302 
Introduction 307 
The State of the Workers before the Industrial Revolution.— The 
Jenny.—Emergence of the Industrial and the Agricultural Proletariat.— 
The Throstle, the Mule, the Power-Loom, the Steam-Engine.—The 
Victory of Machine-Work over Hand-Work.— The Development of-
Industrial Might.— The Cotton Industry.— The Hosiery Manufac­
ture.—The Manufacture of Lace.—Dyeing, Bleaching, Printing.— 
The Manufacture of Wool.—The Linen Trade.—The Manufacture 
of Silk.—The Production and Manufacture of Iron.—Coal-Mining.— 
The Production of Pottery.—Agriculture.—Roadways, Canals, Rail­
roads,  Steamboats.—Summary.—The Emergence of the Proletariat 
as a Factor of National Importance.—The Middle-Class' View of the 
Workers. 
The Industrial Proletariat 324 
Classification of the Proletariat.— Centralisation of Property.— The 
levers of Modern Manufacture.— Centralisation of Population. 
The Great Towns , 328 
The Impression Produced by London.— The Social War and the 
System of General Plundering.— The Lot of the Poor.-— General 
Description of the Slums.— In London: St. Giles and the Adjoin­
ing Quarters.—Whitechapel.—The Interior of the Workers' Dwell­
ings.—The Homeless in the Parks.—Night Refuges.—Dublin.— 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
Edinburgh. — Liverpool. — Factory Towns: Nottingham, Birmingham, 
Glasgow, Leeds, Bradford, Huddersfield.—Lancashire: General Des­
cription.— Bolton.—Stockport.— Ashton-under-Lyne.— Stalybridge.— 
Detailed Description of Manchester: the General System of Its 
Building.—The Old Town.—The New Town.—The Method of Con­
struction of Working-Men's Quarters.— Courts and Side Streets.— 
Ancoats.—Little Ireland.—Hulme.—Salford.—Summary.—Lodging-
Houses.—Overcrowdedness of Population.—Cellar Dwellings.—The 
Clothing of the Workers.—Food.—Tainted Meat.—Adulteration 
of Provision.—False Weights, etc.—General Conclusion. 
Competition 375 
Competition among the Workers Determines the Minimum of Wages, 
Competition among the Property-Holding People Determines Their 
Maximum.— The Worker, the Slave of the Bourgeoisie, Is Forced to 
Sell Himself by the Day, and by the Hour.— Surplus Population.— 
Commercial Crises.— A Reserve Army of Workers.— The Hard Lot of 
This Reserve Army during the Crisis of 1842. 
Irish Immigration 389 
The Causes and Figures.— Description by Thomas Carlyle.— 
Lack of Cleanliness, Crudeness and Drunkenness among the Irish­
men.— The Influence of Irish Competition and of the Contacts with 
the Irish upon the English Workers. 
Results 393 
Preliminary Remarks.— The Influence of the Above-Described Con­
ditions on the Health of the Workers.— The Influence of Large 
Towns, Dwellings, Uncleanliness, etc.— The Facts.— Consumption.— 
Typhus, in Particular in London, Scotland and Ireland.— Digestive 
Troubles.— The Results of Drunkenness.— Quack Remedies.— "God­
frey's Cordial".—Mortality among Workers, Especially among Young 
Children.— Accusation of the Bourgeoisie of Social Murder.— 
Influence on the Mental and Moral Condition of the Workers.— 
Absence of the Necessary Conditions for Education.— Inade­
quacy of Evening and Sunday Schools.— Ignorance.— The Worker's 
Living Conditions Give Him a Sort of Practical Training.—Neglect 
of the Workers' Moral Training.— The Law as the Only Instructor in 
Morals. The Worker's Conditions of Life Tempt Him to Disregard 
Law and Morality.— The Influence of Poverty and Insecurity of 
Existence upon the Proletariat.—Forced Work.—The Centralisation 
of the Population.— Irish Immigration.— The Difference in Character 
between the Worker and the Bourgeois.—The Proletarian's Advantages 
over the Bourgeois.—The Unfavourable Sides of the Proletarian 
Character.—Drunkenness.—Sexual Irregularities.—Neglect of 
Family Duties.— Contempt for the Existing Social Order.— Crimes.— 
Description of the Social War. 
Single Branches of Industry.  Factory  Hands _ 428 
The Influence of Machinery.— Hand-Loom Weavers.— The Work of 
Men Being Superseded by Machinery.— Female Labour, the Dissolution 
of the Family.— The Reversal of All Relations within the Family.— 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
The Moral Consequences of the Mass Employment of Women in 
Factories.— Jus Primae Noctis. — The Work of Children.— The 
Apprentice System.— Subsequent Measures.— The Facts Related by 
the Factory Report.— Long Working-Day.— Night-Work.— Cripples.— 
Other Deformities.—The Nature of Factory-Work.—Relaxation of the 
Whole Organism.— Special Diseases.— Testimony of the Commis­
sioners.— Premature Old Age.— The Specific Influence of Factory-
Work upon the Female Physique.— Some Especially Injurious 
Branches.— Accidents.— The Bourgeoisie's Opinion of the Factory 
System.— Factory Laws and Agitation for the Ten Hours' Bill.— 
The Stupefying and Demoralising Nature of Factory-Work.— Slavery.— 
Factory Regulations.— The Truck-System.— The Cottage System.— 
The Comparison of the Serf of 1145 with the Free Working-Man 
of 1845. 
The Remaining Branches of Industry 479 
Stocking Weavers.—The Lace Industry.—Calico Printers.—Fus­
tian Cutters.—Silk Weavers.—Metal-Wares.—Birmingham.—Stafford­
shire.—Sheffield.—Production of Machinery.—Potteries in the 
North of Staffordshire.—Manufacture of Glass.—Handicraftsmen.— 
Dressmakers and Sewing-Women. 
Labour Movements 501 
Preliminary Remarks.— Crimes.— Revolts Against Machinery.— 
Associations, Strikes.—The Objects of the Unions and Strikes.— 
Excesses Connected with Them.— The General Character of the 
Struggle Waged by the English Proletariat against the Bourgeoisie.— 
The Battle in Manchester in May  1843.—  Respect for the Law is Alien 
to the Proletariat.—Chartism.—The History of the Chartist Move­
ment.—Insurrection of 1842.—The Decisive Separation of Proletarian 
Chartism from Bourgeois Radicalism.— The Social Nature of 
Chartism.— Socialism.— The Working-Men's Views. 
The Mining Proletariat 530 
Cornish Miners.— Alston Moor.— Coal and Iron Mines.— The Work of 
Grown-up Men, Women and Children.— Special Affections.— Work in 
Low Shafts.—Accidents, Explosions, etc.—Mental Education.—Morals. 
—Laws Relating to the Mining Industry.—Systematic Exploitation 
of the Coal-Miners.— The Beginning of the Workers' Movement.— 
The Union of Coal-Miners.— The Great Campaign of 1844 in the 
North of England.—Roberts and the Campaign against Justices of the 
Peace and the Truck-System.— The Results of the Struggle. 
The Agricultural Proletariat 548 
Historical Survey.—Pauperism in the Country.—The Condition of the 
Wage-Workers.— Incendiarisms.— Indifference to the Corn Laws.— 
Religious State of the Agricultural Labourers.—  Wales:  Small Tenants.— 
"Rebecca" Disturbances.—Ireland: Subdivision of the Land.—Pauper­
isation of the Irish Nation.—Crimes.—Agitation for the Repeal of the 
Union with England. 

=====第8页=====
X Contents 
The Attitude of the Bourgeoisie Towards the Proletariat 562 
Demoralisation of the English Bourgeoisie.—Its Avarice.—Political 
Economy and Free Competition.— Pharisaic Charity.—The Hypocrisy 
of Political Economy and Politics in the Question of the Corn Laws.— 
Bourgeois Legislation and Justice.— The Bourgeoisie in Parliament.— 
A Bill Regulating the Relation of Master and Servant.— Malthus' 
Theory.— The Old Poor Law.— The New Poor Law.— Examples 
of the Brutal Treatment of the Poor in the Workhouses.— The Chances 
of the English Bourgeoisie. 
F. Engels. Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England. 
An English Turnout 584 
K. Marx. Peuchet: On Suicide , 597 
F. Engels. A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 613 
i : 6i6 
II. Falseness of the Economic Principles of Circulation 620 
III. Hierarchy of Bankruptcy 624 
IV. Ascending Wing of Bankrupts 626 
The Innocent.— The Honourable.— The Seductive 
V. Centre.—Grandiose Hues 630 
The Tacticians.— The Manoeuvrers.— The Agitators 
VI. Descending Wing.— Dirty Hues 636 
The Cunning Sneakers.—The Bunglers.—The False Brothers 
VII. Conclusion 640 
F. Engels. The Late Butchery at Leipzig.—The German Working Men's 
Movement 645 
F. Engels. Victoria's Visit.—The "Royals" at Loggerheads.—Row 
Betwixt Vic and the German Bourgeoisie.—The Condemnation 
of the Paris Carpenters 649 
F. Engels. "Young Germany" in Switzerland. (Conspiracy against 
Church and State) 651 
F. Engels. Persecution and Expulsion of Communists 654 
F. Engels. History of the English Corn Laws 656 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
K. Marx. Hegel's Construction of the Phenomenology 665 
K. Marx. Draft Plan for a Work on the Modern State 666 
K. Marx. Plan of the "Library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers" 667 
K. Marx. From the Notebook 668 

=====第9页=====
Contents XI 
APPENDICES 
To the Readers of and Contributors to the Gesellschaftsspiegel  671 
Contract Between Marx and the Leske Publishers in Darmstadt on the 
Publication of Kritik der Politik und Nationalökonomie. February l, 1845 675 
Marx to Leopold I, King of Belgium, in Brussels. February 7, 1845 676 
Marx's Undertaking Not to Publish Anything in Belgium on Current 
Politics. March 22, 1845 677 
Marx to Chief Burgomaster Görtz in Trier. October 17, 1845 678 
Marx to Chief Burgomaster Görtz in Trier. November 10,1845 679 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 683 
Name Index 723 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 741 
Index of Periodicals 757 
Subject Index 763 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
Title-page of the first edition of The Holy Family by Marx and Engels 5 
Reproduction of K. Hübner's painting, Weavers Delivering Finished 
Cloth.  1844 235-236 
Cover of the first edition of Engels' The Condition of the Working-Class in England 299 
First page of Engels' address To the Working-Classes of Great-Britain 305 
A page from The Condition of the Working-Class in England (1845), with Edward 
Mead's poem, "The Steam King", translated by Engels  475 
Map of Manchester 515 
The covers of the journals to which Engels contributed 599-601 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
TRANSLATORS 
JACK COHEN: Speeches in Elberfeld; Postscript to The 
Condition of the Working-Class in England. 
An English Turnout 
RICHARD DIXON: To the Readers of and Contribu­
tors to the  Gesellschaftsspiegel;  Contract Between 
Marx and the Leske Publishers in Darmstadt on 
the Publication of Kritik der Politik und 
Nationalökonomie 
RICHARD DIXON and CLEMENS DUTT: The Holy 
Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against 
Bruno Bauer and Company; A Fragment of 
Fourier's on Trade 
CLEMENS DUTT: Draft of an Article on Friedrich 
List's Book Das nationale System der politischen 
Oekonomie;History of the English Corn Laws; 
Hegel's Construction of the Phenomenology; 
Draft Plan for a Work on the Modern State; 
Plan of the "Library of the Best Foreign 
Socialist Writers"; From the Notebook; Marx 
to Leopold I, King of Belgium, in Brussels; 
Marx's Undertaking Not to Publish Anything 
in Belgium on Current Politics; Marx to Chief 
Burgomaster Görtz in Trier (two items) 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: Peuchet: On Suicide 
CHRISTOPHER UPWARD: Description of Recently 
Founded Communist Colonies Still in Existence 
FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY: The Con­
dition of the Working-Class in England 

=====第12页=====

=====第13页=====
Preface 
The fourth volume of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels 
includes their works written from the time when their close 
friendship was first established (late August-early September 1844) 
to the autumn of 1845. Beginning with the present volume, works 
of both Marx and Engels will be published in this edition in the 
chronological order in which they were written. 
The meeting of Marx and Engels in Paris in August 1844 
inaugurated their lifelong partnership. Each of them had indepen­
dently traversed a difficult path of intellectual development from 
idealism to materialism, from revolutionary democracy to com­
munism. By the time they met in Paris each was a convinced 
revolutionary and Communist. With this shared standpoint, their 
work, while preserving the individual features of each, developed 
thereafter in a spirit of the unbreakable unity of two thinkers. At 
the same time, their creative co-operation opened up immediately 
a new stage in the development of their views. Not only did they 
go on to achieve, during the year that followed their meeting, 
greater concreteness in the dialectical and materialist principles 
both had advanced in their works of 1843 and 1844, but they 
broadened the whole range of their ideas and set themselves and 
tackled new problems of elaborating the theoretical foundations of 
the revolutionary world outlook of the proletariat. 
Marx and Engels continued their study of existing philosophical, 
economic and socialist ideas, and their painstaking research into 
the actual social-economic reality and the working-class movement 
of the time. They maintained close contacts with democratic and 
socialist circles in Germany, France, Belgium and other countries, 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
with representatives of the Chartist movement in England, and 
with members of the League of the Just. And all this increasingly 
convinced them that the practice of revolutionary struggle de­
manded profound and comprehensive theoretical work, the crea­
tion of an entirely new and self-consistent theory which would be 
of relevance in all the basic fields of human knowledge. It was to 
the fulfilment of this task that Marx and Engels together directed 
their efforts. They sought not only to establish the scientific basis 
for communism, but to spread communist ideas among the 
working class and revolutionary intellectuals of Europe. For them, 
the new revolutionary theory could be consolidated only in 
struggle against the various non-proletarian trends which had 
taken shape by that time, and by dissociating itself from them. 
A primary task in the autumn of 1844 was to deal with the 
Young Hegelians, who had given up their former radical convic­
tions and swung to the Right. Indeed, a campaign against 
socialism and communism was being mounted by the monthly 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, edited by the Bauer brothers. 
What Marx had had to say in the  Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher 
about the proletariat's historical mission was declared "uncritical", 
and working people written off as an inert and passive "mass", a 
hindrance to social progress. The Bauer brothers and their 
fellow-thinkers announced that the sole active element in the 
world-historical process was their own theoretical activity, to which 
they gave the name of "Critical Criticism". 
Marx had first expressed his intention to come out against the 
philosophical views of the Young Hegelians in 1843, in his articles 
Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction 
and On the Jewish Question (see present edition, Vol. 3). And 
he returned to the idea in the summer of 1844, among other occa­
sions in his conversations with Engels in Paris. The outcome was 
the decision by Marx and Engels to write a book together against 
the Young Hegelians. "A war has been declared," Engels wrote 
sometime later, "against those of the German philosophers, who 
refuse to draw from their mere theories practical inferences, 
and who contend that man has nothing to do but to speculate 
upon metaphysical questions" (see p. 240 of this volume). 
This fourth volume of the Collected Works begins with the first 
joint work of Marx and Engels, The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical 
Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co. Its idea and general plan 
were agreed upon by the two friends, but the major part of the 
text was in fact written by Marx. This work, mainly philosophical 
in content, occupies an important place in the formation of Marx's 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
and Engels' philosophical  and  social-political views.  It attacks from 
a consistently materialist standpoint both  the  subjectivist views  of 
the Young Hegelians  and  Hegel's idealist philosophical system  as a 
whole,  on  which they  had  based them.  At the  same time,  it 
demonstrates  in sharp polemic that  the  subjective idealism  of the 
Young Hegelians  was a  step backward  in comparison with Hegel's 
philosophy. 
Marx  and  Engels  had already  in previous works begun  to work 
out the  principles  of the  materialist conception  of history.  In The 
Holy Family these were further developed.  A new  step forward  was 
made, particularly  as compared with Marx's "Economic  and 
Philosophic Manuscripts  of 1844",  in clarifying  the  decisive role  of 
material production  in social development. Marx  now saw in it the 
basis  of the  whole  of mankind's historical progress.  He wrote,  in 
particular, that  it was  impossible  to understand  a single historical 
period "without knowing  ... the  industry  of that period,  the 
immediate mode  of production  of life itself" (see p. 150 of  this 
volume). 
Formulated  in this work  are  very profound thoughts  on the 
correspondence  of the  political system  of a  given society with  the 
economic structure, their dialectical connection  and  mutual influ­
ence. 
Closely connected with  the  exposition  of the  initial principles  of 
the materialist conception  of history  is the  clear statement  in The 
Holy Family  of the  decisive role  of the  popular masses  in historical 
development  and the  growth  of this role  as the  development 
proceeds. Marx declared that mankind  was  facing  the  task  of 
further profound social transformations,  in the  course  of which 
"together with  the thoroughness  of the  historical action,  the size  of 
the mass whose action  it is  will therefore increase"  (see p. 82 of  this 
volume). 
In developing  the  idea  of the  world-historical role  of the 
proletariat  as the  force destined  to carry  out the  future socialist 
revolution, Marx shows  in The  Holy Family that this historical 
destiny  of the  working class  is the  inevitable result  of its  position  in 
capitalist society.  "The  conditions  of life of the  proletariat," Marx 
writes,  "sum up all the  conditions  of life of society today  in their 
most inhuman form."  The  proletariat,  as a  class,  by virtue  of its  his­
torical existence  "can and  must emancipate  itself" (see pp.  36-37  of 
this volume). Marx also declared that  the social emancipation  of the 
proletariat would mean  the  emancipation  of the  whole  of society 
from exploitation.  He  therefore stressed  the  universal human 
significance,  the  genuinely humanistic meaning  of the  proletariat's 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
class struggle. Thus the basic Marxist idea of the leading role of 
the proletariat in the anti-capitalist revolutionary and liberation 
movement was formulated for the first time in The Holy Family. 
Lenin later described it as a work containing "Marx's view — al­
ready almost fully developed — concerning the revolutionary role 
of the proletariat" (V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 38, p. 26). 
The Holy Family contains, moreover, Marx and Engels' 
materialist interpretation of the role of ideas in history. Analysing 
more deeply the conception of the transformation of theory into a 
material force which he had put forward in A Contribution to the 
Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law, Marx showed how ideas 
become an effective force of social development when they 
correspond to the requirements of real life by expressing the 
interests of progressive classes. He demonstrated this by taking as 
an example the history of philosophy from the seventeenth to the 
beginning of the nineteenth century. Analysing the struggle of the 
two basic trends, materialism and idealism, he reveals the signifi­
cance of materialism as the progressive philosophy in social life, 
particularly in its having created the ideological prerequisites for 
the French bourgeois revolution at the end of the eighteenth 
century; he points out the organic link between the development of 
materialist ideas and the achievements of the natural sciences, and 
emphasises that further creative development of materialist philo­
sophical thought must inevitably lead to communist conclusions. 
While building on the progressive philosophical traditions of the 
past, Marx and Engels by no means intended to stop at the 
achievements of previous materialism. The Holy Family reflects the 
endeavour to develop and re-interpret in a materialist way the 
rational element in Hegel's philosophy—its dialectics—and organ­
ically to unite dialectics which, on the whole, previous materialist 
philosophers lacked, with materialism. The creative development 
of dialectics, the dialectical approach to both social-economic and 
ideological phenomena, the study in social and intellectual pro­
cesses of the operation of the basic objective laws of dialectics, 
especially the law of the unity and struggle of opposites—these 
run through the whole content of The Holy Family. 
Although it marks so significant a stage accomplished in the 
creation of the theoretical foundation of the proletarian world 
outlook, The Holy Family nevertheless belongs to the period when 
Marxism was still in formation and when the basic principles of 
the materialist conception of history and of scientific communism 
had not yet been fully stated. Marx and Engels had not yet 
completely crossed the divide between themselves and their 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
ideological predecessors. In particular, they had not yet entirely 
and in all respects overcome the influence of the weaker aspects of 
Feuerbach's philosophy. It is true that in declaring themselves his 
followers, "real humanists", supporters of Feuerbach's "an­
thropological" materialism, Marx and Engels were actually coming 
out as revolutionary Communists and materialist dialecticians, and 
so filling his terminology with a new content. Their obvious 
dissatisfaction with the metaphysical character and inconsistency of 
all previous materialism soon developed, however, into an under­
standing of the fundamental difference between Feuerbach's 
speculative philosophy and the proletarian outlook that was taking 
shape. That is why, in April 1845, in his "Theses on Feuerbach", 
Marx came out so trenchantly against Feuerbachianism (these 
Theses, together with other works related to The German Ideology, 
will be included in the fifth volume of the present edition). 
The fourth volume also contains Engels' fundamental work, The 
Condition of the Working-Class in England. This was the fruit of his 
careful study of and theoretical generalisation from vast factual 
data drawn from official documents, from both bourgeois and 
working-class newspapers, and from special investigations made by 
economists, sociologists, historians, etc. But above all, the book 
reflects (and this lends it its particular authenticity) the results of 
Engels' own observation of the working and living conditions of 
the workers during his almost two years' stay in Manchester. 
In substance, this work of Engels continues his previous articles 
devoted to studying capitalist development in England (see 
present edition, Vols. 2 and 3). In the scale of the problems it 
deals with and the depth and thoroughness with which they are 
clarified, it considerably surpasses, however, his previous writings. 
As regards the ideas informing it, this work is close to The Holy 
Family. It shows by the whole of its content that in working out 
their revolutionary theory the founders of Marxism based them­
selves on a scientific concrete sociological analysis of the existing 
reality. 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England provides evidence 
that Engels arrived, at the same time as Marx, at an understanding 
of the role of the economic factor in social development, and that 
he made his own independent contribution to the materialist 
analysis of social phenomena. One of the central features of this 
work is his study of the social-economic consequences of the 
industrial revolution in England. Engels brought out the decisive 
influence of changes in social production on the condition of 
whole classes and the entire life of society. And he came to the 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
all-important conclusion that the industrial revolution in England 
had resulted in the formation of a new revolutionary class — the 
proletariat. The position of this class in modern capitalist society 
"is the real basis and point of departure of all social movements of 
the present because it is the highest and most unconcealed 
pinnacle of the social misery existing in our day" (see p. 302 of this 
volume). 
Engels was able to deduce from the example of England, the 
most advanced country in the capitalist world at the time, the 
characteristic features of the capitalist system as a whole. He 
demonstrated the typical features of capitalist industrialisation, 
and its inevitable consequences — the ruin, and in England the 
almost complete disappearance, of the artisans and working 
peasantry, the pauperisation of the former small proprietors and 
the proletarianisation of a considerable part of the population. In 
what must rank as a classical characterisation, Engels drew his 
picture of the big towns as the offspring of capitalist industry, a 
focus of social evils, and at the same time as centres of the 
proletarian masses' resistance to oppression and exploitation. And 
he vividly depicted phenomena inherent in capitalism—the an­
archy of production, the periodic crises, the deepening of class 
antagonisms, and the formation and growth of a reserve army of 
labour, or in other words, chronic unemployment. Engels' book is 
no specialist theoretical economic study, and yet it defines with 
deadly accuracy many aspects of the economic structure of 
capitalist society and its inherent laws and tendencies. Not without 
reason did Marx write later in the first volume of Capital that the 
author of The Condition of the Working-Class in England "complete­
ly understood the nature of the capitalist mode of produc­
tion". 
Engels' masterly picture of the condition of the English pro­
letariat is an unanswerable indictment of the capitalist system 
as it then existed. But this is not the distinguishing feature of 
his book, the one which sets it apart from all other socialist 
writings of the time. Many Utopian Socialists or authors who 
merely sympathised with the working- people had already vividly 
described their unfortunate condition. But they had shown the 
working class only as a suffering mass, not as a revolutionary 
force. The enduring significance of The Condition of the Working-
Class in England lies in the fact that, as Lenin noted, in it "Engels 
was the first to say that the proletariat is not only a suffering class; 
that it is, in fact, the disgraceful economic condition of the 
proletariat that drives it irresistibly forward and compels it to fight 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
for its ultimate emancipation. And the fighting proletariat will help 
itself (V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 2, p. 22). 
As in Marx's works of this time, the world-historical revolu­
tionary role of the working class is deduced in Engels' book from the 
social conditions in capitalist society and the proletarians' position 
in it. There was evident, Engels concludes, an inexorable tendency 
towards the sharpening of the contradictions inherent in capital­
ism, towards polarisation of the class forces, and the transforma­
tion of the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie 
into the principal factor in the life of society. The social revolution 
to overthrow the existing system had become historically inevita­
ble. The proletariat, the class in which "reposes the strength and 
the capacity of development of the nation" (see p. 529 of this 
volume), precisely by virtue of its position in capitalist society, has 
the historic mission of destroying it and accomplishing the socialist 
revolution. 
For the first time in socialist literature, Engels systematically 
analysed the development of the proletariat's emancipation move­
ment and showed the historical significance of this process, which, 
in the final account, will lead to the communist transformation of 
society. Engels demonstrated the regular and progressive character 
of the development of the working-class movement, the inevitabili­
ty of the transition from primitive spontaneous forms of revolu­
tionary protest to higher and more organised forms of strug­
gle—from local and sporadic actions against individual employers 
to systematic resistance of the workers to the exploiters and 
to struggle against the capitalist system  itself;  from uniting the 
proletarian forces within the framework of separate trades to 
creating nationwide class organisations. He elucidated the role of 
strikes, and of the trade unions as schools of class struggle. At the 
same time, he stressed that only by taking the path of political 
struggle would the working class be able to deal the decisive blow 
against the rule of the capitalist class as a whole and achieve 
genuine emancipation. That was the reason he so much stressed 
and lavished such praise on the activity of the English Chartists, 
who transferred the struggle against the bourgeoisie to political 
ground and began a mass proletarian political movement. Engels 
saw in Chartism the concentrated form of working-class opposition 
to the bourgeoisie. 
Yet Engels discerned at the same time the crucial weakness of 
the Chartist movement in its inability to understand the socialist 
aim of the working-class revolutionary struggle, which was re­
flected in a certain ideological narrow-mindedness on the part of 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
its leaders. The English working-class movement, he concluded, 
must find the way to acquire socialist consciousness. The need was 
to unite the Chartist movement with socialism—not with Robert 
Owen's Utopian socialism, divorced as it was from genuine class 
struggle, but with militant proletarian socialism. 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England nevertheless re­
flects to a certain extent the fact that the scientific outlook of the 
proletariat had not yet been completely shaped. Engels himself 
later regarded this book as a stage in the "embryonic" develop­
ment of scientific socialism, when there were still visible "traces" 
of its descent from German classical philosophy. As an example of 
such immaturity, reflecting the influence of the abstract humanism 
of Feuerbach and of Utopian socialism, he pointed to the proposi­
tion that the bourgeoisie itself had an interest in the social 
advantages of the communist system. Such delusions, especially in 
respect of the German bourgeoisie, which was often alleged to be 
far more disinterested than the English, are also apparent in other 
works by Engels belonging to the same period (see p. 230 of this 
volume). And as he himself later admitted in the Preface to the 
second German edition (1892), his idea that England was not far 
from a socialist revolution was also much too optimistic. 
Alongside the two big works of Marx and Engels already 
named, this volume includes a group of their journalistic works, 
with manuscript outlines, and so on. Nearly all these works were 
written by Marx in Brussels, after he had been obliged to move 
there early in February 1845, when the French authorities closed 
down the Paris newspaper Vorwärts! and deported a number of its 
contributors and editors. Until the beginning of the revolution in 
Europe in 1848, Marx pursued his theoretical and political work 
in the Belgian capital. Engels wrote some of his journalistic works 
at the same time as The Condition of the Working-Class in En­
gland—during his stay in Barmen from September 1844 to April 
1845.  He continued to contribute reports on the state of the 
revolutionary movement and of communist propaganda on the 
Continent from Barmen to the Owenites' New Moral  World. 
Another group of articles and reports by Engels, including his 
contributions to the Chartist newspaper The Northern Star, which 
he resumed in the autumn of 1845, were written in Brussels, 
where he stayed for a time from April 1845. 
The content of the articles and reports written by Marx and 
Engels in this period corresponded to the tasks they set themselves 
in the two major works. They were all devoted to exposing the 
capitalist system, passionately defending the interests of the work-

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
ing class, spreading revolutionary communist ideas, and criticising 
ideological trends hostile to the communist movement. 
The socialist journals Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen 
Reform, Deutsches Bürgerbuch, Gesellschaftsspiegel, and Das West-
phälische Dampfboot, which were published in Germany at that 
time and for which Marx and Engels intended many of their 
articles, were all to a greater or lesser extent mouthpieces for the 
ideas of petty-bourgeois "true socialism", alien to the revolution­
ary communist outlook. Attempts to influence the trend of some 
of these periodicals, in particular Engels' efforts to impart a 
revolutionary critical character to the Gesellschaftsspiegel, did not 
succeed. The collaboration of Marx and Engels with these publica­
tions could only be incidental and of short duration. They soon 
broke entirely with some, and wrote elsewhere in opposition to 
them. Nevertheless, their contributions, even in these publications, 
played no small part in formulating and spreading communist 
views and in the birth of the revolutionary proletarian trend in the 
socialist movement of the time, drawing the line between rev­
olutionary communism and other, non-proletarian trends. A 
group of their first adherents already began to unite around Marx 
and Engels in Brussels. 
Marx's article on the book Das nationale System der politischen 
Oekonomie, by the German economist Friedrich List, was intended 
for one of the above-named periodicals, but remained unpub­
lished. The present volume includes a recently discovered draft of 
this article, which contains a trenchant criticism of the views held 
by List as an apologist of the German bourgeoisie, which was then 
seeking by protective tariffs to defend itself against competition 
from the more developed capitalist countries. Marx stresses that 
List's views reflected the physiognomy of the German bourgeois: 
his desire to cover up his greedy exploitation and lust for profit 
with pompous talk about the national interest, coupled with his 
abject servility towards the aristocracy. But Marx did not confine 
himself to merely criticising List's views. The draft published in 
this volume bears witness to his intense work in thinking over the 
theoretical problems, the materialist interpretation of basic 
economic and sociological categories such as "labour", "worker", 
"exchange value", "productive forces", and others. In the course 
of his analysis Marx reveals the difference in principle between the 
"human kernel" of factory and plant production which creates 
"the proletariat, and in the shape of the proletariat the power of a 
new world order", and its capitalist "dirty outer shell" which has to 
be broken to free the productive forces of society from their 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
fetters (see p. 282 of this volume). The thoughts set forth by Marx 
in this draft were developed in his subsequent philosophical and 
economic works. 
The article "Peuchet: On Suicide" provides proof that in 
criticising bourgeois society Marx sought not only to lay bare its 
economic contradictions, but also to expose bourgeois morality, 
customs and way of living. Making use of material on suicides and 
their motives, which he obtained from the memoirs of the police 
archives custodian in Paris, Marx showed that the bourgeois world 
is ruled by egoism, violation of the human personality, trampling 
on natural feelings, monstrous family relations. 
Engels' articles published in this volume: "Continental Social­
ism", "Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany", "Speeches in 
Elberfeld", and others, belong to the Barmen period of his work. 
They present a picture of the social discontent in Germany in the 
forties, the growth of opposition to the feudal and absolutist 
system, and the social dissatisfaction of the working people 
reflected in the wide propagation of communist and socialist ideas. 
These articles contain remarkable biographical material and illus­
trate the mercurial enthusiasm with which young Engels set about 
his organisational, agitational and journalistic activity in the Rhine 
Province of Prussia. 
In the "Speeches in Elberfeld", Engels pronounced a detailed 
condemnation of the capitalist system eroded by internal con­
tradictions, and laid bare the economic roots of the class struggle, 
basing himself both on his experiences in England and a thorough 
study of conditions in Germany. He spoke of the "contradiction 
between a few rich people on the one hand, and many poor on the 
other", and foretold that it would go on deepening "as long as the 
present basis of society is retained". To the world of cruel exploita­
tion, barbarous squandering of human resources, ruthless compe­
tition, war of all against all, Engels opposed a communist society, 
humanely and economically organised, in which "the interests 
of individuals are not opposed to one another but, on the contrary, 
are united" (see pp. 244, 246 of this volume). Engels likewise 
endeavoured to demonstrate the superiority of the communist 
system in the article "Description of Recently Founded Communist 
Colonies Still in Existence". He did not share the views of Utopian 
Socialists who thought that the entire social system could be 
peacefully transformed by the diffusion of these experimental 
colonies; he saw their significance rather in their example, which 
proved that it was possible to organise social and economic rela­
tions more justly and rationally on a collective basis. 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
Among the works written by Engels in Brussels is his "A 
Fragment of Fourier's on Trade", which contains his translation 
of extracts from Fourier's work Des trois unités  externes  accompanied 
by an introduction and a conclusion written by  himself.  It was 
no accident that Engels took the trouble to translate this out­
standing representative of Utopian socialism. He placed a high 
value on Fourier's criticism of existing society, and intended to 
include his works in the "Library of the Best Foreign Socialist 
Writers", the publication of which he and Marx had planned 
(see p. 667 of this volume). The excerpts from Fourier's writings 
which he selected expose the cupidity, money-grubbing and deceit 
reigning in the sphere of finance and trade. This work of Engels 
was also the first public attack against petty-bourgeois "true 
socialism", which debased socialist teaching into something sen­
timental, eclectic, abstract and divorced from the requirements 
of revolutionary struggle. 
Engels' article on Fourier and his intention to publish the works 
of other Socialists show that Marx and himself held their ideologi­
cal forerunners in high respect. Criticism of the weaknesses of 
Utopian socialism did not prevent them from seeing in it the 
rational elements appreciation of which would contribute to the 
workers' education and help them to acquire the revolutionary 
proletarian world outlook. 
Close to the book The Condition of the Working-Class in England 
are Engels' articles "An English Turnout" and "History of the 
English Corn Laws". These articles throw additional light on the 
acute class struggle which had developed in England between the 
proletariat and the bourgeoisie. The second describes the workers' 
demonstrations in August 1842, and the provocative role played in 
these events by the bourgeois adherents of free trade united in the 
Anti-Corn Law League. 
This volume also contains several articles by Engels published in 
September and October 1845 in The Northern Star. Engels in­
formed his English Chartist readers that, in comparison with the 
middle-of-the-road and irresolute positions adopted by bourgeois 
liberal circles in Germany, the German working class was distin­
guished by greater radicalism and receptivity to revolutionary views. 
One of the basic ideas expounded in these reports was the need 
for ideological and political independence for the working class, 
"who have a movement of their own—a knife-and-fork movement" 
(see p. 648 of this volume). 
In the section of this volume "From the Preparatory Materials" 
are published draft plans revealing the broad scope of Marx's 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preface 
intentions and the variety of fields which his searching mind 
explored (problems concerning the state, the history of the French 
Revolution, and so on). The Appendices include, besides other 
biographical documents, Marx's contract with the Leske publishing 
house for the publication of his projected work in two volumes 
Kritik der Politik und Nationalökonomie. It was out of this plan, 
which was partially implemented in the "Economic and Philosophic 
Manuscripts of 1844", that the idea of Capital later crystallised. 
* * * 
Some of the works included in this volume have been translated 
into English for the first time. Among these are such writings by 
Marx as "Draft of an Article on Friedrich List's Book Das nationale 
System der politischen Oekonomie" , "Peuchet: On Suicide", "Plan of 
the Library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers", and all the 
items contained in the Appendices. 
Among the works of Engels the following articles have not been 
previously translated into English: "Description of Recently Found­
ed Communist Colonies Stillin Existence", "Speeches in Elber-
feld", "A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade", "History of the 
English Corn Laws", and the prospectus of the Gesellschaftsspiegel 
(published as an Appendix, since it was written in co-authorship 
with Hess). Reprinted for the first time in the language of the 
original are Engels' two articles from The Northern Star: " 'Young 
Germany' in Switzerland" and "Persecution and Expulsion of 
Communists". Engels' book The Condition of the Working-Class 
in England is published in the English translation by Florence 
Kelley-Wischnewetzky which Engels himself authorised in 
the 1880s. The most important differences between the original 
and the translation which affect the meaning are particularised in 
footnotes. 
Those works which have previously been published in English 
are either rendered in new translations or previous translations 
have been checked with the original. The special features in the 
presentation of individual works, in particular manuscripts, are 
described in the Notes. 
Most of the works published in this volume have been translated 
from the German. If the translation is from another language, or 
if the text was written by the authors in English, mention is made 
of this at the end of the particular work. 
The volume was compiled and the preface and notes written 
by Tatyana Yeremeyeva and edited by Lev Golman (Institute of 

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
Marxism-Leninism of the C.C., C.P.S.U.)- Valentina Kholopova 
(Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C., C.P.S.U.) prepared 
the Name Index, the Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
and the Index of Periodicals, and Yevgenia Zastenker the Subject 
Index. 
The new translations are by Jack Cohen, Richard Dixon, 
Clemens Dutt, Barbara Ruhemann and Christopher Upward, and 
edited by Margaret Mynatt, Pat Sloan and Alick West (Lawrence & 
Wishart), Richard Dixon, Yelena Chistyakova and Victor Schnittke 
(Progress Publishers) and Vladimir Mosolov, scientific editor (In­
stitute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C., C.P.S.U.). 
The volume was prepared for the press by the editor Nadezhda 
Rudenko and the assistant-editor Tatyana Shimanovskaya, for 
Progress Publishers. 

=====第26页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
September 1844-November 1845 

=====第27页=====

=====第28页=====
ober 
ftritif 
ber 
frittf$en ft r 11 i f . 
tißegtn ptuno flauer & Cimfortnt. 
Son 
$mtoid> (Sttgeld tinb Äatl 9Jtar£-
/rankfutt n. <JH. 
Siterar if (^( 2( tt fl 0 f t. 
(J. Ratten.) 
18 4 3. 
Title-page of the first edition of The Holy Family 

=====第29页=====

=====第30页=====
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
THE HOLY FAMILY 
OR 
CRITIQUE  OF  CRITICAL CRITICISM 
AGAINST BRUNO BAUER AND COMPANY' 

=====第31页=====
Written in September-November 1844 
First published as a separate book 
in 1845 in Frankfurt am Main 
Signed: Frederick Engels and Karl Marx Translated from the German 
edition of 1845 

=====第32页=====
Foreword 
Real humanism has no more dangerous enemy in Germany than 
spiritualism or speculative idealism, which substitutes  "self-
consciousness" or the "spirit" for the real individual man and with 
the evangelist teaches: "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh 
profiteth nothing." Needless to say, this incorporeal spirit is 
spiritual only in its imagination. What we are combating in Bower's 
criticism is precisely speculation reproducing itself as a caricature. 
We see in it the most complete expression of the Christian-
Germanic principle, which makes its last effort by transforming 
"criticism" itself into a transcendent power. 
Our exposition deals first and foremost with Bruno Bauer's 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung —the first eight numbers are here 
before us  — because in it Bauer's criticism, and with it the 
nonsense of German speculation in general, has reached its peak. 
The more completely Critical Criticism (the criticism of the 
Literatur-Zeitung) distorts reality into an obvious comedy through 
philosophy, the more instructive it is.— For examples see Faucher 
and Szeliga.— The Literatur-Zeitung offers material by which even 
the broad public can be enlightened on the illusions of speculative 
philosophy. That is the aim of our book. 
Our exposition is naturally determined by its subject. Critical 
Criticism is in all respects below the level already attained by 
German theoretical development. The nature of our subject 
therefore justifies our refraining here from further discussion of 
that development  itself. 
Critical Criticism makes it necessary rather to assert, in contrast 
to it, the already achieved results as such. 

=====第33页=====
8 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
We therefore give this polemic as a preliminary to the independ­
ent works in which we—each of us for himself, of course—shall 
present our positive view and thereby our positive attitude to the 
more recent philosophical and social doctrines. 
Paris, September 1844 
Engels, Marx 

=====第34页=====
Chapter I 
"CRITICAL CRITICISM 
IN THE FORM OF A MASTER-BOOKBINDER", 
OR CRITICAL CRITICISM AS HERR REICHARDT 
Critical Criticism, however superior to the mass it deems  itself, 
nevertheless has boundless pity for the mass. And Criticism so loved 
the mass that it sent its only begotten son, that all who believe in him 
may not be lost, but may have Critical life. Criticism was made mass 
and dwells amongst us and we behold its glory, the glory of the only 
begotten son of the father. In other words, Criticism becomes 
socialistic: and speaks of "works on pauperism".2 It does not regard it 
as a crime to be equal to God but alienates itself and takes the form of 
a master-bookbinder and humiliates itself to the extent of non­
sense— indeed even to Critical nonsense in foreign languages. It, 
whose heavenly virginal purity shrinks from contact with the sinful 
leprous mass, overcomes itself to the extent of taking notice of 
ilBodz,,a and "all original writers on pauperism" and "has for years 
been following this evil of the present time step by step"; it scorns 
writing for experts, it writes for the general public, banning all 
outlandish expressions, all "Latin intricacies, all professional jar­
gon". It bans all that from the works of others, for it would be too 
much to expect Criticism itself to submit to "this administrative 
regulation". And yet it does do so partly, renouncing with admirable 
ease,  if not the words themselves, at least their content. And who will 
reproach it for using "the huge heap of unintelligible foreign words" 
when it repeatedly proves that it does not understand those words 
itself? Here are a few samples3: 
a Reichardt's distortion of Charles Dickens' pseudonym:  Boz.—Ed. 

=====第35页=====
10 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"That is why the institutions of mendicancy inspire them with horror." 
"A doctrine of responsibility in which every motion of human thought  becomes  an 
image of Lot's wife." 
"On the keystone of this really profound edifice of art." 
"This is the main content of Stein's political testament, which the great statesman 
handed in even before retiring from the active service of the government and from all 
its transactions." 
"This people had not yet any dimensions at that time for such extensive freedom." 
"By palavering with fair assurance at the end of his publicistic work that only 
confidence was still lacking." 
"To the manly state-elevating understanding, rising above routine and pusillani­
mous fear, reared on history and nurtured with a live perception of foreign public state 
system." 
"The education of general national welfare." 
"Freedom lay dead in the  breast  of the Prussian national mission under the control of 
the authorities." 
"Popular-organic publicism." 
"The people to whom even Herr Brüggemann delivers the baptismal certificate of  its 
adulthood." 
"A rather glaring contradiction to the other certitudes which are expressed in the 
work on the professional capacities of the people." 
"Wretched self-interest quickly dispels all the chimeras of the national will." 
"Passion for great gains, etc., was the spirit that pervaded the whole of the 
Restoration period and which, with a fair quantity of indifference, adhered to the new 
age." 
"The obscure idea of political significance to be found in the Prussian 
countrymanship nationality rests on the memory of a great history." 
"The antipathy disappeared and turned into a completely exalted condition." 
"In this wonderful transition each one in his own way still put forward in  prospect  his 
own special wish." 
"A catechism with unctuous Solomon-like language the words of which rise gently 
like a dove —  chirp!  chirp!—to the regions of pathos and thunder-like aspects." 
"All the dilettantism of thirty-five years of neglect." 
"The too sharp thundering at the citizens by one of their former town authorities 
could have been suffered with the calmness of mind characteristic of our 
representatives if Benda's view of the Town Charter of 1808 had not laboured under a 
Mussulman conceptual affliction with regard to the essence and the application of the 
Town Charter." 
In Herr Reichardt, the audacity of style always corresponds to the 
audacity of the thought. He makes transitions like the following: 
"Herr Brüggemann ... 1843 ... state theory ... every upright man ... the great 
modesty of our Socialists ... natural marvels ... demands to be made on Germany ... 
supernatural marvels ... Abraham ... Philadelphia ... manna ... baker ... but  since  we are 
speaking of marvels, Napoleon brought," etc. 
After these samples it is no wonder that Critical Criticism gives us a 
further "explanation" of a sentence which it itself describes as 
expressed in "popular language", for it "arms its eyes with organic 
power to penetrate chaos". And here it must be said that then even 

=====第36页=====
The Holy Family 11 
"popular language" cannot remain unintelligible to Critical Criti­
cism. It is aware that the way of the writer must necessarily be a 
crooked one if the individual who sets out on it is not strong enough 
to make it straight; and therefore it naturally ascribes "mathematical 
operations" to the author. 
It is self-evident—and history, which proves everything which is 
self-evident, also proves this—that Criticism does not become mass 
in order to remain mass, but in order to redeem the mass from its 
mass-like mass nature, that is, to raise the popular language of the 
mass to the critical language of Critical Criticism. It is the lowest 
grade of degradation for Criticism to learn the popular language of 
the mass and transfigure that vulgar jargon into the high-flown 
intricacy of the dialectics of Critical Criticism. 

=====第37页=====
Chapter II 
"CRITICAL CRITICISM" AS A "MILL-OWNER", 
OR CRITICAL CRITICISM AS HERR JULES FAUCHER 4 
After rendering most substantial services to self-consciousness by 
humiliating itself to the extent of nonsense in foreign languages, 
and thereby at the same time freeing the world from pauperism, 
Criticism still further humiliates itself to the extent of nonsense in 
practice and history. It masters "English questions of the day" and 
gives us a genuinely critical outline of the history of English industry. 
Criticism, which is self-sufficient, and complete and perfect in 
itself,  naturally cannot recognise history as it really took place, for 
that would mean recognising the base Mass in all its mass-like mass 
nature, whereas the problem is precisely to redeem the Mass from 
its mass nature. History is therefore freed from its mass nature, 
and Criticism, which has a free attitude to its object, calls to 
history: "You ought to have happened in such and such a way!" All the 
laws of Criticism have retrospective force: prior to the decrees of 
Criticism, history behaved quite differently from how it did after 
them. Hence mass-type history, so-called real history, deviates 
considerably from Critical history, as it takes place in Heft VII of 
the Literatur-Zeitung from page 4 onwards. 
In mass-type history there were no factory towns before there 
were factories; but in Critical history, in which, as already in Hegel, 
the son begets his father, Manchester, Bolton and Preston were 
flourishing factory towns before factories were even thought of. In 
real history the cotton industry was founded mainly on Hargreaves' 
jenny and Arkwright's throstle, Crompton's mule being only an 
improvement of the spinning jenny according to the new principle 
discovered by Arkwright. But Critical history knows how to make 
distinctions: it scorns the one-sidedness of the jenny and the 

=====第38页=====
The Holy Family 13 
throstle, and gives the crown to the mule as the speculative 
identity of the extremes. In reality, the invention of the throstle 
and the mule immediately made possible the application of water-
power to those machines, but Critical Criticism sorts out the 
principles lumped together by crude history and makes this 
application come only later, as something quite special. In reality 
the invention of the steam-engine  preceded  all the above-mentioned 
inventions; according to Criticism it is the crown of them all and 
the last. 
In reality the business ties between Liverpool and Manchester in 
their present scope were the result of the export of English goods; 
according to Criticism they are the cause of the export and both 
are the result of the proximity of the two towns. In reality nearly 
all goods from Manchester go to the Continent via Hull, according 
to Criticism via Liverpool. 
In reality all grades of  wages  exist in English factories, from Is 6d 
to 40s and more; but according to Criticism only one rate is 
paid— lis. In reality the machine replaces manual  labour;  according 
to Criticism it replaces thought. In reality the association of workers 
for wage rises is allowed in England, but according to Criticism it is 
prohibited, for when the Mass wants to allow itself anything it 
must first ask Criticism. In reality factory labour is extremely tiring 
and gives rise to specific diseases — there are even special medical 
works on them; according to Criticism "excessive exertion cannot 
be a hindrance to work, for the power is provided by the machine". 
In reality the machine is a machine; according to Criticism it has a 
will, for as it does not rest, neither can the worker, and he is 
subordinated to an alien will. 
But that is still nothing at all. Criticism cannot be content with 
the mass-type parties in England; it creates new ones, including a 
"factory party", for which history may be thankful to it. On the 
other hand, it lumps together the factory-owners and the factory 
workers in one massive heap — why bother about such trifles! — 
and decrees that the factory workers refused to contribute 
to the Anti-Corn-Law League5 not out of ill-will or because of 
Chartism, as the stupid factory-owners maintain, but merely 
because they were poor. It further decrees that with the repeal of 
the English Corn Laws agricultural labourers will have to put up 
with a lowering of wages, in regard to which, however, we must 
most submissively remark that that destitute class cannot be 
deprived of another penny without being reduced to absolute 
starvation. It decrees that the working day in English factories is 
sixteen hours, although a silly un-Critical English law has fixed a 

=====第39页=====
14 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
maximum of twelve hours. It decrees that England is to become a 
huge workshop for the world, although the un-Critical mass of 
Americans, Germans and Belgians are ruining one market after 
another for the English by their competition. Lastly, it decrees that 
neither the propertied nor the non-propertied classes in England 
are aware of the centralisation of property and its consequences for 
the working classes, although the stupid Chartists think they are 
well aware of them; the Socialists maintain that they expounded 
those consequences in detail long ago, and even Tories and Whigs 
like Carlyle, Alison and Gaskell have proved their knowledge of 
them in their works. 
Criticism decrees that Lord Ashley's Ten Hour Bill6  is a  half­
hearted juste-milieu measure and Lord Ashley himself "a true 
illustration of constitutional action", 3 while the factory-owners, the 
Chartists, the landowners — in short, all that makes up the mass 
nature of England — have so far considered this measure as an 
expression, the mildest possible one admittedly, of a downright 
radical principle, since it would lay the axe at the root of foreign 
trade and thereby at the root of the factory system — nay, not 
merely lay the axe to it, but cut deeply into it. Critical Criticism 
knows better. It knows that the ten hour question was discussed 
before a "commission" of the Lower House, although the un-
Critical newspapers try to make us believe that this "commission" 
was the House  itself,  "a Committee of  the Whole House"7; but Criticism 
must needs do away with that eccentricity of the English Constitu­
tion. 
Critical Criticism, which itself  begets  its opposite, the stupidity of the 
Mass, also produces the stupidity of Sir James Graham: by a 
Critical understanding of the English language it puts things in his 
mouth which the un-Critical Home Secretary never said, just to 
allow Critical wisdom to shine brighter in comparison with his 
stupidity. Graham, according to Criticism, says that the machines 
in the factories wear out in about twelve years whether they work 
ten hours a day or twelve, and that therefore a Ten Hour Bill 
would make it impossible for the capitalists to reproduce in twelve 
years through the work of their machines the capital laid out on 
them. Criticism proves that it has thus put a false conclusion in the 
mouth of Sir James Graham, for a machine that works one-sixth 
of the time less every day will naturally remain usable longer. 
However correct this observation of Critical Criticism against its 
own false conclusion, it must, on the other hand, be conceded that 
Here and below the quotations are taken from the continuation of Faucher's 
article, published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 1844.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
The Holy Family 15 
Sir James Graham said that under a Ten Hour Bill the machine 
would have to work quicker in the proportion that its working 
time was reduced (Criticism itself quotes this in [Heft] VIII, page 
32) and that in that case the time when it would be worn out 
would be the same—twelve years.8 This must all the more be ac­
knowledged as the acknowledgement contributes to the glory and 
exaltation of "Criticism"; for only Criticism both made the false 
conclusion and then refuted it. Criticism is just as magnanimous 
towards Lord John Russell, to whom it imputes the wish to change 
the political form of the state and the electoral system. From this 
we must conclude either that Criticism's urge to produce 
stupidities is uncommonly powerful or that Lord John Russell 
must have become a Critical Critic within the past week. 
But Criticism only becomes truly magnificent in its fabrication of 
stupidities when it discovers that the English workers — who in 
April and May held meeting after meeting, drew up petition after 
petition, and all for the Ten Hour Bill, and displayed more 
agitation throughout the factory districts than at any time during 
the past two years — that those workers take only a "partial 
interest" in this question, although it is evident that "legislation 
limiting the working day has also occupied their attention". 
Criticism is truly magnificent when it finally makes the great, the 
glorious, the unheard-of discovery that 
"the apparently more immediate help from the repeal of the Corn Laws absorbs 
most of the wishes of the workers and will do so until no longer doubtful 
realisation of those wishes practically proves the futility of the repeal" — 
proves it to workers who drag Anti-Corn-Law agitators down from 
the platform at every public meeting, who have seen to it that the 
Anti-Corn-Law League no longer dares to hold a public meeting 
in any English industrial town, who consider the League to be 
their only enemy and who, during the debate of the Ten Hour 
Bill — as nearly always before in similar matters — had the support 
of the Tories. Criticism is superb, too, when it discovers that "the 
workers still let themselves be lured by the sweeping promises of 
the Chartist movement", which is nothing but the political expres­
sion of public opinion among the workers. Criticism is superb, too, 
when it realises, in the depths of its Absolute Spirit, that 
"the two party groupings, the political one and that of the landowners and 
mill-owners, no longer wish to merge or coincide". 
It was so far not known that the party grouping of the 
landowners and the mill-owners, because of the numerical small-

=====第41页=====
16 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ness of either class of owners and the equal political rights of each 
(with the exception of the few peers), was so comprehensive that it 
was completely identical with the political party groupings, and not 
their most consistent expression, their peak. Criticism is splendid 
when it suggests that the Anti-Corn-Law Leaguers do not know 
that, ceteris paribus, 3 a drop in the price of bread must be followed 
by a drop in wages, so that all would remain as it was; whereas 
these people expect that, granted there is a drop in wages and a 
consequent lowering of production costs, the result will be an 
expansion of the market. This, they expect, would lead to a 
reduction of competition among the workers, and consequently 
wages would still be kept a little higher in comparison with the 
price of bread than they are now. 
Freely creating its opposite — nonsense — and moving in artistic 
rapture, Criticism, which only two years ago exclaimed "Criticism 
speaks German, theology speaks Latin!",b  has now learnt English 
and calls the estate-owners " Landeigner" (landowners), the factory-
owners "Mühleigner" (mill-owners) — in English a mill means any 
factory with machinery driven by steam or water-power—and the 
workers "Hände" (hands). Instead of "Einmischung" it says Interfe­
renz (interference); and in its infinite mercy for the English 
language, the sinful mass nature of which is abundantly evident, it 
condescends to improve it by doing away with the pedantry with 
which the English place the title "Sir" before the Christian name of 
knights and baronets. Where the Mass says "Sir James Graham", 
it says "Sir Graham". 
That Criticism reforms English history and the English language 
out of principle and not out of levity will presently be proved by the 
thoroughness with which it treats the history of Herr Nauwerck. 
a Other things remaining the same.— Ed. 
Bruno Bauer, Die Gute Sache der Freiheit und meine eigene Angelegenheit, Zürich 
u. Winterthur, 1842.— Ed. 

=====第42页=====
Chapter  III 
"THE THOROUGHNESS  OF  CRITICAL CRITICISM", 
OR CRITICAL CRITICISM  AS HERR  J. (JUNGNITZ?) 9 
Criticism cannot ignore Herr Nauwerck's infinitely important 
dispute with  the  Berlin Faculty  of Philosophy.  It has  indeed  had a 
similar experience  and it  must take Herr Nauwerck's fate  as a 
background  in order  to put its own  dismissal from Bonn 10 in 
sharper  relief.  Criticism, being accustomed  to considering  the 
Bonn affair  as the  event  of the  century,  and  having already 
written  the  "philosophy  of the  deposition  of criticism", could  be 
expected  to give  a similar detailed philosophical construction  of 
the Berlin "collision". Criticism proves  a priori that everything  had 
to happen  in such  a way and no  other.  It proves: 
1) Why the  Faculty  of Philosophy  was  bound  to come into 
"collision"  not  with  a logician  or metaphysician,  but  with  a 
philosopher  of the  state; 
2) Why  that collision could  not be so  sharp  and  decisive  as 
Criticism's conflict with theology  in Bonn; 
3) Why  that collision  was,  properly speaking,  a stupid business, 
since Criticism  had  already concentrated  all  principles  and all 
content  in its  Bonn collision,  so that world history could only 
become  a plagiarist  of Criticism; 
4) Why the  Faculty  of Philosophy considered attacks  on the 
works  of Herr Nauwerck  as attacks  on itself; 
5) Why no  other course remained  for  Herr  N. but to  retire  of 
his own  accord; 
6) Why the  Faculty  had to  defend Herr  N. if it did not  want  to 
disavow  itself; 
7) Why the  "inner split  in the  Faculty  had  necessarily  to 
manifest itself  in such  a way"  that  the  Faculty declared both  N. 
and the  Government right  and  wrong  at the  same time; 

=====第43页=====
18 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
8) Why the Faculty finds in N.'s works no reason for dismissing 
him; 
9) What determined the lack of clarity of the whole verdict; 
10) Why the Faculty "deems itself (!) entitled (!) as a scientific 
authority (!) to examine the essence of the matter", and finally; 
11) Why, nevertheless, the Faculty does not want to write in the 
same way as Herr N. 
Criticism disposes of these important questions with rare 
thoroughness in four pages, proving by means of Hegel's logic 
why everything had to happen as it did and why no god could 
have prevented it. In another place Criticism says that there has 
not yet been full knowledge of a single epoch in history; modesty 
prevents it from saying that it has full knowledge of at least its 
own collision and Nauwerck's, which, although they are not 
epochs, appear to Criticism to be epoch-making. 
Having "abolished" in itself the "element" of thoroughness, 
Critical Criticism becomes "the tranquillity of knowledge".Xl 

=====第44页=====
Chapter IV 
"CRITICAL CRITICISM" AS THE TRANQUILLITY 
OF KNOWLEDGE, 
OR "CRITICAL CRITICISM" AS HERR EDGAR 
1) FLORA TRISTANS UNION OUVRIÈRE 12 
The French Socialists maintain that the worker makes every­
thing, produces everything and yet has no rights, no possessions, 
in short, nothing at all. Criticism answers in the words of Herr 
Edgar, the personification of the tranquillity of  knowledge: 
"To be able to create everything, a stronger consciousness is needed than that 
of the worker. Only the opposite of the above proposition would be true: the 
worker makes nothing, therefore he has nothing; but the reason why he makes 
nothing is that his work is always individual, having as its object his most personal 
needs,  and is everyday work." 
Here Criticism achieves a height of abstraction in which it 
regards only the creations of its own thought and generalities 
which contradict all reality as "something", indeed as "everything". 
The worker creates nothing because he creates only "individual", 
that is, perceptible, palpable, spiritless and un-Critical objects, 
which are an abomination in the eyes of pure Criticism. Every­
thing that is real and living is un-Critical, of a mass nature, and 
therefore "nothing"; only the ideal, fantastic creatures of Critical 
Criticism are "everything". 
The worker creates nothing, because his work remains individu­
al, having only his individual needs as its object, that is, because in 
the present world system the individual interconnected branches 
of labour are separated from, and even opposed to, one another; 
in short, because labour is not organised. Criticism's own proposi­
tion, if taken in the only reasonable sense it can possibly have, 
demands the organisation of labour. Flora Tristan, in an assess­
ment of whose work this great proposition appears, puts forward 
the same demand and is treated en canaille* for her insolence in 
anticipating Critical Criticism. Anyhow, the proposition that the 
a Contemptuously.— Ed. 

=====第45页=====
20 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
worker creates nothing is absolutely crazy except in the sense that 
the individual worker produces nothing whole, which is tautology. 
Critical Criticism creates nothing, the worker creates everything; 
and so much so that even his intellectual creations put the whole 
of Criticism to shame; the English and the French workers provide 
proof of this. The worker creates even man; the critic will never be 
anything but sub-humana though on the other hand, of course, 
he has the satisfaction of being a Critical critic. 
"Flora Tristan is an example of the feminine dogmatism which must have a 
formula and constructs it out of the categories of what exists." 
Criticism does nothing but "construct formulae out of the 
categories of what exists", namely, out of the existing Hegelian 
philosophy and the existing social aspirations. Formulae, nothing 
but formulae. And despite all its invectives against dogmatism, it 
condemns itself to dogmatism and even to feminine dogmatism. It 
is and remains an old woman — faded, widowed Hegelian 
philosophy which paints and adorns its body, shrivelled into the 
most repulsive abstraction, and ogles all over Germany in search 
of a wooer. 
2) BÉRAUD ON PROSTITUTES 13 
Herr Edgar, taking pity on social questions, meddles also in 
"conditions of prostitutes" (Heft V, p. 26). b 
He criticises Paris Police Commissioner Béraud's book on pros­
titution because he is concerned with the "point of view" from 
which "Béraud considers the attitude of prostitutes to society". 
The "tranquillity of knowledge" is surprised to see that a 
policeman adopts the point of view of the police, and it gives the 
Mass to understand that that point of view is quite wrong. But it 
does not reveal its own point of view. Of course not! When 
Criticism takes up with prostitutes it cannot be expected to do so 
in public. 
3) LOVE 
In order to complete its transformation into the "tranquillity of 
knowledge", Critical Criticism must first seek to dispose of love. 
Love is a passion, and nothing is more dangerous for the 
a In the German text there is a pun on the words "Mensch" (man) and 
Unmensch" (brute).— Ed. 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844.— Ed. 

=====第46页=====
The Holy Family 21 
tranquillity of knowledge than passion. That is why, speaking of 
Madame von Paalzow's novels, which, he assures us, he has 
"thoroughly  studied",  Herr Edgar is amazed at "a childish thing 
like so-called  love"  .14 It is a horror and abomination and excites the 
wrath of Critical Criticism, makes it almost as bitter as gall, indeed, 
insane. 
"Love ... is a cruel goddess, and like every deity she wishes to possess the whole 
of man and is not satisfied until he has surrendered to her not merely his soul, but 
his physical  self.  The worship of love is suffering, the peak of this worship is 
self-immolation, suicide." 
In order to change love into "Moloch", the devil incarnate, 
Herr Edgar first changes it into a goddess. When love has become 
a goddess, i. e., a theological object, it is of course submitted to 
theological criticism; moreover, it is known that god and the devil 
are not far apart. Herr Edgar changes love into a "goddess", a 
"cruel goddess" at that, by changing man who loves, the love of 
man,  into a man of love; by making "love" a being apart, separate 
from man and as such independent. By this simple process, by 
changing the predicate into the subject, all the attributes and 
manifestations of human nature can be Critically transformed 
into their negation and into alienations of human nature. 3 Thus, for 
example, Critical Criticism makes criticism, as a predicate and 
activity of man, into a subject apart, criticism which relates 
itself to itself and is therefore Critical Criticism: a "Moloch", 
the worship of which consists in the self-immolation, the suicide of 
man, and in particular of his ability to think. 
"Object," exclaims the tranquillity of knowledge, "object is the right expression, 
for the beloved is important to the lover [denn der Geliebte ist dem Liebenden] (there 
is no feminine) only as this external object of the emotion of his soul, as the object in 
which he wishes to see his selfish feeling satisfied." 
Object! Horrible! There is nothing more damnable, more pro­
fane,  more mass-like than an object— à bas h the object! How could 
absolute subjectivity, the actus purus, c "pure" Criticism, not see in 
love its bête noire, d that Satan incarnate, in love, which first really 
teaches man to believe in the objective world outside  himself, 
a A pun in the original: "alle Wesensbestimmungen und Wesensäusserungen des 
Menschen (all the attributes and manifestations of human nature) are transformed 
into " Unwesen" (fantastic creatures, monsters) and into "Wesensentäusserungen" 
(alienations of human essence).— Ed. 
1 Down with.—  F.d. 
1 Pure act.— Ed. 
' Object of special detestation.— Ed. 

=====第47页=====
22 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
which not only makes man into an object, but even the object into 
a man! 
Love, continues the tranquillity of knowledge, beside  itself,  is 
not even content with turning man into the  category  of "object" for 
another man, it even makes him into a definite, real object, into this 
bad-individual (see Hegel's Phänomenologie 3 on the categories 
"This"  and "That", where there is also a polemic against the bad 
"This"),  external object, which does not remain internal, hidden in 
the brain, but is sensuously manifest. 
Love 
Lives not only in the brain immured. 
No, the beloved is a sensuous  object,  and if Critical Criticism is to 
condescend to recognition of an object, it demands at the very 
least a senseless object. But love is an un-Critical, unchristian 
materialist. 
Finally, love even makes one human being "this external object of 
the emotion of the soul" of another, the object in which the selfish 
feeling of the other finds its satisfaction, a selfish feeling because it 
looks for its own  essence  in the other, and that must not be. Critical 
Criticism is so free from all selfishness that for it the whole range of 
human essence is exhausted by its own  self. 
Herr Edgar, of course, does not tell us in what way the beloved 
differs from the other "external objects of the emotion of the soul 
in which the selfish feelings of men find their satisfaction". The 
spiritually profound, meaningful, highly expressive object of love 
means nothing to the tranquillity of knowledge but the abstract 
formula: "this external object of the emotion of the soul", much 
as the comet means nothing to the speculative natural philosopher 
but "negativity". By making man the external object of the 
emotion of his soul, man does in fact attach "importance" to him, 
Critical Criticism itself admits, but only objective importance, so to 
speak, while the importance which Criticism attaches to objects is 
none other than that which it attaches to  itself.  Hence this 
importance lies not in "bad external being", but in the "Nothing" of 
the Critically important object. 
If the tranquillity of knowledge has no  object  in real man, it has, 
on the other hand, a cause in humanity. Critical love "is careful 
above all not to forget the cause behind the personality, for that 
cause is none other than the cause of humanity". Un-Critical love 
does not separate humanity from the personal, individual man. 
a G. W. F. Hegel, Phänomenologie des Geistes, —Ed. 

=====第48页=====
The Holy Family 23 
"Love  itself,  as an abstract passion, which comes we know not whence and goes 
we know not whither, is incapable of having an interest in internal development." 
In the eyes of the tranquillity of knowledge, love is an abstract 
passion according to the speculative terminology in which the 
concrete is called abstract and the abstract concrete. 
The maid was not born in that valley, 
But where she came from, no one knew. 
And soon all trace of her did vanish 
Once she had bidden them adieu.3 
For abstraction, love is "the maid from a foreign land" who has 
no dialectical passport and is therefore expelled from the country 
by the Critical police. 
The passion of love is incapable of having an interest in internal 
development because it cannot be construed a priori, because its 
development is a real one which takes place in the world of the 
senses and between real individuals. But the main interest of 
speculative construction is the "Whence" and the "Whither". The 
"Whence" is the "necessity of a concept, its proof and deduction" 
(Hegel). The "Whither" is the determination "by which each 
individual link of the speculative circular course, as the animated 
content of the method, is at the same time the beginning of a new 
link" (Hegel). Hence, only if its "Whence" and its "Whither" 
could be construed a priori would love deserve the "interest" of 
speculative Criticism. 
What Critical Criticism combats here is not merely love but 
everything living, everything which is immediate, every sensuous 
experience, any and every real experience, the "Whence" and the 
"Whither" of which one never knows beforehand. 
By overcoming love, Herr Edgar has completely  asserted  himself 
as the "tranquillity of knowledge", and now by his treatment of 
Proudhon, he can show great virtuosity in knowledge, the "object" 
of which is no longer "this external object", and a still greater lack of 
love for the French language. 
4) PROUDHON 
It was not Proudhon  himself,  but "Proudhon's point of view", 
Critical Criticism informs us, that wrote Qu'est-ce que la propriété? 
"I begin my exposition of Proudhon's point of view by characterising its" (the 
point of view's) "work, Qu'est-ce que la propriété?" ' 
As only the works of the Critical point of view possess a 
character of their own, the Critical characterisation necessarily 
a From Schiller's Das Mädchen aus der  Fremde. — Ed. 

=====第49页=====
24 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
begins by giving a character to Proudhon's work. Herr Edgar 
gives this work a character by translating it. He naturally gives 
it a bad character, for he turns it into an object of "Criticism". 
Proudhon's work, therefore, is subjected to a double attack by 
Herr Edgar—an unspoken one in his characterising translation and 
an outspoken one in his Critical comments. We shall see that Herr 
Edgar is more devastating when he translates than when he 
comments. 
Characterising Translation No. 1 
"I do not wish" (says the Critically translated Proudhon) "to give any system of 
the new; I wish for nothing but the abolition of privilege, the abolition of slavery.... 
Justice, nothing but justice, that is what I mean." 
The characterised Proudhon confines himself to will and opin­
ion, because "good will" and unscientific "opinion" are charac­
teristic attributes of the un-Critical Mass. The characterised 
Proudhon behaves with the humility that is fitting for the Mass 
and subordinates what he wishes to what he does not wish. He 
does not presume to wish to give a system of the new, he wishes 
less, he even wishes for nothing but the abolition of privilege, etc. 
Besides this Critical subordination of the will he has to the will he 
has not, his very first word is marked by a characteristic lack of 
logic.  A writer who begins his book by saying that he does not 
wish to give any system of the new, should then tell us what he 
does wish to give: whether it is a systematised old or an 
unsystematised new. But does the characterised Proudhon, who 
does not wish to give any system of the new, wish to give the 
abolition of privilege? No. He just wishes it. 
The real Proudhon says: "Je ne fais pas de  système;  je demande la 
fin du privilège,"* etc. I make no system, I demand, etc., that is to 
say, the real Proudhon declares that he does not pursue any 
abstract scientific aims, but makes immediately practical demands 
on society. And the demand he makes is not an arbitrary one. It is 
motivated and justified by his whole argument and is the summary 
of that argument for, he says, "justice, rien que justice; tel est le 
resume de mon discours." b With his "justice, nothing but justice, that 
is what I mean", the characterised Proudhon gets himself into a 
position which is all the more embarrassing as he means much 
more. According to Herr Edgar, for example, he "means" that 
philosophy has not been practical enough, he "means" to refute 
Charles Comte, and so forth. 
a "I make no system, I demand an end of privilege."—Ed. 
"Justice, nothing but justice; that is the summary of what I  say."—Ed. 

=====第50页=====
The Holy Family 25 
The Critical Proudhon asks: "Ought man then always to be 
unhappy?" In other words, he asks whether unhappiness is man's 
moral destiny. The real Proudhon is a light-minded Frenchman 
and he asks whether unhappiness is a material necessity, a must. 
(L'homme doit-il être éternellement malheureux? 3) 
The mass-type Proudhon says: 
"Et, sans m'arrêter aux explications à toute fin des entrepreneurs de réformes, 
accusant de la détresse générale, ceux-ci la lâcheté et l'impéritie du pouvoir, ceux-là 
les conspirateurs et les émeutes, d'autres l'ignorance et la corruption générale", 
b 
etc. 
The expression "à toute fin" being a bad mass-type expression 
that is not in the mass-type German dictionaries, the Critical 
Proudhon naturally omits this more exact definition of the 
"explanations". This term is taken from mass-type French juris­
prudence, and "explications a toute fin" means explanations which 
preclude any objection. The Critical Proudhon censures the 
"Reformists", a French Socialist Party 16; the mass-type Proudhon 
censures the initiators of reforms. The mass-type Proudhon 
distinguishes various classes of "entrepreneurs de réformes". These 
(ceux-ci) say one thing, those (ceux-là) say another, others (d'autres) a 
third.  The Critical Proudhon, on the other hand, makes the same 
reformists "accuse now one, then another, then a third", which in 
any case is proof of their inconstancy. The real Proudhon, who 
follows mass-type French practice, speaks of "les conspirateurs et les 
émeutes", i.e., first of the conspirators and then of their activity, 
revolts. The Critical Proudhon, on the other hand, who has 
lumped together the various classes of reformists, classifies the 
rebels and hence says: the conspirators and the rebels. The 
mass-type Proudhon speaks of ignorance and "general corruption". 
The Critical Proudhon changes ignorance into stupidity, "corrup­
tion" into "depravity", and finally, as a Critical critic, makes the 
stupidity general. He himself gives an immediate example of it by 
putting "générale" in the singular instead of the plural. He writes: 
"l'ignorance et la corruption générale" for general stupidity and 
depravity. According to un-Critical French grammar this should 
be: l'ignorance et la corruption générales. 
The characterised Proudhon, who speaks and thinks otherwise 
than the mass-type one, necessarily went through quite a different 
a Musi man for ever be unhappy?—Ed. 
b "Without dwelling on the explanations precluding all objections given by the 
initiators of reforms, some of whom blame for the general distress the cowardice 
and incapacity of the government, others — conspirators and revolts, others 
again  — ignorance and general corruption", etc.— Ed. 

=====第51页=====
26 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
course of education. He "questioned the masters of science, read 
hundreds of volumes of philosophy and law, etc., and at last" he 
"realised that we have never yet grasped the meaning of the 
words Justice, Equity, Freedom". The real Proudhon thought he 
had realised at first (je crus d'abord reconnaître*) what the Critical 
Proudhon realised only "at last". The Critical alteration of d'abord 
into enfin is necessary because the Mass may not think it realises 
anything "at first". The mass-type Proudhon tells explicitly how 
he was staggered by the unexpected result of his studies and 
distrusted it. Hence he decided to carry out a "countertest" and 
asked  himself:  "Is it possible that mankind has so long and so 
universally been mistaken over the principles of the application of 
morals? How and why was it mistaken?" etc. He made the 
correctness of his observations dependent on the solution of these 
questions. He found that in morals, as in all other branches of 
knowledge, errors "are  stages  of science". The Critical Proudhon, on 
the other hand, immediately trusted the first impression that his 
studies of political economy, law and the like made upon him. 
Needless to say, the Mass cannot proceed in any thorough way; it is 
bound to raise the first results of its investigations to the level of 
indisputable truths. It has "reached the end before it has started, 
before it has measured itself with its opposite". Hence, "it is seen" 
later "that it is not yet at the beginning when it thinks it has 
reached the end". 
The Critical Proudhon therefore continues his reasoning in the 
most untenable and incoherent way. 
"Our knowledge of moral laws is not complete from the beginning; thus it can 
for some time suffice for social progress, but in the long run it will lead us on a 
false path." 
The Critical Proudhon does not give any reason why incomplete 
knowledge of moral laws can suffice for social progress even for a 
single day. The real Proudhon, having asked himself whether and 
why mankind could universally and so long have been mistaken 
and having found as the solution that all errors are stages of 
science and that our most imperfect judgments contain a sum of 
truths sufficient for a certain number of inductions and for a 
certain area of practical life, beyond which number and which 
area they lead theoretically to the absurd and practically to decay, 
is in a position to say that even imperfect knowledge of moral laws 
can suffice for social progress for a time. 
The Critical Proudhon says: 
I thought at first I had recognised.— Ed. 

=====第52页=====
The Holy Family 27 
"But if new knowledge has become necessary, a bitter struggle arises between 
the old prejudices and the new idea." 
How can a struggle arise against an opponent who does not yet 
exisf? Admitted, the Critical Proudhon has told us that a new idea 
has become necessary but he has not said that it has already come 
into existence. 
The mass-type Proudhon says: 
"Once higher knowledge has become indispensable it is never lacking", it is 
therefore ready at hand. "It is then that the struggle begins." 
The Critical Proudhon asserts: "It is man's destiny to learn step 
by step", as if man did not have a quite different destiny, namely, 
that of being man, and as if that learning "step by step" 
necessarily brought him a step farther. I can go step by step and 
arrive at the very point from which I set out. The un-Critical 
Proudhon speaks, not of "destiny", but of the condition (condition) 
for man to learn not step by step (pas à pas), but by degrees (par 
degrés).  The Critical Proudhon says to  himself: 
"Among the principles upon which society rests there is one which society does 
not understand, which is spoilt by society's ignorance and is the cause of all evil. 
Nevertheless, man honours this principle" and "wills it, for otherwise it would have 
no influence. Now this principle which is true in its  essence  but is false in the way we 
conceive it ... what is it?" 
In the first sentence the Critical Proudhon says that the 
principle is spoilt, misunderstood by society, hence that it is correct 
in itself.  In the second sentence he admits superfluously that it is 
true in its essence; nevertheless he reproaches society with willing 
and honouring "this principle". The mass-type Proudhon, on the 
other hand, reproaches society with willing and honouring not this 
principle, but this principle as falsified by our ignorance ("Ce 
principe ... tel que notre ignorance l'a fait, est honoré." 2). The Critical 
Proudhon finds the  essence  of the principle in its untrue form true. 
The mass-type Proudhon finds that the essence of the falsified 
principle is our incorrect conception, but that it is true in its object 
(objet),  just as the essence of alchemy and astrology is our 
imagination, but their objects — the movement of the heavenly 
bodies and the chemical properties of substances — are true. 
The Critical Proudhon continues his monologue: 
"The object of our investigation is the law, the definition of the social principle. 
Now the politicians, i.e., the men of social science, are a prey to complete lack of 
clarity ...; but as there is a reality at the basis of every error, in their books we shall 
find the truth, which they have brought into the world without knowing it." 
a "This principle ... as our ignorance has made it, is honoured."—Ed. 

=====第53页=====
28 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The Critical Proudhon has a most fantastic way of reasoning. 
From the fact that the politicians are ignorant and unclear, he 
goes on in the most arbitrary fashion to say that a reality lies at the 
basis of every error, which can all the less be doubted as there is a 
reality at the basis of every error—in the person of the one who 
errs.  From the fact that a reality lies at the basis of every error he 
goes on to conclude that truth is to be found in the books of 
politicians. And finally he even makes out that the politicians have 
brought this truth into the  world.  Had they brought it into the 
world we should not need to look for it in their books. 
The mass-type Proudhon says: 
"The politicians do not understand one another (ne s'entendent pas); their error 
is therefore a subjective one, having its origin in them (donc c'est en eux qu'est 
l'erreur)-." Their mutual misunderstanding proves their one-sidedness. They con­
fuse "their private opinion with common sense", and "as", according to the 
previous deduction, "every error has a true reality as its object, their books must 
contain the truth, which they unconsciously have put there" — i.e., in their 
books — "but have not brought into the world" (dans leurs livres doit se trouver la 
vérité, qu'à leur insu ils y auront mise). 
The Critical Proudhon asks himself:  "What is justice, what is its 
essence, its character, its meaning?" As if it had some meaning 
apart from its essence and character. The un-Critical Proudhon 
asks:  What is its principle, its character and its formula (formule)? 
The formula is the principle as a principle of scientific reasoning. 
In the mass-type French language there is an essential difference 
between formule and signification. In the Critical French language 
there is none. 
After his highly irrelevant disquisitions, the Critical Proudhon 
pulls himself together and exclaims: 
"Let us try to get somewhat closer to our object." 
The un-Critical Proudhon, on the other hand, who arrived at 
his object long ago, tries to attain more precise and more positive 
definitions of his object (d'arriver à quelque chose de plus précis et de 
plus positif). 
For the Critical Proudhon "the law is a definition of what is 
right", for the un-Critical Proudhon it is a "statement" (déclaration) 
of it. The un-Critical Proudhon disputes the view that right is 
made by law. But a "definition of the law" can mean that the law 
is defined just as it can mean that it defines. Previously, the 
Critical Proudhon himself spoke about the definition of the social 
principle in this latter sense. To be sure, it is unseemly of the 
mass-type Proudhon to make such nice distinctions. 
Considering these differences between the Critically character-

=====第54页=====
The Holy Family 29 
ised Proudhon and the real Proudhon, it is no wonder that 
Proudhon No. 1 seeks to prove quite different things than 
Proudhon No. 2. 
The Critical Proudhon 
"seeks to prove by the experience of history" that "if the idea that we have of 
what is just and right is false, evidently" (he tries to prove it in spite of its evidence) 
"all its applications in law must be bad, all our institutions must be defective". 
The mass-type Proudhon is far from wishing to prove what is 
evident. He says instead: 
"If the idea that we have of what is just and right were badly defined, if it were 
incomplete or even false, it is evident that all our legislative applications would be 
bad", etc. 
What, then, does the un-Critical Proudhon wish to prove? 
"This hypothesis," he continues, "of the perversion of justice in our under­
standing, and as a necessary consequence in our actions, would be an established 
fact if the opinions of men concerning the concept of justice and its applications 
had not remained constantly the same, if at different times they had undergone 
modifications; in a word, if there had been progress in ideas." 
And precisely that inconstancy, that change, that progress "is 
what history proves by the most striking testimonies". And the 
un-Critical Proudhon quotes these striking testimonies of history. 
His Critical double, who proves a completely different proposition 
by the experience of history, also presents that experience itself in a 
different way. 
According to the real Proudhon, "the wise" (les sages), according 
to the Critical Proudhon, "the philosophers", foresaw the fall of 
the Roman Empire. The Critical Proudhon can of course consider 
only philosophers to be wise men. According to the real 
Proudhon, Roman "rights were consecrated by ten centuries of 
law practice" or "administration of justice" (ces droits  consacrés  par 
une justice dix fois séculaire); according to the Critical Proudhon, 
Rome had "rights consecrated by ten centuries of justice". 
According to the same Proudhon No. 1, the Romans reasoned 
as follows: 
"Rome ... was victorious through its policy and its gods; any reform in worship 
or public spirit would be stupidity and profanation" (according to the Critical 
Proudhon, sacrilège means not the profanation or desecration of a holy thing, as in 
the mass-type French language, but just profanation). "Had it wished to free the 
peoples, it would thereby have renounced its right." "Rome had thus fact and right 
in its favour," Proudhon No. 1 adds. 
According to the un-Critical Proudhon, the Romans reasoned 
more logically. The fact was set out in detail: 
"The slaves are the most fertile source of its wealth; the freeing of the peoples 
would therefore be the ruin of its finance." 

=====第55页=====
30 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
And the mass-type Proudhon adds, referring to law: "Rome's 
claims were justified by the law of nations (droit des gens)." This 
way of proving the right of subjugation was completely in keeping 
with the Roman view on law. See the mass-type pandects: "jure 
gentium servitus invasit" (FT. 4. D. I. I). a 
According to the Critical Proudhon, "idolatry, slavery and 
softness" were "the basis of Roman institutions", of all its 
institutions without exception. The real Proudhon says: "Idolatry 
in religion, slavery in the state and Epicureanism in private life" 
(épicurisme in the ordinary French language is not synonymous 
with mollesse, softness) "were the basis of the institutions." Within 
that Roman situation there "appeared", says the mystic Proudhon, 
"the Word of God", whereas according to the real, rationalistic 
Proudhon, it was "a man who called himself the Word of God". In 
the real Proudhon this man calls the priests "vipers" (vipères); in 
the Critical Proudhon he speaks more courteously with them and 
calls them "serpents". In the former he speaks in the Roman way 
of "advocates" [Advokaten], in the latter in the German way of 
"lawyers" [Rechtsgelehrte]. 
The Critical Proudhon calls the spirit of the French Revolution 
a spirit of contradiction, and adds: 
"That is enough to realise that the new which replaced the old had on itself [an 
sich] nothing methodical and considered." 
He cannot refrain from repeating mechanically the favourite 
categories of Critical Criticism, the "old" and the "new". He 
cannot refrain from the senseless demand that the "new" should 
have on itself [an sich] something methodical and considered, just 
as one might have a stain on oneself [an  sich].  The real Proudhon 
says: 
"That is enough to prove that the new order of things which was substituted for 
the old was in itself [in sich] without method or reflection." 
Carried away by the memory of the French Revolution, the 
Critical Proudhon revolutionises the French language so much that 
he translates un fait  physique**  by "a fact of physics", and un fait 
intellectuel 0 by "a fact of the intellect". By this revolution in the 
French language the Critical Proudhon manages to put physics in 
possession of all the facts to be found in nature. Raising natural 
science unduly on one side, he debases it just as much on the 
"Slavery was spread by the law of nations." (Corpus iuris civilis, Vol. 1. 
Digesta : Liber primus, titulus I, fragmentum  4.)—Ed. 
A physical fact.—Ed. 
An intellectual fact.— Ed. 

=====第56页=====
The Holy Family 31 
other by depriving it of intellect and distinguishing between a fact 
of physics and a fact of the intellect. To the same extent he makes 
all further psychological and logical investigation unnecessary by 
raising the intellectual fact directly to the level of a fact of the 
intellect. 
Since the Critical Proudhon, Proudhon No. 1, has not the 
slightest idea what the real Proudhon, Proudhon No. 2, wishes to 
prove by his historical deduction, neither does the real content of 
that deduction exist for him, namely, the proof of the change in 
the views on law and of the continuous implementation of justice by 
the negation of historical actual right. 
"La société fut sauvée par la négation de ses ... principes ... et la violation des 
droits les plus sacrés." 3 
Thus the real Proudhon proves how the negation of Roman law 
led to the widening of right in the Christian conception, the 
negation of the right of conquest to the right of the communes 
and the negation of the whole feudal law by the French 
Revolution to the present more comprehensive system of law. 
Critical Criticism could not possibly leave Proudhon the glory of 
having discovered the law of the implementation of a principle by 
its negation. In this conscious formulation, this idea was a real 
revelation for the French. 
Critical Comment No. 1 
As the first criticism of any science is necessarily influenced by 
the premises of the science it is fighting against, so Proudhon's 
treatise Qu'est-ce que la propriété? is the criticism of political economy 
from the standpoint of political economy. — We need not go more 
deeply into the juridical part of the book, which criticises law from 
the standpoint of law, for our main interest is the criticism of 
political economy.— Proudhon's treatise will therefore be scientifi­
cally superseded by a criticism of political economy, including 
Proudhon's conception of political economy. This work became 
possible only owing to the work of Proudhon  himself,  just as 
Proudhon's criticism has as its premise the criticism of the 
mercantile system by the physiocrats, Adam Smith's criticism of 
the physiocrats, Ricardo's criticism of Adam Smith, and the works 
of Fourier and Saint-Simon. 
All treatises on political economy take private property for 
"Society was saved by the negation of its principles ... and the violation of the most 
sacred rights." — Ed. 

=====第57页=====
32 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
granted. This basic premise is for them an incontestable fact to 
which they devote no further investigation, indeed a fact which is 
spoken about only "accidentellement", as Say naively admits. 3 But 
Proudhon makes a critical investigation — the first resolute, ruth­
less, and at the same time scientific investigation — of the basis of 
political economy, private property. This is the great scientific 
advance he made, an advance which revolutionises political 
economy and for the first time makes a real science of political 
economy possible. Proudhon's treatise Qu'est-ce que la propriété? is 
as important for modern political economy as Sieyès' work 
Qu'est-ce que le tiers état? h for modern politics. 
Proudhon does not consider the further creations of private 
property, e.g., wages, trade, value, price, money, etc., as forms of 
private property in themselves, as they are considered, for exam­
ple, in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (see Outlines of a Critique 
of Political Economy by F. Engels 0), but uses these economic 
premises in arguing against the political economists; this is fully in 
keeping with his historically justified standpoint to which we 
referred above. 
Accepting the relationships of private property as human and 
rational, political economy operates in permanent contradiction to 
its basic premise, private property, a contradiction analogous to 
that of the theologian who continually gives a human interpreta­
tion to religious conceptions, and by that very fact comes into 
constant conflict with his basic premise, the superhuman character 
of religion. Thus in political economy wages appear at the 
beginning as the proportional share of the product due to labour. 
Wages and profit on capital stand in the most friendly, mutually 
stimulating, apparently most human relationship to each other. 
Afterwards it turns out that they stand in the most hostile 
relationship, in inverse proportion to each other. Value is deter­
mined at the beginning in an apparently rational way, by the cost 
of production of an object and by its social usefulness. Later it 
turns out that value is determined quite fortuitously and that it 
does not need to bear any relation to either the cost of production 
or social usefulness. The size of wages is determined at the 
beginning by free agreement between the free worker and the free 
capitalist. Later it turns out that the worker is compelled to allow 
the capitalist to determine it, just as the capitalist is compelled to 
J.-B.  Say, Traité d'économie politique, t. Il, p.  471.—  Ed. 
b What Is the Third  Estate?  —Ed. 
See present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 418-43.— Ed. 

=====第58页=====
The Holy Family 33 
fix it as low as possible. Freedom of the contracting parties has been 
supplanted by compulsion. The same holds good of trade and all 
other economic relationships. The economists themselves occasion­
ally feel these contradictions, the development of which is the 
main content of the conflict between them. When, however, the 
economists become conscious of these contradictions, they themselves 
attack private property in one or other particular form as the falsifier 
of what is in itself (i.e., in their imagination) rational wages, in 
itself rational value, in itself rational trade. Adam Smith, for 
instance, occasionally polemises against the capitalists, Destutt de 
Tracy against the money-changers, Simonde de Sismondi against 
the factory system, Ricardo against landed property, and nearly all 
modern economists against the non-industrial capitalists, among 
whom property appears as a mere consumer. 
Thus,  as an exception — when they attack some special 
abuse — the economists occasionally stress the semblance of hu­
manity in economic relations, but sometimes, and as a rule, they 
take these relations precisely in their clearly pronounced difference 
from the human, in their strictly economic sense. They stagger 
about within this contradiction completely unaware of it. 
Now Proudhon has put an end to this unconsciousness once for 
all. He takes the human semblance of the economic relations 
seriously and sharply opposes it to their inhuman reality. He forces 
them to be in reality what they imagine themselves to be, or rather 
to give up their own idea of themselves and confess their real 
inhumanity. He therefore consistently depicts as the falsifier of 
economic relations not this or that particular kind of private 
property, as other economists do, but private property as such and 
in its entirety. He has done all that criticism of political economy 
from the standpoint of political economy can do. 
Herr Edgar, who wishes to characterise the standpoint of the 
treatise Qu'est-ce que la propriété?, naturally does not say a word 
either of political economy or of the distinctive character of this 
book, which is precisely that it has made the essence of private 
property the vital question of political economy and jurisprudence. 
This is all self-evident for Critical Criticism. Proudhon, it says, has 
done nothing new by his negation of private property. He has 
only let out a secret which Critical Criticism did not want to 
divulge. 
"Proudhon," Herr Edgar continues immediately after his characterising transla­
tion, "therefore finds something absolute, an eternal foundation in history, a god that 
guides mankind—justice." 

=====第59页=====
34 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Proudhon's book, written in France in 1840, does not adopt the 
standpoint of German development in 1844. It is Proudhon's 
standpoint, a standpoint which is shared by countless diametrically 
opposed French writers, which therefore gives Critical Criticism 
the advantage of having characterised the most contradictory 
standpoints with a single stroke of the pen. Incidentally, to be 
relieved from this Absolute in history as well one has only to apply 
consistently the law formulated by Proudhon  himself,  that of the 
implementation of justice by its negation. If Proudhon does not 
carry consistency as far as that, it is only because he had the 
misfortune of being born a Frenchman, not a German. 
For Herr Edgar, Proudhon has become a  theological  object by his 
Absolute in history, his belief in justice, and Critical Criticism, 
which is ex professo a criticism of theology, can now set to work on 
him in order to expatiate on "religious conceptions". 
"It is a characteristic of every religious conception that it sets up as a dogma a 
situation in which at the end one of the opposites comes out victorious as the only 
truth." 
We shall see how religious Critical Criticism sets up as a dogma 
a situation in which at the end one of the opposites, "Criticism", 
comes out victorious over the other, the "Mass", as the only truth. 
By seeing in mass-type justice an Absolute, a god of history, 
Proudhon committed an injustice that is all the greater because 
just Criticism has explicitly reserved for itself the role of that 
Absolute, that god in history. 
Critical Comment No. 2 
"The fact of misery, of poverty, makes Proudhon one-sided in his considera­
tions;  he sees in it a contradiction to equality and justice; it provides him with a 
weapon. Hence this fact becomes for him absolute and justified, whereas the fact of 
property becomes unjustified." 
The tranquillity of knowledge tells us that Proudhon sees in the 
fact of poverty a contradiction to justice, that is to say, finds it 
unjustified; yet in the same breath it assures us that this fact 
becomes for him absolute and justified. 
Hitherto political economy proceeded from wealth, which the 
movement of private property supposedly creates for the nations, 
to its considerations which are an apology for private property. 
Proudhon proceeds from the opposite side, which political 
economy sophistically conceals, from the poverty bred by the 
movement of private property to his considerations which negate 
private property. The first criticism of private property proceeds, 

=====第60页=====
The Holy Family 35 
of course, from the fact in which its contradictory essence appears 
in the form that is most perceptible and most glaring and most 
directly arouses man's indignation — from the fact of poverty, of 
misery. 
"Criticism, on the other hand, joins the two facts, poverty and property, in a 
single unity, grasps the inner link between them and makes them a single whole, 
which it investigates as such to find the preconditions for its existence." 
Criticism, which has hitherto understood nothing of the facts of 
property and of poverty, uses, "on the other hand", the deed 
which it has accomplished in its imagination as an argument 
against Proudhon's real deed. It unites the two facts in a single one, 
and having made one out of two, grasps the inner link between the 
two. Criticism cannot deny that Proudhon, too, is aware of an 
inner link between the facts of poverty and of property, since 
because of that very link he abolishes property in order to abolish 
poverty. Proudhon did even more. He proved in detail how the 
movement of capital produces poverty. But Critical Criticism does 
not bother with such trifles. It recognises that poverty and private 
property are opposites—a rather widespread recognition. It makes 
poverty and wealth a single whole, which it "investigates as such to 
find the preconditions for its existence"; an investigation which is 
all the more superfluous since it has just made "the whole as such" 
and therefore its making is in itself the precondition for the 
existence of this whole. 
By investigating "the whole as such" to find the preconditions 
for its existence, Critical Criticism is searching in the genuine 
theological manner outside the "whole" for the preconditions for 
its existence. Critical speculation operates outside the object which 
it pretends to deal with. Whereas the whole antithesis is nothing but 
the movement of both its sides, and the precondition for the 
existence of the whole lies in the very nature of the two sides. But 
Critical Criticism dispenses with the study of this real movement 
which forms the whole in order to be able to declare that it, 
Critical Criticism as the tranquillity of knowledge, is above both 
extremes of the antithesis, and that its activity, which has made 
"the whole as such", is now alone in a position to abolish the 
abstraction of which it is the maker. 
Proletariat and wealth are opposites; as such they form a single 
whole. They are both creations of the world of private property. 
The question is exactly what place each occupies in the antithesis. 
It is not sufficient to declare them two sides of a single whole. 
Private property as private property, as wealth, is compelled to 
maintain  itself,  and thereby its opposite, the proletariat, in existence. 

=====第61页=====
36 Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels 
That  is the  positive side of the  antithesis, self-satisfied private 
property. 
The proletariat,  on the  contrary,  is compelled  as proletariat  to 
abolish itself  and  thereby  its opposite, private property, which 
determines  its' existence,  and  which makes  it proletariat.  It is the 
negative side  of the  antithesis,  its restlessness within  its very  self, 
dissolved  and  self-dissolving private property. 
The propertied class  and the  class  of the  proletariat present  the 
same human self-estrangement.  But the  former class feels  at ease 
and strengthened  in this self-estrangement,  it recognises estrange­
ment  as its own  power  and has in it the  semblance  of a  human 
existence.  The  latter feels annihilated  in estrangement;  it sees  in it 
its own  powerlessness  and the  reality  of an  inhuman existence. 
It is, to use an  expression  of Hegel,  in its  abasement  the indignation 
at that abasement,  an indignation  to which  it is  necessarily driven 
by the  contradiction between  its human nature  and its  condition 
of life, which  is the  outright, resolute  and  comprehensive negation 
of that nature. 
Within this antithesis  the private property-owner  is therefore  the 
conservative side,  the  proletarian  the  destructive side. From  the 
former arises  the  action  of preserving  the  antithesis, from  the 
latter  the  action  of annihilating  it. 
Indeed private property drives itself  in its  economic movement 
towards  its own  dissolution,  but  only through  a development 
which does  not  depend  on it,  which  is unconscious  and  which 
takes place against  the  will  of private property  by the  very nature 
of things, only inasmuch  as it  produces  the  proletariat  as pro­
letariat, poverty which  is conscious  of its  spiritual  and  physical 
poverty, dehumanisation which  is conscious  of its  dehumanisation, 
and therefore self-abolishing.  The  proletariat executes  the  sen­
tence that private property pronounces  on itself  by producing  the 
proletariat, just  as it  executes  the  sentence that wage-labour 
pronounces  on itself  by producing wealth  for others  and  poverty 
for itself.  When  the  proletariat  is victorious,  it by no  means 
becomes  the  absolute side  of society,  for it is  victorious only  by 
abolishing itself  and its  opposite. Then  the  proletariat disappears 
as well  as the  opposite which determines  it, private property. 
When socialist writers ascribe this world-historic role  to the 
proletariat,  it is not at all, as  Critical Criticism pretends  to believe, 
because they regard  the  proletarians  as gods. Rather  the  contrary. 
Since  in the  fully-formed proletariat  the  abstraction  of all  humani­
ty, even  of the  semblance  of humanity,  is practically complete; since 
the conditions  of life of the  proletariat  sum up all the  conditions 

=====第62页=====
The Holy Family 37 
of life of society today in their most inhuman form; since man has 
lost himself in the proletariat, yet at the same time has not only 
gained theoretical consciousness of that loss, but through urgent, 
no longer removable, no longer disguisable, absolutely imperative 
need—the practical expression of necessity—is driven directly to 
revolt against this inhumanity, it follows that the proletariat can 
and must emancipate  itself.  But it cannot emancipate itself without 
abolishing the conditions of its own life. It cannot abolish the 
conditions of its own life without abolishing all the inhuman 
conditions of life of society today which are summed up in its own 
situation. Not in vain does it go through the stern but steeling 
school of labour. It is not a question of what this or that 
proletarian, or even the whole proletariat, at the moment regards 
as its aim. It is a question of what the proletariat is, and what, in 
accordance with this being, it will historically be compelled to do. 
Its aim and historical action is visibly and irrevocably 
foreshadowed in its own life situation as well as in the whole 
organisation of bourgeois society today. There is no need to 
explain here that a large part of the English and French 
proletariat is already conscious of its historic task and is constantly 
working to develop that consciousness into complete clarity. 
"Critical Criticism" can all the less admit this since it has 
proclaimed itself the exclusive creative element in history. To it 
belong the historical antitheses, to it belongs the task of abolishing 
them. That is why it issues the following notification through its 
incarnation, Edgar: 
"Education and lack of education, property and absence of property, these 
antitheses, if they are not to be desecrated, must be wholly and entirely the concern of 
Criticism." 
Property and absence of property have received metaphysical 
consecration as Critical speculative antitheses. That is why only the 
hand of Critical Criticism can touch them without committing a 
sacrilege. Capitalists and workers must not interfere in their 
mutual relationship. 
Far from having any idea that his Critical conception of 
antitheses could be touched, that this holy thing could be dese­
crated, Herr Edgar lets his opponent make an objection that he 
alone could make to  himself. 
"Is it then possible," the imaginary opponent of Critical Criticism asks, "to use 
other concepts than those already existing — liberty, equality, etc.? I answer" (note 
Herr Edgar's answer) "that Greek and Latin perished as soon as the range of 
thoughts that they served to express was exhausted." 
3-762 

=====第63页=====
38 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
It is now clear why Critical Criticism does not give a single, 
thought in German. The language of its thoughts has not yet come 
into being in spite of all that Herr Reichardt by his Critical 
handling of foreign words, Herr Faucher by his handling of 
English, and Herr Edgar by his handling of French, have done to 
prepare the new Critical language. 
Characterising Translation No. 2 
The Critical Proudhon says: 
"The husbandmen divided the land among themselves; equality consecrated 
only possession; on this occasion it consecrated property." 
The Critical Proudhon makes landed property arise simultane­
ously with the division of land. He effects the transition from 
possession to property by the expression "on this occasion". 
The real Proudhon says: 
"Husbandry was the basis of  possession  of the  land....  It was not enough to ensure 
for the tiller the fruit of his labour without ensuring for him at the same time the 
instruments of production. To guard the weaker against the encroachments of the 
stronger ... it was felt necessary to establish permanent demarcation lines between 
owners." 
On this occasion, therefore, it is possession that equality conse­
crated in the first place. 
"Every year saw the population increase and the greed of the settlers grow; it 
was thought ambition should be checked by new insuperable barriers. Thus the 
land became property owing to the need for equality ... doubtless the division was 
never geographically equal ... but the principle nevertheless remained the same; 
equality had consecrated possession, equality consecrated property." 
According to the Critical Proudhon 
"the ancient founders of property, absorbed with concern for their needs, 
overlooked the fact that to the right of property corresponded at the same time the 
right to alienate, to sell, to give away, to acquire and to lose, which destroyed the 
equality from which they started out." 
According to the real Proudhon it was not that the founders of 
property overlooked this course of its development in their 
concern for their needs. It was rather that they did not foresee it; 
but even if they had been able to foresee it, their actual need 
would have gained the upper hand. Besides, the real Proudhon is 
too mass-minded to counterpose the right to alienate, sell, etc., to 
the "right of property", i.e., to counterpose the varieties to the 
species. He contrasts the "right to keep one's heritage" to the 
"right to alienate it, etc.", which constitutes a real opposition and a 
real step forward. 

=====第64页=====
The Holy Family 39 
Critical Comment No. 3 
"On what then does Proudhon base his proof of the impossibility of property? 
Difficult as it is to believe it—on the same principle of equality!" 
A short consideration would have sufficed to arouse the belief 
of Herr Edgar. He must be aware that Herr Bruno Bauer based 
all his arguments on "infinite self-consciousness" and that he also 
saw in this principle the creative principle of the gospels which, by 
their infinite unconsciousness, appear to be in direct contradiction 
to infinite self-consciousness. In the same way Proudhon conceives 
equality as the creative principle of private property, which is in 
direct contradiction to equality. If Herr Edgar compares French 
equality with German "self-consciousness" for an instant, he will 
see that the latter principle expresses in German, i.e., in abstract 
thought, what the former says in French, that is, in the language of 
politics and of thoughtful observation. Self-consciousness is man's 
equality with himself in pure thought. Equality is man's conscious­
ness of himself in the element of practice, i.e., man's consciousness 
of other men as his equals and man's attitude to other men as his 
equals. Equality is the French expression for the unity of human 
essence, for man's consciousness of his species and his attitude 
towards his species, for the practical identity of man with man, i.e., 
for the social or human relation of man to man. Hence, just as 
destructive criticism in Germany, before it had progressed in 
Feuerbach to the consideration of real man, tried to resolve 
everything definite and existing by the principle of  self-
consciousness,  destructive criticism in France tried to do the same by 
the principle of equality. 
"Proudhon is angry with philosophy, for which, in  itself,  we cannot blame him. 
But why is he angry? Philosophy, he maintains, has not yet been practical enough; 
it has mounted the high horse of speculation and from up there human beings have 
seemed much too small. I think that philosophy is overpractical, i.e., it has so far 
been nothing but the abstract expression of the existing state of things; it has always 
been captive to the premises of the existing state of things, which it has accepted as 
absolute." 
The opinion that philosophy is the abstract expression of the 
existing state of things does not belong originally to Herr Edgar. 
It belongs to Feuerbach, who was the first to describe philosophy as 
speculative and mystical empiricism and to prove it. But Herr 
Edgar manages to give this opinion an original, Critical twist. 
While Feuerbach concludes that philosophy must come down from 
the heaven of speculation to the depth of human misery, Herr 
Edgar, on the contrary, informs us that philosophy is over-
practical. However, it seems rather that philosophy, precisely 
3* 

=====第65页=====
40 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
because it was only the transcendent, abstract expression of the 
actual state of things, by reason of its transcendentalism and 
abstraction, by reason of its imaginary difference from the world, 
must have imagined it had left the actual state of things and real 
human beings far below  itself.  On the other hand, it seems that 
because philosophy was not really different from the world it could 
not pronounce any real judgment on it, it could not bring any real 
differentiating force to bear on it and could therefore not 
interfere practically, but had to be satisfied at most with a practice 
in abstracto. Philosophy was overpractical only in the sense that it 
soared above practice. Critical Criticism, by lumping humanity 
together in a spiritless mass, gives the most striking proof how 
infinitely small real human beings seem to speculation. In this the 
old speculation agrees with Critical Criticism, as the following 
sentence out of Hegel's Rechtsphilosophie shows: 
"From the standpoint of needs, it is the concrete object of the idea that is called 
man;  therefore what we are concerned with here, and properly speaking only here, is 
man in this sense."3 
In other cases in which speculation speaks of man it does not 
mean the  concrete,  but the abstract, the idea, the spirit, etc. The way 
in which philosophy expresses the actual state of things is 
strikingly exemplified by Herr Faucher in connection with the 
actual English situation and by Herr Edgar in connection with the 
actual situation of the French language. 
"Thus Proudhon also is practical because, finding that the concept of equality is 
the basis of the proofs in favour of property, he argues from the same concept 
against property." 
Proudhon here does exactly the same thing as the German 
critics who,, finding that the proofs of the existence of God are 
based on the idea of man, argue from that idea against the 
existence of God. 
"If the consequences of the principle of equality are more powerful than 
equality  itself,  how does Proudhon intend to help that principle to acquire its 
sudden power?" 
Self-consciousness, according to Herr Bruno Bauer, lies at the 
basis of all religious ideas. It is, he says, the creative principle of 
the gospels. Why, then, were the consequences of the principle of 
self-consciousness more powerful than self-consciousness itself? 
Because, the answer comes after the German fashion,  self-
consciousness is indeed the creative principle of religious ideas. 
3 G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, § 190.— Ed. 

=====第66页=====
The Holy Family 41 
but only as self-consciousness outside  itself,  in contradiction to 
itself,  alienated and estranged. Self-consciousness that has come to 
itself,  that understands  itself,  that apprehends its essence, there­
fore governs the creations of its self-alienation. Proudhon finds 
himself in exactly the same case, with the difference, of course, 
that he speaks French whereas we speak German, and he 
therefore expresses in a French way what we express in a German 
way. 
Proudhon asks himself why equality, although as the creative 
principle of reason it underlies the institution of property and as 
the ultimate rational foundation is the basis of all arguments in 
favour of property, nevertheless does not exist, while its negation, 
private property, does. He accordingly considers the fact of 
property in  itself.  He proves "that, in truth, property, as an 
institution and a principle, is impossible"3 (p. 34), i.e., that it 
contradicts itself and abolishes itself in all points; that, to put it in 
the German way, it is the existence of alienated, self-contra­
dicting, self-estranged equality. The real state of things in France, 
like the recognition of this estrangement, suggests correctly to 
Proudhon the necessity of the real abolition of this estrangement. 
While negating private property, Proudhon feels the need to 
justify the existence of private property historically. His argument, 
like all first arguments of this kind, is pragmatic, i.e., he assumes 
that earlier generations wished consciously and with reflection to 
realise in their institutions that equality which for him represents 
the human essence. 
"We always come back to the same thing.... Proudhon writes in the interest of 
the proletarians." 
He does not write in the interest of self-sufficient Criticism or 
out of any abstract, self-made interest, but out of a mass-type, real, 
historic interest, an interest that goes beyond criticism, that will go 
as far as a crisis. Not only does Proudhon write in the interest of 
the proletarians, he is himself a proletarian, an ouvrier}* His work 
is a scientific manifesto of the French proletariat and therefore has 
quite a different historical significance from that of the literary 
botch work of any Critical Critic. 
"Proudhon writes in the interest of those who have nothing; to have and not to 
have are for him absolute categories. To have is for him the highest, because at the 
same time not to have is for him the highest object of thought. Every man ought to 
a "Est impossible, mathématiquement" (Proudhon, Qu'est-ce que la propriété?, 
p. 34.)—Ed. 
\ worker.— Ed. 

=====第67页=====
42 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
have,  but no more or less than another, Proudhon thinks. But one should bear in 
mind that of all I have, only what I have exclusively, or what I have more of than 
other people have, is interesting for me. With equality, both to have and equality 
itself will be a matter of indifference to me." 
According to Herr Edgar, having and not having are for 
Proudhon absolute categories. Critical Criticism sees nothing but 
categories everywhere. Thus, according to Herr Edgar, having and 
not having, wages, salary, want and need, and work to satisfy that 
need, are nothing but categories. 
If society had to free itself only from the  categories  of having and 
not having, how easy would the "overcoming" and "abolition" of 
those categories be made for it by any dialectician, even if he were 
weaker than Herr Edgar! Indeed, Herr Edgar considers this such 
a trifle that he does not think it worth the trouble to give even an 
explanation of the categories of having and not having as an 
argument against Proudhon. But not having is not a mere 
category, it is a most dismal reality; today the man who has 
nothing is nothing, for he is cut off from existence in general, and 
still more from a human existence, for the condition of not having 
is the condition of the complete separation of man from his 
objectivity. Therefore not having seems quite justified in being the 
highest object of thought for Proudhon; all the more since so little 
thought had been given to this subject prior to him and the 
socialist writers in general. Not having is the most despairing 
spiritualism, a complete unreality of the human being, a complete 
reality of the dehumanised being, a very positive having, a having 
of hunger, of cold, of disease, of crime, of debasement, of 
hebetude, of all inhumanity and abnormity. But every object 
which for the first time is made the object of thought with full 
consciousness of its importance is the highest object of thought. 
Proudhon's wish to abolish not having and the old way of 
having is quite identical with his wish to abolish the practically 
estranged relation of man to his objective  essence  and the economic 
expression of human self-estrangement. But since his criticism of 
political economy is still captive to the premises of political 
economy, the re-appropriation of the objective world itself is still 
conceived in the economic form of possession. 
Proudhon does not oppose having to not having, as Critical 
Criticism makes him do; he opposes possession to the old way of 
having, to private property. He proclaims possession to be a "social 
function". What is "interesting" in a function, however, is not to 
"exclude" the other person, but to affirm and to realise the forces 
of my own being. 

=====第68页=====
The Holy Family 43 
Proudhon did not succeed in giving this thought appropriate 
development. The idea of "equal possession" is the economic and 
therefore itself still estranged expression for the fact that the object 
as being for man, as the objective being of man, is at the same time 
the existence of man for other men, his human relation to other men, the 
social behaviour of man to man. Proudhon abolishes economic 
estrangement within economic estrangement. 
Characterising Translation No. 3 
The Critical Proudhon has a Critical  property-owner,  too, accord­
ing to whose 
"own admission those who had to work for him lost what he appropriated". 
The mass-type Proudhon says to the mass-type property-owner: 
"You have worked! Ought you never to have let others work for you? How, 
then, have they lost while working for you, what you were able to acquire while not 
working for them?" 
By "richesse naturelle" ,a the Critical Proudhon makes Say under­
stand "natural possessions" although Say, to preclude any error, 
states explicitly in the Epitome to his Traité  d'économie  politique h that 
by richesse he understands neither property nor possession, but a 
"sum of values". Of course, the Critical Proudhon reforms Say 
just as he himself is reformed by Herr Edgar. He makes Say 
"infer immediately a right to take a field as property" because 
land is easier to appropriate than air or water. But Say, far from 
inferring from the greater possibility of appropriating land a 
property right to it, says instead quite explicitly: 
"Les droits des propriétaires de terres —remontent à une spoliation." c (Traité 
d'économie politique, édition III, t. I., p. 136, Nota.) 
That is why, in Say's opinion, there must be "concours de la 
législation" d and "droit  positif e to provide a basis for the right to 
landed property. The real Proudhon does not make Say "im­
mediately" infer the right of landed property from the easier 
appropriation of land. He reproaches him with basing himself on 
possibility instead of right and confusing the question of possibility 
with the question of right: 
"Natural wealth." — Ed. 
Treatise of Political Economy.— Ed. 
c "The rights of landed proprietors are to be traced to plunder." — Ed. 
"Co-operation of legislation." — Ed. 
e "Positive right." — Ed. 

=====第69页=====
44 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"Say prend la possibilité pour le droit. On ne demande pas pourquoi la terre a 
été plutôt appropriée que la mer et les airs; on veut savoir, en vertu de quel droit 
l'homme  s'est  approprié cette richesse.'" 1 
The Critical Proudhon continues: 
"The only remark to be made on this is that with the appropriation of a piece of 
land the other elements — air, water and fire — are also appropriated: terra, aqua, 
aëre et igne interdicti sumus." 
Far from making "only" this remark, the real Proudhon says, on 
the contrary, that he draws "attention" to the appropriation of air 
and water incidentally {en passant). The Critical Proudhon makes 
an unaccountable use of the Roman formula of banishment. He 
forgets to say who the "we" are who have been banished. The real 
Proudhon addresses the non-property-owners: 
"Proletarians... property excommunicates us: terra, etc. interdicti sumus." 
The Critical Proudhon polemises against Charles Comte as 
follows: 
"Charles Comte thinks that, in order to live, man needs air, food and clothing. 
Some of these things, like air and water, are inexhaustible and therefore always 
remain common property; but others are available in smaller quantities and 
become private property. Charles Comte therefore bases his proof on the concepts 
of limitedness and unlimitedness; he would perhaps have come to a different 
conclusion had he made the concepts of dispensability and indispensability his main 
categories." 
How childish the Critical Proudhon's polemic is! He expects 
Charles Comte to give up the categories he uses for his proof and 
to jump over to others so as to come, not to his own conclusions, 
but "perhaps" to those of the Critical Proudhon. 
The real Proudhon does not make any such demands on 
Charles Comte; he does not dispose of him with a "perhaps", but 
defeats him with his own categories. 
Charles Comte, Proudhon says, proceeds from the indispensabil­
ity of air, food, and, in certain climates, clothing, not in order to 
live, but in order not to stop living. Hence (according to Charles 
Comte) in order to maintain  himself,  man constantly needs to 
appropriate things of various kinds. These things do not all exist in 
the same proportion. 
"The light of the heavenly bodies, air and water exist in such quantities that 
man can neither increase nor decrease them appreciably; hence everyone can 
a "Say takes possibility for right. The question is not why land has been 
appropriated rather than sea or air, but by what right man has appropriated this 
wealth." — Ed. 
We are banished from land, water, air and fire.— Ed. 

=====第70页=====
The Holy Family 45 
appropriate as much of them as his needs require, without prejudice to the enjoyment 
of others"  .a 
Proudhon proceeds from Comte's own definitions. First of all he 
proves to him that land is also an object of primary necessity, the 
usufruct of which must therefore remain free to everyone, within 
the limits of Comte's clause, namely: "without prejudice to the 
enjoyment of others." Why then has land become private property? 
Charles Comte answers: because it is not unlimited. He should have 
concluded, on the contrary, that because land is limited it may not 
be appropriated. The appropriation of air and water causes no 
prejudice to anybody because, as they are unlimited, there is 
always enough left. The arbitrary appropriation of land, on the 
other hand, prejudices the enjoyment of others precisely because 
the land is  limited.  The use of the land must therefore be 
regulated in the interests of all. Charles Comte's method of 
proving refutes his own thesis. 
"Charles Comte, so Proudhon" (the Critical one, of course) "reasons, proceeds 
from the view that a nation can be the owner of a land; yet if property involves the 
right to use and misuse  — jus utendi et abutendi re sua—even a nation cannot be 
adjudged the right to use and misuse a land." ' 
The real Proudhon does not speak of jus utendi et abutendi that 
the right of property "involves". He is too mass-minded to speak 
of a right of property that the right of property involves. Jus 
utendi et abutendi re sua is, in fact, the right of property  itself. 
Hence Proudhon directly refuses a people the right of property 
over its territory. To those who find that exaggerated, he replies 
that in all epochs the imagined right of national property gave rise 
to suzerainty, tribute, royal prerogatives, corvée, etc. 
The real Proudhon reasons against Charles Comte as follows: 
Comte wishes to expound how property arises and he begins with 
the hypothesis of a nation as owner. He thus falls into a petitio 
principii. b He makes the state sell lands, he lets industrialists buy 
those estates, that is to say, he presupposes the property relations 
that he wishes to prove. 
The Critical Proudhon scraps the French decimal system. He 
keeps the franc but replaces the centime by the "Dreier".c 
"If I cede a piece of land, Proudhon" (the Critical one) "continues, I not only 
rob myself of one harvest; I deprive my children and children's children of a 
a The quotation from Comte's Traité de  la propriété is given according to Proudhon's 
Qu'est-ce que la propriété? p. 93.—  Ed. 
The fallacy of seeking to prove a conclusion by presupposing it as the 
premise.— Ed. 
1 A small coin worth three pfennigs.— Ed. 

=====第71页=====
46 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
lasting good. Land has value not only today, it has also the value of its capacity and 
its future." 
The real Proudhon does not speak of the fact that land has 
value not only today but also tomorrow: he contrasts the full 
present value to the value of its capacity and its future, which 
depends on my skill in exploiting the land. He says: 
"Destroy the land, or, what comes to the same thing for you, sell it; you not 
only deprive yourself of one, two or more harvests; you annihilate all the produce 
you could have obtained from it, you, your children and your children's children." 
For Proudhon the question is not one of stressing the contrast 
between one harvest and the lasting good — the money I get for 
the field can, as capital, also become a "lasting good"—but the 
contrast between the present value and the value the land can 
acquire through continuous cultivation. 
"The new value, Charles Comte says, that I give to a thing by my work is my 
property. Proudhon" (the Critical one) "thinks he can refute him in the following 
way: Then a man must cease to be a property-owner as soon as he ceases to work. 
Ownership of the product can by no means involve ownership of the material from 
which the product was made." 
The real Proudhon says: 
"Let the worker appropriate the products of his work, but I do not understand 
how ownership of the products involves ownership of the matter. Does the 
fisherman who manages to catch more fish than the others on the same bank 
become by this skill the owner of the place where he fishes? Was the skill of a 
hunter ever considered a title to ownership of the game in a canton? The same 
applies to agriculture. In order to transform  possession  into property, another condition 
is necessary besides work, or a man would cease to be a property-owner as soon as 
he ceased to be a worker." 
Cessante causa cessât effectus. a When the owner is owner only as a 
worker, he ceases to be an owner as soon as he ceases to be a worker. 
"According to law, it is prescription which creates ownership; work is only the 
perceptible sign, the material act by which occupation is manifested." 
"The system of appropriation through work," Proudhon goes on, "is therefore 
contrary to law; and when the supporters of that system put it forward as an 
explanation of the laws they are contradicting themselves." 
To say further, according to this opinion, that the cultivation of 
the land, for example, "creates full ownership of the same" is a 
petitio principii. It is a fact that a new productive capacity of the 
matter has been created. But what has to be proved is that 
ownership of the matter itself has thereby been created. Man has 
not created the matter  itself.  And he cannot even create any 
productive capacity if the matter does not exist beforehand. 
When the cause ceases, the effect ceases.— Ed. 

=====第72页=====
The Holy Family 47 
The Critical Proudhon makes Gracchus Babeuf a partisan of 
freedom, but for the mass-minded Proudhon he is a partisan of 
equality (partisan de l'égalité). 
The Critical Proudhon, who wanted to estimate Homer's fee for 
the Iliad,  says: 
"The fee which I pay Homer should be equal to what he gives me. But how is 
the value of what he gives to be determined?" 
The Critical Proudhon is too superior to the trifles of political 
economy to know that the value of an object and what that object 
giv,es somebody else are two different things. The real Proudhon 
says: 
"The fee of the poet should be equal to his product: what then is the value of 
that product?" 
The real Proudhon supposes that the Iliad has an infinite price 
(or exchange value, prix), while the Critical Proudhon supposes 
that it has an infinite value. The real Proudhon counterposes the 
value of the  Iliad,  its value in the economic sense (valeur intrinsèque), 
to its exchange value (valeur échangeable); the Critical Proudhon 
counterposes its "value for exchange" to its "intrinsic value", i.e., 
its value as a poem. 
The real Proudhon says: 
"Between material reward and talent there is no common measure. In this 
respect the situation of all producers is the same. Consequently any comparison 
between them, any classification according to fortune is impossible." ("Entre une 
récompense matérielle et le talent il n'existe pas de commune mesure; sous ce 
rapport la condition de tous les producteurs est égale; conséquemment toute 
comparaison entre eux et toute distinction de fortunes est impossible.") 
The Critical Proudhon says: 
"Relatively, the position of all producers is the same. Talent cannot be weighed 
materially.... Any comparison of the producers among themselves, any external 
distinction is impossible." 
In the Critical Proudhon we read that 
"the man of science must feel himself equal in society, because his talent and his 
insight are only a product of the insight of society". 
The real Proudhon does not speak anywhere about the feelings 
of talent. He says that talent must lower itself to the level of 
society. Nor does he at all assert that the man of talent is only a 
product of society. On the contrary, he says: 
"The man of talent has contributed to produce in himself a useful instrument.... 
There exist in him a free worker and an accumulated social capital." 

=====第73页=====
48 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The Critical Proudhon goes on to say: 
"Besides, he must be thankful to society for releasing him from other work so 
that he can apply himself to science." 
The real Proudhon nowhere resorts to the gratitude of the man 
of talent. He says: 
"The artist, the scientist, the poet, receive their just reward by the mere fact that 
society allows them to apply themselves exclusively to science and art." 
Finally, the Critical Proudhon achieves the miracle of making a 
society of 150 workers able to maintain a "marshal" and, therefore, 
probably, an army. In the real Proudhon the marshal is a "farrier" 
(maréchal). 
Critical Comment No. 4 
"If he" (Proudhon) "retains the concept of wages, if he sees in society an 
institution that gives us work and pays us for it, he has all the less right to 
recognise time as the measure for payment as he but shortly before, agreeing with 
Hugo Grotius, professed that time has no bearing on the validity of an object." 
This is the only point on which Critical Criticism attempts to 
solve its problem and to prove to Proudhon that from the standpoint 
of political economy he is arguing wrongly against political 
economy. Here Criticism disgraces itself in truly Critical fashion. 
Proudhon agrees with Hugo Grotius in arguing that prescription 
is no title to change  possession  into  property  or a "legal principle" into 
another principle, any more than time can change the truth that 
the three angles of a triangle are together equal to two right 
angles into the truth that they are equal to three right angles. 
"Never," exclaims Proudhon, "will you succeed in making length of time, which 
of itself creates nothing, changes nothing, modifies nothing, able to change the user 
into a proprietor." 
Herr Edgar's conclusion is: since Proudhon said that mere time 
cannot change one legal principle into another, that by itself it 
cannot change or modify anything, he is inconsistent when he 
makes labour time the measure of the economic value of the 
product of labour. Herr Edgar achieves this Critically Critical 
remark by translating "valeur" 3 by " Geltung" b so that he can use 
the word for validity of a legal principle in the same sense as for 
the commercial value of a product of labour. He achieves it by 
identifying empty length of time with time filled with labour. Had 
a Value.—Ed. 
b Validity.— Ed. 

=====第74页=====
The Holy Family 49 
Proudhon said that time cannot change a fly into an elephant, 
Critical Criticism could have said with the same justification: he 
has therefore no right to make labour time the measure of wages. 
Even Critical Criticism must be capable of grasping that the 
labour time expended on the production of an object is included in 
the cost of production of that object, that the cost of production of an 
object is what it costs, and therefore what it can be sold for, 
abstraction being made of the influence of competition. Besides the 
labour time and the material of labour, economists include in the 
cost of production the rent paid to the owner of the land, interest 
and the profit of the capitalist. The latter are excluded by 
Proudhon because he excludes private property. Hence there 
remain only the labour time and the expenses. By making labour 
time,  the immediate existence of human activity as activity, the 
measure of wages and the determinant of the value of the 
product, Proudhon makes the human side the decisive factor. In 
old political economy, on the other hand, the decisive factor was 
the material power of capital and of landed property. In other 
words, Proudhon reinstates man in his rights, but still in an 
economic and therefore contradictory way. How right he is from 
the standpoint of political economy can be seen from the fact that 
Adam Smith, the founder of modern political economy, in the very 
first pages of his book, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the 
Wealth of Nations, develops the idea that before the invention of 
private property, that is to say, presupposing the non-existence of 
private property, labour time was the measure of wages and of the 
value of the product of labour, which was not yet distinguished from 
wages. 
But even let Critical Criticism suppose for an instant that 
Proudhon did not proceed from the premise of wages. Does it 
believe that the time which the production of an object requires 
will ever not be an essential factor in the "validity" of the object? 
Does it believe that time will lose its costliness} 
As far as immediate material production is concerned, the 
decision whether an object is to be produced or not, i.e., the 
decision on the value of the object, will depend essentially on the 
labour time required for its production. For it depends on time 
whether society has time to develop in a human way. 
And even as far as intellectual production is concerned, must I 
not, if I proceed reasonably in other respects, consider the time 
necessary for the production of an intellectual work when I 
determine its scope, its character and its plan? Otherwise I risk at 
least that the object that is in my idea will never become an object 

=====第75页=====
50 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
in reality, and can therefore acquire only the value of an 
imaginary object, i.e., an imaginary value. 
The criticism of political economy from the standpoint of 
political economy recognises all the essential determinants of 
human activity, but only in an estranged, alienated form. Here, 
for example, it converts the importance of time for human labour 
into its importance for wages, for wage-labour. 
Herr Edgar continues: 
"In order to force talent to accept that measure, Proudhon misuses the concept 
of free contract and asserts that society and its individual members have the right to 
reject the products of talent." 
Among the followers of Fourier and Saint-Simon, talent puts 
forward exaggerated fee claims on an economic basis and makes its 
imagined notion of its infinite value the measure of the exchange 
value of its products. Proudhon answers it in exactly the same way 
as political economy answers any claim for a price much higher 
than the so-called natural price, that is, higher than the cost of 
production of the object offered. He answers by freedom of 
contract. But Proudhon does not misuse this relation in the sense 
of political economy; on the contrary, he assumes that to be real 
which the economists consider to be only nominal and illusory— 
the freedom of the contracting parties. 
Characterising Translation No. 4 
The Critical Proudhon finally reforms French society by as deep 
a transformation of the French proletarians as of the French 
bourgeoisie. 
He denies the French proletarians "strength" because the real 
Proudhon reproaches them with a lack of virtue (vertu). He makes 
their skill in work problematic—"you are perhaps skilled in 
work"—because the real Proudhon unconditionally recognises it 
("prompts au travail vous êtes," a etc.). He converts the French 
bourgeoisie into dull burghers whereas the real Proudhon 
counterposes the ignoble bourgeois (bourgeois ignobles) to the 
blemished nobles (nobles flétris). He converts the bourgeois from 
happy-medium burghers (bourgeois juste-milieu) 18 into "our good 
burghers", for which the French bourgeoisie can be grateful. 
Hence, where the real Proudhon says the "ill will" of the French 
bourgeoisie (la malveillance de nos bourgeois) is growing, the Critical 
a "You are smart at work."—Ed. 

=====第76页=====
The Holy Family 51 
Proudhon consistently makes the "carefreeness of our burghers" 
grow. The real Proudhon's bourgeois is so far from being carefree 
that he calls out to himself: "N'ayons pas peur! N'ayons pas peur!" 3 
Those are the words of a man who wishes to reason himself out 
of fear and worry. 
By creating the Critical Proudhon through its translation of the 
real Proudhon, Critical Criticism has revealed to the Mass what a 
Critically perfect translation is. It has given directions for "transla­
tion as it ought to be". It is therefore rightly against bad, 
mass-type translations. 
"The German public wants the booksellers' wares ridiculously cheap, so the 
publisher needs a cheap translation; the translator does not want to starve at his 
work, he cannot even perform it with mature reflection" (with all the tranquillity of 
knowledge) "because the publisher must anticipate rivals by quick delivery of 
translations; even the translator has to fear competition, has to fear that someone 
else will produce the ware cheaper and quicker; he therefore dictates his 
manuscript offhand to some poor scribe — as quickly as he can in order not to pay 
the scribe his hourly wage for nothing. He is more than happy when he can next 
day adequately satisfy the harassing type-setter. For the rest, the translations with 
which we are flooded are but a manifestation of the present-day impotence of German 
literature", etc. (Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, p.  54. ' ) 
Critical Comment No. 5 
"The proof of the impossibility of property that Proudhon draws from the fact 
that mankind ruins itself particularly by the interest and profit system and by the 
disproportion between consumption and production lacks its counterpart, namely, 
the proof that private property is historically possible." 
Critical Criticism has- the fortunate instinct not to go into 
Proudhon's reasoning on the interest and profit system, etc., i.e., into 
the most important part of his argument. The reason is that on this 
point not even a semblance of criticism of Proudhon can be offered 
without absolutely positive knowledge of the movement of private 
property. Critical Criticism tries to make up for its impotence by 
observing that Proudhon has not proved the historical possibility of 
property. Why does Criticism, which has nothing but words to give, 
expect others to give it everything? 
"Proudhon proves the impossibility of property by the fact that the worker 
cannot buy back the product of his work out of his wage. Proudhon does not give 
an exhaustive proof of this by expounding the essence of capital. The worker 
cannot buy back his product because it is always a joint product, whereas he is 
never anything but an individual paid man." 
Herr Edgar, in contrast to Proudhon's deduction, could have 
expressed himself still more exhaustively to the effect that the 
a "Let us not be afraid! Let us not be afraid!" — Ed. 

=====第77页=====
52 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
worker cannot buy back his product because in general he must 61131 
it back. The definition of buying already implies that he regards 
his product as an object that is no longer his, an estranged object. 
Among other things, Herr Edgar's exhaustive argument does not 
exhaust the question why the capitalist, who himself is nothing but 
an individual man, and what is more, a man paid by profit and 
interest, can buy back not only the product of labour, but still 
more than this product. To explain this Herr Edgar would have to 
explain the relationship between labour and capital, that is, to 
expound the essence of capital. 
The above quotation from Criticism shows most palpably how 
Critical Criticism immediately makes use of what it has learnt from 
a writer to pass it off as wisdom it has itself discovered and use it 
with a Critical twist against the same writer. For it is from 
Proudhon himself that Critical Criticism drew the argument that it 
says Proudhon did not give and that Herr Edgar did. Proudhon 
says: 
"Divide et impera ... separate the workers from one another, and it is quite 
possible that the daily wage paid to each one may exceed the value of each 
individual product; but that is not the point at issue.... Although you have paid for 
all the individual powers you have still not paid for the collective power." 
Proudhon was the first to draw attention to the fact that the sum 
of the wages of the individual workers, even if each individual 
labour be paid for completely, does not pay for the collective 
power objectified in its product, that therefore the worker is not 
paid as a part of the collective labour power [gemeinschaftlichen 
Arbeitskraft]. Herr Edgar twists this into the assertion that the 
worker is nothing but an individual paid man. Critical Criticism 
thus opposes a general thought of Proudhon's to the further 
concrete development that Proudhon himself gives to the same 
thought. It takes possession of this thought after the fashion of 
Criticism and expresses the secret of Critical socialism in the 
following sentence: 
"The modern worker thinks only of  himself,  i.e., he allows himself to be paid 
only for his own person. It is he himself who fails to take into account the 
enormous, the immeasurable power which arises from his co-operation with other 
powers." 
According to Critical Criticism, the whole evil lies only in the 
workers' "thinking". It is true that the English and French workers 
have formed associations in which they exchange opinions not 
only on their immediate needs as workers, but on their needs as 
human beings. In their associations, moreover, they show a very 

=====第78页=====
The Holy Family 53 
thorough and comprehensive consciousness of the "enormous" 
and "immeasurable" power which arises from their co-operation. 
But these mass-minded, communist workers, employed, for in­
stance, in the Manchester or Lyons workshops, do not believe that 
by "pure thinking" they will be able to argue away their industrial 
masters and their own practical debasement. They are most 
painfully aware of the difference between being and thinking, 
between consciousness and life. They know that property, capital, 
money, wage-labour and the like are no ideal figments of the 
brain but very practical, very objective products of their self-estrange­
ment and that therefore they must be abolished in a practical, 
objective way for man to become man not only in thinking, in 
consciousness, but in mass being, in life. Critical Criticism, on the 
contrary, teaches them that they cease in reality to be wage-
workers if in thinking they abolish the thought of wage-labour; if 
in thinking they cease to regard themselves as wage-workers and, 
in accordance with that extravagant notion, no longer let them­
selves be paid for their person. As absolute idealists, as ethereal 
beings, they will then naturally be able to live on the ether of pure 
thought. Critical Criticism teaches them that they abolish real 
capital by overcoming in thinking the category Capital, that they 
really change and transform themselves into real human beings by 
changing their "abstract ego" in consciousness and scorning as an 
un-Critical operation all real change of their real existence, of the 
real conditions of their existence, that is to say, of their real ego. 
The "spirit", which sees in reality only categories, naturally 
reduces all human activity and practice to the dialectical process of 
thought of Critical Criticism. That is what distinguishes its social­
ism from mass-type socialism and communism. 
After his great argumentation, Herr Edgar must, of course, 
declare Proudhon's criticism "devoid of consciousness". 
"Proudhon, however, wishes to be practical too." "He thinks he has grasped." 
"And nevertheless," cries the tranquillity of knowledge triumphantly, "we cannot 
even now credit him with the tranquillity of knowledge." "We quote a few passages to 
show how little he has thought out his attitude to society." 
Later we shall also quote a few passages from the works of 
Critical Criticism (see the Bank for the Poor and the Model Farm)a to 
show that it has not yet become acquainted with the most 
elementary economic relationships, let alone thought them out, 
and hence with its characteristic Critical tact has felt itself called 
upon to pass judgment on Proudhon. 
a See pp. 197-200 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第79页=====
54 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Now that Critical Criticism as the tranquillity of knowledge has 
"made" all the mass-type "antitheses its concern", has mastered all 
reality in the form of categories and dissolved all human activity 
into speculative dialectics, we shall see it produce the world again 
out of speculative dialectics. It goes without saying that if the 
miracles of the Critically speculative creation of the world are not 
to be "desecrated", they can be presented to the profane Mass 
only in the form of mysteries. Critical Criticism therefore appears in 
the incarnation of Vishnu-Szeliga as a mystery-monger. 

=====第80页=====
Chapter V 
"CRITICAL CRITICISM" AS A MYSTERY-MONGER, 
OR "CRITICAL CRITICISM" AS HERR SZELIGA 2( 
"Critical Criticism" in its Szeliga-Vishnu incarnation provides an 
apotheosis of the Mystères de Paris. Eugène Sue is proclaimed a 
"Critical Critic". Hearing this, he may exclaim like Molière's 
Bourgeois gentilhomme: 
"Par ma foi, il y a plus de quarante ans que je dis de la prose, sans que j'en 
susse rien: et je vous suis le plus obligé du monde de m'avoir appris cela." 3 
Herr Szeliga prefaces his criticism with an aesthetic prologue. 
"The aesthetic prologue" gives the following explanation of the 
general meaning of the "Critical" epic and in particular of the 
Mystères de Paris: 
"The epic gives rise to the thought that the present in itself is nothing, and not 
only" (nothing and not only!) "the eternal boundary between past and future, but" 
(nothing, and not only, but) "but the gap that separates immortality from transience 
and must continually be  filled....  Such is the general meaning of the Mystères de Paris." 
The "aesthetic prologue" further asserts that "if the Critic 
wished he could also be a poet". 
The whole of Herr Szeliga's criticism will prove that assertion. 
It is "poetic fiction" in every respect. 
It is also a product of "free art" according to the definition of 
the latter given in the "aesthetic prologue" — it "invents something 
quite new, something that absolutely never existed before". 
Finally, it is even a Critical epic, for it is "the gap that separates 
immortality" — Herr Szeliga's Critical Criticism---from "tran­
sience"— Eugène Sue's novel  — and "must continually be filled". 
a "Faith, I have been speaking prose for more than forty years without knowing 
it. I am infinitely grateful to you for telling me so." (Molière, Bourgeois gentilhomme, 
Act II, Scene 6.)  — Ed. 

=====第81页=====
56 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
1) "THE MYSTERY OF DEGENERACY IN CIVILISATION" 
AND "THE MYSTERY OF RIGHTLESSNESS IN THE STATE" 
Feuerbach, we know, conceived the Christian ideas of the In­
carnation, the Trinity, Immortality, etc., as the mystery of the 
Incarnation, the mystery of the Trinity, the mystery of Immortali­
ty. Herr Szeliga conceives all present world conditions as mys­
teries.  But whereas Feuerbach disclosed real mysteries, Herr Szeliga 
makes mysteries out of real trivialities. His art is not that of 
disclosing what is hidden, but of hiding what is disclosed. 
Thus he proclaims as mysteries degeneracy (criminals) within 
civilisation and rightlessness and inequality in the state. This 
means that socialist literature, which has revealed these mysteries, 
is still a mystery to Herr Szeliga, or that he wants to convert the 
best-known findings of that literature into a private mystery of 
"Critical Criticism". 
We therefore need not go more deeply into Herr Szeliga's 
discourse on these mysteries; we shall merely draw attention to a 
few of the most brilliant points. 
"Before the law and the judge everything is equal, the high and the low, the 
rich and the poor. This proposition stands at the head of the credo of the state." 
Of the state? The credo of most states starts, on the contrary, by 
making the high and the low, the rich and the poor unequal before 
the law. 
"The gem-cutter Morel in his naive probity most clearly expresses the mystery" 
(the mystery of the antithesis of poor and rich) "when he says: If only the rich 
knew! If only the rich knew! The misfortune is that they do not know what poverty 
is." 
Herr Szeliga does not know that Eugène Sue commits an 
anachronism out of courtesy to the French bourgeoisie when he 
puts the motto of the burghers of Louis XIV's time "Ah! si le roi le 
savait!"* in a modified form: "Ah! si le riche le savait!" b into the 
mouth of the working man Morel who lived at the time of the 
Charte vérité. 21 In England and France, at least, this naive relation 
between rich and poor has ceased to exist. There the scientific 
representatives of wealth, the economists, have spread a very 
detailed understanding of the physical and moral misery of 
poverty. They have made up for that by proving that misery must 
remain because the present state of things must remain. In their 
solicitude they have even calculated the proportions in which the 
a "Ah! if the king knew it!" — Ed. 
b "Ah! if the rich knew it!" — Ed. 

=====第82页=====
The Holy Family 57 
poor must be reduced in number by deaths for the good of the 
rich and for their own welfare. 
If Eugène Sue depicts the taverns, hide-outs and language of 
criminals, Herr Szeliga discloses the "mystery" that what the 
"author" wanted was not to depict that language or those 
hide-outs, but 
"to teach us the mystery of the mainsprings of evil, etc." "It is precisely in the 
most crowded places ... that criminals feel at home." 
What would a natural scientist say if one were to prove to him 
that the bee's cell does not interest him as a bee's cell, that it has 
no mystery for one who has not studied it, because the bee "feels 
at home precisely" in the open air and on the flower? The 
hide-outs of the criminals and their language reflect the character 
of the criminal, they are part of his existence, their description is 
part of his description just as the description of the petite maison 
is part of the description of the femme galante. 
For Parisians in general and even for the Paris police the 
hide-outs of criminals are such a "mystery" that at this very 
moment broad light streets are being laid out in the Cité to give 
the police access to them. 
Finally, Eugène Sue himself states that in the descriptions 
mentioned above he was counting "stir la curiosité craintive" a of his 
readers. M. Eugène Sue has counted on the timid curiosity of his 
readers in all his novels. It is sufficient to recall Atar Gull, 
Salamandre, Plick and Plock, etc. 
2) THE MYSTERY OF SPECULATIVE CONSTRUCTION 
The mystery of the Critical presentation of the Mystères de Paris 
is the mystery of speculative, of Hegelian construction. Once Herr 
Szeliga has proclaimed that "degeneracy within civilisation" and 
rightlessness in the state are "mysteries", i.e., has dissolved them 
in the category "mystery", he lets "mystery" begin its speculative 
career. A few words will suffice to characterise speculative construc­
tion in general. Herr Szeliga's treatment of the Mystères de Paris will 
give the application in detail. 
If from real apples, pears, strawberries and almonds I form the 
general idea "Fruit", if I go further and imagine that my abstract 
idea "Fruit", derived from real fruit, is an entity existing outside 
me, is indeed the true essence of the pear, the apple, etc., then— 
a On the timid curiosity.— Ed. 

=====第83页=====
58 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
in the language of speculative philosophy—I am declaring that 
"Fruit" is the "Substance" of the pear, the apple, the almond, etc. I 
am saying, therefore, that to be a pear is not essential to the pear, 
that to be an apple is not essential to the apple; that what is essential 
to these things is not their real existence, perceptible to the senses, 
but the essence that I have abstracted from them and then foisted 
on them, the essence of my idea—"Fruit". I therefore declare 
apples, pears, almonds, etc., to be mere forms of existence, modi, 
of "Fruit". My finite understanding supported by my senses does 
of course distinguish an apple from a pear and a pear from an 
almond, but my speculative reason declares these sensuous differ­
ences inessential and irrelevant. It sees in the apple the same as in 
the pear, and in the pear the same as in the almond, namely 
"Fruit". Particular real fruits are no more than semblances whose 
true essence is "the substance" — "Fruit". 
By this method one attains no particular wealth of definition. The 
mineralogist whose whole science was limited to the statement that 
all minerals are really "the Mineral" would be a mineralogist only 
in his imagination. For every mineral the speculative mineralogist 
says "the Mineral", and his science is reduced to repeating this 
word as many times as there are real minerals. 
Having reduced the different real fruits to the one "fruit" of 
abstraction—"the Fruit", speculation must, in order to attain some 
semblance of real content, try somehow to find its way back from 
"the Fruit", from the Substance to the diverse, ordinary real fruits, 
the pear, the apple, the almond, etc. It is as hard to produce real 
fruits from the abstract idea "the Fruit" as it is easy to produce this 
abstract idea from real fruits. Indeed, it is impossible to arrive 
at the opposite of an abstraction without relinquishing the abstrac­
tion. 
The speculative philosopher therefore relinquishes the abstrac­
tion "the Fruit", but in a speculative, mystical fashion—with the 
appearance of not relinquishing it. Thus it is really only in 
appearance that he rises above his abstraction. He argues some­
what as follows: 
If apples, pears, almonds and strawberries are really nothing but 
"the Substance", "the Fruit", the question arises: Why does "the 
Fruit" manifest itself to me sometimes as an apple, sometimes as a 
pear, sometimes as an almond? Why this semblance of diversity 
which so obviously contradicts my speculative conception of Unity, 
"the Substance", "the Fruit"? 
This,  answers the speculative philosopher, is because "the Fruit" 
is not dead, undifferentiated, motionless, but a living,  self-

=====第84页=====
The Holy Family 59 
differentiating, moving essence. The diversity of the ordinary 
fruits is significant not only for my sensuous understanding, but 
also for "the Fruit" itself and for speculative reason. The different 
ordinary fruits are different manifestations of the life of the "one 
Fruit"; they are crystallisations of "the Fruit"  itself.  Thus in the 
apple "the Fruit" gives itself an apple-like existence, in the pear a 
pear-like existence. We must therefore no longer say, as one might 
from the standpoint of the Substance: a pear is "the Fruit", an 
apple is "the Fruit", an almond is "the Fruit", but rather "the 
Fruit" presents itself as a pear, "the Fruit" presents itself as an 
apple, "the Fruit" presents itself as an almond; and the differences 
which distinguish apples, pears and almonds from one another are 
the self-differentiations of "the Fruit" and ,-make the particular 
fruits different members of the life-process of "the Fruit". Thus 
"the Fruit" is no longer an empty undifferentiated unity; it is 
oneness as allness, as "totality" of fruits, which constitute an 
"organically linked series of members". In every member of that series 
"the Fruit" gives itself a more developed, more explicit existence, 
until finally, as the "summary" of all fruits, it is at the same time 
the living unity which contains all those fruits dissolved in itself 
just as it produces them from within  itself,  just as, for instance, all 
the limbs of the body are constantly dissolved in and constantly 
produced out of the blood. 
We see that if the Christian religion knows only one Incarnation 
of God, speculative philosophy has as many incarnations as there 
are things, just as it has here in every fruit an incarnation of the 
Substance, of the Absolute Fruit. The main interest for the 
speculative philosopher is therefore to produce the existence of the 
real ordinary fruits and to say in some mysterious way that there 
are apples, pears, almonds and raisins. But the apples, pears, 
almonds and raisins that we rediscover in the speculative world are 
nothing but semblances of apples, semblances of pears, semblances of 
almonds and semblances of raisins, for they are moments in the life 
of "the Fruit", this abstract creation of the  mind,  and therefore 
themselves abstract creations of the  mind.  Hence what is delightful 
in this speculation is to rediscover all the real fruits there, but as 
fruits which have a higher mystical significance, which have grown 
out of the ether of your brain and not out of the material earth, 
which are incarnations of "the Fruit", of the Absolute Subject. When 
you return from the abstraction, the supernatural creation of the 
mind, "the Fruit", to real natural fruits, you give on the contrary 
the natural fruits a supernatural significance and transform them 
into sheer abstractions. Your main interest is then to point out the 

=====第85页=====
60 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
unity of "the Fruit" in all the manifestations of its life—the apple, 
the pear, the almond—that is, to show the mystical interconnection 
between these fruits, how in each one of them "the Fruit" realises 
itself by degrees and necessarily progresses, for instance, from its 
existence as a raisin to its existence as an almond. Hence the value 
of the ordinary fruits no longer consists in their natural qualities, but 
in their speculative quality, which gives each of them a definite place 
in the life-process of "the Absolute Fruit". 
The ordinary man does not think he is saying anything 
extraordinary when he states that there are apples and pears. But 
when the philosopher expresses their existence in the speculative 
way he says something extraordinary. He performs a miracle by 
producing the real natural  objects,  the apple, the pear, etc., out of 
the unreal creation of  the mind "the Fruit", i.e., by creating those fruits 
out of his own abstract reason, which he considers as an Absolute 
Subject outside  himself,  represented here as "the Fruit". And in 
regard to every object the existence of which he expresses, he 
accomplishes an act of creation. 
It goes without saying that the speculative philosopher accom­
plishes this continuous creation only by presenting universally 
known qualities of the apple, the pear, etc., which exist in reality, 
as determining features invented by him, by giving the names of the 
real things to what abstract reason alone can create, to abstract 
formulas of reason, finally, by declaring his own activity, by which 
he passes from the idea of an apple to the idea of a pear, to be the 
self-activity of the Absolute Subject, "the Fruit". 
In the speculative way of speaking, this operation is called 
comprehending Substance as Subject, as an inner process, as an 
Absolute Person, and this comprehension constitutes the essential 
character of Hegel's method. 
These preliminary remarks were necessary to make Herr Szeliga 
intelligible. Only now, after dissolving real relations, e.g., law and 
civilisation, in the category of mystery and thereby making 
"Mystery" into Substance, does he rise to the true speculative, 
Hegelian height and transforms "Mystery" into a self-existing 
Subject incarnating itself in real situations and persons so that the 
manifestations of its life are countesses, marquises, grisettes, porters, 
notaries, charlatans, and love intrigues, balls, wooden doors, etc. 
Having produced the category "Mystery" out of the real world, 
he produces the real world out of this category. 
The mysteries of speculative construction in Herr Szeliga's presen­
tation will be all the more visibly disclosed as he has an indisputable 
double advantage over Hegel. On the one hand, Hegel with 

=====第86页=====
The Holy Family 61 
masterly sophistry is able to present as a process of the imagined 
creation of the mind  itself,  of the Absolute Subject, the process by 
which the philosopher through sensory perception and imagina­
tion passes from one subject to another. On the other hand, 
however, Hegel very often gives a real presentation, embracing the 
thing  itself,  within the speculative presentation. This real develop­
ment within the speculative development misleads the reader into 
considering the speculative development as real and the real as 
speculative. 
With Herr Szeliga both these difficulties vanish. His dialectics 
have no hypocrisy or dissimulation. He performs his tricks with 
the most laudable honesty and the most ingenuous straightfor­
wardness. But then he nowhere develops any real content, so that his 
speculative construction is free from all disturbing accessories, 
from all ambiguous disguises, and appeals to the eye in its naked 
beauty. In Herr Szeliga we also see a brilliant illustration of how 
speculation on the one hand apparently freely creates its object a 
priori out of itself and, on the other hand, precisely because it 
wishes to get rid by sophistry of the rational and natural 
dependence on the object, falls into the most irrational and 
unnatural bondage to the object, whose most accidental and most 
individual attributes it is obliged to construe as absolutely neces­
sary and general. 
3) "THE MYSTERY OF EDUCATED SOCIETY" 
After leading us through the lowest strata of society, for 
example through the criminals' taverns, Eugène Sue transports us 
to "haute volée", 3 to a ball in the Quartier Saint-Germain. 
This transition Herr Szeliga construes as follows: 
"Mystery tries to evade examination by a ... twist: so far it appeared as the 
absolutely enigmatic, elusive and negative, in contrast to the true, real and positive; 
now it withdraws into the latter as its invisible content. But by doing so it gives up 
the unconditional possibility of becoming known." 
"Mystery" which has so far appeared in contrast to the "true", 
the "real", the "positive", that is, to law and education, "now 
withdraws into the latter", that is, into the realm of education. It is 
certainly a mystère for Paris, if not of Paris, that "haute volée" is the 
exclusive realm of education. Herr Szeliga does not pass from the 
a High society.— Ed. 
"Impossibility" in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung. — Ed 

=====第87页=====
62 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
mysteries of the criminal world to those of aristocratic society; 
instead, "Mystery" becomes the "invisible content" of educated 
society, its real essence. It is "not a new twist" of Herr Szeliga's 
designed to enable him to proceed to further examination; 
"Mystery" itself takes this "new twist" in order to escape examina­
tion. 
Before really following Eugène Sue where his heart leads 
him — to an aristocratic ball, Herr Szeliga resorts to the hypocritical 
twists of speculation which makes a priori constructions. 
"One can naturally foresee what a solid shell 'Mystery' will choose to hide in; it 
seems, in fact, that it is of insuperable impenetrability ... that ... hence it may be  expected 
that in general ... nevertheless a new attempt to pick out the kernel is here in­
dispensable." 
Enough. Herr Szeliga has gone so far that the 
"metaphysical subject, Mystery, now steps forward, light, self-confident and 
jaunty". 
In order now to change aristocratic society into a "mystery", 
Herr Szeliga gives us a few considerations on "education". He 
presumes aristocratic society to have all sorts of qualities that no 
man would look for in it, in order later to find the "mystery" that 
it does not possess those qualities. Then he presents this discovery 
as the "mystery" of educated society. Herr Szeliga wonders, for 
example, whether "general reason" (does he mean speculative 
logic?) constitutes the content of its "drawing-room  talk",  whether 
"the rhythm and measure of love alone makes" it a "harmonious 
whole", whether "what we call general education is the form of the 
general, the eternal, the ideal", i.e., whether what we call education 
is a metaphysical illusion. It is not difficult for Herr Szeliga to 
prophesy a priori in answer to his questions: 
"It is to be expected, however ... that the answer will be in the negative." 
In Eugène Sue's novel, the transition from the low world to the 
aristocratic world is a normal transition for a novel. The disguises 
of Rudolph, Prince of Geroldstein, give him entry into the lower 
strata of society as his title gives him access to the highest circles. 
On his way to the aristocratic ball he is by no means engrossed in 
the contrasts of contemporary life; it is the contrasts of his own 
disguises that he finds piquant. He informs his obedient compan­
ions how extraordinarily interesting he finds himself in the various 
situations. 
"Je trouve," he says, "assez de piquant dans ces contrastes: un jour peintre en 
éventails, m'établant dans un bouge de la rue aux Fèves; ce matin commis 

=====第88页=====
The Holy Family 63 
marchand offrant un verre de cassis à Madame Pipelet, et ce soir ... un des 
privilégiés par la grâce de dieu, qui régnent sur ce monde." 3 
When Critical Criticism is ushered into the ball-room, it sings: 
Sense and reason forsake me near, 
In the midst of the potentates here! b 
It pours forth in dithyrambs as follows: 
"Here magic brings the brilliance of the sun at night, the verdure of spring and 
the splendour of summer in winter. We immediately feel in a mood to believe in 
the miracle of the divine presence in the breast of man, especially when beauty and 
grace uphold the conviction that we are in the immediate proximity of ideals." (!!!) 
Inexperienced, credulous Critical country parsonl Only your Criti­
cal ingenuousness can be raised by an elegant Parisian ball-room 
"to a mood" in which you believe in "the miracle of* the divine 
presence in the breast of man", and see in Parisian lionesses 
"immediate ideals" and angels corporeal! 
In his unctuous naivety the Critical parson listens to the two 
"most beautiful among the beautiful", Clémence d'Harville and 
Countess Sarah MacGregor. One can guess what he wishes to 
"hear" from them: 
"In what way we can be the blessing of beloved children and the 'fullness 
of happiness of a husband"!... "We hark ... we wonder ... we do not trust our 
ears." 
We secretly feel a malicious pleasure when the listening parson 
is disappointed. The ladies converse neither about "blessing", nor 
"fullness", nor "general reason", but about "an infidelity of 
Madame d'Harville to her husband". 
We get the following naive revelation about one of the ladies, 
Countess MacGregor: 
She was "enterprising enough to become mother to a child as the result of a secret 
marriage". 
Unpleasantly affected by the enterprising spirit of the Countess, 
Herr Szeliga has sharp words for her: 
"We find that all the strivings of the Countess are for her personal, selfish 
advantage." 
Indeed, he expects nothing good from the attainment of her 
purpose — marriage to the Prince of Geroldstein: 
a "I find these contrasts piquant enough: one day a painter of fans established 
in a hovel in the rue aux Fèves; this morning a salesman offering a glass of black 
currant wine to Madame Pipelet, and this evening ... one of the privileged by the 
grace of God who reign over the world." — Ed. 
b A paraphrase of a couplet from Goethe's Faust, Part I, Scene 6 {The Witches' 
Kitchen).—  Ed. 

=====第89页=====
64 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"concerning which we can by no means expect that she will avail herself of it for 
the happiness of the Prince of Geroldstein's subjects." 
The puritan ends his admonitory sermon with "profound 
earnestness": 
"Sarah" (the enterprising lady), "incidentally, is hardly an exception in this brilliant 
circle, although she is one of its summits." 
Incidentally, hardly! Although! And is not the "summit" of a 
circle an exception? 
Here is what we learn about the character of two other ideals, 
the Marquise d'Harville and the Duchess of Lucenay: 
They '"lack satisfaction of the heart'. They have not found in marriage the 
object of love, so they seek it outside marriage. In marriage, love has remained a 
mystery for them, and the imperative urge of the heart drives them to unravel this 
mystery. So they give themselves up to secret love. These 'victims' of 'loveless 
marriage' are 'driven against their will to debase love to something external, to a 
so-called affair, and take the romantic, the  secrecy,  for the internal, the vivifying, the 
essential element of love'". 
The merit of this dialectical reasoning is to be assessed all the 
higher as it is of more general application. 
He, for example, who is not allowed to drink at home and yet 
feels the need to drink looks for the "object" of drinking "outside" 
the house, and "so" takes to secret drinking. Indeed, he will be 
driven to consider secrecy an essential ingredient of drinking, 
although he will not debase drink to a mere "external" indifferent 
thing, any more than those ladies did with love. For, according to 
Herr Szeliga  himself,  it is not love, but marriage without love, that 
they debase to what it really is, to something external, to a 
so-called affair. 
Herr Szeliga goes on to ask: "What is the 'mystery' of love?" 
We have just had the speculative construction that "mystery" is 
the "essence" of this kind of love. How is it that we now come to be 
looking for the mystery of the mystery, the essence of the essence? 
"Not the shady paths in the thickets," declaims the parson, "not the natural 
semi-obscurity of moonlight night nor the artificial semi-obscurity of costly curtains 
and draperies; not the soft and enrapturing notes of the harps and the organs, not 
the attraction of what is forbidden...." 
Curtains and draperies! Soft and enrapturing notes! Even the 
organl Let the reverend parson stop thinking of church] Who 
would bring an organ to a love tryst? 
"All this" (curtains, draperies and organs) "is only the mysterious." 
And is not the mysterious the "mystery" of mysterious love? By 
no means: 

=====第90页=====
The Holy Family 65 
"The mysterious in it is what excites, what intoxicates, what enraptures, the 
power of sensuality." 
In the "soft and enrapturing" notes, the parson already had what 
enraptures. Had he brought turtle soup and champagne to his 
love tryst instead of curtains and organs, the "exciting and 
intoxicating" would have been present too. 
"It is true we do not like to admit," the reverend gentleman argues, "the power 
of sensuality; but it has such tremendous power over us only because we cast it out 
of us and will not recognise it as our own nature, which we should then be in a 
position to dominate if it tried to assert itself at the expense of reason, of true love 
and of will-power." 
The parson advises us, after the fashion of speculative theology, 
to recognise sensuality as our own nature, in order afterwards to be 
able to dominate it, i.e., to retract recognition of it. True, he wishes 
to dominate it only when it tries to assert itself at the expense of 
Reason —  will-power and love as opposed to sensuality are only the 
will-power and love of Reason. The unspeculative Christian also 
recognises sensuality as long as it does not assert itself at the 
expense of true reason, i.e., of faith, of true love, i.e., of love of 
God, of true will-power, i.e., of will in Christ. 
The parson immediately betrays his real meaning when he 
continues: 
"If then love ceases to be the essential element of marriage and of morality in 
general, sensuality becomes the mystery of love, of morality, of educated socie­
ty— sensuality both in its narrow meaning, in which it is a trembling in the nerves and 
a burning stream in the veins, and in the broader meaning, in which it is elevated to 
a semblance of spiritual power, to lust for power, ambition, craving for glory.... 
Countess MacGregor represents" the latter meaning "of sensuality as the mystery 
of educated society." 
The parson hits the nail on the head. To overcome sensuality he 
must first of all overcome the nerve currents and the quick 
circulation of the  blood.—  Herr Szeliga believes in the "narrow" 
meaning that greater warmth in the body comes from the heat of 
the blood in the veins; he does not know that warm-blooded animals 
are so called because the temperature of their blood, apart from 
slight modifications, always remains at a constant level. — As soon 
as there is no more nerve current and the blood in the veins is no 
longer hot, the sinful body, this seat of sensual lust, becomes a 
corpse and the souls can converse unhindered about "general 
reason", "true love", and "pure morals". The parson debases 
sensuality to such an extent that he abolishes the very elements of 
sensual love which inspire it — the rapid circulation of the blood, 
which proves that man does not love by insensitive phlegm; the 
nerve currents which connect the organ that is the main seat of 

=====第91页=====
66 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
sensuality with the brain. He reduces true sensual love to the 
mechanical secretio seminis and lisps with a notorious German 
theologian: 
"Not for the sake of sensual love, not for the lust of the flesh, but because the 
Lord said: Increase and multiply." 
Let us now compare the speculative construction with Eugène 
Sue's novel. It is not sensuality which is presented as the secret of 
love,  but mysteries, adventures, obstacles, fears, dangers, and 
especially the attraction of what is forbidden. 
"Pourquoi," says Eugène Sue, "beaucoup de femmes prennent-elles pourtant 
des hommes qui ne valent pas leurs maris? Parce que le plus grand charme de l'amour 
est l'attrait affriandant du fruit défendu ... avancez que, en retranchant de cet amour 
les craintes, les angoisses, les difficultés, les mystères, les dangers, il ne reste rien ou 
peu de chose, c'est-à-dire, l'amant ... dans sa simplicité première ... en un mot, ce 
serait toujours plus ou moins l'aventure de cet homme à qui l'on disait: 'Pourquoi 
n'épousez-vous donc pas cette veuve, votre maîtresse?' —'Hélas, j'y ai bien 
pensé' —répondit-il' —'mais alors je ne saurais plus où aller passer mes soirées."" 1 
Whereas Herr Szeliga says explicitly that the mystery of love is 
not in the attraction of what is forbidden, Eugène Sue says just as 
explicitly that it is the "greatest charm of love" and the reason for 
all love adventures extra muros. 
"La prohibition et la contrebande sont inséparables en amour comme en 
marchandise." 
Eugène Sue similarly maintains, contrary to his speculative 
commentator, that 
"the propensity to pretence and craft, the liking for mysteries and intrigues, is 
an essential quality, a natural propensity and an imperative instinct of woman's 
nature". 
The only thing which embarrasses Eugène Sue is that this 
propensity and this liking are directed against marriage. He would 
like to give the instincts of woman's nature a more harmless, more 
useful application. 
Herr Szeliga makes Countess MacGregor a representative of the 
kind of sensuality which "is elevated to a semblance of spiritual 
"Why do many women take as lovers men who are of less worth than their 
husbands? Because the greatest charm of love is the tempting attraction of the 
forbidden fruit.... Grant that if the fears, anxieties, difficulties, mysteries and dangers 
are taken away from that love nothing or very little remains, that is to say, the lover 
... in his original simplicity ... in a word, it would always be more or less the 
adventure of the man who was asked, 'Why do you not marry that widow, your 
mistress?' 'Alas, I have thought a good deal about that,' he answered, 'but then I 
would not know where to spend my evenings.'"—Ed. 
"Prohibition and smuggling are as inseparable in love as in trade." — Ed. 

=====第92页=====
The Holy Family 67 
power", but in Eugène Sue she is a person of abstract reason. Her 
"ambition" and her "pride", far from being forms of sensuality, 
are born of an abstract reason which is completely independent of 
sensuality. That is why Eugène Sue explicitly notes that 
"the fiery impulses of love could never make her icy breast heave; no surprise of 
the heart or the senses could upset the pitiless calculations of this crafty, selfish, 
ambitious woman". 
This woman's essential character lies in the egoism of abstract 
reason that never suffers from the sympathetic senses and on 
which the blood has no influence. Her soul is therefore described 
as "dry and hard", her mind as "artfully wicked", her character as 
"treacherous" and — what is very typical of a person of abstract 
reason — as "absolute", her dissimulation as "profound".— It is to 
be noted incidentally that Eugène Sue motivates the career of the 
Countess just as stupidly as that of most of his characters. An old 
nurse gives her the idea that she must become a "crowned head". 
Convinced of this, she undertakes journeys to capture a crown 
through marriage. Finally she commits the inconsistency of consid­
ering a petty German " Serenissimus" a as a "crowned head". 
After his outpourings against sensuality, our Critical saint deems it 
necessary to show why Eugène Sue introduces us to haute volée at a 
ball, a method which is used by nearly all French novelists, whereas 
the English do so more often at the chase or in a country mansion. 
"For this" (i.e., Herr Szeliga's) "conception it cannot be indifferent there" (in 
Herr Szeliga's construction) "and merely accidental that Eugène Sue introduces us 
to high society at a ball." 
Now the horse has been given a free rein and it trots briskly 
towards the necessary end through a series of conclusions remind­
ing one of the late  Wolff. 
"Dancing is the most common manifestation of sensuality as a mystery. The 
immediate contact, the embracing of the two sexes" (?) "necessary to form a couple 
are allowed in dancing because, in spite of appearances, and the really" (really, Mr. 
Parson?) "perceptible pleasant sensation, it is not considered as sensual contact and 
embracing" (but probably as connected with universal reason?). 
And then comes a closing sentence which at best staggers rather 
than dances: 
"For if it were in actual fact considered as such it would be impossible to understand 
why society is so lenient only as regards dancing while it, on the contrary, so severely 
condemns that which, if exhibited with similar freedom  elsewhere,  incurs branding and 
merciless casting out as a most unpardonable offence against morals and modesty." 
The reverend parson speaks here neither of the cancan nor of 
the polka, but of dancing in general, of the  category  Dancing, which 
a The title for a German prince.— Ed. 

=====第93页=====
68 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
is not performed anywhere except in his Critical cranium. Let him 
see a dance at the Chaumière in Paris, and his Christian-German 
soul would be outraged by the boldness, the frankness, the 
graceful petulance and the music of that most sensual movement. 
His own "really perceptible pleasant sensation" would make it 
"perceptible" to him that "in actual fact it would be impossible to 
understand why the dancers themselves, while on the contrary 
they" give the spectator the uplifting impression of frank human 
sensuality—"which, if exhibited in the same way elsewhere"  — 
namely in Germany—"would be severely condemned as an un­
pardonable offence", etc., etc.— why those dancers, at least so to 
speak in their own eyes, not only should not and may not, but of 
necessity canot and must not be frankly sensual human beings!! 
The Critic introduces us to the ball for the sake of the  essence  of 
dancing. He encounters a great difficulty. True, there is dancing at 
this ball, but only in imagination. The fact is that Eugène Sue does 
not say a word describing the dancing. He does not mix among 
the throng of dancers. He makes use of the ball only as an 
opportunity for bringing together his characters from the upper 
aristocracy. In despair, "Criticism" comes to help out and supple­
ment the author, and its own "fancy" easily provides a description of 
ball incidents, etc. If, as prescribed by Criticism, Eugène Sue was 
not directly interested in the criminals' hide-outs and language when 
he described them, the dance, on the other hand, which not he but 
his "fanciful" Critic describes, necessarily interests him infinitely. 
Let us continue. 
"Actually, the secret of sociable tone and tact — the secret of that extremely 
unnatural thing —  is the longing to return to nature. That is why the appearance of 
a person like Cecily in educated society has such an electrifying effect and is 
crowned with such extraordinary success. She grew up a slave among slaves, 
without any education, and the only source of life she has to rely upon is her 
•nature. Suddenly transported to a court and subjected to its constraint and 
customs, she soon learns to see through the secret of the.latter.... In this sphere, 
which she can undoubtedly hold in sway because her power, the power of her 
nature, has an enigmatic magic, Cecily must necessarily stray into losing all sense of 
measure, whereas formerly, when she was still a slave, the same nature taught her 
to resist any unworthy demand of the powerful master and to remain true to her 
love.  Cecily is the mystery of  educated  society  disclosed.  The scorned senses finally break 
down the barriers and surge forth completely uncurbed", etc. 
Those of Herr Szeliga's readers who have not read Sue's novel 
will certainly think that Cecily is the lioness of the ball that is 
described. In the novel she is in a German gaol while the dancing 
goes on in Paris. 
Cecily, as a slave, remains true to the Negro doctor David 

=====第94页=====
The Holy Family 69 
because she loves him "passionately" and because her owner, Mr. 
Willis, is "brutal" in courting her. The reason for her change to a 
dissolute life is a very simple one. Transported into the "European 
world", she "blushes" at being "married to a Negro". On arriving 
in Germany she is "at once" seduced by a wicked man and her 
"Indian blood" comes into its own. This the hypocritical M. Sue, 
for the sake of douce morale3  and doux commerce^ is bound to 
describe as "perversité naturelle"  .c 
The secret of Cecily is that she is a half-breed. The secret of her 
sensuality is the heat of the tropics. Parny sang praises of the 
half-breed in his beautiful lines to Eleonore. 0 Over a hundred 
sea-faring tales tell us how dangerous she is to sailors. 
"Cecily était le type incarné de la sensualité brûlante, qui ne s'allume qu'au feu 
des tropiques.... Tout le monde a entendu parler de ces filles de couleur, pour ainsi 
dire mortelles aux Européens, de ces vampyrs enchanteurs, qui, enivrant leurs 
victimes de séductions terribles ... ne lui laissent, selon l'énergique expression du 
pays,  que ses larmes à boire, que son coeur à ronger." e 
Cecily was far from producing such a magical effect precisely on 
people aristocratically educated, blasé... 
"les femmes de l'espèce de Cecily exercent une action soudaine, une omnipo­
tence magique sur les hommes de sensualité brutale tels que Jacques Ferrand"  .f 
Since when have men like Jacques Ferrand been representative 
of fine society? But Critical Criticism must speculatively make 
Cecily a factor in the life-process of Absolute Mystery. 
4) "THE MYSTERY OF PROBITY AND PIETY" 
"Mystery, as that of educated society, withdraws, it is true, from the antithesis into 
the inner sphere. Nevertheless, high society once again has exclusively its own circles in 
which it preserves the holy. It is, as it were, the chapel for this holy of holies. But for 
people in the forecourt, the chapel itself is the mystery. Education,  therefore,  in its ex­
clusive position is the same thing for the people ... as vulgarity is for the educated." 
It is true, nevertheless, once again, as it were, but, therefore—those 
are the magic hooks which hold together the links of the chain of 
a Sweet morality.— Ed. 
b Tender commerce.— Ed. 
c "Natural perversity." — Ed. 
E. I). Parny, Poésies erotiques.—Ed. 
e "Cecily was the incarnation of the burning sensuality which only the heat of 
the tropics can kindle.... Everybody has heard of those coloured girls who are fatal, 
so to speak, to Europeans; of those charming vampires who intoxicate their victim 
with terrible seductions ... and leave him nothing, as the forceful expression of the 
country says, but his tears to drink and his heart to gnaw." — Ed. 
"Women of the type of Cecily have a sudden effect, a magic omnipotence 
over men of brutal sensuality like Jacques Ferrand."—Ed. 
4-762 

=====第95页=====
70 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
speculative reasoning. Herr Szeliga has made Mystery withdraw from 
the world of criminals into high society. Now he has to construct 
the mystery that high society has its exclusive circles and that the 
mysteries of those circles are mysteries for the people. Besides the 
magic hooks already mentioned, this construction requires the 
transformation of a circle into a chapel and the transformation of 
non-aristocratic society into a forecourt of that chapel. Again it is a 
mystery for Paris that all the spheres of bourgeois society are only 
a forecourt of the chapel of high society. 
Herr Szeliga pursues two aims. Firstly,  Mystery  which has become 
incarnate in the exclusive circle of high society must be declared 
"common property of the  world".  Secondly, the notary Jacques Ferrand 
must be construed as a link in the life of Mystery. Here is the way 
Herr Szeliga reasons: 
"Education as yet is unable and unwilling to bring all estates and distinctions 
into its circle. Only Christianity and morality are able to found universal kingdoms 
on earth." 
Herr Szeliga identifies education, civilisation, with aristocratic 
education. That is why he cannot see that industry and trade found 
universal kingdoms quite different from Christianity and morality, 
domestic happiness and civic welfare. But how do we come to the 
notary Jacques Ferrand} Quite simply! 
Herr Szeliga transforms Christianity into an individual quality, 
"piety", and morality into another individual quality, "probity". He 
combines these two qualities in one individual whom he christens 
Jacques Ferrand, because Jacques Ferrand does not possess these 
two qualities but only pretends to. Thus Jacques Ferrand becomes 
the "mystery of probity and piety". His "testament", on the other 
hand, is "the mystery of seeming piety and probity", and therefore 
no longer of piety and probity themselves. If Critical Criticism had 
wanted speculatively to construe this testament as a mystery, it 
should have declared the seeming probity and piety to be the 
mystery of this testament, and not the other way round, this 
testament as the mystery of the seeming probity. 
Whereas the Paris college of notaries considered Jacques Fer­
rand as a malicious libel against itself and through the theatrical 
censorship had this character removed from the stage perfor­
mance of the Mystères de Paris, Critical Criticism, at the very time 
when it "polemises against the airy kingdom of conceptions", sees in a 
Paris notary not a Paris notary but religion and morality, probity 
and piety. The trial of the notary Lehon ought to have taught it 
better. The position held by the notary in Eugène Sue's novel is 
closely connected with his official position. 

=====第96页=====
The Holy Family 71 
"Les notaires sont au temporel ce qu'au spirituel sont les curés; ils sont les 
dépositaires de nos secrets"* (Monteil, Hist[oire] des français des div[ers] états," etc. t. ix, 
p. 37). 
The notary is the secular confessor. He is a puritan by profes­
sion, and "honesty", Shakespeare says, is "no Puritan".b He is at 
the same time the go-between for all possible purposes, the 
manager of all civil intrigues and plots. 
With the notary Ferrand, whose whole mystery consists in his 
hypocrisy and his profession, we do not seem to have made a 
single step forward yet. But listen: 
"If for the notary hypocrisy is a matter of the most complete consciousness, and 
for Madame Roland it is, as it were, instinct, then between them there is the great 
mass of those who cannot get to the bottom of the mystery and yet involuntarily 
feel a desire to do so. It is therefore not superstition that leads the high and the 
low to the sombre dwelling of the charlatan Bradamanti (Abbé Polidori); no, it is 
the search for Mystery, to justify themselves to the world." 
"The high and the low" flock to Polidori not to find out a definite 
mystery which is justified to the whole world, but to look for 
Mystery in general, Mystery as the Absolute Subject, in order to 
justify themselves to the world; as if to chop wood one looked, not 
for an axe, but for the Instrument in abstracto. 
All the mysteries that Polidori possesses are limited to a means 
for abortion and a poison for murder.— In a speculative frenzy 
Herr Szeliga makes the "murderer" resort to Polidori's poison 
"because he wants to be not a murderer, but respected, loved and 
honoured". As if in an act of murder it was a question of respect, 
love or honour and not of one's neckl But the Critical murderer 
does not bother about his neck, but only about "Mystery".— As not 
everyone commits murder or becomes pregnant illegitimately, how 
is Polidori to put everyone in the desired possession of Mystery? 
Herr Szeliga probably confuses the charlatan Polidori with the 
scholar Polydore Virgil who lived in the sixteenth century and 
who,  although he did not discover any mysteries, tried to make the 
history of those who did, the inventors, the "common property of 
the world" (see Polidori Virgilii liber de rerum inventoribus, Lugduni 
MDCCVI). 
Mystery, Absolute Mystery, as it has finally established itself as 
the "common property of the world", consists therefore in the 
mystery of abortion and poisoning. Mystery could not make itself 
"Notaries are in the temporal realm what priests are in the spiritual: they are 
the depositories of our  secrets."  — Ed. 
b Shakespeare, All's Well that Ends Well, Act I, Scene  3.—Ed. 
4* 

=====第97页=====
72 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"the common property of the world" more skilfully than by 
turning itself into mysteries which are mysteries to no one. 
5) "MYSTERY, A MOCKERY" 
"Mystery has now become common property, the mystery of the whole world and 
of every individual. Either it is my art or my instinct, or I can buy it as a 
purchasable commodity." 
What mystery has now become the common property of the 
world? Is it the mystery of rightlessness in the state, or the mystery 
of educated society, or the mystery of adulterating wares, or the 
mystery of making eau-de-cologne, or the mystery of "Critical 
Criticism"? None of all these, but Mystery in abstracto, the category 
Mystery! 
Herr Szeliga intends to depict the servants and the porter Pipelet 
and his wife as the incarnation of Absolute Mystery. He wants 
speculatively to construct the servant and the porter of "Mystery". 
How does he manage to make the headlong descent from pure 
category down to the "servant" who "spies at a locked door", from 
Mystery as the Absolute Subject, which is enthroned above the roof in 
the cloudy heavens of abstraction, down to the ground floor where 
the porter's lodge is situated? 
First he subjects the category Mystery to a speculative process. 
When by the aid of means for abortion and poisoning Mystery has 
become the common property of the world, it is 
"therefore by no means any longer concealment and inaccessibility  itself,  but it conceals 
itself,  or better still" (always better!) "I conceal it, I make it inaccessible". 
With this transformation of Absolute Mystery from  essence  into 
concept, from the objective stage, in which it is concealment  itself, 
into the subjective stage, in which it conceals  itself,  or better still, in 
which I conceal it, we have not made a single step forward. On the 
contrary, the difficulty seems to grow, for a mystery in man's head 
or breast is more inaccessible and concealed than at the bottom of 
the sea. That is why Herr Szeliga comes to the aid of his speculative 
progress directly by means of an empirical progress. 
"It is behind locked  doors"  — hark! hark!—"that  henceforth"  — henceforth! — 
"Mystery, is hatched, brewed and perpetrated." 
Herr Szeliga has "henceforth" changed the speculative ego of 
Mystery into a very empirical, very wooden reality — a door. 
"But with that" — i.e., with the locked door, not with the transition from the 
closed essence to the concept—"there exists also the possibility of my overhearing, 
eavesdropping, and spying on it." 

=====第98页=====
The Holy Family 73 
It is not Herr Szeliga who discovered the "mystery" that one can 
eavesdrop at locked doors. The mass-type proverb even says that 
walls have ears. On the other hand it is a quite Critical speculative 
mystery that only "henceforth", after the descent into the hell of the 
criminals' hide-outs and the ascent into the heaven of educated 
society, and after Polidori's miracles, mysteries can be brewed 
behind locked doors and overheard through closed doors. It is just 
as great a Critical mystery that locked doors are a categorical 
necessity for hatching, brewing and perpetrating mysteries — how 
many mysteries are hatched, brewed, and perpetrated behind 
bushes! — as well as for spying them out. 
After this brilliant dialectical feat of arms, Herr Szeliga naturally 
goes on from spying itself to the reasons for spying. Here he reveals 
the mystery that malicious gloating is the reason for it. From 
malicious gloating he goes on to the reason for malicious gloating. 
"Everyone wishes to be better than the others," he says, "because he keeps 
secret the mainsprings not only of his good actions, but of his bad ones too, which 
he tries to hide in impenetrable darkness." 
The sentence should be the other way round: Everyone not only 
keeps the mainsprings of his good actions secret, but tries to 
conceal his bad ones in impenetrable darkness because he wishes 
to be better than the others. 
Thus it seems we have gone from Mystery that  conceals  itself to the 
ego that conceals it, from the ego to the locked door, from the locked 
door to spying, from spying to the reason for spying, malicious 
gloating; from malicious gloating to the reason for malicious gloating, 
the desire to be better than the others. We shall soon have the pleasure 
of seeing the servant standing at the locked door. For the general 
desire to be better than the others leads us directly to this: that 
"everyone is inclined to find out the mysteries of another", and 
this is followed easily by the witty remark: 
"In this respect servants have the best opportunity." 
Had Herr Szeliga read the records from the Paris police 
archives, Vidocq's memoirs, the Livre noir 3 and the like, he would 
know that in this respect the police has still greater opportunity 
than the "best opportunity" that servants have; that it uses 
servants only for crude jobs, that it does not stop at the door or 
where the masters are in neglige, but creeps under their sheets 
next to their naked body in the shape of a femme galante or even 
of a legitimate wife. In Sue's novel the police spy "Bras rouge" 
plays a leading part in the story. 
3 Black book.—Ed. 

=====第99页=====
74 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
What "henceforth" annoys Herr Szeliga in servants is that they 
are not "disinterested" enough. This Critical misgiving leads him to 
the porter Pipelet and his wife. 
"The porter's position, on the other hand, gives him relative independence so 
that he can pour out free, disinterested, although vulgar and injurious, mockery on 
the mysteries of the house." 
At first this speculative construction of the porter is put into a 
great difficulty because in many Paris houses the servant and the 
porter are one and the same person for some of the tenants. 
The following facts will enable the reader to form an opinion of 
the Critical fantasy concerning the relatively independent, disin­
terested position of the porter. The porter in Paris is the 
representative and spy of the landlord. He is generally paid not by 
the landlord but by the tenants. Because of that precarious 
position he often combines the functions of commission agent with 
his official duties. During the Terror, the Empire and the 
Restoration, the porter was one of the main agents of the secret 
police. General Foy, for instance, was watched by his porter, who 
took all the letters addressed to the general to be read by a police 
agent not far away (see Froment, La police dévoilée). As a result 
"portier" 3 and "épicier" h are considered insulting names and the 
porter prefers to be called "concierge". 0 
Far from being depicted as "disinterested" and harmless, 
Eugène Sue's Madame Pipelet immediately cheats Rudolph when 
giving him his change; she recommends to him the dishonest 
money-lender living in the house and describes Rigolette to him as 
an acquaintance who may be pleasant to him. She teases the major 
because he pays her badly and haggles with her — in her vexation 
she calls him a "commandant de deux Hards" A— "ca t'apprendra à ne 
donner que douze francs par mois pour ton ménage." e—and because he 
has the "petitesse"* as to keep a check on his firewood, etc. She 
herself gives the reason for her "independent" behaviour: the 
major only pays her twelve francs a month. 
According to Herr Szeliga, "Anastasia Pipelet has, to some extent, 
to declare a small war on Mystery". 
a Porter.— Ed. 
Grocer.— Ed. 
c Caretaker.— Ed. 
A twopenny major.— Ed. 
That'll teach you to give only twelve francs a month for your house­
keeping.— Ed. 
f 
Pettiness.— Ed. 

=====第100页=====
The Holy Family 75 
According to Eugène Sue, Anastasia Pipelet is a typical Paris 
Portière. He wants "to dramatise the Portière, whom Henri Monier 
portrayed with such mastery". But Herr Szeliga feels bound to 
transform one of Madame Pipelet's qualities— "médisance"* —into 
a separate being and then to make her a representative of that 
being. 
"The husband," Herr Szeliga continues, "the porter Alfred Pipelet, helps her, 
but with less luck." 
To console him for this bad luck, Herr Szeliga makes him also 
into an allegory. He represents the "objective" side of Mystery, 
"Mystery as Mockery". 
"The mystery which defeats him is a mockery, a joke, that is played on him." 
Indeed, in its infinite pity divine dialectic makes the "unhap­
py, old, childish man" a "strong man" in the metaphysical sense, by 
making him represent a very worthy, very happy and very decisive 
factor in the life-process of Absolute Mystery. The victory over 
Pipelet is 
"Mystery's most decisive defeat." "A cleverer, courageous man would not let 
himself be duped by a joke." 
6) TURTLE-DOVE (RIGOLETTE) 
"There is still one step left. Through its own consistent development, Mystery, as 
we saw in Pipelet and Cabrion, is driven to debase itself to mere clowning. The one 
thing necessary now is that the individual should no longer agree to play that silly 
comedy. Turtle-dove takes that step in the most nonchalant way in the world." 
Anyone in two minutes can see through the mystery of this 
speculative clowning and learn to practise it  himself.  We will give 
brief directions in this respect. 
Problem. You must give me the speculative construction showing 
how man becomes master over animals. 
Speculative solution. Given are half a dozen animals, such as the 
lion, the shark, the snake, the bull, the horse and the pug. From 
these six animals abstract the category: the "Animal". Imagine the 
"Animal" to be an independent being. Regard the lion, the shark, 
the snake, etc., as disguises, incarnations, of the "Animal". Just as 
you made your imagination, the "Animal" of your abstraction, into 
a real being, now make the real animals into beings of abstraction, 
of your imagination. You see that the "Animal", which in the lion 
tears man to pieces, in the shark swallows him up, in the snake 
stings him with venom, in the bull tosses him with its horns and in 
the horse kicks him, only barks at him when it presents itself as a 
"' Backbiting.—Ed. 

=====第101页=====
76 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
pug, and converts the fight against man into the mere semblance of 
a fight. Through its own consistent development, the "Animal" is 
driven, as we have seen in the pug, to debase itself to a mere clown. 
When a child or a childish man runs away from a pug, the only 
thing is for the individual no longer to agree to play the silly 
comedy. The individual X takes this step in the most nonchalant 
way in the world by using his bamboo cane on the pug. You see 
how "Man", through the agency of the individual X and the pug, 
has become master over the "Animal", and consequently over 
animals, and in the Animal as a pug has defeated the lion as an 
animal. 
Similarly Herr Szeliga's "turtle-dove" defeats the mysteries of 
the present state of the world through the intermediary of Pipelet 
and Cabrion. More than that! She is herself a manifestation of the 
category "Mystery". 
"She herself is not yet conscious of her high moral value, therefore she is still a 
mystery to  herself." 
The mystery of non-speculative Rigolette is revealed in Eugène 
Sue's book by Murph. She is "une fort jolie  grisette"  .a Eugène Sue 
described in her the lovely human character of the Paris grisette. 
Only owing to his devotion to the bourgeoisie and his own 
tendency to high-flown exaggeration, he had to idealise the grisette 
morally. He had to gloss over the essential point of her situation in 
life and her character, to be precise, her disregard for the form of 
marriage, her naive attachment to the Etudiant b or the Ouvriers It 
is precisely in that attachment that she constitutes a really human 
contrast to the hypocritical, narrow-hearted, self-seeking wife of 
the bourgeois, to the whole circle of the bourgeoisie, that is, to the 
official circle. 
7) THE WORLD SYSTEM OF THE MYSTERIES OF PARIS 
"This world of mysteries is now the general world system, in which the 
individual action of the Mysteries of Paris is set." 
Before, "however", Herr Szeliga "passes on to the philosophical 
reproduction of the epic event", he must "assemble in a general 
picture the sketches previously jotted down separately". 
It must be considered as a real confession, a revelation of Herr 
a A very pretty grisette.— Ed. 
b Student.— Ed. 
c Worker.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
The Holy Family 77 
Szeliga's Critical Mystery, when he says that he wishes to pass on 
to the "philosophical reproduction" of the epic event. He has so 
far been "philosophically reproducing" the world system. 
Herr Szeliga continues his confession: 
"From our presentation it appears that the individual mysteries dealt with have 
not their value in themselves, each separate from the others, and are in no way 
magnificent novelties for gossip, but that their value consists in their constituting an 
organically linked sequence, the totality of which is "Mystery". 
In his mood of sincerity, Herr Szeliga goes still further. He 
admits that the "speculative sequence" is not the real sequence of the 
Mystères de Paris. 
"Granted, the mysteries do not appear in our epic in the relationship of this 
self-knowing sequence" (to cost prices?). "But we are not dealing with the logical, 
obvious, free organism of criticism, but with a mysterious vegetable existence." 
We shall pass over Herr Szeliga's summary and go on im­
mediately to the point that constitutes the "transition". In Pipelet 
we saw the "self-mockery of Mystery". 
"In self-mockery, Mystery passes judgment on  itself.  Thereby the mysteries, 
annihilating themselves in their final consequence, challenge every strong character 
to independent examination." 
Rudolph, Prince of Geroldstein, the man of "pure Criticism", is 
destined to carry out this examination and the "disclosure of the 
mysteries." 
If we deal with Rudolph and his deeds only later, after diverting 
our attention from Herr Szeliga for some time, 3 it can already be 
foreseen, and to a certain degree the reader can sense, indeed 
even surmise without presumption, that instead of treating him as 
a "mysterious vegetable existence", which he is in the Critical 
Literatur-Zeitung, we shall make him a "logical, obvious, free link" 
in the "organism of Critical Criticism." 
a See pp. 162-209 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第103页=====
Chapter VI 
ABSOLUTE CRITICAL CRITICISM, 
OR CRITICAL CRITICISM AS HERR BRUNO 
1) ABSOLUTE CRITICISM'S FIRST CAMPAIGN 
a) "Spirit" and "Mass" 
So far Critical Criticism has seemed to deal more or less with the 
Critical treatment of various maw-type objects. We now find it 
dealing with the absolutely Critical object, with  itself.  So far it has 
derived its relative glory from Critical debasement, rejection and 
transformation of definite mass-type objects and persons. It now 
derives its absolute glory from the Critical debasement, rejection 
and transformation of the Mass in general. Relative Criticism was 
faced with relative limits. Absolute Criticism is faced with an 
absolute limit, the limit of the Mass, the Mass as limit. Relative 
Criticism in its opposition to definite limits was itself necessarily a 
limited individual. Absolute Criticism, in its opposition to the 
general limit, to limit in general, is necessarily an absolute individu­
al. As the various mass-type objects and persons have merged in 
the impure pulp of the "Mass", so has still seemingly objective and 
personal Criticism changed into "pure Criticism". So far Criticism 
has appeared to be more or less a quality of the Critical individu­
als: Reichardt, Edgar, Faucher, etc. Now it is the Subject and Herr 
Bruno is its incarnation. 
So far mass  character  has seemed to be more or less the quality of 
the objects and persons criticised; now objects and persons have 
become the "Mass", and the "Mass" has become object and 
person. All previous Critical attitudes have been dissolved in the 
attitude of absolute Critical wisdom to absolute mass-type stupidi­
ty. This basic attitude appears as the meaning, the tendency and the 
keyword of Criticism's previous deeds and struggles. 
In accordance with its absolute character, "pure" Criticism, as 
soon as it appears, will pronounce the differentiating "cue"; 
nevertheless, as Absolute Spirit it must go through a dialectical 
process. Only at the end of its heavenly motion will its original 
concept be truly realised (see Hegel, Enzyklopädie). 

=====第104页=====
The Holy Family 79 
"Only a few months ago," Absolute Criticism announces, "the Mass believed 
itself to be of gigantic strength and destined to world mastery within a time that it 
could count on its fingers." 
It was precisely Herr Bruno Bauer, in Die gute Sache der Freiheit 3 
(his "own" cause, of course), in Die Judenfrage, 22 etc., who counted 
on his fingers the time until the approaching world mastery, 
although he admitted he could not give the exact date. To the 
record of the sins of the Mass he adds the mass of his own sins. 
"The Mass thought itself in possession of so many truths which seemed obvious 
to it." "But one  possesses  a truth completely only ... when one follows it through its 
proofs." 
For Herr Bauer, as for Hegel, truth is an automaton that proves 
itself.  Man must follow it. As in Hegel, the result of real 
development is nothing but the truth proven, i.e., brought to 
consciousness. Absolute Criticism may therefore ask with the most 
narrow-minded theologian: 
"What would be the purpose of history if its task were not precisely to prove these 
simplest of all truths (such as the movement of the earth round the sun)?" 
Just as, according to the earlier teleologists, plants exist to be 
eaten by animals, and animals to be eaten by men, history exists in 
order to serve as the act of consumption of theoretical eat­
ing— proving. Man exists so that history may exist, and history 
exists so that the proof of truths exists. In this Critically trivialised 
form is repeated the speculative wisdom that man exists, and 
history exists, so that truth may arrive at self-consciousness. 
That is why history, like truth, becomes a person apart, a 
metaphysical subject of which the real human individuals are 
merely the bearers. That is why Absolute Criticism uses phrases 
like these: 
"History does not allow itself to be mocked at ... History has exerted its greatest 
efforts to ... History has been engaged ... what would be the purpose of History?... 
History provides the explicit proof ... History puts forward truths," etc. 
If, as Absolute Criticism asserts, history has so far been occupied 
with only a few such truths — the simplest of all — which in the end 
are self-evident, this inadequacy to which Absolute Criticism 
reduces previous human experiences proves first of all only its own 
inadequacy. From the un-Critical standpoint the result of history 
is, on the contrary, that the most complicated truth, the quintes­
sence of all truth, man, is self-evident in the end. 
a The Good Cause of Freedom.—Ed. 

=====第105页=====
80 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"But truths," Absolute Criticism continues to argue, "which seem to the mass to 
be so crystal-clear that they are self-evident from the start ... and that the mass 
regards proof of them as superfluous, are not worth history supplying explicit 
proof of them; they are in general no part of the problem which history is engaged 
in solving." 
In its holy zeal against the mass, Absolute Criticism pays it the 
finest compliment. If a truth is crystal-clear because it seems 
crystal-clear to the mass; if history's attitude to truths depends on the 
opinion of the mass, then the verdict of the mass is absolute, 
infallible, the law of history, and history proves only what does not 
seem crystal-clear to the mass, and therefore needs  proof.  It is the 
mass,  then, that prescribes history's "task" and "occupation". 
Absolute Criticism speaks of "truths which are self-evident from 
the start". In its Critical naivety it invents an absolute "from the 
start" and an abstract, immutable H nass". There is just as little 
difference, in the eyes of Absolute Criticism, between the "from 
the start" of the sixteenth-century mass and the "from the start" 
of the nineteenth-century mass as there is between those masses 
themselves. It is precisely the characteristic feature of a truth 
which has become true and obvious and is self-evident that it is 
"self-evident from the start". Absolute Criticism's polemic against 
truths which are self-evident from the start is a polemic against 
truths which are "self-evident" in general. 
A truth which is self-evident has lost its savour, its meaning, its 
value for Absolute Criticism as it has for divine dialectic. It has 
become flat, like stale water. On the one hand, therefore, Absolute 
Criticism proves everything which is self-evident and, in addition, 
many things which have the luck to be incomprehensible and 
therefore will never be self-evident. On the other hand, it 
considers as self-evident everything which needs some elaboration. 
Why? Because it is 5e//-evident that real problems are not  self-
evident. 
Since, the "Truth", like history, is an ethereal subject separate 
from the material mass, it addresses itself not to the empirical man 
but to the "innermost depths of the soul"; in order to be "truly 
apprehended" it does not act on his vulgar  body,  which may live deep 
down in an English cellar or at the top of a French block of flats; 
it "stretches" "from end to end" through his idealistic intestines. 
Absolute Criticism does certify that "the mass" has so far in its 
own way, i.e., superficially, been affected by the truths that 
history has been so gracious as to "put forward"; but at the same 
time it prophesies that 
"the attitude of the mass to historical progress will "completely change". 

=====第106页=====
The Holy Family 81 
It will not be long before the mysterious meaning of this Critical 
prophecy becomes "crystal-clear" to us. 
"All great actions of previous history," we are told, "were failures from the start 
and had no effective success because the mass became interested in and enthusiastic 
over them — or, they were bound to come to a pitiful end because the idea 
underlying them was such that it had to be content with a superficial comprehen­
sion and therefore to rely on the approval of the mass." 
It seems that the comprehension which suffices for, and there­
fore corresponds to, an idea ceases to be superficial. It is only for 
appearance's sake that Herr Bruno brings out a relation between an 
idea and its comprehension, just as it is only for appearance's sake that 
he brings out a relation between unsuccessful historical action and 
the mass. If, therefore, Absolute Criticism condemns something as 
"superficial", it is simply previous history, the actions and ideas of 
which were those of the "masses". It rejects mass-type history to 
replace it by Critical history (see Herr Jules Faucher on English 
problems of the day). 3 According to previous un-Critical history, 
i.e., history not conceived in the sense of Absolute Criticism, it must 
further be precisely distinguished to what extent the mass was "in­
terested" in aims and to what extent it was "enthusiastic" over them. 
The "idea" always disgraced itself insofar as it differed from the 
"interest". On the other hand, it is easy to understand that every 
mass-type "interest" that asserts itself historically goes far beyond 
its real limits in the "idea" or "imagination" when it first comes on 
the scene and is confused with human interest in general. This 
illusion constitutes what Fourier calls the tone of each historical 
epoch. The interest of the bourgeoisie in the 1789 Revolution, far 
from having been a "failure", "won" everything and had "most 
effective success", however much its "pathos" has evaporated and the 
"enthusiastic" flowers with which that interest adorned its cradle 
have faded. That interest was so powerful that it was victorious 
over the pen of Marat, the guillotine of the Terror and the sword 
of Napoleon as well as the crucifix and the blue blood of the 
Bourbons. The Revolution was a "failure" only for the mass which 
did not have in the political "idea" the idea of its real "interest", i.e., 
whose true life-principle did not coincide with the life-principle 
of the Revolution, the mass whose real conditions for emancipa­
tion were essentially different from the conditions within which 
the bourgeoisie could emancipate itself and society. If the Revolu­
tion, which can exemplify all great historical "actions", was a 
failure, it was so because the mass within whose living conditions it 
a See pp. 12-16 ol this volume.—Ed. 

=====第107页=====
82 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
essentially came to a stop, was an exclusive, limited mass, not an 
all-embracing one. If the Revolution was a failure it was not 
because the mass was "enthusiastic" over it and "interested" in it, 
but because the most numerous part of the mass, the part distinct 
from the bourgeoisie, did not have its real interest in the principle 
of the Revolution, did not have a revolutionary principle of its 
own,  but only an "idea", and hence only an object of momentary 
enthusiasm and only seeming uplift. 
Together with the thoroughness of the historical action, the size 
of the mass whose action it is will therefore increase. In Critical 
history, according to which in historical actions it is not a matter of 
the acting masses, of empirical action, or of the empirical interest 
of this action, but instead is only "a matter of an idea in them", 
things must naturally take a different course. 
"In the mass," Criticism teaches us, "not somewhere else, as its former liberal 
spokesmen believed, is the true enemy of the spirit to be  found." 
The enemies of progress outside the mass are precisely those 
products of self-debasement, self-rejection and self-alienation of the mass 
which have been endowed with independent being and a life of 
their own. The mass therefore turns against its own deficiency 
when it turns against the independently existing products of its 
self-debasement, just as man, turning against the existence of God, 
turns against his own religiosity. But as those practical  self-
alienations of the mass exist in the real world in an outward way, 
the mass must fight them in an outward way. It must by no means 
hold these products of its self-alienation for mere ideal fantasies, 
mere alienations of  self-consciousness,  and must not wish to abolish 
material estrangement by purely inward spiritual action. As early 
as 1789 Loustalot's journal bore the motto: 
Les grands ne nous paraissent grands 
Que parce que nous sommes à genoux  
Levons nous!  a 
But to rise it is not enough to do so in thought and to leave 
hanging over one's real sensuously perceptible head the real sensuously 
perceptible yoke that cannot be subtilised away with ideas. Yet 
Absolute Criticism has learnt from Hegel's Phänomenologie at least 
the art of converting real objective chains that exist outside me into 
merely ideal, merely subjective chains, existing merely in me and thus 
The great appear great in our eyes 
Only because we are kneeling. 
Let us  rise!  — Ed. 

=====第108页=====
The Holy Family 83 
of converting all external sensuously perceptible struggles into pure 
struggles of thought. 
This Critical transformation is the basis of the pre-established 
harmony between Critical Criticism and the censorship. From the 
Critical point of view, the writer's fight against the censor is not a 
fight of "man against man". The censor is nothing but my own tact 
personified for me by the solicitous police, my own tact struggling 
against my tactlessness and un-Criticalness. The struggle of the 
writer with the censor is only seemingly, only in the eyes of wicked 
sensuousness, anything else than the inner struggle of the writer 
with himself.  Insofar as the censor is really individually different from 
myself,  a police executioner who mishandles the product of my mind 
by applying an external standard alien to the matter in question, he 
is a mere mass-type fantasy, an un-Critical figment of the brain. When 
Feuerbach's Thesen zur Reform der Philosophie 23 were prohibited by 
the censorship, it was not the official barbarity of the censorship 
that was to blame but the uncultured character of Feuerbach's 
Thesen. "Pure" Criticism, unsullied by mass or matter, too, has in 
the censor a purely "ethereal" form, divorced from all mass-type 
reality. 
Absolute Criticism has declared the "Mass" to be the true enemy 
of the Spirit. It develops this in more detail as follows: 
"The Spirit now knows where to look for its only adversary—in the  self-
deception and the pithlessness of the Mass." 
Absolute Criticism proceeds from the dogma of the absolute 
competency of the "Spirit". Furthermore, it proceeds from the 
dogma of the extramundane existence of the Spirit, i.e., of its 
existence outside the mass of humanity. Finally, it transforms "the 
Spirit", "Progress", on the one hand, and "the Mass", on the other, 
into fixed entities, into concepts, and then relates them to one 
another as such given rigid extremes. It does not occur to 
Absolute Criticism to investigate the "Spirit"  itself,  to find out 
whether it is not in its spiritualistic nature, in its airy pretensions, 
that the "phrase", "self-deception" and "pithlessness" are rooted. 
No, the Spirit is absolute, but unfortunately at the same time it 
continually turns into spiritlessness; it continually reckons without 
its host. Hence it must necessarily have an adversary that intrigues 
against it. That adversary is the Mass. 
The position is the same with "Progress". In spite of the 
pretensions of "Progress", continual  retrogressions  and circular move­
ments occur. Far from suspecting that the category "Progress" is 
completely empty and abstract, Absolute Criticism is so profound 

=====第109页=====
84 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
as to recognise "Progress" as being absolute, so as to explain 
retrogression by assuming a "personal adversary" of Progress, the 
Mass. As "the Mass" is nothing but the "opposite of the Spirit", of 
Progress, of "Criticism",3 it can accordingly be defined only by this 
imaginary opposition; apart from that opposition all that Criticism 
can say about the meaning and the existence of the Mass is only 
something meaningless, because completely undefined: 
"The Mass, in that sense in which the  'word'  also embraces the so-called educated 
world." 
"Also"  and "so-called" suffice for a Critical definition. The 
"Mass"  is therefore distinct from the real masses and exists as the 
"Mass" only for "Criticism". 
All communist and socialist writers proceeded from the obser­
vation that, on the one hand, even the most favourably brilliant 
deeds seemed to remain without brilliant results, to end in 
trivialities, and, on the other, all progress of the Spirit had so far 
been progress against the mass of mankind, driving it into an ever 
more dehumanised situation. They therefore declared "progress" 
(see Fourier) to be an inadequate, abstract phrase; they assumed 
(see Owen among others) a fundamental flaw in the civilised 
world; that is why they subjected the real foundations of contem­
porary society to incisive criticism. This communist criticism had 
practically at once as its counterpart the movement of the great 
mass, in opposition to which history had been developing so far. 
One must know the studiousness, the craving for knowledge, the 
moral energy and the unceasing urge for development of the 
French and English workers to be able to form an idea of the 
human nobility of this movement. 
How infinitely profound then is "Absolute Criticism", which, in 
face of these intellectual and practical facts, sees in a one-sided 
way only one aspect of the relationship, the continual foundering 
of the Spirit, and, vexed at this, seeks in addition an adversary of 
the "Spirit", which it finds in the "Mass"! In the end this great 
Critical discovery amounts to a tautology. According to Criticism, the 
Spirit has so far had a limit, an obstacle, in other words, an 
adversary, because it has had an adversary. Who, then, is the 
adversary of the Spirit? Spiritlessness. For the Mass is defined only 
as the "opposite" of the Spirit, as spiritlessness or, to take the more 
precise definitions of spiritlessness, as "indolence", "superficiali-
a In the German text: des Fortschritts der "Kritik" (the Progress of Criticism) — 
probably a misprint.— Ed. 

=====第110页=====
The Holy Family 85 
ty", "self-complacency". What a fundamental superiority over the 
communist writers it is not to have traced spiritlessness, indolence, 
superficiality and self-complacency to their places of origin, but to 
have denounced them morally and  exposed  them as the opposite of 
the Spirit, of Progress! If these qualities are proclaimed qualities 
of the Mass, as of a subject still distinct from them, that distinction 
is nothing but a "Critical" semblance of distinction. Only in 
appearance has Absolute Criticism a definite concrete subject besides 
the abstract qualities of spiritlessness, indolence, etc., for "the 
Mass" in the Critical conception is nothing but those abstract 
qualities, another word for them, a fantastic personification of them. 
The relation between "Spirit and Mass" has, however, also a 
hidden meaning which will be completely revealed in the course of 
the reasoning. We only indicate it here. That relation  discovered  by 
Herr Bruno is, in fact, nothing but a Critically caricatured consum­
mation of Hegefc conception of history, which, in turn, is nothing but 
the speculative expression of the Christian-Germanic dogma of the 
antithesis between Spirit and Matter, between God and the  world. 
This antithesis finds expression in history, in the human world 
itself in such a way that a few chosen individuals as the active Spirit 
are counterposed to the rest of mankind, as the spiritless Mass, as 
Matter. 
Hegefc conception of history presupposes an Abstract or Absolute 
Spirit which develops in such a way that mankind is a mere mass 
that bears the Spirit with a varying degree of consciousness or 
unconsciousness. Within empirical, exoteric history, therefore, 
Hegel makes a speculative, esoteric history, develop. The history of 
mankind becomes the history of the Abstract Spirit of mankind, 
hence a spirit far removed from the real man. 
Parallel with this doctrine of Hegel's there developed in France 
the theory of the doctrinaires24 proclaiming the sovereignty of reason 
in opposition to the sovereignty of the  people,  in order to exclude the 
masses and rule alone. This was quite consistent. If the activity of 
real mankind is nothing but the activity of a mass of human 
individuals, then abstract generality, Reason, the Spirit, on the 
contrary, must have an abstract expression restricted to a few 
individuals. It then depends on the situation and imaginative 
power of each individual whether he will claim to be this 
representative of "the Spirit". 
Already in Hegel the Absolute Spirit of history has its material in 
the Mass and finds its appropriate expression only in philosophy. 
The philosopher, however, is only the organ through which the 
maker of history, the Absolute Spirit, arrives at self-consciousness 

=====第111页=====
86 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
retrospectively  after the movement has ended. The participation of 
the philosopher in history is reduced to this retrospective con­
sciousness, for the real movement is accomplished by the Absolute 
Spirit unconsciously. Hence the philosopher appears on the scene 
post festum. a 
Hegel is guilty of being doubly half-hearted: firstly in that, while 
declaring that philosophy is the mode of existence of the Absolute 
Spirit, he refuses to recognise the actual philosophical individual as 
the Absolute Spirit; secondly, in that he lets the Absolute Spirit as 
Absolute Spirit make history only in appearance. For since the 
Absolute Spirit becomes conscious of itself as the creative World 
Spirit only post festum in. the philosopher, its making of history 
exists only in the consciousness, in the opinion and conception of 
the philosopher, i.e., only in the speculative imagination. Herr 
Bruno Bauer overcomes Hegel's half-heartedness. 
Firstly, he proclaims Criticism to be the Absolute Spirit and 
himself to be Criticism. Just as the element of Criticism is banished 
from the Mass, so the element of the Mass is banished from 
Criticism. Therefore Criticism sees itself incarnate not in a mass, 
but exclusively in a handful of chosen men, in Herr Bauer and his 
disciples. 
Herr Bauer furthermore overcomes Hegel's other half-hearted­
ness.  No longer, like the Hegelian Spirit, does he make history post 
festum and in imagination. He consciously plays the part of the 
World Spirit in opposition to the mass of the rest of mankind; 
he enters into a contemporary dramatic relation with that mass; 
he invents and executes history with a purpose and after mature 
reflection. 
On the one side is the Mass as the passive, spiritless, unhistori-
cal, material element of history. On the other is the Spirit, Criticism, 
Herr Bruno and Co. as the active element from which all historical 
action proceeds. The act of transforming society is reduced to the 
cerebral activity of Critical Criticism. 
Indeed, the relation of Criticism, and hence of Criticism 
incarnate, Herr Bruno and Co., to the Mass is in truth the only 
historical relation of the present time. The whole of present-day 
history is reduced to the movement of these two sides against each 
other. All antitheses have been dissolved in this Critical antithesis. 
Critical Criticism, which becomes objective to itself only in 
relation to its antithesis, to the Mass, to stupidity, is consequently 
obliged continually to produce this antithesis for  itself,  and Herren 
After the event.— Ed. 

=====第112页=====
The Holy Family 87 
Faucher, Edgar and Szeliga have supplied sufficient proof of their 
virtuosity in their speciality, the mass stupefaction of persons and 
things. 
Let us now accompany Absolute Criticism in its campaigns 
against the Mass. 
b) The Jewish Question No. 1. 
The Setting of the Questions 
The "Spirit", contrary to the Mass, behaves from the outset in a 
Critical way by considering its own narrow-minded work, Bruno 
Bauer's Die Judenfrage, as absolute, and only the opponents of that 
work as sinners. In Reply No. 125 to attacks on that treatise, he 
does not show any inkling of its defects; on the contrary, he 
declares he has set forth the "true", "general" (!) significance of 
the Jewish question. In later replies we shall see him obliged to 
admit his "oversights". 3 
"The reception my book has had is the beginning of the proof that the very ones 
who so far have advocated freedom, and still advocate it, must rise against the 
Spirit more than any others; the defence of my book which I am now going to 
undertake will supply further proof how thoughtless the spokesmen of the Mass are; 
they have God knows what a great opinion of themselves for supporting 
emancipation and the dogma of the 'rights of man'." 
On the occasion of a treatise by Absolute Criticism, the "Mass" 
must necessarily have begun to prove its antithesis to the Spirit; for 
it is its antithesis to Absolute Criticism that determines and proves its 
very existence. 
The polemic of a few liberal and rationalist Jews against Herr 
Bruno's Die Judenfrage has naturally a Critical meaning quite 
different from that of the mass-type polemic of the liberals against 
philosophy and of the rationalists against Strauss. Incidentally, the 
originality of the above-quoted remark can be judged by the 
following passage from Hegel: 
"We can here note the particular form of bad conscience manifest in the kind 
of eloquence with which that shallowness" (of the liberals) "plumes  itself,  and first 
of all in the fact that it speaks most of Spirit where its speech has the least spirit, and 
uses the word life", etc., "where it is most dead and withered." 
As for the "rights of man", it has been proved to Herr Bruno 
("On the Jewish Question", Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher 2) that it 
a See pp. 95-96, 106-07 of this volume.—Ed. 
G.W.F. Hegel, Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts. Vorrede. — Ed. 
See present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 146-74.— Ed. 

=====第113页=====
88 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
is "he  himself,  not the spokesmen of  the Mass, who has misunderstood 
and dogmatically mishandled the essence of those rights. Com­
pared to his discovery that the rights of man are not "inborn"—a 
discovery which has been made innumerable times in England 
during the last 40-odd years — Fourier's assertion that the right to 
fish, to hunt, etc., are inborn rights of men is one of genius. 
We give only a few examples of Herr Bruno's fight against 
Philippson, Hirsch and others. Even such poor opponents as these 
are not disposed of by Absolute Criticism. It is by no means 
preposterous of Herr Philippson, as Absolute Criticism maintains, 
to say: 
"Bauer conceives a peculiar kind of state ... a philosophical ideal of a state." 
Herr Bruno, who confuses the state with humanity, the rights of 
man with man and political emancipation with human emancipa­
tion, was bound, if not to conceive, at least to imagine a peculiar 
kind of state, a philosophical ideal of a state. 
"Instead of writing his laboured statement, the rhetorician" (Herr Hirsch) 
"would have done better to refute my proof that the Christian  state,  having as its vital 
principle a definite religion, cannot allow adherents of another particular religion 
... complete equality with its own social estates." 
Had the rhetorician Hirsch really refuted Herr Bruno's proof 
and shown, as is done in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, that 
the state of social estates and of exclusive Christianity is not only 
an incomplete state but an incomplete Christian state, Herr Bruno 
would have answered as he does to that refutation: 
"Objections in this matter are meaningless."26 
Herr Hirsch is quite correct when in answer to Herr Bruno's 
statement: 
"By pressure against the mainsprings of history the Jews provoked counter-
pressure", 
he recalls: 
"Then they must have counted for something in the making of history, and if 
Bauer himself asserts this, he has no right to assert, on the other hand, that they 
did not contribute anything to the making of modern times." 
Herr Bruno answers: 
"An eyesore is something too — does that mean it contributes to develop my 
eyesight?" 
Something which has been an eyesore to me from birth, as the 
Jews have been to the Christian world, and which persists and 
develops with the eye is not an ordinary sore, but a wonderful 
one, one that really belongs to my eye and must even contribute to 
a highly original development of my eyesight. The Critical 

=====第114页=====
The Holy Family 89 
"eyesore" does not therefore hurt the rhetorician "Hirsch". Inci­
dentally, the criticism quoted above revealed to Herr Bruno the 
significance of Jewry in "the making of modern times". 
The theological mind of Absolute Criticism feels so offended by 
a deputy of the Rhenish Landtag stating that "the Jews are queer in 
their own Jewish way, not in our so-called Christian way", that it is 
still "calling him to order for using that argument". 
Concerning the assertion of another deputy that "civil equality 
of the Jews can be implemented only where Jewry no longer 
exists",  Herr Bruno comments: 
"Correct! That is correct if Criticism's other proposition, which I put forward 
in my treatise, is not omitted", namely the proposition that Christianity also must 
have ceased to exist. 
We see that in its Reply No. 1 to the attacks upon Die 
Judenfrage, Absolute Criticism still regards the abolition of religion, 
atheism, as the condition for civil equality. In its first stage it has 
therefore not yet acquired any deeper insight into the essence of 
the state than into the "oversights" of its "work". 
Absolute Criticism feels offended when one of its intended 
"latest" scientific discoveries is betrayed as something already 
generally recognised. A Rhenish deputy remarks: 
"No one has yet maintained that France and Belgium were distinguished by 
particular clarity in recognising principles in the organisation of their political 
affairs." 
Absolute Criticism could have objected that that assertion 
transferred the present into the past by representing as traditional 
the now trivial view of the inadequacy of French political princi­
ples.  Such a relevant objection would not be profitable for 
Absolute Criticism. On the contrary, it must assert the obsolete 
view to be that at present prevailing, and proclaim the now 
prevailing view a Critical mystery which its investigation still has to 
reveal to the Mass. Hence it must say: 
"It" (the antiquated prejudice) "has been asserted by very many" (of the Mass): 
"but a thorough investigation of history will provide the proof that even after the 
great work done by France to comprehend the principles, much still remains to be 
achieved." 
That means that a thorough investigation of history will not 
itself "achieve" the comprehension of the principles. It will only 
prove in its thoroughness that "much still remains to be achieved". A 
great achievement, especially after the works of the Socialists! 
Nevertheless Herr Bruno already achieves much for the com­
prehension of the present social state of things by his remark: 

=====第115页=====
90 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"The certainty prevailing at present is uncertainty." 
If Hegel says that the prevailing Chinese certainty is "Being", 
that the prevailing Indian certainty is "Nothing", etc., Absolute 
Criticism joins him in the "pure" way when it resolves the 
character of the present time in the logical category "Uncertainty", 
and all the purer since "Uncertainty", like "Being" and "Noth­
ing", belongs to the first chapter of speculative logic, the chapter 
on "Quality". 
We cannot leave No. 1 of Die Judenfrage without a general 
remark. 
One of the chief pursuits of Absolute Criticism consists in first 
bringing all questions of the day into their right setting. For it does 
not answer the real questions — it substitutes quite different ones. As 
it makes everything, it must also first make the "questions of the 
day", make them its own questions, questions of Critical Criticism. 
If it were a question of the Code Napoleon, it would prove that it 
is properly a question of the Pentateuch.27 Its setting of "questions of 
the day" is Critical distortion and misrepresentation of them. It thus 
distorted the "Jewish question", too, in such a way that it did not 
need to investigate political emancipation, which is the subject-
matter of that question, but could instead confine itself to a 
criticism of the Jewish religion and a description of the Christian-
Germanic state. 
This method, too, like all Absolute Criticism's originalities, is the 
repetition of a speculative verbal trick. Speculative philosophy, 
namely, Hegel's philosophy, had to transpose all questions from the 
form of common sense to the form of speculative reason and 
convert the real question into a speculative one to be able to answer 
it. Having distorted my question on my lips and, like the catechism, 
put its own question into my mouth, it could, of course, like the 
catechism, have its ready answer to all my questions. 
c) Hinrichs No. 1. Mysterious Hints on Politics, 
Socialism and Philosophy 
"Political!" Absolute Criticism is literally horrified at the pres­
ence of this word in Professor Hinrichs' lectures.28 
"Whoever has followed the development of modern times and knows history 
will also know that the political movements at present taking place have a 
significance quite different" (!) "from a political one: at their base" (at their base! ... 
now for basic wisdom) "they have a social" (!) "significance, which, as we know" (!) 
"is such" (!) "that all political interests appear insignificant" (!) "in comparison 
with it." 

=====第116页=====
The Holy Family 91 
A few months before the Critical Literatur-Zeitung began to be 
published, there appeared, as we know (!), Herr Bruno's fantastic 
political treatise: Staat, Religion und Partheil 
If political movements have social significance, how can political 
interests appear "insignificant" in comparison with their own social 
significance? 
"Herr Hinrichs does not know his way about either in his own house or 
anywhere else in the world.... He could not be at home anywhere  because  ... because 
Criticism, which in the last four years has begun and carried on its by no means 
'political' but 'social!" (!) "work, has remained completely" (!) "unknown to him." 
Criticism, which according to the opinion of the Mass carried on 
"by no means political" but "in all respects theological" work, is still 
content with the word "social", even now when it has uttered this 
word for the first time, not just in the last four years, but since its 
literary birth. 
Since socialist writings spread in Germany the recognition that 
all human aspirations and actions without exception have social 
significance, Herr Bruno can call his theological works social too. 
But what a Critical demand it is that Professor Hinrichs should 
have derived socialism from an acquaintance with Bauer's works, 
considering that all Bruno Bauer's works published up to the 
appearance of Hinrichs' lectures, when they do draw practical 
conclusions, draw political ones! It was impossible, un-Critically 
speaking, for Professor Hinrichs to supplement Herr Bruno's 
published works with his as yet unpublished ones. From the 
Critical point of view, the Mass is, of course, obliged to interpret 
all Absolute Criticism's mass-type "movements", as well as "politi­
cal" ones, from the angle of the future and of Absolute Progress! 
But in order that Herr Hinrichs, after becoming acquainted with 
the Literatur-Zeitung, may never again forget the word "social" or 
fail to recognise the "social" character of Criticism, Criticism 
prohibits the word "political" for the third time before the whole 
world and solemnly repeats the word "social" for the third time. 
"If the true tendency of modern history is considered it is no longer a question of 
political,  but —  but of social significance", etc. 
Just as Professor Hinrichs is the scapegoat for the former 
"political" movements, so is he also for the "Hegelian" movements 
and expressions which Absolute Criticism used intentionally up to 
the publication of the Literatur-Zeitung, and continues to use 
unintentionally in it. 
Once "real Hegelian" and twice "Hegelian philosopher" are 
thrown in Hinrichs' face as catchwords. Herr Bruno even "hopes" 

=====第117页=====
92 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
that the "banal expressions so tiresomely circulated in all the 
books of the Hegelian school" (in particular in his own books) will, 
in view of their great "exhaustion" as seen in Professor Hinrichs' 
lectures, soon reach the end of their journey. From the "exhaus­
tion"  of Professor Hinrichs, Herr Bruno hopes for the dissolution of 
Hegel's philosophy and thereby his own redemption from it. 
Thus in its first campaign Absolute Criticism overthrows its own 
long-worshipped gods, "Politics" and "Philosophy", declaring 
them idols of Professor Hinrichs. 
Glorious first campaign! 
2) ABSOLUTE CRITICISM'S SECOND CAMPAIGN 
a) Hinrichs No. 2. "Criticism" and "Feuerbach". 
Condemnation of Philosophy 
As the result of its first campaign, Absolute Criticism can regard 
"philosophy" as having been dealt with and term it outright an ally 
of the "Mass". 
"Philosophers were predestined to fulfil the heart's desires of the 'Mass'". For 
"the Mass wants simple concepts, in order to have nothing to do with the thing 
itself,  shibboleths, so as to have finished with everything from the start, phrases 
by which Criticism can be done away with." 
And "philosophy" fulfils this longing of the "Mass"! 
Dizzy after its victories, Absolute Criticism breaks out in Pythian 
frenzy against philosophy. Feuerbach's Philosophie der Zukunft* is 
the concealed cauldron b whose fumes inspire the frenzy of 
Absolute Criticism's victory-intoxicated head. It read Feuerbach's 
work in March. The fruit of that reading, and at the same time 
the criterion of the earnestness with which it was undertaken, is 
Article No. 2 against Professor Hinrichs. 
In this article Absolute Criticism, which has never freed itself 
from the cage of the Hegelian way of viewing things, storms at the 
iron bars and walls of its prison. The "simple concept", the 
terminology, the whole mode of thought of philosophy, indeed, 
the whole of philosophy, is rejected with disgust. In its place we 
suddenly find the "real wealth of human relations", the "immense 
content of history", the "significance of man", etc. "The mystery of the 
system"  is declared "revealed". 
L. Feuerbach, Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft. — Ed. 
Engels here makes a pun on "Feuerbach" (literally stream of fire) and 
Feuerkessel" (boiler).— Ed. 

=====第118页=====
The Holy Family 93 
But who, then, revealed the mystery of the "system"? Feuerbach. 
Who annihilated the dialectics of concepts, the war of the gods 
that was known to the philosophers alone? Feuerbach. Who substi­
tuted for the old lumber and for "infinite self-consciousness" if 
not, indeed, "the significance of man"—as though man had another 
significance than that of being  man!  — at any rate "Man"} Feuer-
bach,  and only Feuerbach. And he did more. Long ago he did away 
with the very categories with which "Criticism" now operates—the 
"real wealth of human relations, the immense content of history, 
the struggle of history, the fight of the Mass against the Spirit", 
etc., etc. 
Once man is recognised as the essence, the basis of all human 
activity and situations, only "Criticism" can invent new categories 
and transform man himself into a category and into the principle 
of a whole series of categories, as it is doing now. It is true that in 
so doing it takes the only road to salvation that has remained for 
frightened and persecuted theological inhumanity. History does 
nothing, it "possesses no immense wealth", it "wages no battles". It 
is man, real, living man who does all that, who possesses and 
fights;  "history" is not, as it were, a person apart, using man as a 
means to achieve its own aims; history is nothing but the activity of 
man pursuing his aims. If Absolute Criticism, after Feuerbach's 
brilliant expositions, still dares to reproduce all the old trash in a 
new form, at the same time abusing it as "mass-type" trash—which 
it has all the less right to do as it never stirred a finger to dissolve 
philosophy — that fact alone is sufficient to bring the "mystery" of 
Criticism to light and to assess the Critical naivety with which it 
says the following to Professor Hinrichs, whose "exhaustion" once 
did it such a great service: 
"The damage is to those who have not gone through any development and 
therefore could not alter themselves even if they wished to, and at most to the new 
principle — but no! The new cannot be made into a phrase, separate turns of speech 
cannot be borrowed from it." 
Absolute Criticism prides itself that, in contrast to Professor 
Hinrichs, it has solved "the mystery of the faculty sciences". Has it 
then solved the "mystery" of philosophy, jurisprudence, politics, 
medicine, political economy and so forth? Not at all! It has — be it 
noted! — shown in Die gute Sache der Freiheit that science as a 
source of livelihood and free science, freedom of teaching and 
faculty statutes, contradict each other. 
If "Absolute Criticism" were honest it would have admitted 
where its pretended illumination on the "Mystery of Philosophy" 
comes from. It is a good thing all the same that it does not put 

=====第119页=====
94 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
into Feuerbach'?,  mouth such nonsense as the misunderstood and 
distorted propositions that it borrowed from him, as it has done 
with other people. By the way, it is characteristic of "Absolute 
Criticism's" theological viewpoint that, whereas the German philis-
tines are now beginning to understand Feuerbach and to adopt his 
conclusions, it is unable to grasp a single sentence of his correctly 
or to use it properly. 
Criticism achieves a real advance over its feats of the first 
campaign when it "defines" the struggle of "the Mass" against the 
"Spirit" as "the aim" of all previous history, when it declares that 
"the Mass" is the "pure nothing" of "misery"; when it calls the Mass 
purely and simply "Matter" and contrasts "the Spirit" as truth to 
"Matter". Is not Absolute Criticism therefore genuinely Christian-
Germanic} After the old antithesis between spiritualism and 
materialism has been fought out on all sides and overcome once 
for all by Feuerbach, "Criticism" again makes a basic dogma of it in 
its most loathsome form and gives the victory to the "Christian-
Germanic spirit". 
Finally, it must be considered as a development of Criticism's 
mystery concealed in its first campaign when it now identifies the 
antithesis between Spirit and Mass with the antithesis between 
"Criticism" and the Mass. Later it will go on to identify itself with 
"Criticism" and therefore to represent itself as "the Spirit", the 
Absolute and Infinite, and the Mass, on the other hand, as finite, 
coarse, brutal, dead and inorganic—for that is what "Criticism" 
understands by matter. 
How immense is the wealth of history that is exhausted in the 
relationship of humanity to Herr Bauerl 
b) The Jewish Question No. 2 
Critical Discoveries on Socialism, Jurisprudence 
and Politics (Nationality) 
To the material, mass-type Jews is preached the Christian 
doctrine of freedom of the Spirit, freedom in theory, that spiritualistic 
freedom which imagines itself to be free even in chains, and whose 
soul is satisfied with "the idea" and only embarrassed by any 
mass-type existence. 
"The Jews are emancipated to the extent they have now reached in theory, they 
are free to the extent that they wish to be free." 
From this proposition one can immediately measure the Critical 
gap which separates mass-type, profane communism and socialism 

=====第120页=====
The Holy Family 95 
from absolute socialism. The first proposition of profane socialism 
rejects emancipation in mere theory as an illusion and for real 
freedom it demands besides the idealistic "will" very tangible, very 
material conditions. How low "the Mass" is in comparison with 
holy Criticism, the Mass which considers material, practical up­
heavals necessary even to win the time and means required merely 
to occupy itself with "theory"  I 
Let us leave purely spiritual socialism an instant for politicsl 
Herr Riesser maintains against Bruno Bauer that his state (i.e., 
the Critical state) must exclude "Jews" and "Christians". Herr 
Riesser is right. Since Herr Bauer confuses political emancipation 
with human emancipation, since the state can react to antagonistic 
elements — and Christianity and Judaism are described as treason­
able elements in Die Judenfrage —only by forcible exclusion of the 
persons representing them (as the Terror, for instance, wished to 
do away with hoarding by guillotining the hoarders 31), Herr Bauer 
must have both Jews and Christians hanged in his "Critical state". 
Having confused political emancipation with human emancipation, 
he had to be consistent and confuse the political means of 
emancipation with the human means. But as soon as Absolute 
Criticism is told the definite meaning of its deductions, it gives the 
answer that Schelling once gave to all his opponents who substi­
tuted real thoughts for his phrases: 
" Criticism 's opponents are its opponents because they not only measure it with 
their dogmatic yardstick but regard Criticism itself as dogmatic; they oppose 
Criticism because it does not recognise their dogmatic distinctions, definitions and 
evasions." 
It is, of course, to adopt a dogmatic attitude to Absolute 
Criticism, as also to Herr Schelling, if one assumes it to have 
definite, real meaning, thoughts and views. In order to be accom­
modating and to prove to Herr Riesser its humanity, "Criticism", 
however, decides to resort to dogmatic distinctions, definitions and 
especially to "evasions". 
Thus we read: 
"Had I in that work" (Die Judenfrage) "had the will or the right to go  beyond' 
criticism, I ought" (!) "to have spoken" (!) "not of the state, but of 'society, which 
excludes no one but from which only those exclude themselves who do not wish to 
take part in its development." 
Here Absolute Criticism makes a dogmatic distinction between 
what it ought to have done, if it had not done the contrary, and 
what it actually did. It explains the narrowness of its work Die 
Judenfrage by the "dogmatic evasions" of having the will and the right 

=====第121页=====
96 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
which prohibited it from going "beyond criticism1". What? "Criti­
cism"  should go beyond "criticism"} This quite mass-type notion 
occurs to Absolute Criticism because of the dogmatic necessity for, 
on the one hand, asserting its conception of the Jewish question as 
absolute, as "Criticism", and on the other hand, admitting the 
possibility of a more comprehensive conception. 
The mystery of its "not having the will" and "not having the right" 
will later be revealed as the Critical dogma according to which all 
apparent limitations of "Criticism" are nothing but necessary 
adaptations to the powers of comprehension of the Mass. 
It had not the willl It had not the right to go beyond its narrow 
conception of the Jewish question! But what would it have done 
had it had the will or the  right?  — It would have given a dogmatic 
definition. It would have spoken of "society" instead of the "state", 
that is to say, it would not have studied the real relation of Jewry 
to present-day civil society! It would have given a dogmatic definition 
of "society" as distinct from the "state", in the sense that if the state 
excludes, on the other hand they exclude themselves from society 
who do not wish to take part in its development! 
Society behaves just as exclusively as the state, only in a more 
polite form: it does not throw you out, but it makes it so 
uncomfortable for you that you go out of your own will. 
Basically, the state does not behave otherwise, for it does not 
exclude anybody who complies with all its demands and orders 
and its development. In its perfection it even closes its eyes and 
declares real contradictions to be non-political contradictions which 
do not disturb it. Besides, Absolute Criticism itself has argued that 
the state excludes Jews because and in so far as the Jews exclude 
the state and hence exclude themselves from the state. If this 
reciprocal relationship has a more polite, a more hypocritical, a 
more insidious form in Critical "society", this only proves that 
"Critical" "society" is more hypocritical and less developed. 
Let us follow Absolute Criticism deeper in its "dogmatic distinc­
tions"  and "definitions", and, in particular, in its "evasions". 
Herr Riesser, for example, demands of the critic "that he 
distinguish what belongs to the domain of law" from "what is 
beyond its sphere". 
The Critic is indignant at the impertinence of this juridical 
demand. 
"So far, however," he retorts, "both feeling and conscience have interfered 
in law, always supplemented it, and because of its character, based on its dog­
matic form" (not, therefore, on its dogmatic  essence?),  "have always had to supple­
ment it." 

=====第122页=====
The Holy Family 97 
The Critic forgets only that law, on the other hand, distinguishes 
itself quite explicitly from "feeling and conscience", that this 
distinction is based on the one-sided  essence  of law as well as on its 
dogmatic form, and is even one of the main dogmas of law; that, 
finally, the practical implementation of that distinction is just as 
much the peak of the development of law as the separation of 
religion from all profane content makes it abstract,  absolute  religion. 
The fact that "feeling and conscience" interfere in law is sufficient 
reason for the "Critic" to speak of feeling and conscience when it is 
a matter of law, and of  theological  dogmatism when it is a matter of 
juridical dogmatism. 
The "definitions and distinctions of Absolute Criticism" have 
prepared us sufficiently to hear its latest "discoveries" on "society" 
and "law". 
"The world form that Criticism is preparing, and the thought of which it is even 
only just preparing, is not a merely legal form but" (collect  yourself,  reader) "a social 
one, about which at least this much" (this little?) "can be said: whoever has not 
made his contribution to its development and does not live with his conscience and 
feeling in it, cannot feel at home in it or take part in its history." 
The world form that "Criticism" is preparing is defined as not 
merely legal, but social. This definition can be interpreted in two 
ways.  The sentence quoted may be taken as "not legal but social" 
or as "not merely legal, but a/50 social". Let us consider its content 
according to both readings, beginning with the first. Earlier, 
Absolute Criticism defined the new "world form" distinct from 
the "state" as "society". Now it defines the noun "society" by the 
adjective "social". If Herr Hinrichs was three times given the word 
"social" in contrast to his "political", Herr Riesser is now given 
social society in contrast to his "legal" society. If the Critical 
explanations for Herr Hinrichs reduced themselves to the formula 
"social"-!-"social" + "social" = 3a, Absolute Criticism in its second 
campaign passes from addition to multiplication and Herr Riesser is 
referred to society multiplied by  itself,  society to the second power, 
social society=a 2. In order to complete its deductions on society, 
all that now remains for Absolute Criticism to do is to go 
on to fractions, to extract the square root of society, and so 
forth. 
If, on the other hand, we take the second reading: the "not 
merely legal, but also social" world form, this hybrid world form is 
nothing but the world form existing today, the world form of 
present-day society. It is a great, a meritorious Critical miracle that 
"Criticism" in its pre-world thinking is only just preparing the 
future existence of the world form which exists today. But however 

=====第123页=====
98 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
matters stand with "not merely legal but social society", Criticism 
can for the time being say no more about it than "fabula  docet"  ,a 
the moral application. Those who do not live in that society with 
their feeling and their conscience will "not feel at home" in it. In 
the end, no one will live in that society except "pure feeling" 
and "pure conscience", that is, "the Spirit", "Criticism" and its 
supporters. The Mass will be excluded from it in one way or 
another so that "mass-type society" will exist outside "social 
society". 
In a word, this society is nothing but the Critical heaven from 
which the real world is excluded as being the un-Critical hell. In its 
pure thinking, Absolute Criticism is preparing this transfigured 
world form of the contradiction between "Mass" and "Spirit". 
Of the same Critical depth as these explanations on "society" are 
the explanations Herr Riesser is given on the destiny of nations. 
The Jews' desire for emancipation and the desire of the 
Christian states to "classify" the Jews in "their government 
scheme" — as though the Jews had not long ago been classified in 
the Christian government scheme! — lead Absolute Criticism to 
prophecies on the decay of nationalities. See by what a complicated 
detour Absolute Criticism arrives at the present historical move­
ment— namely, by the detour of  theology.  The following illuminat­
ing oracle shows us what great results Criticism achieves in this 
way: 
"The future of all nationalities—is— very—obscurel" 
But let the future of nationalities be as obscure as it may be, for 
Criticism's sake. The one essential thing is clear: the future is the 
work of Criticism. 
"Destiny," it exclaims, "may decide as it will: we now know that it is our work." 
As God leaves his creation, man, his own will, so Criticism leaves 
destiny, which is its creation, its own will. Criticism, of which destiny 
is the work, is, like God, almighty. Even the "resistance" which it 
"finds" outside itself is its own work. "Criticism makes its adver­
saries."  The "mass indignation" against it is therefore "dangerous" 
only for "the Mass"  itself. 
But if Criticism, like God, is almighty, it is also, like God, all-wise 
and is capable of combining its almightiness with the freedom, the 
will and the natural determination of human individuals. 
a The fable teaches.— Ed. 

=====第124页=====
The Holy Family 99 
"It would not be the epoch-making force if it did not have the effect of making 
each one what he wills to be and showing each one irrevocably the standpoint 
corresponding to his nature and his will." 
Leibniz could not have given a happier presentation of the 
pre-established harmony between the almightiness of God and the 
freedom and natural determination of man. 
If "Criticism" seems to clash with psychology by not distinguish­
ing between the will to be something and the ability to be 
something, it must be borne in mind that it has decisive grounds 
to declare this "distinction" "dogmatic". 
Let us steel ourselves for the third campaign! Let us recall once 
more that "Criticism makes its adversary"! But how could it make 
its adversary, the "phrase", if it were not a phrase-monger? 
3) ABSOLUTE CRITICISM'S THIRD CAMPAIGN 
a) Absolute Criticism's Self-Apology. 
Its "Political" Past 
Absolute Criticism begins its third campaign against the "Mass" 
with the question: 
"What is now the object of criticism?" 
In the same number of the Literatur-Zeitung we find the 
information: 
"Criticism wishes nothing but to know things." 
According to this, all things are the  object  of Criticism. It would 
be senseless to inquire about some particular, definite object 
peculiar to Criticism. The contradiction is easily resolved when one 
remembers that all things "merge" into Critical things and all 
Critical things into the Mass, as the "Object" of "Absolute Criticism". 
First of all, Herr Bruno describes his infinite pity for the "Mass." 
He makes "the gap that separates him from the  crowd"  an object of 
"persevering study." He wants "to find out the significance of that gap 
for the future" (this is what above was called knowing "all" things) 
and at the same time "to abolish it". In truth he therefore already 
knows the significance of that gap. It consists in being abolished by 
him. 
As each man's self is nearest to him, "Criticism" first sets about 
abolishing its own mass nature, like the Christian ascetics who begin 
the campaign of the spirit against the flesh with the mortification 
of their own flesh. The "flesh" of Absolute Criticism is its really 

=====第125页=====
100 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
massive literary past, amounting to 20-30 volumes. Herr Bauer 
must therefore free the literary biography of "Criticism" — which 
coincides exactly with his own literary biography — from its mass­
like appearance; he must retrospectively improve and explain it and 
by this apologetic commentary "place its earlier works in safety". 
He begins by explaining by a double cause the error of the 
Mass, which until the end of the Deutsche Jahrbücher and the 
Rheinische Zeitung™ regarded Herr Bauer as one of its supporters. 
Firstly the mistake was made of regarding the literary movement 
as not "purely literary". At the same time the opposite mistake was 
made, that of regarding the literary movement as "a merely" or 
"purely" literary movement. There is no doubt that the "Mass" was 
mistaken in any case, if only because it made two mutually 
incompatible errors at the same time. 
Absolute Criticism takes this opportunity of exclaiming to those 
who ridiculed the "German nation" as a "blue stocking": 
"Name even a single historical epoch which was not authoritatively outlined before­
hand by the 'pen' and had not to allow itself to be shattered by a stroke of the pen." 
In his Critical naivety Herr Bruno separates "the p°n" from the 
subject who writes, and the subject who writes as "abstract writer" 
from the living historical man who wrote. This allows him to go 
into ecstasy over the wonder-working power of the "pen". He might 
just as well have demanded to be told of a historical movement 
which was not outlined beforehand by "poultry" or the "goose girl". 
Later we shall be told by the same Herr Bruno that so far not 
one historical epoch, not a single one, has become known. How 
could the "pen", which so far has been unable to outline "any 
single" historical epoch after the event, have been able to outline 
them all beforehand? 
Nevertheless, Herr Bruno proves the correctness of his view by 
deeds, by himself "outlining beforehand" his own "past" with apolo­
getic "strokes of the pen". 
Criticism, which was involved on all sides not only in the general 
limitation of the world and of the epoch, but in quite particular 
and personal limitations, and which nevertheless assures us that it 
has been "absolute, perfect and pure" Criticism in all its works for as 
long as man can think, has only  accommodated  itself to the prejudices 
and power of comprehension of the Mass, as God is wont to do in his 
revelations to man. 
"It was bound to come," Absolute Criticism informs us, "to a breach of Theory 
with its seeming ally," 

=====第126页=====
The Holy Family 101 
But because Criticism, here called Theory for a change, comes to 
nothing, but everything, on the contrary, comes from it; because it 
develops not inside but outside the world, and has predestined 
everything in its divine immutable consciousness, the  breach  with its 
former ally was a "new turn" only in appearance, only for others, 
not in itself and not for Criticism  itself. 
"But this turn 'properly speaking' was not even new. Theory had continually 
worked on criticism of itself (we know how much effort has been expended on it to 
force it to criticise itself); "it had never flattered the Mass" (but itself all the more); 
"it had always taken care not to get itself ensnared in the premises of its opponent." 
"The Christian theologian must tread cautiously." (Bruno Bauer, 
Das entdeckte Christentum, p. 99.) How did it happen that "cau­
tious"  Criticism nevertheless did get ensnared and did not already 
at that time express its "proper" meaning clearly and audibly? 
Why did it not speak out bluntly? Why did it let the illusion of its 
brotherhood with the Mass persist? 
"'Why hast thou done this to me?' said Pharaoh to Abraham as he restored to 
him Sarah his wife. 'Why didst thou say she was thy sister?'" (Das entdeckte 
Christentum by Bruno Bauer, p. 100.) 
"'Away with reason and language!' says the theologian, 'for otherwise Abraham 
would be a liar. It would be a mortal insult to Revelation!'" (loc. cit.) 
"Away with reason and language!" says the Critic. For had Herr 
Bauer really and not just apparently been ensnared with the Mass, 
Absolute Criticism would not be absolute in its revelations, it 
would be mortally insulted. 
"It is only," Absolute Criticism continues, "that its" (Absolute Criticism's) 
"efforts had not been  noticed,  and there was moreover a stage of Criticism when 
it was forced sincerely to consider its opponent's premises and to take them seriously 
for an instant; a stage, in short, when it was not yet fully capable of taking away 
from the Mass the latter's conviction that it had the same cause and the same 
interest as Criticism." 
"Criticism's, efforts had just not been noticed; therefore the Mass 
was to blame. On the other hand, Criticism admits that its efforts 
could not be noticed because it itself was not yet "capable" of making 
them noticeable. Criticism therefore appears to be to blame. 
God help us! Criticism was "forced"—violence was used against 
it—"sincerely to consider its opponent's premises and to take 
them seriously for an instant". A fine sincerity, a truly theological 
sincerity, which does not really take a thing seriously but only 
"takes it seriously for an instant"; which has always, therefore every 
instant, been careful not to get itself ensnared in its opponent's 
premises, and nevertheless, "for an instant" "sincerely" takes these 
very premises into consideration. Its "sincerity" is still greater in 
the closing part of the sentence. It was in the same instant when 
5-762 

=====第127页=====
102 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Criticism "sincerely took into consideration the premises of the 
Mass"  that it "was not yet fully capable" of destroying the illusion 
about the unity of its cause and the cause of the Mass. It was not yet 
capable, but it already had the will and the thought of it. It could not 
yet outwardly break with the Mass but the break was already 
complete inside it, in its mind—complete in the same instant when 
it sincerely sympathised with the Mass! 
In its involvement with the prejudices of the Mass, Criticism was 
not really involved in them; on the contrary, it was, properly speaking, 
free from its own limitation and was only "not yet completely 
capable" of informing the Mass of this. Hence all the limitation of 
"Criticism" was pure appearance; an appearance which without the 
limitation of the Mass would have been superfluous and would 
therefore not have existed at all. It is therefore again the Mass that 
is to blame. 
Insofar as this appearance, however, was supported by "the 
inability", "the impotence" of Criticism to express its thought, 
Criticism itself was imperfect. This it admits in its own way, which is 
as sincere as it is apologetic. 
"In spite of having subjected liberalism itself to devastating criticism, it" 
(Criticism) "could still be regarded as a peculiar kind of liberalism, perhaps as its 
extreme form; in spite of its true and decisive arguments having gone beyond 
politics, it  nevertheless  was still bound to give an appearance of engaging in politics, and 
this incomplete appearance won it most of the friends mentioned above." 
Criticism won its friends through its incomplete appearance of 
engaging in politics. Had it  completely  appeared to engage in politics, 
it would inevitably have lost its political friends. In its apologetic 
anxiety to wash itself free of all sin, it accuses the false appearance of 
having been an incomplete false appearance, not a complete false one. 
By substituting one appearance for the other, "Criticism" can 
console itself with the thought that if it had the "complete 
appearance" of wishing to engage in politics, it does not have, on 
the other hand, even the "incomplete appearance" of anywhere or 
at any time having dissolved politics. 
Not completely satisfied with the "incomplete appearance", 
Absolute Criticism again asks  itself: 
"How did it happen that Criticism at that time became involved in 'mass-linked, 
political' interests',1 that it—even" (!)—"was  obliged"  (!)—"to  engage in politics" (!). 
Bauer the theologian takes it as a matter of course that Criticism 
had to indulge endlessly in speculative  theology  for he, "Criticism", is 
indeed a theologian ex professo. But to engage in  politics?  That must 
be motivated by very special, political, personal circumstances! 

=====第128页=====
The Holy Family 103 
Why, then, had "Criticism" to engage even in politics} "It was 
accused—that is the answer to the question." At least the "mystery" 
of "Bauer's politics" is thereby disclosed; at least the appearance, 
which in Bruno Bauer's Die gute Sache der Freiheit und meine eigene 
Sache links its "own cause" to the mass-linked "cause of freedom" 
by means of an  "and",  cannot be called non-political. But if 
Criticism pursued not its "own cause" in the interest of politics, but 
politics in the interest of its own cause, it must be admitted that not 
Criticism was taken in by politics, but politics by Criticism. 
So Bruno Bauer was to be dismissed from his chair of 
theology34 : he was accused; "Criticism" had to engage in politics, 
that is to say, to conduct "its", i.e., Bruno Bauer's, suit. Herr Bauer 
did not conduct Criticism's suit, "Criticism" conducted Herr Bauer !s 
suit. Why did "Criticism" have to conduct its suit? 
"In order to justify  itself!"  It may well  be; only "Criticism" is far 
from limiting itself to such a personal, vulgar reason. It may well 
be; but not solely for that reason, "but mainly in order to bring out 
the contradictions of its opponents", and, Criticism could add, in 
order to have bound together in a single book old essays against 
various theologians — see among other things the wordy bickering 
with Planck,3-' that family affair between "Bauer-theology" and 
Strauss-theology. 
Having got a load off its heart by admitting the real interest of 
its "politics", Absolute Criticism remembers its '"suif and again 
chews the old Hegelian cud (see the struggle between Enlighten­
ment and faith 36 in the Phänomenologie, see the whole of the 
Phänomenologie) that "the old which resists the new is no longer 
really the old", the cud which it has already chewed over at length 
in Die gute Sache der Freiheit. Critical Criticism is a ruminant 
animal. It keeps on warming up a few crumbs dropped by Hegel, 
like the above-quoted proposition about the "old" and the "new", 
or again that about the "development of the extreme out of its 
opposite extreme", and the like, without ever feeling the need to 
deal with "speculative dialectic" in any other way than by the 
exhaustion of Professor Hinrichs. Hegel, on the contrary, it 
continually transcends "Critically" by repeating him. For example: 
"Criticism, by appearing and giving the investigation a new form, i.e., giving it 
the form which is no longer susceptible of being transformed into an external 
limitation," etc. 
When I transform something I make it something essentially 
different. Since every form is also an "external limitation", no form 
is "susceptible" of being transformed into an "external limitation" 

=====第129页=====
104 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
any more than an apple of being "transformed" into an apple. 
Admittedly, the form which "Criticism" gives to the investigation 
is not susceptible of being transformed into any "external limita­
tion" for quite another reason. Beyond every "external limitation" 
it is blurred into an ash-grey, dark-blue vapour of nonsense. 
"It" (the struggle between the old and the new) "would, however, be quite 
impossible even then" (namely at the moment when Criticism "gives" the investiga­
tion "the new form") "if the old were to deal with the question of compatibility or 
incompatibility ... theoretically." 
But why does not the old deal with this question theoretically? 
Because "this, however, is least of all possible for it in the beginning, 
since at the moment of surprise" (i.e., in the beginning) it "knows 
neither itself nor the new", i.e., it deals theoretically neither with 
itself nor with the new. It would be quite impossible if "impossibil­
ity", unfortunately, were not impossible! 
When the "Critic" from the theological faculty further "admits 
that he erred intentionally, that he committed the mistake deliber­
ately and after mature reflection" (all that Criticism has experi­
enced, learnt, and done is transformed for it into a free, pure and 
intentional product of its reflection) this confession of the Critic 
has only an "incomplete appearance" of truth. Since the Kritik der 
Synoptiker" has a completely theological foundation, since it is 
through and through theological criticism, Herr Bauer, university 
lecturer in theology, could write and teach it "without mistake or 
error". The mistake and error were rather on the part of the 
theological faculties, which did not realise how strictly Herr Bauer 
had kept his promise, the promise he gave in Kritik der Synoptiker, 
Bd. I, Foreword, p. xxiii. 
"If the negation may appear still too sharp and far-reaching in this first volume 
too, we must remember that the truly positive can be born only if the negation has 
been serious and general.... In the end it will be seen that only the most devastating 
criticism of the world can teach us the creative power of Jesus and of his principle." 
Herr Bauer intentionally separates the Lord "Jesus" and his 
"principle" in order to free the positive meaning of his promise 
from all semblance of ambiguity. And Herr Bauer has really made 
the "creative" power of the Lord Jesus and of his principle so 
evident that his "infinite self-consciousness" and the "Spirit" are 
nothing but creations of Christianity. 
If Critical Criticism's dispute with the Bonn theological faculty 
explained so well its "politics" at that time, why did Critical 
a B. Bauer, Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker. —Ed. 

=====第130页=====
The Holy Family 105 
Criticism continue to engage in politics after the dispute had been 
settled? Listen to this: 
"At this point 'Criticism' should have either come to a halt or immediately  proceeded 
further to examine the essence of politics and depict it as its adversary; — if only it 
had been possible for it to be able to come to a halt in the struggle at that time and 
if, on the other hand, there had not been a far too strict historical law that when a 
principle measures itself for the first time with its opposite it must let itself be 
repressed by it...." 
What a delightful apologetic phrase! "Criticism should have come 
to a halt" if only it had been possible ... "to be able to come to a 
halt"! Who  "should"  come to a halt? And who should have done 
what "it would not have been possible ... to be able to do"? On the 
other hand! Criticism should have proceeded "if only, on the other 
hand, there had not been a far too strict historical law," etc. 
Historical laws are also "far too strict" with Absolute Criticism! If 
only they did not stand on the opposite side to Critical Criticism, 
how brilliantly the latter would proceed! But à la guerre comme à la 
guerrel In history, Critical Criticism must allow itself to be made 
a sorry "story" of! 
"If Criticism" (still Herr Bauer) "had to ... it will at the same time be admitted that 
it always felt uncertain when it gave in to demands of this" (political) "kind, and 
that as a result of these demands it came into contradiction with its true elements, a 
contradiction that had already found its solution in those elements." 
Criticism was forced into political weaknesses by the all too strict 
laws of history, but — it entreats— it will at the same time be admitted 
that it was above those weaknesses, if not in reality, at least in  itself. 
Firstly, it had overcome them, "in feeling", for "it always felt uncer­
tain in its demands"; it felt ill at ease in politics, it could not make out 
what was the matter with it. More than that! It came into 
contradiction with its true elements. And finally the greatest thing of 
all! The contradiction with its true elements into which it came 
found its solution not in the course of Criticism's development, but 
"had",  on the contrary, "already" found its solution in Criticism's 
true elements existing independently of the contradiction! These 
Critical elements can claim with pride: before Abraham was, we 
were. Before the opposite to us was produced by development, it 
lay yet unborn in our chaotic womb, dissolved, dead, ruined. But 
since Criticism's contradiction with its true elements "had already 
found its solution" in the true elements of Criticism, and since a 
solved contradiction is not a contradiction, it found  itself,  to be 
precise, in no contradiction with its true elements, in no contradic­
tion with  itself,  and — the general aim of self-apology seems 
attained. 

=====第131页=====
106 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Absolute Criticism's self-apology has a whole apologetical dic­
tionary at its disposal: 
"not even properly speaking", "only not noticed", "there was besides", "not yet 
complete", "although — nevertheless", "not only — but mainly", "just as much, 
properly speaking, only", "Criticism should have if only it had been possible and if 
on the other hand", "if ... it will at the same time be admitted", "was it not 
natural, was it not inevitable", "neither ..." etc. 
Not so very long ago Absolute Criticism said the following about 
apologetic phrases of this kind: 
"'Although' and 'nevertheless', 'indeed' and 'but', a heavenly 'Nay', and an 
earthly 'Yea', are the main pillars of modern theology, the stilts on which it strides 
along, the artifice to which its whole wisdom is reduced, the phrase which recurs in 
all its phrases, its alpha and omega" (Das entdeckte Christentum, p. 102). 
b) The Jewish Question No. 3 
"Absolute Criticism" does not stop at proving by its autobiog­
raphy its own singular almightiness which "properly speaking, first 
"creates  the old, just as much as the new". It does not stop at writing 
in person the apology of its past. It now sets third persons, the rest 
of the secular world, the Absolute "Task", the "task which is much 
more important now", the apologia for Bauer's deeds and "works". 
The Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher published a criticism of Herr 
Bauer's Die Judenfrage. 3 His basic error, the confusion of "political" 
with "human emancipation", was revealed. True, the old Jewish 
question was not first brought into its "correct setting"; the "Jewish 
question" was rather dealt with and solved in the setting which 
recent developments have given to old questions of the day, and as a 
result of which the latter have become "questions" of the present 
instead of "questions" of the past. 
Absolute Criticism's third campaign, it seems, is intended to 
reply to the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher. First of all, Absolute 
Criticism admits: 
"In Die Judenfrage the same 'oversight' was made—that of identifying the human 
with the political essence." 
Criticism remarks: 
"it would be too late to reproach criticism for the stand which it still maintained 
partially two years ago." "The question is rather to explain why criticism ... even had 
to engage in politics." 
K. Marx, On the Jewish Question. See present edition, Vol.  3.—Ed. 

=====第132页=====
The Holy Family 107 
"Two years ago?" We must reckon according to the absolute 
chronology, from the birth of the Critical Redeemer of the world, 
Bauer's Literatur-Zeitungl The Critical world redeemer was born 
anno 1843. In the same year the second, enlarged edition of 
Die Judenfrage was published. The "Critical" treatment of the 
"Jewish question" in Einundzwanzig Bogen aus der Schweiz appeared 
later in the same year, 1843 old style. 37 After the end of the Deutsche 
Jahrbücher and the Rheinische Zeitung, in the same momentous year 
1843 old style, or anno 1 of the Critical era, appeared Herr 
Bauer's fantastic-political work Staat, Religion und Parthei, which 
exactly repeated his old errors on the "political essence". The 
apologist is forced to falsify chronology. 
The "explanation" why Herr Bauer "even had to" engage in 
politics is a matter of general interest only under certain condi­
tions.  If the infallibility, purity and absoluteness of Critical 
Criticism are assumed as basic dogma, then, of course, the facts 
contradicting that dogma turn into riddles which are just as 
difficult, profound and mysterious as the apparently ungodly 
deeds of God are for theologians. 
If, on the other hand, "the Critic" is considered as a finite 
individual, if he is not separated from the limitations of his time, 
one does not have to answer the question why he had to de­
velop even within the world, because the question itself does not 
exist. 
If, however, Absolute Criticism insists on its demand, one can 
offer to provide a little scholastic treatise dealing with the 
following "questions of the times": 
"Why had the Virgin Mary's conception by the Holy Ghost to be 
proved by no other than Herr Bruno Bauer?" "Why had Herr 
Bauer to prove that the angel that appeared to Abraham was a 
real emanation of God, an emanation which, nevertheless, lacked 
the consistency necessary to digest food?" "Why had Herr Bauer to 
provide an apologia for the Prussian royal house and to raise 
the Prussian state to the rank of absolute state?" "Why had 
Herr Bauer, in his Kritik der Synoptiker, to substitute 'infinite 
self-consciousness'  for man?" "Why had Herr Bauer in his Das entdeckte 
Christentum to repeat the Christian theory of creation in a He­
gelian form?" "Why had Herr Bauer to demand of himself and 
others an 'explanation' of the miracle that he was bound to be 
mistaken?" 
While waiting for proofs of these necessities, which are just as 
"Critical" as they are "Absolute", let us listen once more to 
"Criticism's" apologetic evasions. 

=====第133页=====
108 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"The Jewish question ... had ... first to be brought into its correct setting, as a 
religious and theological and as a political question." "As to the treatment and 
solution of both these questions, Criticism is neither religious nor political." 
The point is that the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher declares 
Bauer's treatment of the "Jewish question" to be really theological 
and /antostic-political. 
First, "Criticism" replies to the "reproach" of  theological  limitation. 
"The Jewish question is a religious question. The Enlightenment claimed to solve it 
by describing the religious contradiction as insignificant or even by denying it. 
Criticism, on the contrary, had to present it in its purity." 
When we come to the political part of the Jewish question we 
shall see that in politics, too, Herr Bauer the theologian is not 
concerned with politics but with theology. 
But when the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher attacked his treat­
ment of the Jewish question as "purely religious", it was concerned es­
pecially with his article in Einundzwanz ig Bogen,  the title of which was: 
"Die Fähigkeit der heutigen Juden und Christen, frei zu  werden"  .a 
This article has nothing to do with the old "Enlightenment". It 
contains Herr Bauer's positive view on the ability of the present-
day Jews to be emancipated, that is, on the possibility of their 
emancipation. 
"Criticism" says: 
"The Jewish question is a religious question." 
The question is: What is a religious question? and, in particular, 
what is a religious question today? 
The theologian will judge by appearances and see a religious 
question in a religious question. But "Criticism" must remember 
the explanation it gave Professor Hinrichs that the political interests 
of the present time have social significance, that it is "no longera 
question" of political interests} 3 
The Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher with equal right said to 
Criticism: Religious questions of the day have at the present time 
a social significance. It is no longer a question of religious interests 
as such. Only the theologian can believe it is a question of religion as 
religion. Granted, the Jahrbücher committed the error of not 
stopping at the word "social". It characterised the real position of the 
jews in civil society today. Once Jewry was stripped bare of the 
a "The Ability of Present-Day Jews and Christians to Obtain Freedom." — Ed. 
b See pp. 90-91 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第134页=====
The Holy Family 109 
religious shell and its empirical, worldly, practical kernel was 
revealed, the practical, really social way in which this kernel is to be 
abolished could be indicated. Herr Bauer was content with a 
"religious question" being a "religious question". 
It was by no means denied, as Herr Bauer makes out, that the 
Jewish question is also a religious question. On the contrary, it was 
shown that Herr Bauer grasps only the religious essence of Jewry, 
but not the secular, real basis of that religious essence. He combats 
religious consciousness as if it were something independent. Herr 
Bauer therefore explains the real Jews by the Jewish religion, 
instead of explaining the mystery of the Jewish religion by the real 
Jews. Herr Bauer therefore understands the Jew only insofar as he 
is an immediate object of theology or a theologian. 
Consequently Herr Bauer has no inkling that real secular Jewry, 
and hence religious Jewry too, is being continually produced by the 
present-day civil life and finds its final development in the money 
system.  He could not have any inkling of this because he did not 
know Jewry as a part of the real world but only as a part of his 
world, theology; because he, a pious, godly man, considers not the 
active everyday Jew but the hypocritical Jew of the Sabbath to be the 
real Jew. For Herr Bauer, as a theologian of the Christian faith, the 
world-historic significance of Jewry had to cease the moment Chris­
tianity was born. Hence he had to repeat the old orthodox view that 
it has maintained itself in spite of history; and the old theological 
superstition that Jewry exists only as a confirmation of the divine 
curse, as a tangible proof of the Christian revelation had to recur 
with him in the Critical-theological form that it exists and has 
existed only as crude religious doubt about the supernatural origin 
of Christianity, i.e., as a tangible proof against Christian revelation. 
On the other hand, it was proved that Jewry has maintained itself 
and developed through history, in and with history, and that this 
development is to be perceived not by the eye of the theologian, 
but only by the eye of the man of the world, because it is to be 
found, not in religious theory, but only in commercial and industrial 
practice. It was explained why practical Jewry attains its full 
development only in the fully developed Christian world, why 
indeed it is the fully developed practice of the Christian world itself 
The existence of the present-day Jew was not explained by his 
religion — as though this religion were something apart, indepen­
dently existing  — but the tenacious survival of the Jewish religion 
was explained by practical features of civil society which are 
fantastically reflected in that religion. The emancipation of the 
Jews into human beings, or the human emancipation of Jewry, 

=====第135页=====
110 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
was therefore not conceived, as by Herr Bauer, as the special task 
of the Jews, but as a general practical task of the present-day 
world, which is Jewish to the core. It was proved that the task of 
abolishing the essence of Jewry is actually the task of abolishing the 
Jewish character of civil society, abolishing the inhumanity of the 
present-day practice of life, the most extreme expression of which 
is the money system. 
Herr Bauer, as a genuine, although Critical, theologian or theolo­
gical Critic, could not get beyond the religious contradiction. 
In the attitude of the Jews to the Christian world he could see only 
the attitude of the Jewish religion to the Christian religion. He even 
had to restore the religious contradiction in a Critical way—in.the 
antithesis between the attitudes of the Jew and the Christian to 
Critical religion—atheism, the last stage of theism, the negative 
recognition of God. Finally, in his theological fanaticism he had to 
restrict the ability of the "present-day Jews and Christians", i.e., 
of the present-day world, "to obtain freedom" to their ability to 
grasp "the Criticism" of theology and apply it themselves. For the 
orthodox theologian the whole world is dissolved in "religion and 
theology". (He could just as well dissolve it in politics, political 
economy, etc., and call theology heavenly political economy, for 
example, since it is the theory of the production, distribution, 
exchange and consumption of "spiritual wealth" and of the 
treasures of heaven!) Similarly, for the radical, Critical theologian, 
the ability of the world to achieve freedom, is dissolved in the 
single abstract ability to criticise "religion and theology" as "reli­
gion and theology". The only struggle he knows is the struggle 
against the religious limitations of self-consciousness, whose Critical 
"purity" and "infinity" is just as much a theological limitation. 
Herr Bauer, therefore, dealt with the religious and theological 
question in the religious and theological way, if only because he saw 
in the "religious" question of the time a "purely religious" question. 
His "correct setting of the question" set the question "correctly" 
only in respect of his "own ability"—to answer! 
Let us now go on to the political part of the Jewish question. 
The Jews (like the Christians) are fully politically emancipated in 
various states. Both Jews and Christians are far from being 
humanly emancipated. Hence there must be a difference between 
political and human emancipation. The essence of political emanci­
pation, i.e., of the developed, modern state, must therefore be 
studied. On the other hand, states which cannot yet politically 
emancipate the Jews must be rated by comparison with the 
perfected political state and shown to be under-developed states. 

=====第136页=====
The Holy Family 111 
That is the point of view from which the "political emancipa­
tion" of the Jews should have been dealt with and is dealt with in 
the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher. 
Herr Bauer offers the following defence of "Criticism's" Die 
Judenfrage. 
"The Jews were shown that they laboured under an illusion about the system 
from which they demanded freedom." 
Herr Bauer did show that the illusion of the German Jews was to 
demand the right to partake in the political community life in a 
land where there was no political community and to demand 
political rights where only political privileges existed. On the other 
hand, Herr Bauer was shown that he  himself,  no less than the 
Jews,  laboured under "illusions" about the "German political 
system". For he explained the position of the Jews in the German 
states as being due to the inability of "the Christian state" to 
emancipate the Jews politically. Flying in the face of the facts, he 
depicted the state of privilege, the Christian-Germanic state, as the 
Absolute Christian state. It was proved to him, on the contrary, 
that the politically perfected, modern state that knows no religious 
privileges is also the fully developed Christian state, and that 
therefore the fully developed Christian state, not only can emanci­
pate the Jews but has emancipated them and by its very nature 
must emancipate them. 
"The Jews are shown ... that they are under the greatest illusion about 
themselves when they think they are demanding freedom and the recognition of 
free humanity, whereas for them it is, and can be, only a question of a special pri­
vilege." 
Freedom! Recognition of free humanity! Special privilege! Edifying 
words by which to by-pass certain questions apologetically! 
Freedom? It was a question of political freedom. Herr Bauer was 
shown that when the Jew demands freedom and nevertheless 
refuses to renounce his religion, he "is engaging in politics" and 
sets no condition that is contrary to political freedom. Herr Bauer 
was shown that it is by no means contrary to political emancipation 
to divide man into the non-religious citizen and the religious private 
individual. He was shown that just as the "state emancipates itself 
from religion by emancipating itself from state religion and leaving 
religion to itself within civil society, so the individual emancipates 
himself politically from religion by regarding it no longer as a 
public matter but as a private matter. Finally, it was shown that the 
terroristic attitude of the French Revolution to religion, far from 
refuting this conception, bears it out. 

=====第137页=====
112 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Instead of studying the real attitude of the modern state to 
religion, Herr Bauer thought it necessary to imagine a Critical 
state,  a state which is nothing but the Critic of  theology  inflated into a 
state in Herr Bauer's imagination. If Herr Bauer is caught up in 
politics he continually makes politics a prisoner of his faith, Critical 
faith. Insofar as he deals with the state he always makes out of it 
an argument against "the adversary", un-Critical religion and theolo­
gy. The state acts as executor of  Critical-theological  cherished desires. 
When Herr Bauer had first freed himself from orthodox, un-
Critical theology, political authority took for him the place of religious 
authority. His faith in Jehovah changed into faith in the Prussian 
state.  In Bruno Bauer's work Die evangelische Landeskirche* not 
only the Prussian state, but, quite consistently, the Prussian royal 
house too, was made into an absolute. In reality Herr Bauer had no 
political interest in that state; its merit, in the eyes of "Criticism", 
was rather that it abolished dogmas by means of the Unified 
Church 38 and suppressed the dissenting sects with the help of the 
police. 
The political movement that began in the year 1840 redeemed 
Herr Bauer from his conservative politics and raised him for a 
moment to liberal politics. But here again politics was in reality 
only a pretext for theology. In his work Die gute Sache der Freiheit 
und meine eigene Angelegenheit, the free state is the Critic of the 
theological faculty in Bonn and an argument against religion. In 
Die Judenfrage the contradiction between state and religion is the 
main interest, so that the criticism of political emancipation 
changes into a criticism of the Jewish religion. In his latest political 
work, Staat, Religion und Parthei, the most secret cherished desire 
of the Critic inflated into a state is at last expressed. Religion is 
sacrificed to the state or rather the state is only the means by which 
the opponent of "Criticism", un-Critical religion and theology, is 
done to death. Finally, after Criticism has been redeemed, if only 
apparently, from all politics by the socialist ideas, which have been 
spreading in Germany from 1843 onwards, in the same way as it 
was redeemed from its conservative politics by the political 
movement after 1840, it is finally able to proclaim its writings 
against un-Critical theology to be social and to indulge unhindered 
in its own Critical theology, the contrasting of Spirit and Mass, as 
the annunciation of the Critical Saviour and Redeemer of the 
world. 
Let us return to our subject! 
[B. Bauer,] Die evangelische Landeskirche Preussens und die Wissenschaft. — Ed. 

=====第138页=====
The Holy Family 113 
Recognition of free humanity? "Free humanity", recognition of 
which the Jews did not merely think they wanted, but really did 
want, is. the same "free humanity" which found  classic  recognition 
in the so-called universal rights of man. Herr Bauer himself 
explicitly treated the Jews' efforts for recognition of their free 
humanity as their efforts to obtain the universal rights of man. 
In the  Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher it was demonstrated to Herr 
Bauer that this "free humanity" and the "recognition" of it are 
nothing but the recognition of the egoistic civil individual and of 
the unrestrained movement of the spiritual and material elements 
which are the content 'of his life situation, the content of present-day 
civil life; that the rights of man do not, therefore, free man from 
religion, but give him freedom of religion; that they do not free him 
from property, but procure for him freedom of  property;  that they 
do not free him from the filth of gain, but rather give him freedom 
of gainful occupation. 
It was shown that the recognition of the rights of man by the 
modern state has no other meaning than the recognition of slavery by 
the state of antiquity had. In other words, just as the ancient state 
had slavery as its natural basis, the modern state has as its natural 
basis civil society and the man of civil society, i.e., the independent 
man linked with other men only by the ties of private interest and 
unconscious natural necessity, the slave of labour for gain and of his 
own as well as other men's selfish need. The modern state has 
recognised this its natural basis as such in the universal rights of 
man.  It did not create it. As it was the product of civil society 
driven beyond the old political bonds by its own development, the 
modern state, for its part, now recognised the womb from which it 
sprang and its basis by the declaration of the rights of man. Hence, 
the political emancipation of the Jews and the granting to them of 
the "rights of man" is an act the two sides of which are mutually 
dependent. Herr Riesser correctly expresses the meaning of the 
Jews'  desire for recognition of their free humanity when he 
demands, among other things, the freedom of movement, sojourn, 
travel, earning one's living, etc. These manifestations of "free 
humanity" are explicitly recognised as such in the French Declara­
tion of the Rights of Man. The Jew has all the more right to the 
recognition of his "free humanity" as "free civil society" is of a 
thoroughly commercial and Jewish nature, and the Jew is a 
necessary member of it. The  Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher further 
demonstrated why the member of civil society is called, par 
excellence, "Man" and why the rights of man are called "inborn 
rights". 

=====第139页=====
114 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The only Critical thing Criticism could say about the rights of 
man was that they are not inborn but arose in the course of 
history. That much Hegel had already told us. Finally, to its 
assertion that both Jews and Christians, in order to grant or 
receive the universal rights of man, must sacrifice the privilege of 
faith—the Critical theologian supposes his one fixed idea at the 
basis of all things — there was specially counterposed the fact 
contained in all un-Critical declarations of the rights of man that 
the right to believe what one wishes, the right to practise any 
religion, is explicitly recognised as a universal right of man. Besides, 
"Criticism" should have known that Hébert's party in particular 
was defeated on the pretext that it attacked the rights of man by 
attacking freedom of religion, 39 and that similarly the rights of man 
were invoked later when freedom of worship was restored.40 
"As far as political essence is concerned, Criticism followed its contradictions to 
the point where the contradiction between theory and practice had been most 
thoroughly elaborated during the past fifty years — to the French representative 
system,  in which the freedom of theory is disavowed by practice and the freedom of 
practical life seeks in vain its expression in theory. 
"Now that the basic illusion has been done away with, the contradiction proved in 
the debates in the French Chamber, the contradiction between free theory and the 
practical validity of privileges, between the legal validity of privileges and a public 
system in which the egoism of the pure individual tries to dominate the exclusivity of the 
privileged, should be conceived as a general contradiction in this sphere." 
The contradiction that Criticism proved in the debates in the 
French Chamber was nothing but a contradiction of constitutional­
ism. Had Criticism grasped it as a general contradiction it would 
have grasped the general contradiction of constitutionalism. Had it 
gone still further than in its opinion it "should have" gone, had it, 
to be precise, gone as far as the abolition of this general 
contradiction, it would have proceeded correctly from constitution­
al monarchy to arrive at the democratic representative state, the 
perfected modern statev Far from having criticised the essence of 
political emancipation and proved its definite relation to the 
essence of man, it would have arrived only at the fact of political 
emancipation, at the fully developed modern state, that is to say, 
only at the point where the existence of the modern state 
conforms to its essence and where, therefore, not only the relative, 
but the absolute imperfections, those which constitute its very 
essence, can be observed and described. 
The above-quoted "Critical" passage is all the more valuable as 
it proves beyond any doubt that at the very moment when 
Criticism sees the "political essence" far below  itself,  it is, on the 
contrary, far below the political essence; it still needs to find in the 

=====第140页=====
The Holy Family 115 
latter the solution of its own contradictions and it still persists in 
not giving a thought to the modern principle of the state. 
To "free theory" Criticism contrasts the "practical validity of 
privileges"; to the "legal validity of privileges" it contrasts the "public 
system". 
In order not to misinterpret the opinion of Criticism, let us 
recall the contradiction it proved in the debates in the French 
Chamber, the very contradiction which "should have been con­
ceived" as a general one. One of the questions dealt with was the 
fixing of a day in the week on which children would be freed 
from work. Sunday was suggested. One deputy moved to leave out 
mention of Sunday in the law as being unconstitutional. The 
Minister Martin (du Nord) saw in this motion an attempt to 
proclaim that Christianity had ceased to exist. Monsieur Crémieux 
declared on behalf of the French Jews that the Jews, out of respect 
for the religion of the great majority of Frenchmen, did not object 
to Sunday being mentioned. Now, according to free theory, Jews 
and Christians are equal, but according to this practice Christians 
have a privilege over Jews; for otherwise how could the Sunday of 
the Christians have a place in a law made for all Frenchmen? 
Should not the Jewish Sabbath have the same right, etc.? Or in the 
practical life of the French too, the Jew is not really oppressed by 
Christian privileges; but the law does not dare to express this 
practical equality. All the contradictions in the political essence 
expounded by Herr Bauer in Die Judenfrage are of this 
kind — contradictions of constitutionalism, which is, in general, the 
contradiction between the modern representative state and the old 
state of privileges. 
Herr Bauer is committing a very serious oversight when he 
thinks he is rising from the political to the human essence by 
conceiving and criticising this contradiction as a "general" one. He 
would thus only rise from partial political emancipation to full 
political emancipation, from the constitutional state to the demo­
cratic representative state. 
Herr Bauer thinks that by the abolition of privilege the  object  of 
privilege is also abolished. Concerning the statement of Monsieur 
Martin (du Nord), he says: 
"There is no longer any religion when there is no longer any privileged religion. 
Take from religion its exclusive power and it will no longer exist."3 
Just as industrial activity is not abolished when the privileges of the 
a This passage from B. Bauer's Die Judenfrage (p. 66) is quoted by Marx in his 
article "On the Jewish Question" (see present edition, Vol. 3, p. 149).— Ed. 

=====第141页=====
116 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
trades, guilds and corporations are abolished, but, on the contrary, 
real industry begins only after the abolition of these privileges; just 
as ownership of the land is not abolished when privileged land-
ownership is abolished, but, on the contrary, begins its universal 
movement only with the abolition of privileges and with the free 
division and free sale of land; just as trade is not abolished by the 
abolition of trade privileges, but finds its true realisation in free 
trade; so religion develops in its practical universality only 
where there is no privileged religion (cf. the North American 
States). 
The modern "public system'", the developed modern state, is not 
based, as Criticism thinks, on a society of privileges, but on a 
society in which privileges have been abolished and dissolved, on 
developed civil society in which the vital elements which were still 
politically bound under the privilege system have been set free. 
Here no "privileged exclusivity," stands opposed either to any other 
exclusivity or to the public system. Free industry and free trade 
abolish privileged exclusivity and thereby the struggle between the 
privileged exclusivities. They replace exclusivity with man freed 
from privilege — which isolates from the general totality but at the 
same time unites in a smaller exclusive totality—man no longer 
bound to other men even by the semblance of a common bond. 
Thus they produce the universal struggle of man against man, 
individual against individual. In the same way civil society as a 
whole is this war against one another of all individuals, who are no 
longer isolated from one another by anything but their individuali­
ty, and the universal unrestrained movement of the elementary 
forces of life freed from the fetters of privilege. The contradiction 
between the democratic representative state and civil society is the 
completion of the classic contradiction between public commonweal 
and slavery. In the modern world each person is at the same time a 
member of slave society and of the public commonweal. Precisely 
the slavery of civil society is in appearance the greatest freedom 
because it is in appearance the fully developed independence of the 
individual, who considers as his own freedom the uncurbed 
movement, no longer bound by a common bond or by man, of the 
estranged elements of his life, such as property, industry, religion, 
etc., whereas actually this is his fully developed slavery and 
inhumanity. Law has here taken the place of privilege. 
It is therefore only here, where we find no contradiction 
between free theory and the practical validity of privilege, but, on 
the contrary, the practical abolition of privilege, free industry, free 
trade, etc., conform to "free theory", where the public system is 

=====第142页=====
The Holy Family 117 
not opposed by any privileged exclusivity, where the contradiction 
expounded by Criticism is abolished—only here is the fully de­
veloped modern state to be  found. 
Here also reigns the  reverse  of the law which Herr Bauer, on the 
occasion of the debates in the French Chamber, formulated in 
perfect agreement with Monsieur Martin (du Nord): 
"Just as M. Martin (du Nord) saw the proposal to omit mention of Sunday in the 
law as a motion to declare that Christianity has ceased to exist, with equal reason 
(and this reason is very well founded)  — the declaration that the law of the Sabbath is no 
longer binding on the Jews would be a proclamation abolishing Judaism." 3 
It is just the opposite in the developed modern state. The state 
declares that religion, like the other elements of civil life, only 
begins to exist in its full scope when the state declares it to be 
non-political and therefore leaves it to  itself.  To the dissolution of 
the political existence of these elements, as for example, the 
dissolution of property by the abolition of the property qualification 
for electors, the dissolution of religion by the abolition of the state 
church, to this proclamation of their civil death corresponds their 
most vigorous life, which henceforth obeys its own laws undis­
turbed and develops to its full scope. 
Anarchy is the law of civil society emancipated from divisive 
privileges, and the anarchy of civil  society  is the basis of the modern 
public system, just as the public system in its turn is the guarantee 
of that anarchy. To the same great extent that the two are 
opposed to each other they also determine each other. 
It is clear how capable Criticism is of assimilating the "new". But 
if we remain within the bounds of "pure Criticism", the question 
arises:  Why did Criticism not conceive as a universal contradiction 
the contradiction which it disclosed in connection with the debates 
in the French Chamber, although in its own opinion that is what 
"should have" been done? 
"That step was, however, then impossible—not only because ... not only be­
cause ... but also because without that last remnant of inner involvement with 
its opposite Criticism was impossible and could not have come to the point from 
which only one step remained to be taken." 
It was impossible ... because ... it was impossible! Criticism 
assures us, moreover, that the fateful "one step" necessary "to 
come to the point from which only one step remained to be taken" 
a This passage from B. Bauer's Die Judenfrage (p. 71) is quoted by Marx in his 
article "On the Jewish Question" (see present edition, Vol. 3, p. 149).— Ed. 
Here and below quotations are taken from the article "Was ist jetzt der 
Gegenstand der Kritik?" (Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII).— Ed. 

=====第143页=====
118 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
was impossible. Who will dispute that? In order to be able to come 
to a point from which only "one step" remains to be taken, it is 
absolutely impossible to take that "one step" more which leads 
over the point beyond which still "one step" remains to be taken. 
All's well that ends well! At the end of the encounter with the 
Mass, which is hostile to Criticism's Die Judenfrage, "Criticism" 
admits that its conception of the "rights of man", its 
"appraisal of religion in the French Revolution", the "free political essence it 
pointed to occasionally at the conclusion of its considerations", in short, the whole 
"period of the French Revolution, was for Criticism neither more nor less than a 
symbol—that is to say, not the period of the revolutionary efforts of the French in 
the exact and prosaic sense —a symbol and therefore only a fantastic expression of 
the shapes which it saw at the end". 
We shall not deprive Criticism of the consolation that when it 
sinned politically it did so only at the "conclusion" and at the 
"end" of its works. A notorious drunkard used to console himself 
with the thought that he was never drunk before midnight. 
In the sphere of the "Jewish question", Criticism has indisputa­
bly been winning more and more ground from the Enemy. In 
No. 1 of the "Jewish question", the treatise of "Criticism" defended 
by Herr Bauer was still absolute and revealed the "true" and "gener­
al" significance of the "Jewish question". In No. 2 Criticism had 
neither the "will" nor the "right" to go beyond Criticism. In No. 3 it 
had still to take "one step", but that step was "impossible"—because 
it was—"impossible". It was not its "will or right" but its 
involvement in its "opposite" that prevented it from taking that 
"one step". It would very much have liked to clear the last obstacle, 
but unfortunately a last remnant of Mass stuck to its Critical 
seven-league boots. 
c) Critical Battle Against the French Revolution 
The narrow-mindedness of the Mass forced the "Spirit", Criti­
cism,  Herr Bauer, to consider the French Revolution not as the 
time of the revolutionary efforts of the French in the "prosaic 
sense" but "only" as the "symbol and fantastic expression" of the 
Critical figments of his own brain. Criticism does penance for its 
"oversight" by submitting the Revolution to a fresh examination. At 
the same time it punishes the seducer of its innocence—"the 
Mass"  — by communicating to it the results of this "fresh examina­
tion". 
"The French Revolution was an experiment which still belonged entirely to the 
eighteenth century." 

=====第144页=====
The Holy Family 119 
The chronological truth that an experiment of the eighteenth 
century like the French Revolution is still entirely an experiment 
of the eighteenth century, and not, for example, an experiment of 
the nineteenth, seems "still entirely" to be one of those truths 
which "are self-evident from the start". But in the terminology of 
Criticism,, which is very prejudiced against "crystal-clear" truths, a 
truth like that is called an "examination" and therefore naturally 
has its place in a "fresh examination of the Revolution". 
"The ideas to which the French Revolution gave rise did not, however, lead 
beyond the order of things that it wanted to abolish by force." 
Ideas can never lead beyond an old world order but only beyond 
the ideas of the old world order. Ideas cannot carry out anything at 
all. In order to carry out ideas men are needed who can exert 
practical force. In its literal sense the Critical sentence is therefore 
another truth that is self-evident, and therefore another "examina­
tion". 
Undeterred by this examination, the French Revolution gave 
rise to ideas which led beyond the ideas of the entire old world 
order. The revolutionary movement which began in 1789 in the 
Cercle social, 41 which in the middle of its course had as its chief 
representatives Leclerc and Roux, and which finally with Babeufs 
conspiracy was temporarily defeated, gave rise to the communist 
idea which Babeufs friend Buonarroti re-introduced in France after 
the Revolution of 1830. This idea, consistently developed, is the 
idea of the new world order. 
"After the Revolution had therefore" (!) "abolished the feudal barriers in the 
life of the people, it was compelled to satisfy and even to inflame the pure egoism 
of the nation and, on the other hand, to curb it by its necessary complement, the 
recognition of a supreme being, by this higher confirmation of the general state 
system, which has to hold together the individual self-seeking atoms." 
The egoism of the nation is the natural egoism of the general 
state system, as opposed to the egoism of the feudal classes. The 
supreme being is the higher confirmation of the general state 
system, and hence also of the nation. Nevertheless, the supreme 
being is supposed to curb the egoism of the nation, that is, of the 
general state system! A really Critical task, to curb egoism by 
means of its confirmation and even of its religious confirmation, 
i.e., by recognising that it is of a superhuman nature and 
therefore free of human restraint! The creators of the supreme 
being were not aware of this, their Critical intention. 
Monsieur Bûchez, who bases national fanaticism on religious 
fanaticism, understands his hero Robespierre better. 42 

=====第145页=====
120 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Nationalism [Nationalität] led to the downfall of Rome and Greece. 
Criticism therefore says nothing specific about the French Revolution 
when it maintains that nationalism caused its downfall, and it 
says just as little about the nation when it defines its egoism as 
pure. This pure egoism appears rather to be a very dark, 
spontaneous egoism, combined with flesh and blood, when com­
pared, for example, with the pure egoism of Fichte's "ego". 
But if, in contrast to the egoism of the feudal classes, its purity is 
only relative, no "fresh examination of the revolution" was needed 
to see that the egoism which has a nation as its content is more 
general or purer than that which has as its content a particular 
social class or a particular corporation. 
Criticism's explanations about the general state system are no less 
instructive. They are confined to saying that the general state 
system must hold together the individual self-seeking atoms. 
Speaking exactly and in the prosaic sense, the members of civil 
society are not atoms. The specific property of the atom is that it has 
no properties and is therefore not connected with beings outside it 
by any relationship determined by its own natural necessity. The 
atom has no needs, it is self-sufficient; the world outside it is an 
absolute vacuum, i.e., is contentless, senseless, meaningless, just 
because the atom has all fullness in  itself.  The egoistic individual in 
civil society may in his non-sensuous imagination and lifeless 
abstraction inflate himself into an atom, i.e., into an unrelated, 
self-sufficient, wantless,  absolutely  full, blessed being. Unblessed sensu­
ous reality does not bother about his imagination, each of his senses 
compels him to believe in the existence2 of the world and of 
individuals outside him, and even his profane stomach reminds him 
every day that the world outside him is not empty, but is what really 
fills. Every activity and property of his being, every one of his vital 
urges,  becomes a  need,  a necessity, which his self-seeking transforms 
into seeking for other things and human beings outside him. But 
since the need of one individual has no self-evident meaning for 
another egoistic individual capable of satisfying that need, and 
therefore no direct connection with its satisfaction, each individual 
has to create this connection; it thus becomes the intermediary 
between the need of another and the objects of this need. 
Therefore, it is natural necessity, the essential human properties 
however estranged they may seem to be, and interest that hold the 
members of civil society together; civil, not political life is their real 
There is evidently an error in the original: "an den Sinn" instead of "an das 
Sein". — Ed. 

=====第146页=====
The Holy Family 121 
tie. It is therefore not the state that holds the atoms of civil society 
together, but the fact that they are atoms only in imagination, in the 
heaven of their fancy, but in reality beings tremendously different 
from atoms, in other words, not divine egoists, but egoistic human 
beings. Only political superstition still imagines today that civil life must 
be held together by the state, whereas in reality, on the contrary, the 
state is held together by civil life. 
"Robespierre's and Saint-Just's tremendous idea of making a 'free people' which 
would live only according to the rules of justice and virtue—see, for example, 
Saint-Just's report on Danton's crimes and his other report on the general 
police — could be maintained for a certain time only by terror and was a 
contradiction against which the vulgar, self-seeking elements of the popular community 
reacted in the cowardly and insidious way that was only to be expected from 
them." 
This phrase of Absolute Criticism, which describes a "free 
people" as a "contradiction" against which the elements of the 
"popular community" are bound to react, is absolutely hollow, for 
according to Robespierre and Saint-Just liberty, justice and virtue 
could, on the contrary, be only manifestations of the life of the 
"people" and only properties of the "popular community". Ro­
bespierre and Saint-Just spoke explicitly of "liberty, justice and 
virtue" of ancient times, belonging only to the "popular community". 
Spartans, Athenians and Romans at the time of their greatness were 
"free,  just and virtuous peoples". 
"What," asks Robespierre in his speech on the principles of public morals 
(sitting of the Convention on February 5, 1794), "is the fundamental principle of 
democratic or popular government? It is virtue, I mean public virtue, which worked 
such miracles in Greece and Rome and which will work still greater ones in 
republican France; virtue which is nothing but love of one's country and its 
laws. 
Robespierre then explicitly calls the Athenians and Spartans 
"peuples libres".* He continually recalls the ancient popular commu­
nity and quotes its heroes as well as its corrupters — Lycurgus, 
Demosthenes, Miltiades, Aristides, Brutus and Catilina, Caesar, 
Clodius and Piso. 
In his report on Danton's arrest (referred to by Criticism) 
Saint-Just says explicitly: 
"The world has been empty since the Romans, and only their memory fills it 
and still prophesies liberty." 
His accusation is composed in the ancient style and directed 
against Danton as against Catilina. 
In Saint-Just's other report, the one on the general police,*5 the 
a Free peoples.— Ed. 

=====第147页=====
122 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
republican is described exactly in the ancient sense, as inflexible, 
modest, simple and so on. The police should be an institution of the 
same nature as the Roman censorship. — He does not fail to 
mention Codrus, Lycurgus, Caesar, Cato, Catilina, Brutus, An­
tonius, and Cassius. Finally, Saint-Just describes the "liberty, justice 
and virtue" that he demands in a single word when he says: 
"Que les hommes révolutionnaires soient des Romains."' 1 
Robespierre, Saint-Just and their party fell because they con­
fused the ancient, realistic-democratic commonweal based on real 
slavery with the modern spiritualistic-democratic representative state, 
which is based on emancipated slavery, bourgeois society. What a terrible 
illusion it is to have to recognise and sanction in the rights of man 
modern bourgeois society, the society of industry, of universal 
competition, of private interest freely pursuing its aims, of 
anarchy, of self-estranged natural and spiritual individuality, and at 
the same time to want afterwards to annul the manifestations of the 
life of this society in particular individuals and simultaneously to 
want to model the political head of that society in the manner of 
antiquity! 
The illusion appears tragic when Saint-Just, on the day of his 
execution, pointed to the large table of the Rights of Man hanging 
in the hall of the Conciergerie and said with proud dignity: "C'est 
pourtant moi qui ai fait cela." b It was just this table that proclaimed 
the right of a man who cannot be the man of the ancient 
commonweal any more than his economic and industrial conditions 
are those of ancient times. 
This is not the place to vindicate the illusion of the Terrorists 
historically. 
"After the fall of Robespierre the political enlightenment and movement hastened 
to the point where they became the prey of Napoleon who, shortly after 18 
Brumaire, could say: 'With my prefects, gendarmes and priests I can do what I like 
with France."' 
Profane history, on the other hand, reports: After the fall of 
Robespierre, the political enlightenment, which formerly had been 
overreaching itself and had been extravagant, began for the first 
time to develop prosaically. Under the government of the Direc­
tory,46 bourgeois society, freed by the Revolution itself from the 
trammels of feudalism and officially recognised in spite of the 
Terror's wish to sacrifice it to an ancient form of political life, 
"Let revolutionary men be Romans."—Ed. 
"Yet it was I who made  that."—Ed. 

=====第148页=====
The Holy Family 123 
broke out in powerful streams of life. A storm and stress of 
commercial enterprise, a passion for enrichment, the exuberance 
of the new bourgeois life, whose first self-enjoyment is pert, 
light-hearted, frivolous and intoxicating; a real enlightenment of 
the land of France, the feudal structure of which had been 
smashed by the hammer of the Revolution and which, by the first 
feverish efforts of the numerous new owners, had become the 
object of all-round cultivation; the first moves of industry that had 
now become free — these were some of the signs of life of the 
newly emerged bourgeois society. Bourgeois society is positively 
represented by the bourgeoisie. The bourgeoisie, therefore, begins 
its rule. The rights of man cease to exist merely in theory. 
It was not the revolutionary movement as a whole that became 
the prey of Napoleon on 18 Brumaire, as Criticism in its faith in a 
Herr von Rotteck or Welcker believes 47; it was the liberal 
bourgeoisie. One only needs to read the speeches of the legislators 
of the time to be convinced of this. One has the impression of 
coming from the National Convention into a modern Chamber of 
Deputies. 
Napoleon represented the last battle of revolutionary terror against 
the bourgeois society which had been proclaimed by this same 
Revolution, and against its policy. Napoleon, of course, already 
discerned the essence of the modern state; he understood that it is 
based on the unhampered development of bourgeois society, on 
the free movement of private interest, etc. He decided to recog­
nise and protect this basis. He was no terrorist with his head in the 
clouds. Yet at the same time he still regarded the state as an end in 
itself and civil life only as a treasurer and his subordinate which 
must have no will of its own. He perfected the Terror by substituting 
permanent war for permanent revolution. He fed the egoism of the 
French nation to complete satiety but demanded also the sacrifice 
of bourgeois business, enjoyments, wealth, etc., whenever this was 
required by the political aim of conquest. If he despotically 
suppressed the liberalism of bourgeois society — the political ideal­
ism of its daily practice — he showed no more consideration for its 
essential material interests, trade and industry, whenever they 
conflicted with his political interests. His scorn of industrial hommes 
d'affaires was the complement to his scorn of ideologists. In his 
home policy, too, he combated bourgeois society as the opponent 
of the state which in his own person he still held to be an absolute 
aim in  itself.  Thus he declared in the State Council that he would 
not suffer the owner of extensive estates to cultivate them or not 
as he pleased. Thus, too, he conceived the plan of subordinating 

=====第149页=====
124 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
trade to the state by appropriation of roulage. 3 French business­
men took steps to anticipate the event that first shook Napoleon's 
power. Paris exchange brokers forced him by means of an 
artificially created famine to delay the opening of the Russian 
campaign by nearly two months and thus to launch it too late in 
the year. 
Just as the liberal bourgeoisie was opposed once more by 
revolutionary terror in the person of Napoleon, so it was opposed 
once more by counter-revolution in the Restoration in the person 
of the Bourbons. Finally, in 1830 the bourgeoisie put into effect its 
wishes of the year 1789, with the only difference that its political 
enlightenment was now completed, that it no longer considered the 
constitutional representative state as a means for achieving the 
ideal of the state, the welfare of the world and universal human 
aims but, on the contrary, had acknowledged it as the official 
expression of its own exclusive power and the political recognition 
of its own special interests. 
The history of the French Revolution, which dates from 1789, 
did not come to an end in 1830 with the victory of one of its 
components enriched by the consciousness of its own social 
importance. 
d) Critical Battle Against French Materialism 
"Spinozism dominated the eighteenth century both in its later French variety, 
which made matter into substance, and in deism, which conferred on matter a 
more spiritual name.... Spinoza's French  school  and the supporters of deism were but 
two sects disputing over the true meaning of his system.... The simple fate of this 
Enlightenment was its decline in romanticism after being obliged to surrender to the 
reaction which began after the French movement." 
That is what Criticism says. 
To the Critical history of French materialism we shall oppose a 
brief outline of its ordinary, mass-type history. We shall acknowl­
edge with due respect the abyss between history as it really 
happened and history as it takes place according to the decree of 
"Absolute Criticism", the creator equally of the old and of the new. 
And finally, obeying the prescriptions of Criticism, we shall make 
the "Why?", "Whence?" and "Whither?" of Critical history the 
"object of a persevering study". 
"Speaking exactly and in the prosaic sense", the French Enlight­
enment of the eighteenth century, and in particular French 
a Road haulage.— Ed. 

=====第150页=====
The Holy Family 125 
materialism, was not only a struggle against the existing political 
institutions and the existing religion and theology; it was just as 
much an open, clearly  expressed  struggle against the metaphysics of the 
seventeenth century, and against all metaphysics, in particular that of 
Descartes, Malebranche, Spinoza and Leibniz. Philosophy was counter-
posed to metaphysics, just as Feuerbach, in his first resolute attack 
on Hegel, counterposed sober philosophy to wild speculation. Seven­
teenth century metaphysics, driven from the field by the French 
Enlightenment, notably, by French materialism of the eighteenth 
century, experienced a victorious and substantial restoration in Ger­
man philosophy, particularly in the speculative German philosophy of 
the nineteenth century. After Hegel linked it in a masterly fashion 
with all subsequent metaphysics and with German idealism and 
founded a metaphysical universal kingdom, the attack on theology 
again corresponded, as in the eighteenth century, to an attack on 
speculative metaphysics and metaphysics in general. It will be defeated 
for ever by materialism, which has now been perfected by the work 
of speculation itself and coincides with humanism. But just as 
Feuerbach is the representative of materialism coinciding with 
humanism, in the theoretical domain, French and English socialism 
and communism represent materialism coinciding with humanism in 
the practical domain. 
"Speaking exactly and in the prosaic sense", there are two trends in 
French materialism; one traces its origin to Descartes, the other to 
Locke. The latter is mainly a French development and leads directly 
to socialism. The former, mechanical materialism, merges with 
French natural science proper. The two trends intersect in the 
course of development. We have no need here to go more deeply 
into the French materialism that derives directly from Descartes, 
any more than into the French school of Newton and the 
development of French natural science in general. 
We shall therefore merely say the following: 
Descartes in his physics endowed matter with self-creative power 
and conceived mechanical motion as the manifestation of its life. 
He completely separated his physics from his metaphysics. Within his 
physics, matter is the sole substance, the sole basis of being and 
of knowledge. 
Mechanical French materialism adopted Descartes' physics in op­
position to his metaphysics. His followers were by profession 
anti-metaphysicians, i.e., physicists. 
This school begins with the physician Le Roy, reaches its zenith 
with the physician Cabanis, and the physician La Mettrie is its 
centre. Descartes was still living when Le Roy, like La Mettrie in 

=====第151页=====
126 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the eighteenth century, transposed the Cartesian structure of the 
animal to the human soul and declared that the soul is a modus of 
the body and ideas are mechanical motions. Le Roy even thought 
Descartes had kept his real opinion secret. Descartes protested. At 
the end of the eighteenth century Cabanis perfected Cartesian 
materialism in his treatise: Rapports du physique et du moral de 
l'homme. 48 
Cartesian materialism still exists today in France. It has achieved 
great successes in mechanical natural  science  which, "speaking exactly 
and in the prosaic sense", will be least of all reproached with 
romanticism. 
The metaphysics of the seventeenth century, represented in 
France by Descartes, had materialism as its antagonist from its very 
birth. The latter's opposition to Descartes was personified by 
Gassendi, the restorer of Epicurean materialism. French and En­
glish materialism was always closely related to Democritus and 
Epicurus. Cartesian metaphysics had another opponent in the 
English materialist Hobbes. Gassendi and Hobbes triumphed over 
their opponent long after their death at the very time when 
metaphysics was already officially dominant in all French schools. 
Voltaire pointed out that the indifference of the French of the 
eighteenth century to the disputes between the Jesuits and the 
Jansenists49 was due less to philosophy than to Law's financial 
speculations. So the downfall of seventeenth-century metaphysics 
can be explained by the materialistic theory of the eighteenth 
century only in so far as this theoretical movement itself is 
explained by the practical nature of French life at that time. This 
life was turned to the immediate present, to worldly enjoyment 
and worldly interests, to the earthly world. Its anti-theological, 
anti-metaphysical, materialistic practice demanded corresponding 
anti-theological, anti-metaphysical, materialistic theories. Meta­
physics had in practice lost all credit. Here we have only to in­
dicate briefly the theoretical course of events. 
Jn the seventeenth century metaphysics (cf. Descartes, Leibniz, 
and others) still contained a positive, secular element. It made 
discoveries in mathematics, physics and other exact sciences which 
seemed to come within its scope. This semblance was done away 
with as early as the beginning of the eighteenth century. The 
positive sciences broke away from metaphysics and marked out 
their independent fields. The whole wealth of metaphysics now 
consisted only of beings of thought and heavenly things, at the 
very time when real beings and earthly things began to be the 
centre of all interest. Metaphysics had become insipid. In the very 

=====第152页=====
The Holy Family 127 
year in which Malebranche and Arnauld, the last great French 
metaphysicians of the seventeenth century, died, Helvétius and 
Condillac were born. 
The man who deprived seventeenth-century metaphysics and 
metaphysics in general of all credit in the domain of theory was 
Pierre Bayle. His weapon was scepticism, which he forged out of 
metaphysics' own magic formulas. He himself proceeded at first 
from Cartesian metaphysics. Just as Feuerbach by combating 
speculative theology was driven further to combat speculative 
philosophy, precisely because he recognised in speculation the last 
prop of theology, because he had to force theology to retreat from 
pseudo-science to crude, repulsive faith, so Bayle too was driven by 
religious doubt to doubt about the metaphysics which was the 
prop of that faith. He therefore critically investigated metaphysics 
in its entire historical development. He became its historian in 
order to write the history of its death. He refuted chiefly Spinoza 
and Leibniz. 
Pierre Bayle not only prepared the reception of materialism and 
of the philosophy of common sense in France by shattering 
metaphysics with his scepticism. He heralded the atheistic society 
which was soon to come into existence by proving that a society 
consisting only of atheists is possible, that an atheist can be a man 
worthy of respect, and that it is not by atheism but by superstition 
and idolatry that man debases  himself. 
To quote a French writer, Pierre Bayle was "the last metaphysician 
in the sense of the seventeenth century and the first philosopher in the 
sense of the eighteenth century". 
Besides the negative refutation of seventeenth-century theology 
and metaphysics, a positive, anti-metaphysical system was required. A 
book was needed which would systematise and theoretically sub­
stantiate the life practice of that time. Locke's treatise An Essay 
Concerning Humane Understanding came from across the Channel 
as if in answer to a call. It was welcomed enthusiastically like a 
long-awaited guest. 
The question arises: Is Locke perhaps a disciple of Spinoza? 
"Profane" history can answer: 
Materialism is the natural-born son of Great Britain.50 Already the 
British schoolman, Duns Scotus, asked, "whether it was impossible for 
matter to think}" 
In order to effect this miracle, he took refuge in God's 
omnipotence, i.e., he made  theology  preach materialism. Moreover, 
he was a nominalist.51 Nominalism, the first form of materialism, is 
chiefly found among the English schoolmen. 

=====第153页=====
128 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The real progenitor of English materialism and all modern experi­
mental science is Bacon. To him natural philosophy is the only true 
philosophy, and physics based upon the experience of the senses is 
the chiefest part of natural philosophy. Anaxagoras and his homoeome-
riae52, Democritus and his atoms, he often quotes as his author­
ities.  According to him the senses are infallible and the source 
of all knowledge. All science is based on experience, and consists 
in subjecting the data furnished by the senses to a rational 
method of investigation. Induction, analysis, comparison, observa­
tion, experiment, are the principal forms of such a rational 
method. Among the qualities inherent in matter, motion is the 
first and foremost, not only in the form of mechanical and mathe­
matical motion, but chiefly in the form of an impulse, a vital 
spirit, a tension—or a 'Qwa/',52a  to use a term of Jakob Böhme's — 
of matter. The primary forms of matter are the living, individual­
ising forces of being inherent in it and producing the distinctions 
between the species. 
In Bacon, its first creator, materialism still holds back within 
itself in a naive way the germs of a many-sided development. On 
the one hand, matter, surrounded by a sensuous, poetic glamour, 
seems to attract man's whole entity by winning smiles. On the 
other, the aphoristically formulated doctrine pullulates with incon­
sistencies imported from theology. 
In its further evolution, materialism becomes one-sided. Hobbes is 
the man who systématises Baconian materialism. Knowledge based 
upon the senses loses its poetic blossom, it passes into the abstract 
experience of the geometrician. Physical motion is sacrificed to 
mechanical or mathematical motion; geometry is proclaimed as the 
queen of sciences. Materialism takes to misanthropy. If it is to 
overcome its opponent, misanthropic, fleshless spiritualism, and that 
on the latter's own ground, materialism has to chastise its own 
flesh and turn ascetic. Thus it passes into an intellectual entity; but 
thus,  too, it evolves all the consistency, regardless of consequences, 
characteristic of the intellect. 
Hobbes, as Bacon's continuator, argues thus: if all human 
knowledge is furnished by the senses, then our concepts, notions, 
and ideas are but the phantoms of the real world, more or less 
divested of its sensual form. Philosophy can but give names to these 
phantoms. One name may be applied to more than one of 
them. There may even be names of names. But it would imply a 
contradiction if, on the one hand, we maintained that all ideas had 
their origin in the world of sensation, and, on the other, that a 
word was more than a word; that besides the beings known to us 

=====第154页=====
The Holy Family 129 
by our senses, beings which are one and all individuals, there 
existed also beings of a general, not individual, nature. An unbodily 
substance is the same absurdity as an unbodily body. Body, being, 
substance, are but different terms for the same reality. It is 
impossible to separate thought from matter that thinks. This 
matter is the substratum of all changes going on in the world. The 
word infinite is meaningless, unless it states that our mind is capable 
of performing an endless process of addition. Only material things 
being perceptible, knowable to us, we cannot know anything about 
the existence of God. My own existence alone is certain. Every 
human passion is a mechanical movement which has a beginning 
and an end. The objects of impulse are what we call good. Man is 
subject to the same laws as nature. Power and freedom are 
identical. 
Hobbes had systematised Bacon without, however, furnishing a 
proof for Bacon's fundamental principle, the origin of all human 
knowledge and ideas from the world of sensation. 
It was Locke who, in his Essay on the Humane Understanding, 
supplied this  proof. 
Hobbes had shattered the theistic prejudices of Baconian 
materialism; Collins, Dodwell, Coward, Hartley, Priestley, similarly 
shattered the last theological bars that still hemmed in Locke's 
sensationalism. At all events, for materialists, deism is but an 
easy-going way of getting rid of religion. 
We have already mentioned how opportune Locke's work was 
for the French. Locke founded the philosophy of bon sens, of 
common sense; i.e., he said indirectly that there cannot be any 
philosophy at variance with the healthy human senses and reason 
based on them. 
Locke's immediate pupil, Condillac, who translated him into 
French, at once applied Locke's sensualism against seventeenth-
century metaphysics. He proved that the French had rightly 
rejected this metaphysics as a mere botch work of fancy and 
theological prejudice. He published a refutation of the systems of 
Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz and Malebranche. 
In his Essai sur l'origine des connaissances humaines he expounded 
Locke's ideas and proved that not only the soul, but the senses too, 
not only the art of creating ideas, but also the art of sensuous 
perception., are matters of  experience  and habit. The whole develop­
ment of man therefore depends on education and external cir­
cumstances. It was only by eclectic philosophy that Condillac was 
ousted from the French schools. 
The difference between French and English materialism reflects 

=====第155页=====
130 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the difference between the two nations. The French imparted to 
English materialism wit, flesh and blood, and eloquence. They 
gave it the temperament and grace that it lacked. They civilised it. 
In Helvétius, who also based himself on Locke, materialism 
assumed a really French character. Helvétius conceived it im­
mediately in its application to social life (Helvétius, De l'homme) P 
The sensory qualities and self-love, enjoyment and correctly 
understood personal interest are the basis of all morality. The 
natural equality of human intelligences, the unity of progress of 
reason and progress of industry, the natural goodness of man, and 
the omnipotence of education, are the main features in his system. 
In La Mettrie's works we find a synthesis of Cartesian and 
English materialism. He makes use of Descartes' physics in detail. 
His L'homme machine is a treatise after the model of Descartes' 
animal-machine. The physical part of Holbach's Système de la nature 
is also a result of the combination of French and English 
materialism, while the moral part is based essentially on the 
morality of Helvétius. 54 Robinet (De la nature), the French material­
ist who had the most connection with metaphysics and was there­
fore praised by Hegel, refers explicitly to Leibniz. 
We need not dwell on Volney, Dupuis, Diderot and others, any 
more than on the physiocrats, after we have proved the dual 
origin of French materialism from Descartes' physics and English 
materialism, and the opposition of French materialism to seven­
teenth-century metaphysics, to the metaphysics of Descartes, 
Spinoza, Malebranche, and Leibniz. This opposition only became 
evident to the Germans after they themselves had come into 
opposition to speculative metaphysics. 
Just as Cartesian materialism passes into natural science proper, 
the other trend of French materialism leads directly to socialism 
and communism. 
There is no need for any great penetration to see from the 
teaching of materialism on the original- goodness and equal 
intellectual endowment of men, the omnipotence of experience, 
habit and education, and the influence of environment on man, 
the great significance of industry, the justification of enjoyment, 
etc., how necessarily materialism is connected with communism 
and socialism. If man draws all his knowledge, sensation, etc., 
from the world of the senses and the experience gained in it, then 
what has to be done is to arrange the empirical world in such a 
way that man experiences and becomes accustomed to what is 
truly human in it and that he becomes aware of himself as man. If 
correctly understood interest is the principle of all morality, man's 

=====第156页=====
The Holy Family 131 
private interest must be made to coincide with the interest of 
humanity. If man is unfree in the materialistic sense, i.e., is free 
not through the negative power to avoid this or that, but through 
the positive power to assert his true individuality, crime must not 
be punished in the individual, but the anti-social sources of crime 
must be destroyed, and each man must be given social scope for 
the vital manifestation of his being. If man is shaped by environ­
ment, his environment must be made human. If man is social by 
nature, he will develop his true nature only in society, and the 
power of his nature must be measured not by the power of the 
separate individual but by the power of society. 
These and similar propositions are to be found almost literally 
even in the oldest French materialists. This is not the place to 
assess them. The apologia of vices by Mandeville, one of Locke's 
early English followers, is typical of the socialist tendencies of 
materialism. He proves that in modern society vice is indispensable 
and useful.* This was by no means an apologia for modern society. 
Fourier proceeds directly from the teaching of the French 
materialists. The Babouvists were crude, uncivilised materialists, but 
developed communism, too, derives directly from French material­
ism. The latter returned to its mother-country, England, in the 
form Helvétius gave it. Bentham based his system of correctly 
understood interest on Helvétius' morality, and Owen proceeded 
from Bentham's system to found English communism. Exiled to 
England, the Frenchman Cabet came under the influence of 
communist ideas there and on his return to France became the 
most popular, if the most superficial, representative of commu­
nism. Like Owen, the more scientific French Communists, Dézamy, 
Gay and others, developed the teaching of materialism as the 
teaching of real humanism and the logical basis of communism. 
Where, then, did Herr Bauer or, Criticism, manage to acquire 
the documents for the Critical history of French materialism? 
1) Hegel's Geschichte der Philosophie b presents French materialism 
as the realisation of the Substance of Spinoza, which at any rate is 
far more comprehensible than "the French school of Spinoza". 
2) Herr Bauer read Hegel's Geschichte der Philosophie as saying 
that French materialism was the school of Spinoza. Then, as he 
found in another of Hegel's works that deism and materialism are 
two parties representing one and the same basic principle, he 
a Bernard de. Mandeville, The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick 
Benefits.— Ed. 
h G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. —Ed. 

=====第157页=====
132 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
concluded that Spinoza had two schools which disputed over the 
meaning of his system. Herr Bauer could have found the 
supposed explanation in Hegel's Phänomenologie, where it is said: 
"Regarding that Absolute Being, Enlightenment itself falls out with itself ... and 
is divided between the views of two parties.... The one ... calls Absolute Being that 
predicateless Absolute ... the other calls it matter .... Both are entirely the same 
notion — the distinction lies not in the objective fact, but purely in the diversity of 
starting-point adopted by the two developments" (Hegel, Phänomenologie, pp. 420, 
421, 422). a 
3) Finally Herr Bauer could find, again in Hegel, that when 
Substance does not develop into a concept and self-consciousness, 
it degenerates into "romanticism". The journal Hallische Jahrbücher 
at one time developed a similar theory. 
But at all costs the "Spirit" had to decree a "foolish destiny" for its 
"adversary", materialism. 
Note. French materialism's connection with Descartes and Locke 
and the opposition of eighteenth-century philosophy to seven­
teenth-century metaphysics are presented in detail in most recent 
French histories of philosophy. In this respect, we had only to 
repeat against Critical Criticism what was already known. But the 
connection of eighteenth-century materialism with English and 
French communism of the nineteenth century still needs to be 
presented in detail. We confine ourselves here to quoting a few 
typical passages from Helvétius, Holbach and Bentham. 
1) Helvétius. "Man is not wicked, but he is subordinate to his interests. One 
must not therefore complain of the wickedness of man but of the ignorance of the 
legislators, who have always placed the particular interest in opposition to the 
general interest." — "The moralists have so far had no success because we have to 
dig into legislation to pull out the roots which create vice. In New Orleans women 
have the right to repudiate their husbands as soon as they are tired of them. In 
countries like that women are not faithless, because they have no interest in being 
so." — "Morality is but a frivolous science when not combined with politics and 
legislation." — "The hypocritical moralists can be recognised on the one hand by 
the equanimity with which they consider vices which undermine the state, and on 
the other by the fury with which they condemn private vice." — "Human beings 
are born neither good nor bad but ready to become one or the other according as 
a common interest unites or divides them." — "If citizens could not achieve their 
own particular good without achieving the general good, there would be no vicious 
people except fools" {De l'esprit, t. I, Paris, 1822, 55 pp. 117, 240, 241, 249, 251, 369 
and 339). 
English text taken from the translation by J. B. Bailie, published by Allen and 
Unwin, 1931, pp. 591, 592,  593.—  Ed. 

=====第158页=====
The Holy Family 133 
As, according to Helvétius, it is education, by which he means 
(cf. loc. cit., p. 390) not only education in the ordinary sense but 
the totality of the individual's conditions of life, which forms man, 
if a reform is necessary to abolish the contradiction between 
particular interests and those of society, so, on the other hand, 
a transformation of consciousness is necessary to carry out such 
a reform: 
"Great reforms can be implemented only by weakening the stupid respect of 
the peoples for old laws and customs" (loc. cit., p. 260) 
or, as he says elsewhere, by abolishing ignorance. 
2) Holbach. "Ce n'est que lui-même que l'homme peut aimer dans les objets qu'il 
aime: ce n'est que lui-même qu'il peut affectionner dans les êtres de son espèce." 
"L'homme ne peut jamais se séparer de lui-même dans aucun instant de sa vie; il 
ne peut se perdre de vue." "C'est toujours notre utilité, notre intérêt ... qui nous 
fait hair ou aimer les objets". 3 (Système social, t. 1, Paris, 1822, pp. 80, 112), but 
"L'homme pour son propre intérêt doit aimer les autres hommes puisqu'ils sont 
nécessaires à son bien-être... La morale lui prouve, que de tous les êtres le plus 
nécessaire à l'homme c'est l'homme", (p. 76). "La vraie morale, ainsi que la vraie 
politique, est celle qui cherche à approcher les hommes, afin de les faire travailler 
par des efforts réunis à leur bonheur mutuel. Toute morale qui sépare nos intérêts 
de ceux de nos  associés  est fausse, insensée, contraire à la nature" 0 (p. 116). "Aimer 
les autres ... c'est confondre nos intérêts avec ceux de nos  associés,  afin de travailler à 
l'utilité commune... La vertu n'est que l'utilité  des hommes réunis en  société  (p. 77). "Un 
homme sans passions ou sans désirs cesserait d'être un homme... Parfaitement 
détaché de lui-même, comment pourrait-on le déterminer à s'attacher à d'autres? 
Un homme, indifférent pour tout, privé de passions, qui se suffirait à lui-même, ne 
serait plus un être sociable... La vertu n'est que la communication du bien" e (loc. cit., 
p. 118). "La morale religieuse ne servit jamais à rendre les mortels plus sociables" 
(loc. cit., p. 36). 
"Man can only love himself in the objects he loves: he can have affection only 
for himself in the other beings of his kind." "Man can never separate himself from 
himself for a single instant in his life; he cannot lose sight of  himself."  'Tt is always 
our convenience, our interest ... that makes us hate or love things."—Ed. 
"In his own interest man must love other men, because they are necessary to 
his welfare.... Morality proves to him that of all beings the most  necessary  to man is 
man."—Ed. 
c "True morality, and true politics as well, is that which seeks to bring men 
nearer to one another to make them work by united efforts for their common 
happiness. Any morality which separates our interests from those of our  associates,  is 
false,  senseless, unnatural." — Ed. 
"To love others ... is to merge our interests with  those  of our  associates,  to work for 
the common benefit.... Virtue is but the usefulness of men united in  society."  — Ed. 
e "A man without desires or passions would cease to be a man.... Perfectly 
detached from  himself,  how could one make him decide to attach himself to 
others? A man indifferent to everything and having no passions, sufficient to 
himself,  would cease to be a social being.... Virtue is but the communication of 
good."—Ed. 
"Religious morality never served to make mortals more sociable." — Ed. 
6-762 

=====第159页=====
134 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
3) Bentham. We only quote one passage from Bentham in which he opposes 
"intérêt general in the political sense". "L'intérêt des individus ... doit céder à 
l'intérêt public. Mais ... qu'est-ce que cela signifie? Chaque individu n'est-il pas 
partie du public autant que chaque autre? Cet intérêt public, que vous personnifiez, 
n'est qu'un terme abstrait: il ne représente que la masse des intérêts individuels... 
S'il était bon de sacrifier la fortune d'un individu pour augmenter celle des autres, 
il serait encore mieux d'en sacrifier un second, un troisième, sans qu'on puisse 
assigner aucune limite.... Les intérêts individuels sont les seuls intérêts réels" 3 
(Bentham, Théorie des peines et des récompenses, Paris, 1826,  3eme éd., II, p. [229], 
230). 
e) Final Defeat of Socialism 
"The French set up a series of systems of how the mass should be organised, but 
they had to resort to fantasy because they considered the mass, as it is, to be usable 
material." 
Actually, the French and the English have proved, and proved 
in great detail, that the present social system organises the "mass 
as it is" and is therefore its organisation. Criticism, following the 
example of the Allgemeine Zeitung, disposes of all socialist and 
communist systems by means of the fundamental word "fantasy"? 1 
Having thus shattered foreign socialism and communism, Criti­
cism transfers its war-like operations to Germany. 
"When the German Enlighteners suddenly found themselves disappointed in their 
hopes of 1842 and, in their embarrassment, did not know what to do, news of the 
recent French systems came in the nick of time. They were henceforth able to speak 
of raising the lower classes of the people and at that price they were able to 
dispense with the question whether they did not themselves belong to the mass, 
which is to be found not only in the lowest strata." 
Criticism has obviously so exhausted its entire provision of well 
meaning motives in the apologia for Bauer's literary past that it 
can find no other explanation for the German socialist movement 
than the "embarrassment" of the Enlighteners in 1842. "Fortu­
nately they received news of the recent French systems." Why not 
of the English} For the decisive Critical reason that Herr Bauer 
received no news of the recent English systems through Stein's 
book: Der Communismus und Socialismus des heutigen Frankreichs. 
This is also the decisive reason why only French systems ever exist 
for Criticism in all its talk about socialist systems. 
The German Enlighteners, Criticism goes on to explain, commit-
a "The interest of individuals ... must give way to the public interest. But ... 
what does that mean? Is not each individual part of the public as much as any 
other? This public interest that you personify is but an abstract term: it represents 
but the mass of individual interests.... If it were good to sacrifice the fortune of one 
individual to increase that of others, it would be better to sacrifice that of a second, 
a third, and so on ad infinitum.... Individual interests, are the only real inter­
ests."—Ed. 

=====第160页=====
The Holy Family 135 
ted a sin against the Holy Ghost. They busied themselves with the 
"lower classes of the people", already in existence in 1842, in 
order to get rid of the question, which did not yet exist then, as to 
what rank they were destined to occupy in the Critical world system 
that was to be instituted in anno 1843: sheep or goat, Critical 
Critic or impure Mass, Spirit or Matter. But above all they should 
have thought seriously of the Critical salvation of their own souls, for 
of what profit is it to me if I gain the whole world, including the 
lower classes of the people, and suffer the loss of my own soul? 
"But a spiritual being cannot be raised to a higher level unless it is altered, and 
it cannot be altered before it has experienced extreme resistance." 
Were Criticism better acquainted with the movement of the 
lower classes of the people it would know that the extreme 
resistance that they have experienced from practical life is chang­
ing them every day. Modern prose and poetry emanating in 
England and France from the lower classes of the people would 
show it that the lower classes of the people know how to raise 
themselves spiritually even without being directly overshadowed by 
the Holy Ghost of Critical Criticism. 
"They," Absolute Criticism continues to indulge in fancy, "whose whole wealth is 
the word 'organisation of the mass'", etc. 
A lot has been said about "organisation of labour", although 
even this "catchword" came not from the Socialists themselves but 
from the politically radical party in France, which tried to be an 
intermediary between politics and socialism.58 But nobody before 
Critical Criticism spoke of "organisation of the mass" as of a 
question yet to be solved. It was proved, on the contrary, that 
bourgeois society, the dissolution of the old feudal society, is this 
organisation of the mass. 
Criticism puts its discovery in quotation marks [Gänsefüsse a]. The 
goose that cackled to Herr Bauer the watchword for saving the 
Capitol 59 is none but his own goose, Critical Criticism. It organised 
the mass anew by speculatively constructing it as the Absolute 
Opponent of the Spirit. The antithesis between spirit and mass is 
the Critical "organisation of society", in which the Spirit, or 
Criticism, represents the organising work, the mass — the raw 
material, and history—the product. 
After Absolute Criticism's great victories over revolution, 
materialism and socialism in its third campaign, we may ask: What 
is the final result of these Herculean feats? Only that these 
J Gänsefüsse  ( = goose-feet) is a German word for quotation marks.— Ed. 

=====第161页=====
136 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
movements perished without any result because they were still 
criticism adulterated by mass or spirit adulterated by matter. Even in 
Herr Bauer's own literary past Criticism discovered manifold 
adulterations of criticism by the mass. But here it writes an 
apologia instead of a criticism, "places in safety" instead of 
surrendering; instead of seeing in the adulteration of the spirit by the 
flesh the death of the spirit too, it reverses the case and finds in 
the adulteration of the flesh by the spirit the life even of Bauer's 
flesh. On the other hand, it is all the more ruthless and decisively 
terroristic as soon as imperfect criticism still adulterated by mass is 
no longer the work of Herr Bauer but of whole peoples and of a 
number of ordinary Frenchmen and Englishmen; as soon as 
imperfect criticism is no longer entitled Die Judenfrage, or Die gute 
Sache der Freiheit, or Staat, Religion und Parthei, but revolution, 
materialism, socialism or communism. Thus Criticism did away 
with the adulteration of spirit by matter and of criticism by mass 
by sparing its own flesh and crucifying the flesh of others. 
One way or the other, the "spirit adulterated by flesh" or 
"Criticism adulterated by mass" has been cleared out of the way. 
Instead of this un-Critical adulteration, there appears absolutely 
Critical disintegration of spirit and flesh, criticism and mass, their 
pure opposition. This opposition in its world-historic form in which 
it constitutes the true historical interest of the present time, is the 
opposition of Herr Bauer and Co., or the Spirit, to the rest of the 
human race as Matter. 
Revolution, materialism and communism therefore have fulfilled 
their historic mission. By their downfall they have prepared the 
way for the Critical  Lord.  Hosanna! 
f) The Speculative Cycle of Absolute Criticism 
and the Philosophy of Self-Consciousness 
Criticism, having supposedly attained perfection and purity in one 
domain, therefore committed only one oversight, "only" one "incon­
sistency", that of not being "pure" and "perfect" in all domains. 
The "one" Critical domain is none other than that of  theology.  The 
pure area of this domain extends from the Kritik der Synoptiker by 
Bruno Bauer to Das entdeckte Christenthum by Bruno Bauer, as the 
farthest frontier post. 
"Modern Criticism," we are told, "had finally dealt with Spinozism; it was 
therefore inconsistent of it naively to presuppose Substance in one domain, even if 
only in individual, falsely expounded points." 

=====第162页=====
The Holy Family 137 
Criticism's earlier admission that it had been involved in political 
prejudice was immediately followed by the extenuating cir­
cumstance that this involvement had been "basically so slight!" Now 
the admission of inconsistency is tempered by the parenthesis that it 
was committed only in individual, falsely expounded points. It was not 
Herr Bauer who was to blame, but the false points which ran away 
with Criticism like recalcitrant mounts. 
A few quotations will show that by overcoming Spinozism 
Criticism ended up in Hegelian idealism, that from "Substance" it 
arrived at another metaphysical monster, the "Subject", "Substance 
as a process", "infinite self-consciousness", and that the final result 
of "perfect" and "pure" Criticism is the restoration of the Christian 
theory of creation in a speculative, Hegelian form. 
Let us first open the Kritik der Synoptiker. 
"Strauss remains true to the view that Substance is the Absolute. Tradition in this 
form of universality, which has not yet attained the real and rational certitude of 
universality, that certitude which can be attained only in self-consciousness, in the 
oneness  and infinity of self-consciousness, is nothing but Substance which has emerged 
from its logical simplicity and has assumed a definite form of existence as the 
power of the community" (Kritik der Synoptiker, Vol. I, Preface, pp. vi [-vii]). 
Let us leave to their fate "the universality which attains cer­
titude", the "oneness and infinity" (the Hegelian Notion).— In­
stead of saying that the view put forward in Strauss' theory on the 
"power of the community" and "tradition" has its abstract expres­
sion, its logical and metaphysical hieroglyphic, in the Spinozist 
conception of Substance, Herr Bauer makes "Substance emerge from 
its logical simplicity and assume a definite form of existence in the 
power of the community". He applies the Hegelian miracle 
apparatus by which the "metaphysical  categories"  — abstractions ex­
tracted out of reality— emerge from logic, where they are dissolved 
in the "simplicity" of thought, and assume "a definite form" of 
physical or human existence; he makes them become incarnate. 
Help,  Hinrichsl 
"Mysterious," Criticism continues its argument against Strauss, "mysterious is 
this view because whenever it wishes to explain and make visible the process to 
which the gospel history owes its origin, it can only bring out the semblance of a 
process [...] The sentence: 'The gospel history has its source and origin in 
tradition', posits the same thing twice—'tradition' and the 'gospel history'; admit­
tedly it does posit a relation between them, but it does not tell us to what internal 
process of Substance the development and exposition owe their origin."3 
According to Hegel, Substance must be conceived as an internal 
a This is also a quotation from B. Bauer's book Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte 
der Synoptiker. — Ed. 

=====第163页=====
138 Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels 
process.  He  characterises development from  the  viewpoint  of Sub­
stance  as follows: 
"But  if we  look more closely  at this expansion,  we find that  it has not  come about 
by one and the  same principle taking shape  in diverse ways;  it is  only  the shapeless 
repetition  of one and the  same thing  ... keeping  up a  tedious semblance  of diversity" 
(Phänomenologie, Preface,  p. 12). 
Help, Hinrichs! 
"Criticism," Herr Bauer continues, "according  to this, must turn against itself 
and look  for the  solution  of the  mysterious substantiality  ... in  what  the  development of 
Substance itself leads  to, in the  universality  and  certitude  of the  idea  and its  real 
existence,  in infinite self-consciousness." 
Hegels criticism  of the  substantiality view continues: 
"The compact solidity  of Substance  is to be  opened  up and  Substance raised 
to self-consciousness"  (loc. cit., p. 7). 
Bauer's self-consciousness,  too, is  Substance raised  to self-
consciousness  or self-consciousness  as  Substance; self-consciousness  is 
transformed from  an attribute  of man  into  a self-existing subject. This 
is the  metaphysical-theological caricature  of man in his  severance from 
nature.  The  being  of this self-consciousness  is therefore  not man, 
but the  idea  of which self-consciousness  is the  real existence.  It is the 
idea become  man, and  therefore  it is  infinite.  All  human qualities  are 
thus transformed  in a  mysterious  way  into qualities  of imaginary 
"infinite self-consciousness". Hence, Herr Bauer says expressly that 
everything  has its  origin  and its  explanation  in  this "infinite  self-
consciousness",  i.e.,  finds  in it the  basis  of its  existence. Help, 
Hinrichs  ! 
Herr Bauer continues: 
"The power  of the  substantiality relation lies  in its  impulse, which leads  us to the 
concept,  the  idea  and  self-consciousness." 
Hegel says: 
"Thus  the  concept  is the  truth  of the  substance."  "The  transition  of the 
substantiality relation takes place through  its own  immanent necessity  and  consists  in 
this only, that the concept  is the  truth  of the  substance."  "The  idea  is the  adequate 
concept."  "The  concept  ... having achieved free existence  ... is  nothing  but the ego 
or pure self-consciousness" (Logik, Hegel's Werke,  2nd ed., Vol. 5, pp. 6, 9, 229, 13). 
Help,  Hinrichsl 
It seems comic  in the  extreme when Herr Bauer says  in his 
Literatur-Zeitung: 
"Strauss came  to grief because  he was  unable  to complete  the criticism  of HegeFs 
system,  although  he proved  by his  half-way criticism  the  necessity  for its  comple­
tion", etc.60 

=====第164页=====
The Holy Family 139 
It was not a complete criticism of Hegel's system that Herr Bauer 
himself thought he was giving in his Kritik der Synoptiker but at the 
most the completion of Hegeh system, at least in its application to 
theology. 
He describes his criticism (Kritik der Synoptiker, Preface, p. xxi) as 
"the last act of a definite system", which is no other than Hegeh 
system. 
The dispute between Strauss and Bauer over Substance and 
Self-Consciousness is a dispute within Hegelian speculation. In Hegel 
there are three elements, Spinoza's Substance, Fichte's  Self-
Consciousness and Hegel's necessarily antagonistic unity of the 
two, the Absolute Spirit. The first element is metaphysically dis­
guised nature separated from man; the second is metaphysically 
disguised spirit separated from nature; the third is the metaphysical­
ly disguised unity of both, real man and the real human species. 
Within the domain of theology, Strauss expounds Hegel from 
Spinoza's point of view, and Bauer does so from Fichte's point of 
view, both quite consistently. They both criticised Hegel insofar as 
with him each of the two elements was falsified by the other, 
whereas they carried each of these elements to its one-sided and 
hence consistent development.— Both of them therefore go beyond 
Hegel in their criticism, but both also remain within his speculation 
and each represents only one side of his system. Feuerbach, who 
completed and criticised Hegel from Hegel's point of view by 
resolving the metaphysical Absolute Spirit into "real man on the basis 
of nature", was the first to complete the criticism of religion by 
sketching in a grand and masterly manner the basic features of the 
criticism-of Hegel's speculation and hence of all metaphysics. 
With Herr Bauer it is, admittedly, no longer the Holy Ghost, but 
nevertheless infinite self-consciousness that dictates the writings of 
the evangelist. 
"We ought not any longer to conceal the fact that the correct conception of the 
gospel history also has its philosophical basis, namely, the philosophy of  self-consciousness" 
(Bruno Bauer, Kritik der Synoptiker, Preface, p. xv). 
This philosophy of Herr Bauer, the philosophy of  self-consciousness, 
like the results he achieved by his criticism of theology, must be 
characterised by a few extracts from Das entdeckte Christenthum, his 
last work on the philosophy of religion. 
Speaking of the French materialists, he says: 
"When the truth of materialism, the philosophy of self-consciousness, is revealed 
and self-consciousness is recognised as the Universe, as the solution of the riddle of 
Spinoza's substance and as the true causa sui3 ..., what is the purpose of the Spirit? 
a Cause of  itself.—  Ed. 

=====第165页=====
140 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
What is the purpose of  self-consciousness}  As if  self-consciousness,  by positing the  world, 
did not posit distinction, and did not produce itself in all it produces, since it does 
away again with the distinction of what it produced from  itself,  and since, consequently 
it is itself only in production and in movement — as if self-consciousness in this 
movement, which is  itself,  had not its purpose and did not possess  itself!"  (Das 
entdeckte Christenthum, p. 113.) 
"The French materialists did, indeed, conceive the movement of  self-
consciousness as the movement of the universal being, matter, but they could not yet 
see that the movement of the universe became real for itself and achieved unity with 
itself only as the movement of self-consciousness" (1. c, pp.  [ 114-]  115). 
Help,  Hinrichsl 
In plain language the first extract means: the truth of materialism 
is the opposite of materialism, absolute, i.e., exclusive, unmitigated 
idealism. Self-consciousness, the Spirit, is the Universe. Outside of it 
there is nothing. "Self-consciousness", "the Spirit", is the almighty 
creator of the world, of heaven and earth. The world is a 
manifestation of the life of self-consciousness which has to alienate 
itself and take on the form of a slave, but the difference between 
the world and self-consciousness is only an apparent difference. 
Self-consciousness distinguishes nothing real from  itself.  The world 
is, rather, only a metaphysical distinction, a phantom of its ethereal 
brain and an imaginary product of the latter. Hence  self-
consciousness does away again with the appearance, which it 
conceded for a moment, that something exists outside of it, and it 
recognises in what it has "produced" no real object, i.e., no object 
which in reality is distinct from it. By this movement, however, 
self-consciousness first produces itself as absolute, for the absolute 
idealist, in order to be an absolute idealist, must necessarily 
constantly go through the sophistical process of first transforming 
the world outside himself into an appearance, a mere fancy of his 
brain, and afterwards declaring this fantasy to be what it really is, 
i.e., a mere fantasy, so as finally to be able to proclaim his sole, 
exclusive existence, which is no longer disturbed even by the 
semblance of an external world. 
In plain language the second extract means: The French 
materialists did, of course, conceive the movements of matter as 
movements involving spirit, but they were not yet able to see that 
they are not material, but ideal movements, movements of  self-
consciousness, consequently pure movements of thought. They 
were not yet able to see that the real movement of the universe 
became true and real only as the ideal movement of  self-
consciousness free and freed from matter, that is, from reality; in 
other words, that a material movement distinct from ideal brain 
movement exists only in appearance. Help, Hinrichsl 

=====第166页=====
The Holy Family 141 
This speculative theory of creation is almost word for word in 
Hegel; it can be found in his first work, his Phänomenologie. 
"The alienation of self-consciousness itself establishes thinghood.... In this 
alienation self-consciousness establishes itself as object, or sets up the object as 
itself.  On the other hand, there is also this other moment in the process that it has 
just as much abolished this alienation and objedification and resumed them into 
itself....  This is the movement of  consciousness"  (Hegel, Phänomenologie, pp. 574-75). 
"Self-consciousness has a content, which it distinguishes from  itself....  This content 
in its distinction is itself the ego, for it is the movement of superseding  itself....  More 
precisely stated, this content is nothing but the very movement just spoken of; for the 
content is the Spirit which traverses the whole range of its own being, and does this 
for itself as Spirit" (loc. cit., pp. [582-] 583). a 
Referring to this theory of creation of Hegel's, Feuerbach 
observes: 
"Matter is the self-alienation of the spirit. Thereby matter itself acquires spirit 
and reason — but at the same time it is assumed as a nothingness, an unreal being, 
inasmuch as being producing itself from this alienation, i.e., being divesting itself of 
matter, of sensuousness, is pronounced to be being in its perfection, in its true 
shape and form. Therefore the natural, the material, the sensuous, is what is to be 
negated here too, as nature poisoned by original sin is in theology" (Philosophie der 
Zukunft, p. 35). 
Herr Bauer therefore defends materialism against un-Critical 
theology, at the same time as he reproaches it with "not yet" being 
Critical theology, theology of reason, Hegelian speculation. Hinrichs! 
Hinrichs! 
Herr Bauer, who in all domains carries through his opposition 
to Substance, his philosophy of  self-consciousness  or of the Spirit, must 
therefore in all domains have only the figments of his own brain to 
deal with. In his hands, Criticism is the instrument to sublimate 
into mere appearance and pure thought all that affirms a finite 
material existence outside infinite  self-consciousness.  What he combats 
in Substance is not the metaphysical illusion but its mundane 
kernel—nature; nature both as it exists outside man and as man's 
nature. Not to presume Substance in any domain — he still uses this 
language — means therefore for him not to recognise any being 
distinct from thought, any natural energy distinct from the spon­
taneity of the spirit, any power of human nature distinct from  reason,  any 
passivity distinct from activity, any influence of others distinct from 
one's own action, any feeling or willing distinct from knowing, any 
heart distinct from the  head,  any object  distinct from the subject, any 
practice distinct from theory, any man distinct from the Critic, any 
a See the English edition of Hegel's Works, pp. 789, 790.— Ed. 
Ludwig Feuerbach, Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft. — Ed. 

=====第167页=====
142 Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels 
real community distinct from abstract generality,  any  Thou distinct 
from  I. Herr Bauer  is therefore consistent when  he  goes  on to 
identify himself with infinite self-consciousness, with  the  Spirit, 
i.e., to replace these creations  of his by  their creator.  He is  just  as 
consistent  in rejecting  as stubborn mass  and  matter  the  rest  of the 
world which obstinately insists  on  being something distinct from 
what  he,  Herr Bauer,  has  produced.  And so he  hopes: 
It will  not be  long 
Before  all bodies perish.3 
His own  ill-humour  at so far  being unable  to master  "the  some­
thing  of this clumsy world"  he interprets equally consistently  as the 
self-discontent  of  this world,  and the  indignation  of his  Criticism  at 
the development  of mankind  as the  mass-type indignation  of mankind 
against  his  Criticism, against  the  Spirit, against Herr Bruno Bauer 
and Co. 
Herr Bauer  was a  theologian from  the  very beginning,  but no 
ordinary  one; he was a  Critical theologian  or a  theological Critic. 
While still  the  extreme representative  of old  Hegelian orthodoxy 
who put in a  speculative form  all  religious  and  theological nonsense, 
he constantly proclaimed Criticism  his  private domain.  At  that time 
he called Strauss' criticism human criticism  and  expressly asserted  the 
right  of divine criticism  in opposition  to it. He  later stripped  the 
great self-reliance  or self-consciousness, which  was the  hidden kernel 
of this divinity,  of its  religious shell, made  it self-existing  as an 
independent being,  and  raised  it, under  the  trade-mark ''Infinite 
Self-consciousness^,  to the  rank  of the  principle  of Criticism. Then 
he accomplished  in his own  movement  the  movement that  the 
"philosophy  of self-consciousness" describes  as the  absolute  act of 
life. He  abolished anew  the  "distinction" between  "the  product", 
infinite self-consciousness,  and the  producer,  himself, and  acknowl­
edged that infinite self-consciousness  in its  movement  "was  only  he 
himself, and  that therefore  the  movement  of the  universe only 
becomes true  and  real  in his  ideal self-movement. 
Divine criticism  in its  return into itself  is restored  in a  rational, 
conscious, Critical  way;  being in-itself  is transformed into being 
in-and-for-itself  and  only  at the end  does  the  fulfilled, realised, 
revealed beginning take place. Divine criticism,  as distinct from 
human criticism, reveals itself  as Criticism, pure Criticism, Critical 
Criticism.  The  apologia  for the Old and the New  Testament  is 
replaced  by the  apologia  for the old and new  works  of Herr 
a J. W.  Goethe, Faust, Part  I, Scene  3 ("Faust's Study").—Ed. 

=====第168页=====
The Holy Family 143 
Bauer, The theological antithesis of God and man, spirit and flesh, 
infinity and finiteness is transformed into the Critical-theological 
antithesis of the Spirit, Criticism, or Herr Bauer, and the matter of 
the mass, or the secular world. The theological antithesis of faith and 
reason has been resolved into the Critical-theological antithesis of 
common sense and pure Critical thought. The Zeitschrift für spekula­
tive Theologie has been transformed into the Critical Literatur-
Zeitung. The religious redeemer of the world has finally become a 
reality in the Critical redeemer of the  world,  Herr Bauer. 
Herr Bauer's last stage is not an anomaly in his development; it 
is the return of his development into itself from its alienation. 
Naturally, the point at which divine Criticism alienated itself and 
came out of itself coincided with the point at which it became 
partly untrue to itself and created something human. 
Returning to its starting-point, Absolute Criticism has ended the 
speculative cycle and thereby its own life's career. Its further 
movement is pure, lofty circling within  itself,  above all interest of a 
mass nature and therefore devoid of any further interest for the 
Mass. 

=====第169页=====
Chapter VII 
CRITICAL CRITICISM'S CORRESPONDENCE 
1) THE CRITICAL MASS 
Où peut-on être mieux 
Qu'au sein de sa famille?3 
In its Absolute existence as Herr Bruno, Critical Criticism has 
declared the mass of mankind, the whole of mankind that is not 
Critical Criticism, to be its opposite, its essential object; essential, 
because the Mass exists ad majorem gloriam dei, b the glory of 
Criticism, of the Spirit; its object, because it is only the matter on 
which Critical Criticism operates. Critical Criticism has proclaimed 
its relationship to the Mass as the world-historic relationship of the 
present time. 
No world-historic opposition is formed, however, by the statement 
that one is in opposition to the whole world. One can imagine that 
one is a stumbling-block for the world because one is clumsy 
enough to stumble everywhere. But for a world-historic opposition 
it is not enough for me to declare the world  77131  opposite; the world 
for its part must declare me to be its essential opposite, and must 
treat and recognise me as such. Critical Criticism ensures itself this 
recognition by its  correspondence,  which is called upon to bear witness 
before the world to Criticism's function of redeemer and equally 
to the general irritation of the world at the Critical gospel. Critical 
Criticism is its own object as the  object  of the  world.  The correspond­
ence is intended to show it as such, as the world interest of the 
present time. 
Critical Criticism is in its own eyes the Absolute Subject. The 
Absolute Subject requires a cult. A real cult requires other 
believing individuals. The Holy Family of Charlottenburg therefore 
receives from its correspondents the cult due to it. The correspond­
ents tell it what it is and what its adversary, the Mass, is not. 
Where can one feel better than in the bosom of one's family? (From J. F. 
Marmontel's one-act comedy Lucile, Scene 4.) — Ed. 
For the greater glory of God.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
The Holy Family 145 
However, Criticism falls into an inconsistency by thus having its 
opinion of itself represented as the opinion of the world and by its 
concept being converted into reality. Within Criticism itself a sort of 
Mass is forming, a Critical Mass whose simple function is untiring­
ly to echo the stock phrases of Criticism. For consistency's sake this 
inconsistency may be forgiven. Not feeling at home in the sinful 
world, Critical Criticism must set up a sinful world in its own 
home. 
The path of Critical Criticism's correspondent, a member of the 
Critical Mass, is not a rosy one. It is a difficult, thorny path, a 
Critical path. Critical Criticism is a spiritualistic lord, pure spon­
taneity, actus purus, intolerant of any influence from without. The 
correspondent can therefore be a subject only in appearance, can 
only seem to behave independently towards Critical Criticism, can 
only seemingly want to communicate something new and of his own 
to it. In reality he is Critical Criticism's own product, its perception 
of its own voice made for an instant objective and self-existing. 
That is why the correspondents do not fail to assert incessantly 
that Critical Criticism itself knows, realises, understands, grasps; and 
experiences what at the same moment is being communicated to it 
for appearance's sake.61  Thus Zerrleder, for instance, uses the 
expressions: "Do you grasp it? You know. You know for the 
second and third time. You have probably heard enough to be 
able to see for  yourself." 
So too the Breslau correspondent Fleischhammer says: "But the 
fact," etc., "will be as little of a puzzle to you as to me." Or the 
Zurich correspondent Hirzel: "You will probably find out for 
yourself."  The Critical correspondent has such anxious respect for 
the absolute understanding of Critical Criticism that he attributes 
understanding to it even where there is absolutely nothing to 
understand. For example, Fleischhammer says: 
"You will perfectly [!] understand [!] me when I tell you that one can hardly 
go out without meeting young Catholic priests in their long black cowls and 
cloaks." 
Indeed, in their fear the correspondents hear Critical Criticism 
saying, answering, exclaiming, deridingl 
Zerrleder, for example, says: "But—you say. Well, then, listen." 
And Fleischhammer: "Yes, I hear what you say—I only mean 
that...." And Hirzel: "Good for you, you will exclaim\" And a 
Tübingen correspondent: "Do not laugh at me!" 
The correspondents, therefore, also express themselves as 
though they were communicating facts to Critical Criticism and 

=====第171页=====
146 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
expect from it the spiritual interpretation; they provide it with 
premises and leave the conclusion to it, or they even apologise for 
repeating things Criticism has known for a long time. 
Zerrleder, for example, says: 
"Your correspondent can only give a picture, a description of the facts. The 
Spirit which animates these things is certainly not unknown to you." Or again: "Now 
you will surely draw the conclusion for  yourself." 
And Hirzel says: 
"I shall not presume to entertain you with the speculative proposition that every 
creation arises out of its extreme opposite." 
Sometimes, too, the experiences of the correspondents are merely 
the fulfilment and confirmation of Criticism's prophecies. 
Fleischhammer, for example, says: 
"Your prediction has come true." 
And Zerrleder: 
"Far from being disastrous, the tendencies that I have described to you as 
gaining ever greater scope in Switzerland, are very fortunate; they only confirm the 
thought you have already often expressed," etc. 
Critical Criticism sometimes feels urged to express the conde­
scension involved by its participation in the correspondence and 
motivates this condescension by the fact that the correspondent 
has successfully carried out some  task.  Thus Herr Bruno writes to 
the Tübingen correspondent: 
"It is really inconsistent on my part to answer your letter.— On the other hand, 
you have again ... made such an apt remark that I ... cannot refuse the explanation 
you request." 
Critical Criticism has letters written to it from the provinces; not 
the provinces in the political sense, which, as we know, do not 
exist anywhere in Germany, but from the Critical provinces of 
which  • Berlin is the capital, Berlin, the seat of the Critical 
patriarchs and of the Holy Critical Family, whereas the provinces 
are where the Critical Mass resides. The Critical provincials dare 
not engage the attention of the supreme Critical authority without 
bows and apologies. 
Thus,  someone writes anonymously to Herr Edgar, who, being a 
member of the Holy Family, is also an eminent personage: 
"Honourable Sir, I hope you will excuse these lines on the grounds that young 
people like to unite in common strivings (there is not more than two years' 
difference in our ages)." 
The coeval of Herr Edgar describes himself incidentally as the 
essence of modern philosophy. Is it not in the nature of things that 
Criticism should correspond with the essence of philosophy? If Herr 

=====第172页=====
The Holy Family 147 
Edgar's coeval affirms that he has already lost his teeth, that is only 
an allusion to his allegorical essence. This "essence of modern 
philosophy" has "learned from Feuerbach to set the factor of 
education in objective view". It at once gives a sample of its 
education and views by assuring Herr Edgar that it has acquired a 
"complete view of his short story", "Es leben feste Grundsätze!"' 1 At 
the same time it openly admits that Herr Edgar's point of view is 
by no means quite clear to it, and finally invalidates the assurance 
concerning the complete view by the question: "Or have I 
completely misunderstood you?" After this sample it will be found 
quite normal that the essence of modern philosophy, referring to 
the Mass, should say: 
" We must at least once condescend to examine and untie the magic knot which 
bars common human reason from access to the unrestricted flood of thought." 
In order to get a complete view of the Critical Mass one should 
read the correspondence of Herr Hirzel from Zurich (Heft V). This 
unfortunate man memorises the stock phrases of Criticism with 
really touching docility and praiseworthy power of recall, not 
omitting Herr Bruno's favourite phrases about the battles he has 
waged and the campaigns he has planned and led. But Herr 
Hirzel exercises his profession as a member of the Critical Mass 
especially by raging against the profane Mass and its attitude to 
Critical Criticism. 
He speaks of the Mass claiming a part in history, "of the pure 
Mass",  of "pure Criticism", of the "purity of this contradiction" — "a 
contradiction purer than any that history has provided" — of the 
"discontented being", of the "perfect emptiness, ill humour, dejec­
tion, heartlessness, timidity, fury and bitterness of the Mass 
towards Criticism"; of "the Mass which only exists in order by its 
resistance to make Criticism sharper and more vigilant". He 
speaks of "creation from the extreme opposite", of how Criticism 
is above hate and similar profane sentiments. The whole of Herr 
Hirzel's contribution to the Literatur-Zeitung is confined to this 
profusion of Critical stock phrases. While reproaching the Mass 
for being satisfied with mere "disposition", "good will", "the 
phrase", "faith", etc., he  himself,  as a member of the Critical Mass, 
is content with phrases, expressions of his "Critical disposition", 
his "Critical faith", his "Critical good will" and leaves "action, 
work, struggle" and "works" to Herr Bruno and Co. 
Despite the terrible picture of the world-historic tension between 
"Long live firm principles!" A. Weill und E. Bauer, Berliner Novellen. — Ed. 

=====第173页=====
148 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the profane world and "Critical Criticism" which the members of 
the "Critical Mass" outline, for the non-believer at least not even 
the fact of the matter is stated, the factual existence of this 
world-historic tension. The obliging and un-Critical repetition of 
Criticism's "imaginations" and "pretensions" by the correspond­
ents only proves that the fixed ideas of the master are the fixed 
ideas of the servant as well. It is true that one of the Critical 
correspondents 3 makes an attempt at a proof based on fact. 
"You see," he writes to the Holy Family, "that the Literatur-Zeitung is fulfilling 
its purpose, i.e., that it meets with no approval. It could meet with approval only if it 
sounded in unison with the general thoughtlessness, if you strode proudly before it 
with the jingling of hackneyed phrases of a whole janissary band of current 
categories." 
The jingling of hackneyed phrases of a whole janissary band of 
current categories! It is evident that the Critical correspondent 
does his best to keep pace with non-"current" hackneyed phrases. 
But his explanation of the fact that the Literatur-Zeitung meets with 
no approval must be rejected as purely apologetic. This fact could 
be better explained in just the opposite way by saying that Critical 
Criticism is in unison with the great mass, to be precise, the great 
mass of scribblers who meet with no approval. 
It is therefore not enough for the Critical correspondent to 
address Critical hackneyed phrases to the Holy Family as 
"prayers" and at the same time to the Mass as "anathemas". 
Un-Critical, mass-type correspondents, real delegates of the Mass to 
Critical Criticism, are needed to show the real tension between the 
Mass and Criticism. 
That is why Critical Criticism also assigns a place to the 
un-Critical Mass. It makes unbiased representatives of the latter 
correspond  with it, acknowledge the opposition to  itself,  Criticism, as 
important and absolute, and utter a fearful cry for redemption 
from this opposition. 
2) THE "UN-CRITICAL MASS" AND "CRITICAL CRITICISM" 
a) The "Obdurate Mass" and the "Unsatisfied Mass" 
The hardness of heart, the obduracy and blind unbelief of "the 
Mass"  has one rather determined representative. This representa-
a The reference is to the author of an anonymous report published in the 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844, in the section "Correspondenz aus 
der Provinz". — Ed. 

=====第174页=====
The Holy Family 149 
tive speaks of the exclusively "Hegelian philosophical education of 
the Berlin Couleur". 63 
"The only true progress that we can make," he says, "lies in the acknowledge­
ment of reality. But we learn from you that our knowledge was not knowledge of 
reality but of something unreal." 
He calls "natural science" the basis of philosophy. 
"A good naturalist stands in the same relation to the philosopher as the 
philosopher to the theologian." 
Further he comments as follows on the "Berlin Couleur". 
"I do not think it would be exaggerating to try to explain the state of these 
people by saying that, although they have gone through a process of spiritual 
moulting, they have not yet altogether got rid of their old skin in order to be able 
to absorb the elements of renovation and rejuvenation." "We must yet assimilate 
this"  (natural-scientific and industrial) "knowledge". "The knowledge of the world 
and of man, which we need most of all, cannot be acquired only by acuity of 
thought; all the senses must collaborate and all the aptitudes of man must be 
applied as indispensable instruments; otherwise contemplation and knowledge will 
always remain defective — and will lead to moral death." 
This correspondent, however, sweetens the pill that he hands 
out to Critical Criticism. He "makes Bauer's words find their 
correct application", he has "followed Bauer's thoughts", he agrees 
that "Bauer has spoken the truth" and in the end he seems to 
polemise, not against Criticism  itself,  but against a "Berlin 
Couleur" which is distinct from it. 
Critical Criticism, feeling itself hit and, moreover, being as 
sensitive as an old maid in all matters of faith, is not taken in by 
these distinctions and this semi-homage. 
"You are mistaken," it answers, "if you have taken the party you described at 
the beginning of your letter for your opponent. Rather admit" (and now comes the 
crushing sentence of excommunication) "that you are an opponent of Criticism itself I" 
The miserable wretch! The man of the Mass! An opponent of 
Criticism itselfl But as far as the content of that  mass-type  polemic is 
concerned, Critical Criticism declares its respect for its critical 
attitude to natural science and industry. 
"All respect for natural science! All respect for James Watt and" (a really noble 
turn!) "no respect at all for the millions that he made for his relatives." 
All respect for the respect of Critical Criticism! In the same 
letter in which Critical Criticism reproaches the above-mentioned 
Berlin Couleur with too easily disposing of thorough and solid 
works without studying them and having finished with a work 
when they have merely remarked that it is epoch-making, etc.— in 
that same letter Criticism itself disposes of the whole of natural 

=====第175页=====
150 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
science and industry by merely declaring its respect for them. The 
clause which it appends to its declaration of respect for natural 
science reminds one of the first fulminations of the deceased 
knight Krug against natural philosophy. 
"Nature is not the only reality because we eat and drink it in its individual 
products." 
Critical Criticism knows this much about the individual products 
of nature that "we eat and drink them". All respect for the natural 
science of Critical Criticism! 
Criticism is consistent in countering the embarrassingly importu­
nate demand to study "nature" and "industry" with the following 
indisputably witty rhetorical exclamation: 
"Or" (!) "do you think that the knowledge of historical reality is already  complete? 
Or" (!) "do you know of any single period in history which is already actually 
known?" 
Or does Critical Criticism believe that it has reached even the 
beginning of a knowledge of historical reality so long as it excludes 
from the historical movement the theoretical and practical relation 
of man to nature, i.e., natural science and industry? Or does it 
think that it actually knows any period without knowing, for 
example, the industry of that period, the immediate mode of 
production of life itself? Of course, spiritualistic,  theological  Critical 
Criticism only knows (at least it imagines it knows) the main 
political, literary and theological acts of history. Just as it separates 
thinking from the senses, the soul from the body and itself from 
the world, it separates history from natural science and industry 
and sees the origin of history not in vulgar material production on 
the earth but in vaporous clouds in the heavens. 
The representative of the "obdurate" and "hard-hearted" Mass 
with his trenchant reproofs and counsels is disposed of as a 
mass-type materialist. Another correspondent, not so malicious or 
mass-like, who places his hopes in Critical Criticism but finds them 
unsatisfied, fares no better. The representative of the "unsatisfied" 
Mass writes: 
"I must, however, admit that the first number of your paper was by no means 
satisfying. We expected something else." 
The Critical patriarch answers in person: 
"I knew beforehand that it would not satisfy expectations, because I could 
rather easily imagine those expectations. One is so exhausted that one wishes to 
have everything at once. Everything? No! If possible everything and nothing at the 
same time. An everything that costs no trouble, an everything that one can absorb 
without going through any development, an everything that is contained in a single 
word." 

=====第176页=====
The Holy Family 151 
In his vexation at the undue demands of the "Mass", which 
demands something, indeed everything, from Criticism, which by 
principle and disposition "gives nothing", the Critical patriarch 
relates an anecdote in the way that old men do. Not long ago a 
Berlin acquaintance complained bitterly of the verbosity and profu­
sion of detail of his works— Herr Bruno is known to make a bulky 
work out of the tiniest semblance of a thought. He was consoled 
with the promise of being sent the ink necessary for the printing 
of the book in a small pellet so that he could easily absorb it. The 
patriarch explains the length of his "works" by the bad spreading 
of the ink, as he explains the nothingness of his Literatur-Zeitung 
by the emptiness of the "profane Mass", which,- in order to be full, 
wants to swallow everything and nothing at the same time. 
Just as it is difficult to deny the importance of what has so far 
been related, it is equally difficult to see a world-historic contradic­
tion in the fact that a mass-type acquaintance of Critical Criticism 
considers Criticism empty, while Criticism, for its part, declares 
him to be un-Critical; that a second acquaintance does not find 
that the Literatur-Zeitung satisfies his expectations, and that a third 
acquaintance and friend of the family finds Criticism's works too 
bulky. However, acquaintance No. 2, who entertains expectations, 
and friend of the family No. 3, who wishes at least to find out the 
secrets of Critical Criticism, constitute the transition to a more 
substantial and tenser relationship between Criticism and the 
"un-Critical Mass". Cruel as Criticism is to the "hard-hearted" 
Mass which has only "common human reason", we shall find it 
condescending to the Mass that is pining for redemption from 
contradiction. The Mass which approaches Criticism with a con­
trite heart, a spirit of repentance and a humble mind will be 
rewarded for its honest striving with many a wise, prophetic and 
outspoken word. 
b) The "Soft-Hearted" Mass "Pining for Redemption" 
The representative of the sentimental, soft-hearted Mass pining for 
redemption cringes and implores Critical Criticism for a kind word 
with effusions of the heart, deep bows and rolling of the eyes, as 
follows: 
"Why am I writing this to you? Why am I justifying myself before you? Because 
I respect  you and therefore desire your respect; because I owe you deepest thanks for 
my development and therefore love you. My heart impels me to justify myself before 
you ... who have upbraided me.... Far be it from me to obtrude upon you; judging by 

=====第177页=====
152 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
myself,  I thought you might be pleased to have proof of sympathy from a man who is 
still little known to you. I make no claim whatsoever that you should answer my letter: 
I wish neither to take up your time, of which you can make better use, nor to be 
irksome to you, nor to expose myself to the mortification of seeing something that I 
hoped for remain unfulfilled. You may interpret my letter as sentimentality, 
importunity or vanity" (!) "or whatever you like; you may answer me or not, I cannot 
resist the impulse to send it and I only hope that you will realise the friendly feeling 
which inspired it" (!!). 
Just as from the beginning God has had mercy on the  poor  in spirit, 
this mass-like but humble correspondent, too, who whimpers for 
mercy from Critical Criticism, has his wish fulfilled. Critical Criticism 
gives him a kind answer. More than that! It gives him most profound 
explanations on the objects of his curiousity. 
"Two years ago," Critical Criticism teaches, "it was opportune to remember the 
Enlightenment of the French in the eighteenth century in order to be able to make 
use of those light troops,  too, at a place in the battle that was then being waged. The 
situation is now quite different. Truths now change very quickly. What was then 
opportune is now an oversight." 
Of course it was only "an oversight" then too, but an "opportune" 
one, when the Absolute Critical All-high itself (cf. Anekdota, Book 
II, p. 89) a called those light troops "our saints", our "prophets", 
"patriarchs", etc. Who would call light troops a troop of "patriarchs"? 
It was an "opportune" oversight when it spoke with enthusiasm of 
the self-denial, moral energy and inspiration with which these light 
troops "thought, worked — and studied — throughout their lives 
for the truth". It was an "oversight" when, in the preface to Das 
entdeckte Christenthum, it was stated that these "light" troops 
"seemed invincible and any one well-informed would have wagered 
that they would put the world out of joint" and that "it seemed 
beyond doubt that they would succeed in giving the world a new 
shape". Those light troops? 
Critical Criticism continues to teach the inquisitive representative 
of the "cordial Mass": 
"Although it was a new historical merit of the French to attempt to set up a 
social theory, they are none the less now exhausted; their new theory was not yet pure, 
their social fantasies and their peaceful democracy are by no means free from the 
assumptions of the old state of things." 
Criticism is talking here about Fourierism—if it is talking about 
anything—and in particular of the Fourierism of La Démocratie 
pacifique. But this is far from being the "social theory" of the 
French. The French have social  theories,  but not a social theory; the 
a B. Bauer, "Leiden und Freuden des theologischen Bewusstseins". Anekdota 
zur neuesten deutschen Philosophie und Publicistik, Bd.  2.—Ed. 

=====第178页=====
The Holy Family 153 
diluted Fourierism that La Démocratie pacifique preaches is nothing 
but the social doctrine of a section of the philanthropic 
bourgeoisie. The people is communistic, and, as a matter of fact, 
split into a multitude of different groups; the true movement and 
the elaboration of these different social shades is not only not 
exhausted, it is really only beginning. But it will not end in pure, i.e., 
abstract, theory as Critical Criticism would like it to; it will end in a 
quite practical practice that will not bother at all about the 
categorical categories of Criticism. 
"No nation," Criticism chatters on, "has so far any advantage over another. If 
one can succeed in winning some spiritual superiority over the others, it will be the 
one which is in a position to criticise itself and the others and to discover the causes 
of the universal decay." 
Every nation has so far some advantage over another. But if the 
Critical prophecy is right, no nation will have any advantage over 
another, because all the civilised peoples of Europe — the English, 
the Germans, the French — now "criticise themselves and others" 
and "are in a position to discover the causes of the universal 
decay". Finally, it is high-sounding tautology to say that "criticis­
ing", "discovering", i.e., spiritual activities, give a spiritual superiori­
ty, and Criticism, which in its infinite self-consciousness places itself 
above the nations and expects them to kneel at its feet and 
implore it for enlightenment, only shows by this caricatured 
Christian-Germanic idealism that it is still up to its neck in the 
mire of German nationalism. 
The criticism of the French and the English is not an abstract, 
preternatural personality outside mankind; it is the real human 
activity of individuals who are active members of society and who 
suffer, feel, think and act as human beings. That is why their 
criticism is at the same time practical, their communism a socialism 
in which they give practical, concrete measures, and in which they 
not only think but even more act, it is the living, real criticism of 
existing society, the recognition of the causes of "the decay". 
After Critical Criticism's explanations for the inquisitive member 
of the Mass, it is entitled to say of its Literatur-Zeitung: 
"Here Criticism that is pure, graphic, relevant and adds nothing is practised." 
Here "nothing self-existing is given"; here nothing at all is given 
except criticism that gives nothing, that is, criticism which culminates 
in extreme non-criticism. Criticism has underlined passages printed 
and reaches its full bloom in excerpts. Wolfgang Menzel and Bruno 
Bauer stretch a brotherly hand to each other and Critical Criticism 
stands where the philosophy of identity stood at the beginning of this 

=====第179页=====
154 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
century, when Schelling protested against the mass-like supposition 
that he wanted to give something, anything except pure, entirely 
philosophical philosophy.64 
c) Grace Bestowed on the Mass 
The soft-hearted Korrespondent whose instruction we have just 
witnessed stood in a comfortable relationship to Criticism. In his 
case there was only an idyllic hint of the tension between the Mass 
and Criticism. Both sides of the world-historic contradiction behaved 
kindly and politely, and therefore exoterically, to each other. 
Critical Criticism, in its unhealthy, soul-shattering effect on the 
Mass,  is seen first in regard to a correspondent who has one foot 
already in Criticism and the other still in the profane world. He 
represents the "Mass" in its inner struggle with Criticism. 
At times it seems to him "that Herr Bruno and his friends do 
not understand mankind", that "they are the ones who are really 
blinded". Then he immediately corrects  himself: 
"Yes,  it is as clear as daylight to me that you are right and that your thoughts are 
correct; but excuse me, the people is not wrong either.... Oh yes\ The people is 
right.... I cannot deny that you are right.... I really do not know what it will all lead 
to: you will say ... well, stay at home.... Alas, I can no longer stand it.... Alasl One 
might otherwise go mad in the end.... Kindly accept... Believe me, the knowledge 
one has acquired sometimes makes one feel as stupid as if a mill-wheel were turning 
in one's head." 
Another correspondent, too, writes that he "is occasionally 
disconcerted". One can see that Critical grace is about to be  bestowed 
on this mass-type correspondent. The poor wretch! The sinful 
Mass is tugging at him on one side and Critical Criticism on the 
other. It is not the knowledge he has acquired that reduces this 
pupil of Critical Criticism to a state of stupor; it is the question of 
faith and conscience; Critical Christ or the people, God or the 
world, Bruno Bauer and his friends or the profane Mass! But just 
as bestowal of divine grace is preceded by extreme wretchedness of 
the sinner, Critical grace is preceded by a crushing stupefaction. 
And when it is at last bestowed, the chosen one loses not stupidity 
but the consciousness of stupidity. 
3) THE UN-CRITICALLY CRITICAL MASS OR "CRITICISM" 
AND THE "BERLIN COULEUR" 
Critical Criticism has not succeeded in depicting itself as the 
essential opposite, and hence at the same time as the essential object, 
of the mass of humanity. Apart from the representatives of the 

=====第180页=====
The Holy Familv 155 
obdurate Mass which reproaches Critical Criticism for its objectless-
ness and gives it to understand in the most courteous possible way 
that it has not yet gone through the  process  of its spiritual "moult" 
and must first of all acquire solid knowledge, there is the 
soft-hearted correspondent. He is no opposite at all, but then the 
actual reason for his approach to Critical Criticism is a purely 
personal one. As we can see a little further on in his letter, he really 
only wants to reconcile his devotion to Herr Arnold Ruge with his 
devotion to Herr Bruno Bauer. This attempt at reconciliation does 
credit to his kind heart, but it in no way constitutes an interest of a 
mass nature. Finally, the last correspondent to appear was no 
longer a real member of the Mass, he was only a catechumen of 
Critical Criticism. 
In general, the Mass is an indefinite object, and therefore can 
neither carry out a definite action nor enter into a definite 
relationship. The Mass, as the object of Critical Criticism, has 
nothing in common with the real masses who, for their part, form 
among themselves oppositions of a pronounced mass nature. 
Critical Criticism's mass is "made" by Criticism  itself,  as would be 
the case if a naturalist, instead of speaking of definite classes, 
contrasted the Class to  himself. 
Hence, in order to have an opposite of a really mass nature, 
Critical Criticism needs, besides this abstract Mass which is the 
figment of its own brain, a definite Mass that can be empirically 
demonstrated and not just conjured up. This Mass must see in 
Critical Criticism both its  essence  and the annihilation of its  essence.  It 
must wish to be Critical Criticism, non-Mass, without being able to. 
This Critically un-Critical Mass is the above-mentioned "Berlin 
Couleur" . The mass of humanity which is seriously concerned with 
Critical Criticism is confined to a Berlin Couleur. 
The "Berlin Couleur", the "essential object" of Critical Criticism, 
of which it is always thinking and which, Critical Criticism 
imagines, is always thinking of Critical Criticism, consists, as far as 
we know, of a few ci-devant 3 Young Hegelians in whom Critical 
Criticism claims to inspire partly a horror vacuib and partly a feeling 
of futility. We are not investigating the actual state of affairs, we 
rely on what Criticism says. 
The Correspondence is mainly intended to expound at length to 
the public this world-historic relation of Criticism to the "Berlin 
Couleur", to reveal its profound significance, to show why Criti-
Former.— Ed. 
Horror of emptiness.— Ed. 

=====第181页=====
156 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
cism must necessarily be cruel towards this "Mass", and finally to 
make it appear that the whole world is in fearful agitation over this 
opposition, expressing itself now in favour of, and then against the 
actions of Criticism. For example, Absolute Criticism writes to a 
correspondent who sides with the '^Berlin Couleur": 
"I have already heard things like that 50 often that I have made up my mind not 
to take any more notice of them." 
The world has no idea how often it has dealt with Critical things 
like that. 
Let us now hear what a member of the Critical Mass reports on 
the Berlin Couleur: 
"'If anyone recognises the Bauers'" (the Holy Family must always be recognised 
pêle-mêle) "began his answer 3 — 'I am the one. But the Literatur-Zeitungl Let us be 
quite fair!' It was interesting for me to hear what one of those radicals, those clever 
men of anno 42, thought of you...." 
The correspondent goes on to report that the unfortunate man 
had all sorts of reproaches to make to the Literatur-Zeitung. 
Herr Edgar's short story, Die drei Biedermänner, ,b he found 
lacking in polish and exaggerated. He could not understand that 
censorship is not so much a fight of man against man, an external 
fight, as an internal one. They do not take the trouble to bethink 
themselves and to replace the phrase the censor  objects  to by a cleverly 
expressed and thoroughly developed Critical thought. He found 
Herr Edgar's essay on Béraud c lacking in thoroughness. The 
Critical reporter thinks it was thorough. True he admitted 
himself:  "I have not read Béraud's book." But he believes that 
Herr Edgar has succeeded, etc., and  belief,  we know, is bliss. "In 
general," the Critical believer continues, "he" (the one from the 
Berlin Couleur) "is not at all satisfied with Herr Edgar's works." He 
also finds that "Proudhon is not dealt with  thoroughly  enough". d And 
here the reporter gives Herr Edgar a testimonial: 
"It is true" (!?) "that I am acquainted with Proudhon. I know that Edgar's presentation 
took the characteristic points from him and set them out clearly." 
The only reason why Herr Edgar's  excellent  criticism of Proudhon 
is not liked, the reporter says, can only be that Herr Edgar does not 
fulminate against property. And just imagine it, the opponent 
a The reference is to the answer given by an adherent to the Berlin Couleur to 
one of the authors of the anonymous report "Aus der Provinz" published in the 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844.— Ed. 
Published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft III-V. — Ed. 
c See p. 20 of this volume.— Ed. 
See pp. 23-54 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第182页=====
The Holy Family 157 
finds Herr Edgar's essay on the "Union ouvrière"* unimportant. 
To console Herr Edgar the reporter says: 
"Of course, it does not give anything independent, and these people have really 
gone back to Gruppe's point of view, which, to be sure, they have always maintained. 
Criticism must give, give and givel" 
As though Criticism had not given quite new linguistic, histori­
cal, philosophical, economic, and juridical discoveries! And it is so 
modest as to let itself be told that it has not given anything 
independent^. Even our Critical correspondent gave mechanics some­
thing that it had not hitherto known when he made people go back 
to the same point of view which they had always maintained. It is 
clumsy to recall Gruppe's point of view. In his pamphlet, which is 
otherwise miserable and not worth mentioning, Gruppe asked 
Herr Bruno what criticism he could give on speculative logic. 65 
Herr Bruno referred him to future generations and — 
"a fool is waiting for an answer". 
As God punished the unbelieving Pharaoh by hardening his 
heart and did not think him worthy of being enlightened, so the 
reporter assures us: 
"They are therefore not at all  .worthy  of seeing or knowing the contents of your 
Literatur-Zeitung." 
And instead of advising his friend Edgar to acquire thoughts 
and knowledge he gives him the following advice: 
"Let Edgar get a bag of phrases and draw blindly out of it when he writes essays 
in future, in order to acquire a style in harmony with the public." 
Besides assurances of "a certain fury, ill-favour, emptiness, 
thoughtlessness, an inkling of something which they are not able 
to fathom, and a feeling of nullity" (all these epithets apply, of 
course, to the Berlin Couleur), eulogies like the following are 
made of the Holy Family: 
"Lightness of treatment penetrating the matter, command of the categories, 
insight acquired by study, in a word, command of the Objects. He" (of the Berlin 
Couleur) "takes an easy attitude to the thing, you make the thing easy." Or: "Your 
criticism in the Literatur-Zeitung is pure, graphic and relevant." 
Finally it is stated: 
"I have written it all to you at such length because I know that I shall give you 
pleasure by reporting the opinions of my friend. From this you can see that the 
Literatur-Zeitung is fulfilling its purpose." 
Its purpose is opposition to the Berlin Couleur. Having just 
a See pp. 19-20 of this volume.— Ed. 
H. Heine, Die Nordsee (second cycle "Fragen"). — Ed. 

=====第183页=====
158 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
witnessed the Berlin Couleur's polemic against Critical Criticism 
and the reproof it received for that polemic, we are now given a 
double picture of its efforts to obtain mercy from Critical 
Criticism. 
One correspondent writes: 
"My acquaintances in Berlin told me when I was there at the beginning of the 
year that you repel all and keep all at a distance; that you keep yourself to yourself 
and let nobody approach you, assiduously avoiding all intercourse. I, of course, 
cannot tell which side is to blame." 
Absolute Criticism replies: 
"Criticism does not form any party and will have no party of its own; it is solitary 
because it is engrossed in its" (!) "object and opposes itself to it. It  isolates  itself from 
everything." 
Critical Criticism thinks it rises above all dogmatic antitheses by 
substituting for the real antitheses the imaginary antithesis be­
tween itself and the  world,  between the Holy Ghost and the profane 
Mass. In the same way it thinks it rises above parties by falling below 
the party point of view, by counterposing itself as a party to the rest 
of mankind and concentrating all interest in the personality of 
Herr Bruno and Co. The truth of Criticism's admission that it sits 
enthroned in the solitude of abstraction, that even when it seems to 
be occupied with some  object  it does not come out of its objectless 
solitude into a truly social relation to a real  object,  because its object 
is only the object of its imagination, only an imaginary object  — the 
truth of this Critical admission is proved by the whole of our 
exposition. Equally correctly Criticism defines its abstraction as 
absolute abstraction, in the sense that "it isolates itself from 
everything", and precisely this isolation of nothing from everything, 
from all thought, contemplation, etc., is absolute nonsense. Inciden­
tally, the solitude which it achieves by isolating and abstracting 
itself from everything is no more free from the object from which it 
abstracts itself than Origen was from the genital organ that he 
isolated from  himself. 
Another correspondent begins by describing one of the members 
of the "Berlin Couleur", whom he saw and spoke with, as 
"gloomy", "depressed", "no longer able to open his mouth" 
(although he was formerly always "ready with a quite impudent 
word"),  and "despondent". This member of the "Berlin Couleur" 
related the following to the correspondent, who in turn reported it 
to Criticism: 
"He cannot grasp how people like you two, who formerly respected the 
principle of humanity, can behave in such an  aloof,  repelling, indeed arrogant 

=====第184页=====
The Holy Family 159 
manner." He does not know "why there are some people who, it seems, 
intentionally cause a split. Have we not all the same point of view? Do we not all 
pay homage to the extreme, to Criticism? Are we not all capable, if not of producing, 
at least of grasping and applying an extreme thought?" He "finds that this split is 
motivated by no other principle than egoism and arrogance". 
Then the correspondent puts in a good word: 
"Have not at least some of our friends grasped Criticism, or perhaps the good 
will of Criticism ... 'ut desint vires, tarnen est laudanda voluntas'." 3 
Criticism replies with the following antitheses between itself and 
the Berlin Couleur: 
"There are various standpoints on criticism." The members of 
the Berlin Couleur "thought they had criticism in their pocket", 
but Criticism "really knows and applies the force of criticism", i.e., 
does not keep it in its pocket. For the former, criticism is pure 
form, whereas for Criticism, on the other hand, it is the "most 
substantial or rather the only substantial thing". Just as Absolute 
Thought considers itself the whole of reality, so does Critical 
Criticism. That is why it sees no content outside itself and is 
therefore not the criticism of real objects existing outside the 
Critical subject; on the contrary, it makes the object, it is the 
Absolute Subject-Object. Further! "The former kind of criticism 
disposes of everything, of the investigation of things, by means of 
phrases. The latter isolates itself from everything by means of 
phrases." The former is "clever in ignorance", the latter is "learn­
ing". The latter, at any rate, is not clever, it learns par ça, par là, b 
but only in appearance, only in order to be able to fling what it 
has superficially learnt from the Mass back at the Mass in the form 
of a "catchword", as wisdom that it itself has discovered, and to 
resolve it into the nonsense of Critical Criticism. 
"For the former, words such as 'extreme', 'proceed', 'not go far enough' are of 
importance and highly revered categories; the latter investigates the standpoints and 
does not apply to them the measures of those abstract categories." 
The exclamations of Criticism No. 2 that it is no longer a 
question of politics, that philosophy is done away with, and its 
dismissal of social systems and developments by means of words 
like "fantastic", "utopian", etc.— what is all that if not a Critically 
revised version of "proceeding" and "not going far enough"? And 
are not its "measures", such as "History", "Criticism", "summing 
up of objects", "the old and the new", "Criticism and Mass", 
"investigation of standpoints" — in a word, are not all its catch-
a "The strength may be lacking, but the will is praiseworthy." — Ed. 
Here and there.— Ed. 

=====第185页=====
160 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
words categorical measures and abstractly categorical ones at 
that!? 
"The former is theological, spiteful, envious, petty, presumptuous, the latter is 
the opposite of all that." 
After thus praising itself a dozen times in one breath and 
ascribing to itself all that the Berlin Couleur lacks, just as God is 
all that man is not, Criticism bears witness to itself that: 
"It has achieved a clarity, a thirst for learning, a tranquillity in which it is 
unassailable and invincible." 
Hence it can "at the most treat" its opponent, the Berlin Couleur, 
"with Olympic laughter". This laughter—it explains with its custom­
ary thoroughness what it is and what it is not—"this laughter is 
not arrogance". By no means! It is the negation of the negation. It 
is "only the  process  that the Critic must apply in all ease and equanimity 
against a subordinate standpoint which thinks itself equal to him" 
(what conceit!). When the Critic laughs, therefore, he is applying a 
processl And "in all equanimity" he applies the process of laughter 
not against persons, but against a standpoint] Even laughter is a 
category  which he applies and even must apply! 
Extramundane Criticism is not an essential activity of the human 
subject who is real and therefore lives and suffers in present-day 
society, sharing in its pains and pleasures. The real individual is 
only an accidental feature, an earthly vessel of Critical Criticism, 
which reveals itself in it as eternal Substance. The subject is not the 
human individual's criticism, but the non-human individual of Criti­
cism.  Criticism is not a manifestation of man, but man is an alienation 
of Criticism, and that is why the Critic lives completely outside 
society. 
"Can the Critic live in the society which he criticises?" 
It should be asked instead: Must he not live in that society? 
Must he not himself be a manifestation of the life of that society? 
Why does the Critic sell the products of his mind, for thereby he 
makes the worst law of present-day society his own law? 
"The Critic must not even dare to mix personally with society." 
That is why he creates for himself a Holy Family, just as the 
solitary God endeavours in the Holy Family to end his tedious 
isolation from society. If the Critic wants to free himself from bad 
society he must first of all free himself from his own society. 
"Thus the Critic dispenses with all the pleasures of  society,  but its sufferings, too, 
stay remote from him. He knows neither friendship" (except that of Critical friends) 

=====第186页=====
The Holy Family 161 
"nor love" (except self-love) "but on the other hand calumny is powerless against 
him; nothing can offend him; no hatred, no envy can affect him; vexation and 
grief are feelings unknown to him." 
In short, the Critic is free from all human passions, he is a divine 
person; he can apply to himself the song of the nun. 
I think not of a lover, 
I think not of a spouse. 
I think of God the Father 
For he my life endows.3 
Criticism cannot write a single passage without contradicting 
itself.  Thus it tells us finally: 
"The Philistinism that stones the Critic" (he has to be stoned by analogy with 
the Bible), "that misjudges him and ascribes impure motives to him" (ascribes 
impure motives to pure Criticism!) "in order to make him equal to  itself"  (the conceit 
of equality reproved above!), "is not laughed at by him, because it is not worth it, but 
is seen through and calmly relegated to its own insignificant significance." 
Earlier the Critic had to apply the process of laughter to the 
"subordinate standpoint that thought itself equal to him". Critical 
Criticism's unclarity about its mode of procedure with the godless 
"Mass"  seems almost to indicate an interior irritation, a sort of bile 
to which "feelings" are not "unknown". 
However, there should be no misunderstanding. Having waged 
a Herculean struggle to free itself from the un-Critical "profane 
Mass"  and "everything", Critical Criticism has at last succeeded in 
achieving its solitary, god-like, self-sufficient,  absolute  existence. If in its 
first pronouncement in this, its "new phase", the old world of 
sinful feelings seems still to have some power over it, we shall now 
see Criticism find aesthetic relaxation and transfiguration in an 
"artistic form" and complete its penance so it can finally as a 
second triumphant Christ accomplish the Critical last judgment 
and after its victory over the dragon ascend calmly to heaven. 
a From the German folk-song Die Nonne published in the book by F. K. Freiherr 
von Erlach, Die Volkslieder der Deutschen, Bd. IV.— Ed. 

=====第187页=====
Chapter VIII 
THE EARTHLY COURSE AND TRANSFIGURATION 
OF "CRITICAL CRITICISM", 
OR "CRITICAL CRITICISM" AS RUDOLPH, 
PRINCE OF GEROLDSTEIN 3 
Rudolph, Prince of Geroldstein, does penance in his earthly course 
for a double crime: his personal crime and that of Critical Criticism. 
In a furious dialogue he drew his sword against his father; Critical 
Criticism, also in a furious dialogue, let itself be carried away by 
sinful feelings against the Mass. Critical Criticism did not reveal a 
single mystery. Rudolph does penance for that and reveals all 
mysteries. 
Rudolph, Herr Szeliga informs us, is the first servant of the state 
of humanity (the Humanitätsstaat of the Swabian Egidius. See 
Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher by Dr. Karl Weil, 1844, Bd. 2 66). 
For the world not to be  destroyed,  Herr Szeliga asserts, it is necessary 
that 
"men of ruthless criticism appear.... Rudolph is such a man.... Rudolph grasps 
the thought of pure criticism. And that thought is more fruitful for him and 
mankind than all the experiences of the latter in its history, than all the knowledge 
that Rudolph, guided even by the most reliable teacher, was able to derive from 
that history.... The impartial judgment by which Rudolph perpetuates his earthly 
course is, in fact, nothing but 
the revelation of the mysteries of society." 
He is: "the revealed mystery of all mysteries." 
Rudolph has far more external means at his disposal than the 
other men of Critical Criticism. But the latter consoles  itself: 
"Unattainable for those less favoured by destiny are Rudolph's results" (!), "not 
unattainable is the splendid goal (!)." 
In this chapter Marx continues his criticism of Szeliga's article "Eugène Sue: 
Die Geheimnisse von Paris" (see pp. 55-77 of this volume).— Ed. 

=====第188页=====
The Holy Family 163 
That is why Criticism leaves the realisation of its own thoughts to 
Rudolph, who is so favoured by destiny. It sings to him: 
Hahnemann, go on ahead. 
You've waders on, you won't get wet!a 
Let us accompany Rudolph in his Critical earthly course, which "is 
more fruitful for mankind than all the expenences of the latter in its 
history, than all the knowledge" etc., and which twice saves the world 
from destruction. 
1) CRITICAL TRANSFORMATION OF A BUTCHER INTO A DOG, 
OR CHOURINEURb 
Chourineur was a butcher by trade. Owing to a concourse of 
circumstances, this mighty son of nature becomes a murderer. 
Rudolph comes across him accidentally just when he is molesting 
Fleur de Marie. Rudolph gives the dexterous brawler a few 
impressive, masterly punches -on the head, and thus wins his 
respect.. Later, in the tavern frequented by criminals, Chourineur's 
kind-hearted disposition is revealed. "You still have heart and 
honour," Rudolph says to him. By these words he instils in 
Chourineur respect for  himself.  Chourineur is reformed or, as 
Herr Szeliga says, is transformed into a "moral being". Rudolph 
takes him under his protection. Let us follow the course of 
Chourineur's education under the guidance of Rudolph. 
1st Stage. The first lesson Chourineur receives is a lesson in 
hypocrisy, faithlessness, craft and dissimulation. Rudolph uses the 
reformed Chourineur in exactly the same way as Vidocq used the 
criminals he had reformed, i.e., he makes him a mouchardc  and 
agent provocateur. He advises him to "pretend" to the "maître 
d'école" A that he has altered his "principle of not stealing" and to 
suggest a robbery so as to lure him into a trap set by Rudolph. 
Chourineur feels that he is being made a fool of. He protests 
against the suggestion of playing the role of mouchard and agent 
provocateur. Rudolph easily convinces the son of nature by the 
"pure" casuistry of Critical Criticism that a foul trick is not foul 
when it is done for  "good,  moral" reasons. Chourineur, as an agent 
provocateur and under the pretence of friendship and confidence, 
lures his former companion to destruction. For the first time in his 
life he commits an act of infamy. 
From the German folk-tale Sieben Schwaben published in Volksbücher, hrsg. 
v. G. O. Marbach.— Ed. 
b Chourineur is French thieves' slang for a murderous ruffian.— Ed. 
c Police  spy.—  Ed. 
The "maître d'école", a nickname given by his fellow criminals.— Ed. 

=====第189页=====
164 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
2nd Stage. We next find Chourineur acting as garde-malade* to 
Rudolph, whom he has saved from mortal danger. 
Chourineur has become such a respectable moral being that he 
rejects the Negro doctor David's suggestion to sit on the floor, for 
fear of dirtying the carpet. He is indeed too shy to sit on a chair. 
He first lays the chair on its back and then sits on the front legs. 
He never fails to apologise when he addresses Rudolph, whom he 
saved from a mortal danger, as "friend" or "Monsieur" instead of 
"Monseigneur" . 
What a wonderful training of the ruthless son of nature! 
Chourineur expresses the innermost secret of his Critical transfor­
mation when he admits to Rudolph that he has the same 
attachment for him as a bulldog for its master: "Je me sens pour 
vous,  comme qui dirait l'attachement d'un bouledogue pour son 
maître." The former butcher is transformed into a dog. Hence­
forth all his virtues will be reduced to the virtue of a dog, pure 
"dévouement" to its master. His independence, his individuality will 
disappear completely. But' just as bad painters have to label their 
pictures to say what they are supposed to represent, Eugène Sue 
has to put a label on "bulldog" Chourineur, who constantly affirms: 
"The two words, 'You still have heart and honour', made a man out 
of me." Until his very last breath, Chourineur will find the motive 
for his actions, not in his human individuality, but in that label. As 
proof of his moral reformation he will often reflect on his own 
excellence and the wickedness of other individuals. And every 
time he throws out moral sentences, Rudolph will say to him: "I 
like to hear you speak like that." Chourineur has not become an 
ordinary bulldog but a moral one. 
3rd Stage. We have already admired the  petty-bourgeois  respectabili­
ty which has taken the place of Chourineur's coarse but daring 
unceremoniousness. We now learn that, as befits a "moral being", 
he has also adopted the gait and demeanour of the petty bourgeois. 
"A le voir marcher  — on l'eût pris pour le bourgeois le plus inoffensif du 
monde." b 
Still sadder than this form is the content that Rudolph gives his 
Critically reformed life. He sends him to Africa "to serve as a 
living and salutary example of repentance to the world of 
unbelievers". In future, he will have to represent, not his own 
human nature, but a Christian dogma. 
a Sick attendant.— Ed. 
"To see him walk you would have taken him for the most harmless  bourgeois  in 
the world."—Ed. 

=====第190页=====
The Holy Family 165 
4th Stage. The Critically moral transformation has made 
Chourineur a quiet, cautious man who behaves according to the 
rules of fear and worldly wisdom. 
"Le Chourineur", reports Murph, who in his indiscreet simplicity continually tells 
tales out of school "n'a pas dit un mot de l'exécution du maître d'école, de peur de 
se trouver compromis." 3 
So Chourineur knows that the punishment of the maître d'école 
was an illegal act. But he does not talk about it for fear of 
compromising  himself.  Wise Chourineur! 
5th Stage. Chourineur has carried his moral education to such 
perfection that he gives his dog-like attitude to Rudolph a civilised 
form — he becomes conscious of it. After saving Germain from a 
mortal danger he says to him: 
"I have a protector who is to me what God is to priests—he is such as to make 
one kneel before him." 
And in imagination he kneels before his God. 
"Monsieur Rudolph," he says to Germain, "protects you. I say 'Monsieur' though I 
should say 'Monseigneur'. But I am used to calling him 'Monsieur Rudolph', and he 
allows me to." 
"Magnificent awakening and flowering!" exclaims Szeliga in 
Critical delight. 
6th Stage. Chourineur worthily ends his career of pure dévoue­
ment, or moral bulldogishness, by finally letting himself be stabbed 
to death for his gracious lord. At the moment when Squelette 
threatens the prince with his knife, Chourineur stays the mur­
derer's arm. Squelette stabs him. But, dying, Chourineur says to 
Rudolph: 
"I was right when I said that a lump of earth" (a bulldog) "like me can 
sometimes be useful to a great and gracious master like you." 
To this dog-like utterance, which sums up the whole of Chouri-
neur's Critical life like an epigram, the label put in his mouth 
adds: 
"We are quits, Monsieur Rudolph. You told me that I had heart and honour." 
Herr Szeliga cries as loud as he can: 
"What a merit it was for Rudolph to have restored the Schurimann " (?) "to 
mankind (?)!" 
a "Chourineur said nothing of the punishment meted out to the maître  d'école  for 
fear of compromising  himself."  — Ed. 
Schurimann is a Germanised form of Chourineur.— Ed. 
7-762 

=====第191页=====
166 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
2) REVELATION OF THE MYSTERY OF CRITICAL RELIGION, 
OR FLEUR DE MARIE 
a) The Speculative "Marguerite"3 
A word more about Herr Szeliga's speculative "Marguerite" be­
fore we go on to Eugène Sue's Fleur de Marie. 
The speculative "Marguerite" is above all a correction. The fact is 
that the reader could conclude from Herr Szeliga's construction 
that Eugène Sue had 
"separated the presentation of the objective basis" (of the "world system") 
"from the development of the acting individual forces which can be understood 
only against that background". 
Besides the task of correcting this erroneous conjecture that the 
reader may have made from Herr Szeliga's presentation, Marguer­
ite has also a metaphysical mission in our, or rather Herr Szeliga's, 
"epic". 
"The world system and an epic event would still not  be artistically united in a really 
single whole if they were only interspersed in a motley mixture — now here a bit of 
world system and then there some stage play. If real unity is to result, both things, 
the mysteries of this prejudiced world and the clarity, frankness and confidence 
with which Rudolph penetrates and reveals them, must clash in a single individual.... 
This is the task of Marguerite." 
Herr Szeliga speculatively constructs Marguerite by analogy with 
Bauer's construction of the Mother of God. 
On one side is the "divine element" (Rudolph) to which "all power 
and freedom" are attributed, the only active principle. On the 
other side is the passive "world system" and the human beings 
belonging to it. The world system is the "ground of reality". If 
this ground is not to be "entirely abandoned" or "the last remnant 
of the natural condition is not to be abolished"; if the world itself 
is to have some share in the "principle of development" that 
Rudolph, in contrast to the world, concentrates in  himself;  if "the 
human element is not to be represented simply as unfree and 
inactive", Herr Szeliga is bound to fall into the "contradiction of 
religious consciousness". Although he tears apart the world system 
and its activity as the dualism of a dead Mass and Criticism 
(Rudolph), he is nevertheless obliged to concede some attributes of 
divinity to the world system and the mass and to give in 
Marguerite a speculative construction of the unity of the two, 
Rudolph and the world (see Kritik der Synoptiker, Band I, p. 39). 
"Fleur de Marie" is translated by the authors into German as "Marien-
Blume" which means Marguerite.— Ed. 

=====第192页=====
The Holy Family 167 
Besides the real relations of the  house-owner,  the acting "individual 
force", to his house (the "objective basis"), mystical speculation, and 
speculative aesthetics too, need a third concrete, speculative unity, à 
Subject-Object which is the house and the house-owner in one. As 
speculation does not like natural mediations in their extensive 
circumstantiality, it does not realise that the same "bit of world 
system", the house, for example, which for one, the house-owner, 
for example, is an "objective basis", is for the other, the builder of 
the house, an "epic event". In order to get a "really single whole" 
and "real unity", Critical Criticism, which reproaches "romantic art" 
with the "dogma of unity", replaces the natural and human 
connection between the world system and world events by a fantastic 
connection, a mystical Subject-Object, just as Hegel  replaces  the real 
connection between man and nature by an absolute Subject-Object 
which is at one and the same time the whole of nature and the whole 
of humanity, the Absolute Spirit. 
In the Critical Marguerite "the universal guilt of the time, the guilt 
of mystery", becomes the "mystery of guilt", just as the universal debt3 
of mystery becomes the mystery of  debts  in the indebted Epicier.b 
According to the Mother-of-God construction, Marguerite should 
really have been the mother of Rudolph, the redeemer of the world. 
Herr Szeliga expressly says: 
"According to the logical sequence, Rudolph should have been the son of 
Marguerite." 
Since, however, he is not her son, but her father, Herr Szeliga 
finds in this "the new mystery that the present often bears in its 
womb the long departed past instead of the future". He even reveals 
another mystery, a still greater one, a mystery which directly 
contradicts mass-type statistics, the mystery that 
"a child, if it does not, in its turn, become a father or mother, but goes to its grave 
pure and innocent, is ... essentially ... a daughter". 
Herr Szeliga faithfully follows Hegel's speculation when, accord­
ing to the "logical sequence", he regards the daughter as the mother 
of her father. In Hegel's philosophy of history, as in his philosophy 
of nature, the son engenders the mother, the spirit nature, the 
Christian religion paganism, the result the beginning. 
After proving that according to the "logical sequence" Marguerite 
ought to have been Rudolph's mother, Herr Szeliga proves the 
opposite: 
a Here the authors have a pun on the word  "Schuld"  which means "guilt" and 
"debt".— Ed. 
b Grocer.— Ed. 
7* 

=====第193页=====
168 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"in order to conform fully to the idea she embodies in our epic, she must never 
become a mother". 
This shows at least that the idea of our epic and Herr Szeliga's 
logical sequence are mutually contradictory. 
The speculative Marguerite is nothing but the "embodiment of an 
idea". But what idea? 
"She has the task of representing, as it were, the last tear of grief that the past 
sheds prior to its final passing away." 
She is the representation of an allegorical tear, and even this 
little that she is, is only "as it were". 
We shall not follow Herr Szeliga in his further description of 
Marguerite. We shall leave her the satisfaction, according to Herr 
Szeliga's prescription, of "constituting the most decisive antithesis to 
everyone", a mysterious antithesis, as mysterious as the attributes 
of God. 
Neither shall we delve into the "true mystery" that is "deposited 
by God in the breast of man" and at which the speculative 
Marguerite "as it were" hints. We shall pass from Herr Szeliga's 
Marguerite to Eugène Sue's Fleur de Marie and to the Critical 
miraculous cures Rudolph accomplishes on her. 
b) Fleur de Marie 
We meet Marie surrounded by criminals, as a prostitute in 
bondage to the proprietress of the criminals' tavern. In this 
debasement she preserves a human nobleness of soul, a human 
unaffectedness and a human beauty that impress those around 
her, raise her to the level of a poetical flower of the criminal world 
and win for her the name of Fleur de Marie. 
We must observe Fleur de Marie attentively from her first 
appearance in order to be able to compare her original form with 
her Critical transformation. 
In spite of her frailty, Fleur de Marie at once gives proof of 
vitality, energy, cheerfulness, resilience of character  — qualities 
which alone explain her human development in her inhuman 
situation. 
When Chourineur ill-treats her, she defends herself with her 
scissors. That is the situation in which we first find her. She does 
not appear as a defenceless lamb who surrenders without any 
resistance to overwhelming brutality; she is a girl who can 
vindicate her rights and put up a fight. 
In the criminals' tavern in the Rue aux Fèves she tells 
Chourineur and Rudolph the story of her life. As she does so she 

=====第194页=====
The Holy Family 169 
laughs at Chourineur's wit. She blames herself because on being 
released from prison she spent the 300 francs she had earned 
there on amusements instead of looking for work. "But," she said, 
"I had no one to advise me." The memory of the catastrophe of 
her life — her selling herself to the proprietress of the criminals' 
tavern — puts her in a melancholy mood. It is the first time since 
her childhood that she has recalled these events. 
"Le fait est, que ça me chagrine de regarder ainsi derrière moi ... ça doit être 
bien bon d'être honnête." a 
When Chourineur makes fun of her and tells her she must 
become honest, she exclaims: 
"Honnête, mon dieu! et avec quoi donc veux-tu que je sois honnête?" 
She insists that she is not one "to have fits of tears": "Je ne suis 
pas pleurnicheuse" c; but her position in life is sad  — "Ça n'est pas 
gai." d Finally, contrary to Christian repentance, she pronounces on 
the past the human sentence, at once Stoic and Epicurean, of a free 
and strong nature: 
"Enfin ce qui est fait, est fait." e 
Let us accompany Fleur* de Marie on her first outing with 
Rudolph. 
"The consciousness of your terrible situation has probably often 
distressed you," Rudolph says, itching to moralise. 
"Yes,"  she replies, "more than once I looked over the embankment of the 
Seine; but then I would gaze at the flowers and the sun and say to  myself:  the river 
will always be there and I am not yet seventeen years old. Who can say? Dans ces 
moments-là il me semblait que mon sort n'était pas mérité, qu'il y avait en moi 
quelque chose de bon. Je me disais, on m'a bien tourmenté, mais au moins je n'ai 
jamais fait de mal à personne." 
Fleur de Marie considers her situation not as one she has freely 
created, not as the expression of her own personality, but as a fate 
she has not deserved. Her bad fortune can change. She is still young. 
Good and evil, as Marie conceives them, are not the moral 
abstractions of good and evil. She is good because she has never 
caused suffering to anyone, she has always been human towards her 
a "The fact is that it grieves me when I look back in this way ... it must be 
lovely to be honest." — Ed. 
b "Honest! My God! What do you want me to be honest with?"—Ed. 
"I am no crybaby."—Ed. 
d "It isn't a happy  one."—Ed. 
e "Well, what is done is done."—Ed. 
1 "On such occasions it seemed to me that I had not deserved my fate, that I had 
something good in me. People have tormented me enough, I used to say to  myself, 
but at least I have never done any harm to anyone." — Ed. 

=====第195页=====
170 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
inhuman surroundings. She is good because the sun and the 
flowers reveal to her her own sunny and blossoming nature. She is 
good because she is still young, full of hope and vitality. Her 
situation is not  good,  because it puts an unnatural constraint on 
her, because it is not the expression of her human impulses, not 
the fulfilment of her human desires; because it is full of torment 
and without joy. She measures her situation in life by her own 
individuality, her essential nature, not by the ideal of what is  good. 
In natural surroundings, where the chains of bourgeois life fall 
away and she can freely manifest her own nature, Fleur de Marie 
bubbles over with love of life, with a wealth of feeling, with human 
joy at the beauty of nature; these show that her social position has 
only grazed the surface of her and is a mere misfortune, that she 
herself is neither good nor bad, but human. 
"Monsieur Rodolphe, quel bonheur ... de l'herbe, des champs! Si vous vouliez 
me permettre de descendre, il fait si beau ... j'aimerais tant à courir dans ces 
prairies!" 3 
Alighting from the carriage, she plucks flowers for Rudolph, 
"can hardly speak for joy", etc., etc. 
Rudolph tells her that he is going to take her to Madame George's 
farm.  There she can see dove-cotes, cow-stalls and so forth; there 
they have milk, butter, fruit, etc. Those are real blessings for this 
child. She will be merry, that is her main thought. "C'est à n'y pas 
croire ... comme je veux m'amuser!" b She explains to Rudolph in the 
most unaffected way her own share of responsibility^or her misfor­
tune.  " Tout mon sort est  venu de  ce que  je n'ai pas  économisé  mon argent!" c 
She therefore advises him to be thrifty and to put money in the 
savings-bank. Her fancy runs wild in the castles in the air that 
Rudolph builds for her. She becomes sad only because she 
"has forgotten the present" and "the contrast of that present with the dream of 
a joyous and laughing existence reminds her of the cruelty of her situation". 
So far we have seen Fleur de Marie in her original un-Critical 
form. Eugène Sue has risen above the horizon of his narrow world 
outlook. He has slapped bourgeois prejudice in the face. He will 
hand over Fleur de Marie to the hero Rudolph to atone for his 
temerity and to reap applause from all old men and women, 
from the whole of the Paris police, from the current religion and 
from "Critical Criticism". 
a "Monsieur Rudolph, what happiness! ... grass, fields! If you would allow me 
to get out, the weather is so fine ... I should love so much to run about in these 
meadows." — Ed. 
"You can't believe how I am longing for some fun!" — Ed. 
c "My whole fate is due to the fact that I did not save up my money." — Ed. 

=====第196页=====
The Holy Family 171 
Madame George, to whom Rudolph entrusts Fleur de Marie, is 
an unhappy, hypochondriacal religious woman. She immediately 
welcomes the child with the unctuous words: "God blesses those 
who love and fear him, who have been unhappy and who repent." 
Rudolph, the man of "pure Criticism", has the wretched priest 
Laporte, whose hair has greyed in superstition, called in. He has 
the mission of accomplishing Fleur de Marie's Critical reform. 
Joyfully and unaffectedly Marie approaches the old priest. In 
his Christian brutality, Eugène Sue makes a "marvellous instinct" at 
once whisper in her ear that "shame ends where repentance and 
penance begin", that is, in the church, which alone saves. He 
forgets the unconstrained merriness of the outing, a merriness 
which nature's grace and Rudolph's friendly sympathy had pro­
duced, and which was troubled only by the thought of having to 
go back to the criminals' landlady. 
The priest Laporte immediately adopts a supermundane attitude. 
His first words are: 
"God's mercy is infinite, my dear child! He has proved it to you by not 
abandoning you in your severe trials.... The magnanimous man who saved you 
fulfilled the word of the Scriptures" (note—the word of the Scriptures, not a human 
purpose!): "Verily the Lord is nigh to those who invoke him; he will fulfil their 
desires ... he will hear their voice and will save them ... the Lord will accomplish his 
work." 
Marie cannot yet understand the evil meaning of the priest's 
exhortations. She answers: 
"I shall pray for those who pitied me and brought me back to God." 
Her first thought is not for God, it is for her human saviour and 
she wants to pray for him, not for her own absolution. She 
attributes to her prayer some influence on the salvation of others. 
Indeed, she is still so naive that she supposes she has already been 
brought back to God. The priest feels it is his duty to destroy this 
unorthodox illusion. 
"Soon," he says, interrupting her, "soon you will deserve absolution, absolution 
from your great errors ... for, to quote the prophet once more, the Lord holdeth 
up those who are on the brink of falling." 
One should not fail to see the inhuman expressions the priest 
uses.  Soon you will deserve absolution. Your sins are not yet 
forgiven. 
As Laporte, when he receives the girl, bestows on her the 
consciousness of her sins, so Rudolph, when he leaves her, presents 
her with a gold cross, the symbol of the Christian crucifixion 
awaiting her. 
Marie has already been living for some time on Madame 

=====第197页=====
172 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
George's farm. Let us first listen to a dialogue between the old 
priest Laporte and Madame George. 
He considers "marriage" out of the question for Marie "because no man, in 
spite of the priest's guarantee, will have the courage to face the past that has soiled 
her youth". He adds: "she has great errors to atone for, her moral sense ought to 
have kept her upright." 
He proves, as the commonest of bourgeois would, that she could 
have remained good: "There are many virtuous people in Paris 
today." The hypocritical priest knows quite well that at any hour 
of the day, in the busiest streets, those virtuous people of Paris 
pass indifferently by little girls of seven or eight years who sell 
allumette? and the like until about midnight as Marie herself used 
to do and who, almost without exception, will have the same fate 
as Marie. 
The priest has made up his mind concerning Marie's penance; in 
his own mind he has already condemned her. Let us follow Marie 
when she is accompanying Laporte home in the evening. 
"See,  my child," he begins with unctuous eloquence, "the boundless horizon 
the limits of which are no longer visible" (for it is evening), "it seems to me that 
the calm and the vastness almost give us an idea of eternity.... I am telling you this, 
Marie, because you are sensitive to the beauties of creation.... I have often been 
moved by the religious admiration which they inspire in you — you who for so long 
were deprived of religious feeling." 
The priest has already succeeded in changing Marie's immediate 
naive pleasure in the beauties of nature into a religious admiration. 
For her, nature has already become devout, Christianised nature, 
debased to creation. The transparent sea of space is desecrated and 
turned into the dark symbol of stagnant eternity. She has already 
learnt that all human manifestations of her being were "profane", 
devoid of religion, of real consecration, that they were impious 
and godless. The priest must soil her in her own eyes, he must 
trample underfoot her natural, spiritual resources and means of 
grace, in order to make her receptive to the supernatural means 
of grace he promises her, baptism. 
When Marie wants to make a confession to him and asks him to 
be lenient he answers: 
"The Lord has shown you that he is merciful." 
In the clemency which she is shown Marie must not see a 
natural, self-évident attitude of a related human being to her, an­
other human being. She must see in it an extravagant, supernatural, 
a Matches.— Ed. 

=====第198页=====
The Holy Family 173 
superhuman mercy and condescension; in human leniency she must 
see divine mercy. She must transcendentalise all human and natural 
relationships by making them relationships to God. The way Fleur 
de Marie in her answer accepts the priest's chatter about divine 
mercy shows how far she has already been spoilt by religious 
doctrine. 
As soon as she entered upon her improved situation, she said, 
she had felt only her new happiness. 
"Every instant I thought of Monsieur Rudolph. I often raised my eyes to 
heaven, to look there, not for God, but for Monsieur Rudolph, and to thank him. 
Yes, I confess, Father, I thought more of him than of God; for he did for me what 
God alone could have done.... I was happy, as happy as someone who has escaped a 
great danger for ever." 
Fleur de Marie already finds it wrong that she took a new happy 
situation in life simply for what it really was, that she felt it as a 
new happiness, that her attitude to it was a natural, not a 
supernatural one. She accuses herself of seeing in the man who 
rescued her what he really was, her rescuer, instead of supposing 
some imaginary saviour, God, in his place. She is already caught in 
religious hypocrisy, which takes away from another man what he 
has deserved in respect of me in order to give it to God, and 
which in general regards everything human in man as alien to him 
and everything inhuman in him as really belonging to him. 
Marie tells us that the religious transformation of her thoughts, 
her sentiments, her attitude to life was effected by Madame 
George and Laporte. 
"When Rudolph took me away from the Cité, I already had a vague 
consciousness of my degradation. But the education, the advice and examples I got 
from you and Madame George made me understand ... that I had been more 
guilty than unfortunate.... You and Madame George made me realise the infinite 
depth of my damnation." 
That is to say she owes to the priest Laporte and Madame 
George the replacement of the human and therefore bearable 
consciousness of her degradation by the Christian and hence 
unbearable consciousness of eternal damnation. The priest and the 
bigot have taught her to judge herself from the Christian point of 
view. 
Marie feels the depth of the spiritual misfortune into which she 
has been cast. She says: 
"Since the consciousness of good and evil had to be so frightful for me, why 
was I not left to my wretched lot?... Had I not been snatched away from infamy, 
misery and blows would soon have killed me. At least I should have died in 
ignorance of a purity that I shall always wish for in vain." 

=====第199页=====
174 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The heartless priest replies: 
"Even the most noble nature, were it to be plunged only for a day in the filth 
from which you have been saved, would be indelibly branded. That is the immutability 
of divine justicel" 
Deeply wounded by this priestly curse uttered in such honeyed 
tones,  Fleur de Marie exclaims: 
"You see therefore, I must despair!" 
The grey-headed slave of religion answers: 
"You must renounce hope of effacing this desolate page from your life, but you 
must trust in the infinite mercy of God. Here below, my poor child, you will have 
tears,  remorse and penance, but one day up above, forgiveness and eternal blissl" 
Marie is not yet stupid enough to be satisfied with eternal bliss 
and forgiveness up above. 
"Pity, pity, my God!" she cries. "I am so young.... Malheur à moi!" 3 
Then the hypocritical sophistry of the priest reaches its peak: 
"On the contrary, happiness for you, Marie; happiness for you to whom the Lord 
sends this bitter but saving remorse! It shows the religious susceptibility of your soul.... 
Each of your sufferings is counted up above. Believe me, God left you awhile on the 
path of evil only to reserve for you the  glory  of repentance  and the eternal reward due to 
atonement." 
From this moment Marie is enslaved  by the consciousness  of sin. In her 
former most unhappy situation in life she was able to develop a 
lovable, human individuality; in her outward debasement she was 
conscious that her human essence was her true  essence.  Now the filth of 
modern society, which has touched her externally, becomes her 
innermost being, and continual hypochondriacal self-torture be­
cause of that filth becomes her duty, the task of her life appointed by 
God himself,  the self-purpose of her existence. Formerly she said of 
herself "Je ne suis pas pleurnicheuse" and knew that "ce qui  est fait, est 
fait". Now self-torment will be her  good  and remorse will be her glory. 
It turns out later that Fleur de Marie is Rudolph's daughter. We 
come across her again as Princess of Geroldstein. We overhear a 
conversation she has with her father: 
"En vain je prie Dieu de me délivrer de ces obsessions, de remplir uniquement 
mon cœur de son pieux amour, de ses saintes espérances, de me prendre enfin toute 
entière, puisque je veux me donner toute entière à lui ... il n'exauce pas mes 
vœux — sans doute, parce que mes préoccupations terrestres me rendent indigne 
d'entrer en commun avec lui." 
"Woe unto  me!"— Ed. 
"In vain I pray to God to deliver me from these obsessions, to fill my heart 
solely with his pious love and his holy hopes; in a word, to take me entirely, 

=====第200页=====
The Holy Family 175 
When man has realised that his transgressions are infinite crimes 
against God he can be sure of salvation and mercy only if he gives 
himself wholly to God and becomes wholly dead to the world and 
worldly concerns. When Fleur de Marie realises that her delivery 
from her inhuman situation in life was a miracle of God she herself has 
to become a saint in order to be worthy of such a miracle. Her human 
love must be transformed into religious love, the striving for 
happiness into striving for eternal bliss, worldly satisfaction into holy 
hope, communion with people into communion with God. God must 
take her entirely. She herself reveals to us why he does not take her 
entirely. She has not yet given herself entirely to him, her heart is still 
preoccupied and engaged with earthly affairs. This is the last 
flickering of her strong nature. She gives herself entirely up to God 
by becoming wholly dead to the world and entering a convent. 
A monastery is no place for him 
Who has no stock of sins laid in, 
So numerous and great 
That be it early, be it late 
He may not miss the sweet delight 
Of penance for a heart contrite. 
(Goethe)3 
In the convent Fleur de Marie is promoted to  abbess  through the 
intrigues of Rudolph. At first she refuses to accept this appointment 
because she feels unworthy. The old abbess persuades her: 
"Je vous dirai plus, ma chère fille, avant d'entrer au bercail, votre existence aurait 
été aussi égarée, qu'elle a été au contraire pure et louable ... que les vertus évangéliques , 
dont vous avez donné l'exemple depuis votre séjour ici, expieraient et rachèteraient 
encore aux yeux du Seigneur un passé si coupable qu'il fût." b 
From what the abbess says, we see that Fleur de Marie's earthly 
virtues have changed into evangelical virtues, or rather that her real 
virtues can no longer appear otherwise than as evangelical carica­
tures. 
Marie answers the abbess: 
"Sainte mère—je crois maintenant pouvoir accepter."0 
because I wish to give myself entirely to him ... he does not grant my wishes, 
doubtless because my earthly preoccupations make me unworthy of communion 
with him." — Ed. 
a J. W. Goethe, Zahme Xenien,  IX.—Ed. 
"I shall say more, my dear daughter: if before entering the fold your life had 
been as full of error as, on the contrary, it was pure and praiseworthy ... the 
evangelical virtues of which you have given an example since you have been here 
would have atoned for and redeemed your past in the eyes of the Lord, no matter 
how sinful it  was."  — Ed. 
c "Holy Mother, I now believe that 1 can accept." — Ed. 

=====第201页=====
176 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Convent life does not suit Mane's individuality — she dies. 
Christianity consoles her only in imagination, or rather her Christian 
consolation is precisely the annihilation of her real life and 
essence — her death. 
So Rudolph first changed Fleur de Marie into a repentant sinner, 
then the repentant sinner into a nun and finally the nun into a 
corpse. At her funeral not only the Catholic priest, but also the 
Critical priest Szeliga preaches a sermon over her grave. 
Her "innocent" existence he calls her "transient" existence, 
opposing it to "eternal and unforgettable guilt". He praises the fact 
that her "last breath" was a "prayer for forgiveness and pardon". But 
just as the protestant Minister, after expounding the necessity of the 
Lord's mercy, the participation of the deceased in universal original 
sin and the intensity of his consciousness of sin, must praise the 
virtues of the departed in  earthly  terms, so, too, Herr Szeliga uses the 
expression: 
"And yet personally, she has nothing to ask forgiveness for." 
Finally he throws on Marie's grave the most faded flower of pulpit 
eloquence: 
"Inwardly pure as human beings seldom are, she has closed her eyes to this 
world." 
Amen! 
3) REVELATION OF THE MYSTERIES OF LAW 
a) The Maître  d'école,  or the New Penal Theory. 
The Mystery of Solitary Confinement Revealed. 
Medical Mysteries 
The maître d'école is a criminal of Herculean strength and great 
intellectual vigour. He was brought up an educated and well-
schooled man. This passionate athlete comes into conflict with the 
laws and customs of bourgeois society, whose universal yardstick is 
mediocrity, delicate morals and quiet trade. He becomes a mur­
derer and abandons himself to all the excesses of a violent 
temperament that can nowhere find a fitting human occupation. 
Rudolph captures this criminal. He wants to reform him 
critically and set him up as an example for the world of law. He 
quarrels with the world of law not over "punishment"  itself,  but 
over kinds and methods of punishment. He invents, as the Negro 
doctor David aptly expresses it, a penal theory which would be 

=====第202页=====
The Holy Family 177 
worthy of the "greatest German criminal expert", and which has since 
had the good fortune to be defended by a German criminal expert 
with German earnestness and German thoroughness. Rudolph has 
not the slightest idea that one can rise above criminal experts: his 
ambition is to be "the greatest criminal expert", primus inter pares* He 
has the maître d'école blinded by the Negro doctor David. 
At first Rudolph repeats all the trivial objections to capital 
punishment: that it has no effect on the criminal and no effect on 
the people, for whom it seems to be an entertaining spectacle. 
Further Rudolph establishes a difference between the maître 
d'école and the soul of the maître d'école. It is not the man, not the 
real maître d'école whom he wishes to save; he wants the spiritual 
salvation of his soul. 
"The salvation of a soul," he teaches, "is something holy.... Every crime can be 
atoned for and redeemed, the Saviour said, but only if the criminal earnestly desires 
to repent and atone. The transition from the court to the scaffold is too short.... 
You" (the maître d'école) "have criminally misused your strength. I shall paralyse 
your strength ... you will tremble before the weakest, your punishment will be 
equal to your crime ... but this terrible punishment will at least leave you the 
boundless horizon of atonement.... I shall cut you off only from the outer world in 
order to plunge you into impenetrable night and leave you alone with the memory 
of your ignominious deeds.... You will be forced to look into yourself ... your 
intelligence, which you have degraded, will be roused and will lead you to 
atonement." 
Since Rudolph regards the soul as holy and man's  body  as profane, 
since he thus considers only the soul to be the true essence, 
because — according to Herr Szeliga's Critical description of hu­
manity— it belongs to heaven, the body and the strength of the 
maître d'école do not belong to humanity, the manifestation of their 
essence cannot be given human form or claimed for humanity and 
cannot be treated as essentially human. The maître d'école has 
misused his strength; Rudolph paralyses, lames, destroys that 
strength. There is no more Critical means of getting rid of the 
perverse manifestations of a human essential strength than the 
destruction of this essential strength. This is the Christian means 
— plucking out the eye if it offends or cutting off the hand if it 
offends, in a word, killing the body if the body gives offence; for 
the eye, the hand, the body are really only superfluous sinful 
appendages of man. Human nature must be killed in order to heal 
its ailments. Mass-type jurisprudence, too, in agreement here with 
the Critical, sees in the laming and paralysing of human strength 
the antidote to the objectionable manifestations of that strength. 
a The first among equals.— Ed. 

=====第203页=====
178 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
What Rudolph, the man of pure Criticism, objects to in profane 
criminal justice is the too swift transition from the court to the 
scaffold. He, on the other hand, wants to link vengeance on the 
criminal with penance and consciousness of sin in the criminal, 
corporal punishment with spiritual punishment, sensuous torture 
with the non-sensuous torture of remorse. Profane punishment 
must at the same time be a means of Christian moral education. 
This penal theory, which links jurisprudence with theology, this 
"revealed mystery of the mystery", is no other than the penal 
theory of the Catholic Church, as already expounded at length by 
Bentham in his work Punishments and Rewards.* In that book 
Bentham also proved the moral futility of the punishments of 
today. He calls legal penalties "legal parodies". 
The punishment that Rudolph imposed on the maître d'école is 
the same as that which Origen imposed on  himself.  He emasculates 
him, robs him of a productive organ, the eye. "The eye is the light 
of the body." b It does great credit to Rudolph's religious instinct 
that he should hit, of all things, upon the idea of blinding. This 
punishment was current in the thoroughly Christian empire of 
Byzantium and came to full flower in the vigorous youthful period 
of the Christian-Germanic states of England and France. Cutting 
man off from the perceptible outer world, throwing him back into 
his abstract inner nature in order to correct him — blinding—is a 
necessary consequence of the Christian doctrine according to 
which the consummation of this cutting off, the pure isolation of 
man in his spiritualistic "ego", is good  itself.  If Rudolph does not 
shut the maître d'école up in a real monastery, as was the case in 
Byzantium and in Franconia, he at least shuts him up in an ideal 
monastery, in the cloister of an impenetrable night which the light 
of the outer world cannot pierce, the cloister of an idle conscience 
and consciousness of sin filled with nothing but the phantoms of 
memory. 
A certain speculative bashfulness prevents Herr Szeliga from 
discussing openly the penal theory of his hero Rudolph that 
worldly punishment must be linked with Christian repentance and 
atonement. Instead he imputes to him — naturally as a mystery 
which is only just being revealed to the world — the theory that 
punishment must make the criminal the "judge" of his "own" 
crime. 
a Théorie des peines et des récompenses. — Ed. 
New Testament, Matthew, 6:22.— Ed. 

=====第204页=====
The Holy Family 179 
The mystery of this revealed mystery is Hegels penal theory. 
According to Hegel, the criminal in his punishment passes 
sentence on  himself.  Gans developed this theory at greater length. 
In Hegel this is the speculative disguise of the old jus talionis* which 
Kant expounded as the only juridical penal theory. For Hegel, 
self-judgment of the criminal remains a mere "Idea", a mere 
speculative interpretation of the current empirical punishments for 
criminals. He thus leaves the mode of application to the respective 
stage of development of the state, i.e., he leaves punishment as it 
is. Precisely in that he shows himself more critical than his Critical 
echo.  A penal theory which at the same time sees in the criminal 
the man can do so only in abstraction, in imagination, precisely 
because punishment, coercion, is contrary to human conduct. More­
over, this would be impossible to carry out. Purely subjective 
arbitrariness would take the place of the abstract law because it 
would always depend on the official, "honourable and decent" men 
to adapt the penalty to the individuality of the criminal. Plato long 
ago realised that the law must be one-sided and take no account of 
the individual. On the other hand, under human conditions 
punishment will really be nothing but the sentence passed by the 
culprit on  himself.  No one will want to convince him that violence 
from without, done to him by others, is violence which he had 
done to  himself.  On the contrary, he will see in other men his 
natural saviours from the punishment which he has imposed on 
himself;  in other words, the relation will be reversed. 
Rudolph expresses his innermost thought—the purpose of 
blinding the maître d'école —when he says to him: 
"Chacune de tes paroles sera une prière." 
He wants to teach him to pray. He wants to convert the 
Herculean robber into a monk whose only work is prayer. Com­
pared with this Christian cruelty, how humane is the ordinary 
penal theory that just chops a man's head off when it wants to 
destroy him. Finally, it goes without saying that whenever real 
mass-type legislation was seriously concerned with improving the 
criminal it acted incomparably more sensibly and humanely than 
the German Harun al-Rashid. The four Dutch agricultural colonies 
and the Ostwald penal colony in Alsace are truly human attempts 
in comparison with the blinding of the maître d'école. Just as 
j* The right of retaliation — an eye for an eye.— Ed. 
"Every word you say will be a prayer."—Ed. 

=====第205页=====
180 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Rudolph kills Fleur de Marie by handing her over to the priest 
and consciousness of sin, just as he kills Chourineur by robbing 
him of his human independence and degrading him into a 
bulldog, so he kills the maître  d'école  by having his eyes gouged out 
in order that he can learn to "pray". 
This is, of course, the way in which all reality emerges "simply" 
out of "pure Criticism", namely, as a distortion and senseless 
abstraction of reality. 
Immediately after the blinding of the maître d'école Herr Szeliga 
causes a moral miracle to take place. 
"The terrible maître d'école," he reports, "suddenly recognises the power of 
honesty and decency and says to Schurimann: 'Yes, I can trust you, you have never 
stolen anything'." 
Unfortunately Eugène Sue recorded a statement of the maître 
d'école about Chourineur which contains the same recognition and 
cannot be the effect of his having been blinded, since it was made 
earlier. In talking to Rudolph alone, the maître d'école said about 
Chourineur: 
"Du reste il n'est pas capable de vendre un ami. Non: il a du bon ... il a 
toujours eu des idées singulières." a 
This would seem to do away with Herr Szeliga's moral miracle. 
Now we shall see the real results of Rudolph's Critical cure. 
We next meet the maître d'école as he is going with a woman 
called Chouette to Bouqueval farm to play a foul trick on Fleur de 
Marie. The thought that dominates him is, of course, the thought 
of revenge on Rudolph. But the only way he knows of wreaking 
vengeance on him is metaphysically, by thinking and hatching 
"evil" to spite him. 
"Il m'a ôté la vue, il ne m'a pis ôté la pensée du mal." 
He tells Chouette why he had sent for her: 
"I was bored all alone with those honest people." 
When Eugène Sue satisfies his monkish, bestial lust in the 
self-humiliation of man to the extent of making the maître d'école 
implore on his knees the old hag Chouette and the little imp 
Tortillard not to abandon him, the great moralist forgets that that 
"Besides, he is not capable of betraying a friend. No, there's something good 
in him ... he has always had strange ideas."—Ed. 
"He has taken away my sight but not the thought of  evil."—Ed. 

=====第206页=====
The Holy Family 181 
is the height of diabolical satisfaction for Chouette. Just as 
Rudolph, precisely by the violent act of blinding the criminal, 
proved to him the power of physical force, which he wants to show 
him is insignificant, so Eugène Sue now teaches the maître d'école 
really to recognise the full power of the senses. He teaches him to 
understand that without it man is unmanned and becomes a 
helpless object of mockery for children. He convinces him that the 
world deserved his crimes, for he had only to lose his sight to be 
ill-treated by it. He robs him of his last human illusion, for so far 
the maître  d'école  believed in Chouette's attachment to him. He had 
said to Rudolph: "She would let herself be thrown into the fire 
for me." Eugène Sue, on the other hand, has the satisfac­
tion of hearing the maître d'école cry out in the depths of 
despair: 
"Mon dieu! Mon dieu! Mon dieu!" 
He has learnt to "pray"  I In this "appel involontaire de la 
commisération divine," Eugène Sue sees "quelque chose de providen­
tiel" .a 
The first result of Rudolph's Criticism is this  spontaneous  prayer.  It is 
followed immediately by an involuntary atonement at Bouqueval farm, 
where the ghosts of those whom the maître  d'école  murdered appear 
to him in a dream. 
We shall not give a detailed description of this dream. We next 
find the Critically reformed maître d'école fettered in the cellar of 
the "Bras rouge", half devoured by rats, half starving and half 
insane as a result of being tortured by Chouette and Tortillard, 
and roaring like a beast. Tortillard had delivered Chouette to him. 
Let us watch the treatment he inflicts on her. He copies the hero 
Rudolph not only outwardly, by scratching out Chouette's eyes, but 
morally too by repeating Rudolph's hypocrisy and embellishing his 
cruel treatment with pious phrases. As soon as the maître  d'école  has 
Chouette in his power he gives vent to "une joie effrayante" b and his 
voice trembles with rage. 
"Tu sens bien," he says, "que je ne veux pas en finir tout de suite ... torture pour 
torture ... il faut que je te parle longuement avant de te tuer ... ca va être affreux pour 
toi. D'abord, vois-tu ... depuis ce rêve de la ferme de Bouqueval, qui m'a remis sous les 
yeux tous nos crimes, depuis ce rêve, qui a manqué de me rendre fou ... qui me rendra 
fou ... il s'est  passé en moi un changement étrange ... J'ai eu horreur de ma férocité 
passée ... d'abord je ne t'ai pas permis de martyriser la goualeuse, cela n'était rien 
encore ... en m'entraînant ici dans cette cave, en m'y faisant souffrir le froid et la faim 
... tu m'as laissé tout à l'épouvante de mes réflexions ... Oh! tu ne sais pas ce que c'est 
a "Spontaneous appeal for divine mercy ... something providential."—Ed. 
b "A terrifying joy." — Ed. 

=====第207页=====
182 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
que d'etre seul ... l'isolement m'a purifié. Je ne l'aurais pas cru possible ... une preuve 
que je suis peut-être moins scélérat qu'autrefois ... ce que j'éprouve une joie infinie à 
te tenir là ... monstre ... non pour me venger, mais ... mais pour venger nos victimes ... 
oui, j'aurai accompli un devoir quand de ma propre main j'aurai puni ma complice ... 
j'ai maintenant horreur de mes meurtres passés, et pourtant ... trouves-tu pas cela 
bizarre? c'est sans crainte, c'est avec sécurité que je vais commettre sur toi un meurtre 
affreux avec des raffinements affreux ... dis ... dis ... conçois-tu cela?" 3 
In those few words the maître d'école goes through a whole 
gamut of moral casuistry. 
His first words are a frank expression of his desire for 
vengeance. He wants to give torture for torture. He wants to 
murder Chouette and he wants to prolong her agony by a long 
sermon. And — delightful sophistry! — the speech with which he 
tortures her is a sermon on morals. He asserts that his dream at 
Bouqueval has improved him. At the same time he reveals the real 
effect of the dream by admitting that it almost drove him mad and 
that it will actually do so. He gives as a proof of his reform that he 
prevented Fleur de Marie from being tortured. Eugène Sue's 
personages — earlier Chourineur and now the maître d'école —must 
express, as the result of their thoughts, as the conscious, motive of 
their actions, his own intention as a writer, which causes him to 
make them behave in a certain way and no other. They must 
continually say: I have reformed myself in this, in that, etc. Since 
their life has no real content, their words must give vigorous 
tones to insignificant features like the protection of Fleur de 
Marie. 
Having reported the salutary effect of his Bouqueval dream, the 
maître d'école must explain why Eugène Sue had him locked up in 
a cellar. He must find the novelist's procedure reasonable. He 
a "You realise that I do not want to get it over at once.... Torture for torture.... 
I must have a long talk with you before killing you.... It is going to be terrible for 
you. First of all, you see ... since that dream at Bouqueval farm which brought all 
our crimes back before me, since that dream which nearly drove me mad ... and 
which will drive me mad ... a strange change has come over me.... I have become 
horrified at my past cruelty.... At first I would not let you torture the songstress 
[Fleur de Marie], but that was nothing.... By bringing me to this cellar and making 
me suffer cold and hunger.... you left me to the terror of my own thoughts.... Oh, 
you don't know what it is to be alone.... Isolation purified me. I should not have 
thought it possible ... a proof that I am perhaps less of a blackguard than before ... 
what an infinite joy I feel to have you in my power, you monster ... not in order to 
revenge myself but ... to avenge our victims.... Yes, I shall have done my duty when 
I have punished my accomplice with my own hand.... I am now horrified at my 
past murders, and yet ... don't you find it strange? ... it is without fear and quite 
calmly that I am going to commit a terrible murder on you, with terrible 
refinements ... tell me, tell me ... do you understand that?"—Ed. 

=====第208页=====
The Holy Family 183 
must say to Chouette: by locking me up in a cellar, causing me to 
be gnawed by rats and to suffer hunger and thirst, you have 
completed my reform. Solitude has purified me. 
The beastly roar, the 'wild fury, the terrible lust for vengeance 
with which the maître d'école welcomes Chouette are in complete 
contradiction to this moralising talk. They betray what kind of 
thoughts occupied him in his dungeon. 
The maître d'école himself seems to realise this, but being 
a Critical moralist, he will know how to reconcile the contradic­
tions. 
He declares that the "infinite joy" of having Chouette in his 
power is precisely a sign of his reform, for his lust for vengeance 
is not a natural one but a moral one. He wants to avenge, not 
himself,  but the common victims of Chouette and himself.  If he 
murders her, he does not commit murder, he fulfils a duty. He does 
not avenge himself on her, he punishes his accomplice like an 
impartial judge. He shudders at his past murders and, neverthe­
less, marvelling at his own casuistry, he asks Chouette: "Don't you 
find it strange? Without fear and quite calmly I am going to kill 
you." On moral grounds that he does not reveal, he gloats at the 
same time over the picture of the murder that he is going to 
commit, as being a meurtre affreux, a meurtre avec des raffinements 
affreux.* 
It is in accord with the character of the maître d'école that he 
should murder Chouette, especially after the cruelty with which 
she treated him. But that he should commit murder on moral 
grounds, that he should give a moral interpretation to his savage 
pleasure in the meurtre affreux and the raffinements affreux, that he 
should show his remorse for the past murders precisely by 
committing a fresh one, that from a simple murderer he should 
become a murderer in a double  sense,  a moral murderer—all this is the 
glorious result of Rudolph's Critical cure. 
Chouette tries to get away from the maître d'école. He notices it 
and holds her fast. 
"Tiens-toi donc, la chouette, il faut que je finisse de t'expliquer comment peu à 
peu j'en suis venu à me repentir ... cette révélation te sera odieuse ... et elle te 
prouvera aussi combien je dois être impitoyable dans la vengeance, que je veux 
exercer sur toi au nom de nos victimes ... Il faut que je me hâte ... la joie de te 
tenir là me fait boudir le sang ... j'aurai le temps de te rendre les approches de la 
mort effroyables en te forçant de m'entendre ... Je suis aveugle ... et ma pensée 
prend une forme, un corps pour me représenter incessamment d'une manière 
visible, presque palpable ... les traits de mes victimes ... les idées s'imagent presque 
a Terrible murder ... murder with terrible refinements.— Ed. 

=====第209页=====
184 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
matériellement dans le cerveau. Quand au repentir se joint une expiation d'une 
effrayante sévérité ... une expiation qui change notre vie en une longue insomnie 
remplie d'hallucinations vengeresses ou de réflexions désespérées ... peut-être alors 
le pardon des hommes succède au remords et à l'expiation." 3 
The maître d'école continues with his hypocrisy which every 
minute betrays itself as such. Chouette must hear how he came by 
degrees to repentance. This revelation will be hateful to her, for it 
will prove that it is his duty to take a pitiless revenge on her, not in 
his own name, but in the name of their common victims. Suddenly 
the maître d'école interrupts his didactic lecture. He must, he says, 
"hurry" with his lecture, for the pleasure of having her in his 
hands makes the blood pound in his veins; that is a moral reason 
for cutting the lecture short! Then he calms his blood again. The 
long time that he takes in preaching her a moral sermon is not 
wasted for his revenge. It will "make the approach of death 
terrifying" for her. That is a different moral reason, one for 
protracting his sermon! And having such moral reasons he can 
safely resume his moral text where he left off. 
The maître d'école describes correctly the condition to which 
isolation from the outer world reduces a man. For one to whom 
the sensuously perceptible world becomes a mere idea, for him mere 
ideas are transformed into sensuously perceptible beings. The fig­
ments of his brain assume corporeal form. A world of tangible, 
palpable ghosts is begotten within his mind. That is the secret of 
all pious visions and at the same time it is the general form of 
insanity. When the maître d'école repeats Rudolph's words about 
the "power of repentance and atonement linked with terrible 
torments", he does so in a state of semi-madness, thus proving in 
fact the connection between Christian consciousness of sin and 
insanity. Similarly, when the maître d'école considers the transfor­
mation of life into a night of dream filled with ghosts as the 
real result of repentance and atonement, he is expressing the 
"Keep still, Chouette, I must finish explaining to you how I gradually came to 
repentance.... This revelation will be hateful to you ... and it will also show you how 
pitiless I must be in the vengeance I want to wreak on you in the name of our 
victims.... I must hurry.... The joy of having you here in my hands makes the blood 
pound in my veins.... I shall have time to make the approach of your death 
terrifying to you by forcing you to listen to me.... I am blind ... and my thoughts 
take a shape, a body, such that they incessantly present to me visibly, almost 
palpably ... the features of my victims.... The ideas are reflected almost materially 
in my brain. When repentance is linked with an atonement of terrifying severity, 
an atonement that changes our life into a long sleeplessness filled with hallucina­
tions of revenge or desperate reflections ... then, perhaps, the pardon of men 
follows remorse and atonement." — Ed. 

=====第210页=====
The Holy Family 185 
true mystery of pure Criticism and of Christian reform, which 
consists in changing man into a ghost and his life into a life 
of dream. 
At this point Eugène Sue realises how the salutary thoughts which 
he makes the blind robber prate after Rudolph will be made 
ridiculous by the robber's treatment of Chouette. That is why he 
makes the maître d'école say: 
"La salutaire influence de ces pensées est telle que ma fureur s'apaise." 3 
So the maître d'école now admits that his moral wrath was nothing 
but profane rage. 
"Le courage ... la force ... la volonté me manquent pour te tuer ... non, ce n'est 
pas à moi de verser ton sang ... ce serait ... un meurtre" (he calls things by 
their names) ... "meurtre excusable peut-être ... mais ce serait toujours un 
meurtre." 
Chouette wounds the maître d'école with a dagger just in time. 
Eugène Sue can now let him kill her without any further moral 
casuistry. 
"Il poussa un cri de douleur ... les ardeurs féroces de sa vengeance, de ses rages, 
ses instincts sanguinaires, brusquement réveillés et exaspérés par cette attaque, 
firent une explosion soudaine, terrible, où s'abîma sa raison déjà forte­
ment ébranlée ... Ah vipère! ... j'ai senti ta dent ... tu seras comme moi sans 
yeux." c 
And he scratches her eyes out. 
When the nature of the maître d'école, which has been only 
hypocritically, sophistically disguised, only ascetically repressed by 
Rudolph's cure, breaks out, the outburst is all the more violent and 
terrifying. We must be grateful to Eugène Sue for his admission 
that the reason of the maître d'école was badly shaken by all the 
events which Rudolph has prepared. 
"The last spark of his reason was extinguished in that cry of terror, in that cry 
of a damned soul" (he sees the ghosts of his murdered victims) "... the maître  d'école 
rages and roars like a frenzied beast.... He tortures Chouette to death." 
Herr Szeliga mutters under his breath: 
a "The salutary influence of these thoughts is such that my rage is ap­
peased."— Ed. 
"I lack courage ... strength ... will to kill you.... No, it is not for me to shed 
your blood ... it would be ... murder.... Excusable murder, perhaps, but murder all 
the same."—Ed. 
c "He uttered a cry of pain ... his fierce passion of vengeance, of rage and of 
bloodthirsty instinct, suddenly aroused and exacerbated by this attack, had a 
sudden and terrible outburst in which his already badly shaken reason was 
shattered.... Viper! I have felt your fang ... you will be sightless as I am." — Ed. 

=====第211页=====
186 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"With the maître d'école there cannot be such a swift" (!) "and fortunate" (!) 
"transformation" (!) "as with Schurimann." 
Just as Rudolph sends Fleur de Marie into a convent, he makes 
the maître d'école an inmate of the Bicêtre asylum. He has paralysed 
his spiritual as well as his physical strength. And rightly. For the 
maître d'école sinned with his spiritual as well as his physical 
strength, and according to Rudolph's penal theory the sinning 
forces must be annihilated. 
But Eugène Sue has not yet consummated the "repentance and 
atonement linked with a terrible revenge". The maître d'école 
recovers his reason, but fearing to be delivered to justice he 
remains in Bicêtre and pretends to be mad. Monsieur Sue forgets 
that "every word he said was to be a prayer", whereas finally it is 
much more like the inarticulate howling and raving of a madman. 
Or does Monsieur Sue perhaps ironically put these manifestations 
of life on the same level as praying? 
The idea underlying the punishment that Rudolph carried out 
in blinding the maître d'école —the isolation of the man and his 
soul from the outer world, the combination of legal punishment 
with theological torture — finds its ultimate expression in solitary 
confinement. That is why Monsieur Sue glorifies this system. 
"How many centuries had to pass before it was realised that there is only one 
means of overcoming the rapidly spreading leprosy" (i.e., the corruption of morals 
in prisons) "which is threatening the body of society: isolation." 
Monsieur Sue shares the opinion of the worthy people who 
explain the spread of crime by the organisation of prisons. 
To remove the criminal from bad society he is left to his own 
society. 
Eugène Sue says: 
"I should consider myself lucky if my weak voice could be heard among all 
those which so rightly and so insistently demand the complete and absolute 
application of solitary confinement." 
Monsieur Sue's wish has been only partially fulfilled. In the 
debates on solitary confinement in the Chamber of Deputies this 
year, even the official supporters of that system had to acknowl­
edge that it leads sooner or later to insanity in the criminal. All 
sentences of imprisonment for more than ten years had therefore 
to be converted into deportation. 
Had Messieurs Tocqueville and Beaumont studied Eugène Sue's 
novel thoroughly they would certainly have secured complete and 
absolute application of solitary confinement. 
If Eugène Sue deprives criminals with a sane mind of society in 

=====第212页=====
The Holy Family 187 
order to make them insane, he gives insane persons society to 
make them sane. 
"L'expérience prouve que pour les aliénés l'isolement est aussi funeste qu'il est 
salutaire pour les détenus criminels."3 
If Monsieur Sue and his Critical hero Rudolph have not made 
law poorer by any mystery, whether through the Catholic penal 
theory or the Methodist solitary confinement, they have, on the other 
hand, enriched medicine with new mysteries, and after all, it is 
just as much of a service to discover new mysteries as to disclose old 
ones.  In its report on the blinding of the maître d'école, Critical 
Criticism fully agrees with Monsieur Sue: 
"When he is told he is deprived of the light of his eyes he does not even be­
lieve it." 
The maître d'école could not believe in the loss of his sight 
because in reality he could still see. Monsieur Sue is describing a 
new kind of cataract and is reporting a real mystery for mass-type, 
un-Critical ophthalmology. 
The pupil is white after the operation, so it is a case of cataract of 
the crystalline lens. So far, this could, of course, be caused by injury 
to the envelope of the lens without causing much pain, though 
not entirely without pain. But as doctors achieve this result only 
by natural, not by Critical means, the only resort was to wait until 
inflammation set in after the injury and the exudation dimmed the 
lens. 
A still greater miracle and greater mystery befall the maître d'école 
in the third chapter of the third book. 
The man who has been blinded sees again. 
"La Chouette, le maître d'école et Tortillard virent le prêtre et Fleur de 
Marie." 
If we do not interpret this restoration of the maître d'école's 
ability to see as an author's miracle after the method of the Kritik 
der Synoptiker, the maître d'école must have had his cataract 
operated on again. Later he is blind again. So he used his eyes too 
soon and the irritation of the light caused inflammation which 
ended in paralysis of the retina and incurable amaurosis. It is 
another mystery for un-Critical ophthalmology that this process 
takes place here in a single second. 
a "Experience proves that isolation is as fatal for the insane as it is salutary for 
imprisoned criminals." — Ed. 
b "Chouette, the maître d'école and Tortillard saw the priest and Fleur de 
Marie."—Ed. 

=====第213页=====
188 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
b) Reward and Punishment. Double Justice 
(with a Table) 
The hero Rudolph reveals a new theory to keep society upright 
by rewarding the good and punishing the  wicked.  Un-Critically 
considered, this theory is nothing but the theory of society as it is 
today. How little lacking it is in rewards for the good and 
punishments for the wicked! Compared with this revealed mys­
tery, how un-Critical is the mass-type Communist Owen, who sees 
in punishment and reward the consecration of differences in social 
rank and the complete expression of a servile abasement. 
It could be considered as a new revelation that Eugène Sue 
makes rewards derive from the judiciary—from a new appendix 
to the Penal Code — and not satisfied with one jurisdiction he 
invents a  second.  Unfortunately this revealed mystery, too, is the 
repetition of an old theory expounded in detail by Bentham in his 
work already mentioned. 3 On the other hand, we cannot deny 
Monsieur Eugène Sue the honour of having motivated and 
developed Bentham's suggestion in an incomparably more Critical 
way than the latter. Whereas the mass-type Englishman keeps his 
feet on the ground, Sue's deduction rises to the Critical region of 
the heavens. His argument is as follows: 
"The supposed effects of heavenly wrath are materialised to deter the wicked. 
Why should not the effect of the divine reward of the good be similarly 
materialised and anticipated on earth?" 
In the un-Critical view it is the other way round: the heavenly 
criminal theory has only idealised the earthly theory, just as divine 
reward is only an idealisation of human wage service. It is 
absolutely necessary that society should not reward all good people 
so that divine justice will have some advantage over human 
justice. 
In depicting his Critical rewarding justice, Monsieur Sue gives 
"an example of the feminine dogmatism that must have a formula 
and forms it according to the categories of what  exists"  ,b dogmatism 
which was censured with all the "tranquillity of knowledge" by 
Herr Edgar in Flora Tristan. For each point of the present penal 
code, which he retains, Monsieur Sue projects the addition of a 
counterpart in a reward code copied from it to the last detail. For 
easier survey we shall give his description of the complementary 
pairs in tabular form: 
a Théorie des peines et des récompenses. —Ed. 
See pp. 19-20 of this volume. — Ed. 

=====第214页=====
The Holy Family 189 
Table of Critically Complete Justice 
Existing Justice Critically Supplementing Justice 
Name: Justice Criminelle 3 Name: Justice Vertueuse 
Description: holds in its hand a sword to 
shorten the wicked by a head. Description: holds in its hand a crown to 
raise the good by a head. 
Purpose: Punishment of the wicked— 
imprisonment, infamy, deprivation 
of life. Purpose: Reward of the good, free 
board, honour, maintenance of life. 
The people is notified of the terrible 
chastisements for the wicked. The people is notified of the brilliant 
triumphs for the good. 
Means of discovering the  wicked:  Police 
spying, mouchards, to keep watch over 
the wicked. Means of discovering the  good:  Espionnage 
de vertu, mouchards c to keep watch 
over the virtuous. 
Method of ascertaining whether someone is 
wicked:  Les assises du crime, criminal 
assizes. The public ministry points out 
and indicts the crimes of the accused 
for public vengeance. 
Condition of the criminal after sentence: 
Under surveillance de la haute police. Is 
fed in prison. The state defrays ex­
penses. Method of ascertaining whether someone is 
good:  Assises de la vertu, virtue as­
sizes.  The public ministry points out and 
proclaims the noble deeds of the accused 
for public recognition. 
Condition of the virtuous after sentence: 
Under surveillance de la haute charité 
morale. e Is fed at home. The state 
defrays expenses. 
Execution: The criminal stands on the 
scaffold. Execution: Immediately opposite the 
scaffold of the criminal a pedestal is 
erected on which the grand homme de 
bien stands.—A pillory of virtue. 
a Criminal justice.— Ed. 
Virtuous justice.—Ed. 
c Spying out virtue, informers.—Ed. 
Supervision of the supreme police.—Ed. 
Supervision of supreme moral charity.—Ed. 
Man of great virtue.—Ed. 

=====第215页=====
190 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Moved by the sight of this picture, Monsieur Sue exclaims: 
"Hélas,  c'est une utopie, mais supposez qu'une société soit organisée de telle 
sorte!"11 
That would be the Critical organisation of  society.  We must defend 
this organisation against Eugène Sue's reproach that up to now it 
has remained a Utopia. Sue has again forgotten the "Virtue Prize" 
which is awarded every year in Paris and which he himself 
mentions. This prize is even organised in duplicate: the material 
prix Montyon for noble acts of men and women, and the prix rosière 
for girls of highest morality. There is even the wreath of roses 
demanded by Eugène Sue. 
As far as espionnage de vertu and the surveillance de haute charité 
morale are concerned, they were organised long ago by the Jesuits. 
Moreover, the Journal des Débats, Siècle, Petites affiches de Paris, etc., 
point out and proclaim the virtues, noble acts and merits of all the 
Paris stockjobbers b daily and at cost price not counting the 
pointing out and proclamation of political noble acts, for which 
each party has its own organ. 
Old Voss remarked long ago that Homer is better than his gods. 
The "revealed mystery of all mysteries", Rudolph, can therefore 
be made responsible for Eugène Sue's ideas. 
In addition, Herr Szeliga reports: 
"Besides, the passages in which Eugène Sue interrupts the narration and 
introduces or concludes episodes are very numerous, and all are Critical." 
c) Abolition of Degeneracy Within Civilisation 
and of Rightlessness in the State 
The juridical preventive means for the abolition of crime and 
hence of degeneracy within civilisation consists in the 
"protective guardianship assumed by the state over the children of executed 
criminals or of those condemned to a life sentence". 
Sue wants to organise the subdivision of crime in a more liberal 
way. No family should any longer have a hereditary privilege to 
crime; free competition in crime should triumph over monopoly. 
Monsieur Sue abolishes "rightlessness in the state" by reforming 
the section of the Code pénal on abus de confiance, 0 and especially by 
the institution of paid lawyers for the poor. He finds that in 
a Alas! It is a utopia! But suppose a society were organised in this way! 
This word is in English in the original.—Ed. 
Breach of trust.— Ed. 

=====第216页=====
The Holy Family 191 
Piedmont, Holland, etc., where there are lawyers for the poor, 
rightlessness in the state has been abolished. The only failing of 
French legislation is that it does not provide for payment of 
lawyers for the poor, has no lawyers restricted to serving the poor, 
and makes the legal limits of poverty too narrow. As if rightless­
ness did not begin in the very lawsuit  itself,  and as if it had not 
already been known for a long time in France that the law gives 
nothing, but only sanctions what exists. The already trivial  dif­
ferentiation between droit and fait seems still to be a mystère de 
Paris for the Critical novelist. 
If we add to the Critical revelation of the mysteries of law the 
great reforms which Eugène Sue wants to institute in respect of 
huissiers,' we shall understand the Paris journal Satan. There we 
see the residents of a district in the city write to the "grand 
réformateur à tant la ligne" h that there is no gaslight yet in their 
streets. Monsieur Sue replies that he will deal with this shortcom­
ing in the sixth volume of his Juif errant. 0 Another part of the city 
complains of the shortcomings of preliminary education. He 
promises a preliminary education reform for that district of the 
city in the tenth volume of Juif errant. 
4) THE REVEALED MYSTERY OF THE "STANDPOINT" 
"Rudolph does not remain at his lofty" (!) "standpoint ... he does not shirk the 
trouble of adopting by free choice the standpoints on the right and on the left, 
above and below" (Szeliga). 
One of the principal mysteries of Critical Criticism is the 
"standpoint" and judgment from the standpoint of the standpoint. For 
Criticism every man, like every product of the spirit, is turned into 
a standpoint. 
Nothing is easier than to see through the mystery of the 
standpoint when one has seen through the general mystery of 
Critical Criticism, that of warming up old speculative trash. 
First of all, let Criticism itself expound its theory of the 
"standpoint" in the words of its patriarch, Herr Bruno Bauer. 
"Science ... never deals with a given single individual or a given definite 
standpoint.... It will not fail, of course, to do away with the limitations of a standpoint if 
it is worth the trouble and if these limitations have really general human 
significance; but it conceives them as pure category and determinateness of  self-
consciousness  and accordingly speaks only for those who have the courage to rise to 
a Bailiffs.—Ed. 
"Great reformer at so much a  line."—Ed. 
c The Wandering  Jew.—Ed. 

=====第217页=====
192 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
the generality of self-consciousness, i.e., who do not wish with all their strength to 
remain within those limitations" (Anekdota, t. II, p. 127).a 
The mystery of this courage of Bauer's is Hegel's Phänomenologie. 
Because Hegel here substitutes self-consciousness for man, the most 
varied manifestations of human reality appear only as definite 
forms,  as determinateness of self-consciousness. But mere determinate-
ness of self-consciousness is a "pure category", a mere "thought", 
which I can consequently also transcend in "pure" thought and 
overcome through pure thought. In Hegel's Phänomenologie the 
material, sensuously perceptible, objective foundations of the various 
estranged forms of human self-consciousness are allowed to 
remain. The whole destructive work results in the most conservative 
philosophy because it thinks it has overcome the objective  world,  the 
sensuously perceptible real world, by transforming it into a 
"Thing of Thought", a mere determinateness of self-consciousness, 
and can therefore also dissolve its opponent, which has become 
ethereal, in the "ether of pure thought". The Phänomenologie is 
therefore quite consistent in that it ends by replacing human 
reality by "absolute knowledge" — knowledge, because this is the only 
mode of existence of self-consciousness, and because  self-
consciousness is considered the only mode of existence of 
man—absolute knowledge for the very reason that  self-
consciousness knows only itself and is no longer disturbed by any 
objective world. Hegel makes man the man of self-consciousness 
instead of making self-consciousness the self-consciousness of man, of 
real man, i.e., of man living also in a real, objective world and 
determined by that world. He stands the world on its head and can 
therefore in his head also dissolve all limitations, which nevertheless 
remain in existence for bad sensuousness, for real man. Moreover, 
everything that betrays the limitations of general self-consciousness— 
all sensuousness, reality, individuality of men and of their world — 
is necessarily held by him to be a limit. The whole of the Phänomeno­
logie is intended to prove that self-consciousness is the only reality 
and all reality. 
Herr Bauer has recently re-christened absolute knowledge Criti­
cism,  and given the more profane sounding name standpoint to the 
determinateness of self-consciousness. In the Anekdota both names 
are still to be found side by side, and standpoint is still explained 
as the determinateness of self-consciousness. 
Since the "religious world as such" exists only as the world of 
self-consciousness, the Critical Critic — the theologian ex profes-
a B. Bauer, Leiden und Freuden des theologischen Bewusstseins. —Ed. 

=====第218页=====
The Holy Family 193 
so—cannot by any means entertain the thought that there is a 
world in which  consciousness  and being are distinct; a world which 
continues to exist when I merely abolish its existence in thought, 
its existence as a category or as a standpoint; i.e., when I modify 
my own subjective consciousness without altering the objective 
reality in a really objective way, that is to say, without altering my 
own objective reality and that of other men. Hence the speculative 
mystical identity of being and thinking is repeated in Criticism as the 
equally mystical identity of practice and theory. That is why 
Criticism is so vexed with practice which wants to be something 
distinct from theory, and with theory which wants to be something 
other than the dissolution of a definite category in the "boundless 
generality of self-consciousness". Its own theory is confined to stating 
that everything determinate is an opposite of the boundless 
generality of self-consciousness and is, therefore, of no signifi­
cance; for example, the state, private property, etc. It must be 
shown, on the contrary, how the state, private property, etc., turn 
human beings into abstractions, or are products of abstract man, 
instead of being the reality of individual, concrete human beings. 
Finally, it goes without saying that whereas Hegel's Phänome­
nologie, in spite of its speculative original sin, gives in many in­
stances the elements of a true description of human relations, 
Herr Bruno and Co., on the other hand, provide only an empty 
caricature, a caricature which is satisfied with deriving any deter-
minateness out of a product of the spirit or even out of real rela­
tions and movements, changing this determinateness into a deter-
minateness of thought, into a category, and making out that this 
category is the standpoint of the product, of the relation and the 
movement, in order then to be able to look down on this deter­
minateness triumphantly with old-man's wisdom from the stand­
point of abstraction, of the general category and of general  self-
consciousness. 
Just as in Rudolph's opinion all human beings maintain the 
standpoint of good or bad and are judged by these two immutable 
conceptions, so for Herr Bauer and Co. all human beings adopt 
the standpoint of Criticism or that of the Mass. But both turn real 
human beings into abstract standpoints. 
5) REVELATION OF THE MYSTERY OF THE UTILISATION 
OF HUMAN IMPULSES, OR CLEMENCE D'HARVILLE 
So far Rudolph has been unable to do more than reward the good 
and punish the wicked in his own way. We shall now see an example 

=====第219页=====
194 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
of how he makes the passions useful and "gives the good natural 
disposition of Clémence d'Harville an appropriate development". 
"Rudolph," says Herr Szeliga, "draws her attention to the entertaining aspect of 
charity, a thought which testifies to a knowledge of human beings that can only arise 
in the soul of Rudolph after it has been through trial." 
The expressions which Rudolph uses in his conversation with 
Clémence: 
"faire attrayant", "utiliser le goût naturel?', "régler l'intrigue", "utiliser  les penchants à 
la dissimulation et à la ruse", "changer en qualités généreuses des instincts impérieux, 
inexorables" a etc., 
these expressions just as much as the impulses themselves, which 
are mostly attributed here to woman's nature, betray the secret 
source of Rudolph's wisdom — Fourier. He has come across some 
popular presentation of Fourier's theory. 
The application is again just as much Rudolph's Critical own as is 
the exposition of Bentham's theory given above. 
It is not in charity as such that the young marquise is to find the 
satisfaction of her essential human nature, a human content and 
purpose of her activity, and hence entertainment. Charity offers 
rather only the external occasion, only the pretext, only the material, 
for a kind of entertainment that could just as well use any other 
material as its content. Misery is exploited consciously to procure 
the charitable person "the piquancy of a novel, the satisfaction of 
curiosity, adventure, disguise, enjoyment of his or her own 
excellence, violent nervous excitement", and the like. 
Rudolph has thereby unconsciously expressed the mystery which 
was revealed long ago, that human misery  itself,  the infinite 
abjectness which is obliged to receive alms, must serve the 
aristocracy of money and education as a plaything to satisfy its 
self-love, tickle its arrogance and amuse it. 
The numerous charitable associations in Germany, the numer­
ous charitable societies in France and the great number of 
charitable quixotic societies in England, the concerts, balls, plays, 
meals for the poor, and even the public subscriptions for victims 
of accidents, have no other object. It seems then that along 
these lines charity, too, has long been organised as entertain­
ment. 
The sudden, unmotivated transformation of the marquise at the 
mere word "amusant" makes us doubt the durability of her cure; 
a "To make attractive", "to utilise natural taste", "to regulate intrigue", "to utilise the 
propensity to dissimulation and craft", "to change imperious, inexorable instincts into 
noble qualities".— Ed. 

=====第220页=====
The Holy Family 195 
or rather this transformation is sudden and unmotivated only in 
appearance and is caused only in appearance by the description of 
charité as an amusement. The marquise loves Rudolph and 
Rudolph wants to disguise himself along with her, to intrigue and to 
indulge in charitable adventures. Later, when the marquise pays a 
charity visit to the prison of Saint-Lazare, her jealousy of Fleur de 
Marie becomes apparent and out of charity towards her jealousy 
she conceals from Rudolph the fact of Marie's detention. At the 
best, Rudolph has succeeded in teaching an unhappy woman to 
play a silly comedy with unhappy beings. The mystery of 
the philanthropy he has hatched is betrayed by the Paris fop who 
invites his partner to supper after the dance in the following 
words: 
"Ah, Madame! ce n'est pas assez d'avoir dansé au bénéfice des ces pauvres 
Polonais ... soyons philanthropes jusqu'au bout ... allons souper maintenant au profit 
des pauvresl" 3 
6) REVELATION OF THE MYSTERY OF THE EMANCIPATION 
OF WOMEN, OR LOUISE MOREL 
On the occasion of the arrest of Louise Morel, Rudolph indulges 
in reflections which he sums up as follows: 
"The master often ruins the maid, either by fear, surprise or other use of the 
opportunities provided by the nature of the servants' condition. He reduces her to 
misery, shame and crime. The law is not  concerned  with this.... The criminal who has 
in fact driven a girl to infanticide is not punished." 
Rudolph's reflections do not go so far as to make the servants' 
condition the object of his most gracious Criticism. Being a petty 
ruler, he is a great patroniser of servants' conditions. Still less does 
he go so far as to understand that the general position of women 
in modern society is inhuman. Faithful in all respects to his 
previous theory, he deplores only that there is no law which 
punishes a seducer and links repentance and atonement with ter­
rible chastisement. 
Rudolph has only to take a look at the existing legislation in 
other countries. English laws fulfil all his wishes. In their delicacy, 
which Blackstone so highly praises, they go so far as to declare it a 
felony to seduce even a prostitute. 
Herr Szeliga exclaims with a flourish: 
a "Ah, Madame, it is not enough to have danced for the benefit of these poor 
Poles....  Let us be philanthropic to the end.... Let us have supper now for the benefit 
of the poorl"—Ed. 

=====第221页=====
196 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"So" (!)—"thinks" (!)— "Rudolph" (!)—"and now compare these thoughts with 
your fantasies about the emancipation of woman. The act of this emancipation can be 
almost physically grasped from them, but you are much too practical to start with, 
and that is why your attempts have failed so often." 
In any case we must thank Herr Szeliga for revealing the 
mystery that an act can be almost physically grasped from 
thoughts. As for his ridiculous comparison of Rudolph with men 
who taught the emancipation of woman, compare Rudolph's 
thoughts with the following "fantasies" of Fourier: 
"Adultery, seduction, are a credit to the seducer, are good tone.... But, poor 
girl! Infanticide! What a crime! If she prizes her honour she must efface all traces 
of dishonour. But if she sacrifices her child to the prejudices of the world her 
ignominy is all the greater and she is a victim of the prejudices of the law.... That is 
the vicious circle which every civilised mechanism describes." 
"Is not the young daughter a ware held up for sale to the first bidder who 
wishes to obtain exclusive ownership of her?... De même qu'en grammaire deux 
négations valent une affirmation, l'on peut dire qu'en négoce conjugal deux 
prostitutions valent une vertu." a 
"The change in a historical epoch can always be determined by women's 
progress towards freedom, because here, in the relation of woman to man, of the 
weak to the strong, the victory of human nature over brutality is most evident. The 
degree of emancipation of woman is the natural measure of general emancipa­
tion." 
"The humiliation of the female sex is an essential feature of civilisation as well 
as of barbarism. The only difference is that the civilised system raises every vice 
that barbarism practises in a simple form to a compound, equivocal, ambiguous, 
hypocritical mode of existence.... No one is punished more severely for keeping 
woman in slavery than man  himself"  {Fourier)!3 
It is superfluous to contrast Rudolph's thoughts with Fourier's 
masterly characterisation of marriage, or with the works of the 
materialist section of French communism.68 
The most pitiful off-scourings of socialist literature, a sample of 
which is to be found in this novelist, reveal "mysteries" still 
unknown to Critical Criticism. 
7) REVELATION OF POLITICAL ECONOMIC MYSTERIES 
a) Theoretical Revelation of Political Economic Mysteries 
First revelation: Wealth often leads to waste, waste to ruin. 
Second revelation: The above-mentioned effects of wealth arise 
from a lack of instruction in rich youth. 
Third revelation: Inheritance and private property are and must be 
inviolable and sacred. 
a "Just as in grammar two negations are the equivalent of an affirmation, we can 
say that in the marriage trade two prostitutions are the equivalent of virtue." — Ed. 

=====第222页=====
The Holy Family 197 
Fourth revelation: The rich man is morally responsible to the 
workers for the way he uses his fortune. A large fortune is a 
hereditary deposit—a feudal tenement —entrusted to clever, firm, 
skilful and magnanimous hands, which are at the same time 
charged with making it fruitful and using it in such a way that 
everything which has the good luck to be within the range of the 
dazzling and wholesome radiation of that large fortune is fruc­
tified, vitalised and improved. 
Fifth revelation: The state must give inexperienced rich youth the 
rudiments of individual economy. It must give a moral character to 
riches. 
Sixth revelation: Finally, the state must tackle the vast question of 
organisation of labour. It must give the wholesome example of the 
association of capitals and labour, of an association which is honest, 
intelligent and fair, which ensures the well-being of the worker 
without prejudice to the fortune of the rich, which establishes links of 
sympathy and gratitude between these two  classes  and thus ensure* 
tranquillity in the state for ever. 
Since the state at present does not yet accept this theory 
Rudolph himself gives some practical examples. They reveal the 
mystery that the most generally known economic relations are still 
"mysteries" for Monsieur Sue, Monsieur Rudolph and Critical 
Criticism. 
b) "The Bank for the Poor" 
Rudolph institutes a Bank for the Poor. The statute of this Critical 
Bank for the Poor is as follows: 
It must give support during periods of unemployment to honest 
workers with families. It must replace alms and pawnshops. It has 
at its disposal an annual income of 12,000 francs and distributes 
interest-free assistance loans of 20 to 40 francs. At first it extends 
its activity only to the seventh arrondissement of Paris, where most of 
the workers live. Working men and women applying for relief 
must have a certificate from their last employer vouching for their 
good behaviour and giving the cause and date of the interruption 
of work. These loans are to be paid off in monthly instalments of 
one-sixth or one-twelfth of the sum at the choice of the borrower, 
counting from the day on which he finds employment again. The 
loan is guaranteed by the borrower's word of honour. Moreover, 
the latter's parole jurée 3 must be guaranteed by two other workers 
a Sworn word.— Ed. 
8-762 

=====第223页=====
198 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
As the Critical purpose of the Bank for the Poor is to remedy one 
of the most grievous misfortunes in the life of the worker—inter­
ruption in employment—assistance would be given only to unem­
ployed manual workers. Monsieur Germain, the manager of this 
institution, draws a yearly salary of 10,000 francs. 
Let us now cast a mass-type glance at the practice of Critical 
political economy. The annual income is 12,000 francs. The 
amount loaned per person is from 20 to 40 francs, hence an 
average of 30 francs. The number of workers in the seventh 
arrondissement who are officially recognised as "needy" is at least 
4,000. Hence, in a year only 400, or one-tenth, of the neediest 
workers in the seventh arrondissement can receive  relief.  If we 
estimate the average length of unemployment in Paris at 4 months, 
i.e., 16 weeks, we shall be considerably below the actual figure. 
Thirty francs divided over 16 weeks gives somewhat less than 37 
sous and 3 centimes a week, not even 27 centimes a day. The daily 
expense on one prisoner in France is on the average a little over 47 
centimes, somewhat over 30 centimes being spent on food alone. 
But the worker to whom Monsieur Rudolph pays relief has a 
family. Let us take the average family as consisting of man, wife 
and only two children; that means that 27 centimes must be 
divided among four persons. From this we must deduct rent—a 
minimum of 15 centimes a day — so that 12 centimes remain. The 
average amount of bread eaten by a single prisoner costs about 14 
centimes. Therefore, even disregarding all other needs, the work­
er and his family will not be able to buy even a quarter of the 
bread they need with the help obtained from the Critical Bank for 
the Poor. They will certainly starve if they do not resort to the 
means that the bank is intended to obviate — the pawnshop, 
begging, thieving and prostitution. 
The manager of the Bank for the Poor, on the other hand, is all 
the more brilliantly provided for by the man of ruthless Criticism. 
The income he administers is 12,000 francs, his salary is 10,000. 
The management therefore costs 85 per cent of the total, nearly 
three times as much as the mass-type administration of poor relief 
in Paris, which costs about 17 per cent of the total. 
Let us suppose for a moment that the assistance that the Bank 
for the Poor provides is real, not just illusory. In that case the 
institution of the revealed mystery of all mysteries rests on the 
illusion that only a different distribution of wages is required to 
enable the workers to live through the year. 
Speaking in the prosaic sense, the income of 7,500,000 French 
workers averages no more than 91 francs per head, that of 

=====第224页=====
The Holy Family 199 
another 7,500,000 is only 120 francs per head; hence for at least 
15,000,000 it is less than is absolutely necessary for life. 
The idea of the Critical Bank for the Poor, if it is rationally 
conceived, amounts to this: during the time the worker is em­
ployed as much will be deducted from his wages as he needs for 
his living during unemployment. It comes to the same thing 
whether I advance him a certain sum during his unemployment 
and he gives it back when he has employment, or he gives up a 
certain sum when he has employment and I give it back to him 
when he is unemployed. In either case he gives me when he is 
working what he gets from me when he is unemployed. 
Thus,  the "pure" Bank for the Poor differs from the mass-type 
savings-banks only in two very original, very Critical qualities. The 
first is that the Bank for the Poor lends money "o fonds perdus" 3 
on the senseless assumption that the worker could pay back if he 
wanted to and that he would always want to pay back if he could. 
The second is that it pays no interest on the sum put aside by the 
worker. As this sum is given the form of an advance, the Bank for 
the Poor thinks it is doing the worker a favour by not charging 
him any interest. 
The difference between the Critical Bank for the Poor and the 
mass-type savings-banks is therefore that the worker loses his 
interest and the Bank its capital. 
c) Model Farm at Bouqueval 
Rudolph founds a model farm at Bouqueval. The choice of the 
place is all the more fortunate as it preserves memories of feudal 
times,  namely of a château seigneurial.* 
Each of the six men employed on this farm is paid 150 ecus, or 
450 francs a year, while the women get 60 ecus, or 180 francs. 
Moreover they get board and lodging free. The ordinary daily 
fare of the people at Bouqueval consists of a "formidable" plate of 
ham, an equally formidable plate of mutton and, finally, a no less 
massive piece of veal supplemented by two kinds of winter salad, 
two large cheeses, potatoes, cider, etc. Each of the six men does 
twice the work of the ordinary French agricultural labourer. 
As the total annual income produced by France, if divided 
equally, would come to no more than 93 francs per person, and as 
the total number of inhabitants employed directly in agriculture is 
a Not to be repaid.— Ed. 
A feudal manor.— Ed. 
8* 

=====第225页=====
200 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
two-thirds of the population of France, it will be seen what a 
revolution the general imitation of the German caliph's model 
farm would cause not only in the distribution, but also in the 
production of the national wealth. 
According to what has been said, Rudolph achieved this enor­
mous increase in production solely by making each labourer work 
twice as much and eat six times as much as before. 
Since the French peasant is very industrious, labourers who 
work twice as much must be superhuman athletes, as the "formida­
ble" meat dishes also seem to indicate. Hence we may assume that 
each of the six men eats at least a pound of meat a day. 
If all the meat produced in France were distributed equally 
there would not be even a quarter of a pound per person per day. 
It is therefore obvious what a revolution Rudolph's example would 
cause in this respect too. The agricultural population alone would 
consume more meat than is produced in France, so that as a result 
of this Critical reform France would be left without any live­
stock. 
The fifth part of the gross product which Rudolph, according to 
the report of the manager of Bouqueval, Father Châtelain, allows 
the labourers, in addition to the high wage and sumptuous board, 
i ;<othing else than his rent. It is assumed that, on the average, 
after deduction of all production costs and profit on the working 
capital, one-fifth of the gross product remains for the French 
landowner, that is to say, the ratio of the rent to the gross product 
is one to five. Although it is beyond doubt that Rudolph decreases 
the profit on his working capital beyond all proportion by 
increasing the expenditure for the labourers beyond all propor­
tion— according to Chaptal (De l'industrie française, t. I, p. 239) the 
average yearly income of the French agricultural labourer is 120 
francs—although Rudolph gives his whole rent away to the 
labourers, Father Châtelain nevertheless reports that the prince 
• hereby increases his revenue and thus inspires un-Critical land­
owners to farm in the same way. 
The Bouqueval model farm is nothing but a fantastic illusion; its 
hidden fund is not the natural land of the Bouqueval estate, it is a 
magic purse of Fortunatus that Rudolph has! 
In this connection Critical Criticism exultantly declares: 
"Vou can see from the whole plan at a first glance that it is not a Utopia." 
Only Critical Criticism can see at a first glance at a Fortunatus' 
purse that it is not a Utopia. The first glance of Criticism  is — the 
glance of "the evil eye"! 

=====第226页=====
The Holy Family 201 
8) RUDOLPH, 
"THE REVEALED MYSTERY OF ALL MYSTERIES" 
The miraculous means by which Rudolph accomplishes all his 
redemptions and miracle cures is not his fine words but his ready 
money. That is what the moralists are like, says Fourier. You must 
be a millionaire to be able to imitate their heroes. 
Morality is "impuissance mise en action". 3 Every time it fights a vice 
it is defeated. And Rudolph does not even rise to the standpoint 
of independent morality, which is based at least on the conscious­
ness of human dignity. His morality, on the contrary, is based on the 
consciousness of human weakness. His is the  theological  morality. We 
have investigated in detail the heroic feats that he accomplished with 
his fixed,  Christian ideas, by which he measures the world, with his 
"charité", "dévouement" , " abnfgation" , "repentir" , "bons" and 
"méchants" , "récompense" and "punition" , "châtiments terribles" , "isole­
ment" , "salut de l'âme", b etc. We have proved that they are mere 
Eulenspiegel tricks. All that we still have to deal with here is the 
personal character of Rudolph, the "revealed mystery of all 
mysteries" or the revealed mystery of "pure Criticism". 
The antithesis of "good" and "evil" confronts the Critical 
Hercules when he is still a youth in two personifications, Murph 
and Polidori, both of them Rudolph's teachers. The former 
educates him in good and is "the Good One". The latter educates 
him in evil and is "the Evil One". So that this conception should 
by no means be inferior in triviality to similar conceptions in other 
novels, Murph, the personification of "the  good",  cannot be 
"savant" or "particularly endowed intellectually". But he is honest, 
simple, and laconic; he feels himself great when he applies to evil 
such monosyllabic words as "foul" or "vile", and he has a horreur 
of anything which is base. To use Hegel's expression, he honestly 
sets the melody of the good and the true in an equality of tones, 
i.e., on one note. 
Polidori, on the contrary, is a prodigy of cleverness, knowledge 
and education, and at the same time of the "most dangerous 
immorality", having, in particular, what Eugène Sue, as a member 
of the young pious French bourgeoisie, could not forget— "le plus 
a "Impotence in action." Ch. Fourier, Théorie des quatre mouvements et des 
destinées générales, Part II, Epilogue. —Ed. 
"Charity", "devotion", "self-denial", "repentance", the  "good"  and the  "wicked" 
people,  "reward"  and "punishment", "terrible chastisements", "isolation", "salvation of 
the soul".— Ed. 

=====第227页=====
202 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
effrayant scepticisme".'1  We can judge the spiritual energy and 
education of Eugène Sue and his hero by their panic fear of 
scepticism. 
"Murph," says Herr Szeliga, "is at the same time the perpetuated guilt of 
January 13 and the perpetual redemption of that guilt by his incomparable love 
and self-sacrifice for the person of Rudolph." 
Just as Rudolph is the deus ex machina and the mediator of the 
world, so Murph, for his part, is the personal deus ex machina and 
mediator of Rudolph. 
"Rudolph and the salvation of mankind, Rudolph and the realisation of man's 
essential perfections, are for Murph an inseparable unity, a unity to which he 
dedicates himself not with the stupid dog-like devotion of the slave, but knowingly 
and independently." 
So Murph is an enlightened, knowing and independent slave. 
Like every prince's valet, he sees in his master the salvation of 
mankind personified. Graun flatters Murph with the words: 
"intrépide garde du corps". 0 Rudolph himself calls him modèle d'un 
valet d and truly he is a model servant. Eugène Sue tells us that 
Murph scrupulously addresses Rudolph as "Monseigneur" when 
alone with him. In the presence of others he calls him Monsieur 
with his lips to keep his incognito, but "Monseigneur" with his heart. 
"Murph helps to raise the veil from the mysteries, but only for Rudolph's sake. 
He helps in the work of destroying the power of mystery." 
The denseness of the veil which conceals the simplest conditions 
of the world from Murph can be seen from his conversation with 
the envoy Graun. From the legal right of self-defence in case of 
emergency he concludes that Rudolph, as judge of the secret court, 
was entitled to blind the maître d'école, although the latter was in 
chains and "defenceless". His description of how Rudolph will tell 
of his "noble" actions before the assizes, will make a display of 
eloquent phrases, and will let his great heart pour forth, is worthy 
of a grammar-school boy who has just read Schiller's Räuber. The 
only mystery which Murph lets the world solve is whether he 
blacked his face with coal-dust or black paint when he played the 
charbonnier." 
3 " The most frightful scepticism".— Ed. 
On this day, Rudolph, in a fit of anger, made an attempt on the life of his 
father, but repented and gave the word to do good.— Ed. 
c "Fearless bodyguard".— Ed. 
A model servant.— Ed. 
e Coal-man.— Ed. 

=====第228页=====
The Holy Family 203 
"The angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just" (Mat. 
13:49).  "Tribulation and anguish, upon every soul of man that doeth evil...; But 
glory, honour, and peace, to every man that worketh good" (Rom. 2:9-10). 
Rudolph makes himself one of those angels. He goes forth into 
the world to sever the wicked from among the just, to punish the 
wicked and reward the good. The conception of good and evil has 
sunk so deep into his weak brain that he really believes in a 
corporeal Satan and wants to catch the devil alive, as at one time 
Professor Sack wanted to in Bonn.69  On the other hand, he tries to 
copy on a small scale the opposite of the devil, God. He likes "de 
jouer un peu le rôle de la providence". a Just as in reality all differences 
become merged more and more in the difference between poor 
and rich, so all aristocratic differences become dissolved in idea in 
the opposition between good and evil. This distinction is the last 
form that the aristocrat gives to his prejudices. Rudolph regards 
himself as a good man and thinks that the wicked exist to afford 
him the self-satisfaction of his own excellence. Let us consider this 
personification of "the good" a little more closely. 
Herr Rudolph indulges in charity and extravagance like the 
Caliph of Baghdad in the Arabian Nights. He cannot possibly lead 
that kind of life without sucking the blood out of his little 
principality in Germany to the last drop like a vampire. As 
Monsieur Sue tells us, he would have been one of the mediatised 
German princes 70 had he not been saved from involuntary 
abdication by the protection of a French marquis. This gives us an 
idea of the size of his territory. We can form a further idea of how 
Critically Rudolph appraises his own situation by the fact that he, a 
minor German Serenissimus, thinks it necessary to live semi-
incognito in Paris in order not to attract attention. He specially 
takes with him one of his  chancellors  for the Critical purpose of the 
latter representing for him "le côté théâtral et puéril du pouvoir 
souverain" b as though a minor German Serenissimus needed another 
representative of the theatrical and childish side of sovereign 
power besides himself and his mirror. Rudolph has succeeded in 
imposing on his suite the same Critical self-delusion. Thus his 
servant Murph and his envoy Graun do not notice that the Parisian 
homme d'affaires, 0 Monsieur Badinot, makes fun of them when he 
pretends to take their private instructions as matters of state and 
sarcastically chatters about 
a "To play the role of Providence a  little".—Ed. 
"The theatrical and childish side of sovereign power".—Ed. 
c Household manager.— Ed. 

=====第229页=====
204 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"rapports occultes qui peuvent exister entre les intérêts les plus divers et les 
destinés des empires"? "Yes," says Rudolph's envoy, "he has the impudence to say to 
me sometimes: 'How many complications unknown to the people there are in the 
government of a state! Who would think, Herr Baron, that the notes which I 
deliver to you doubtless have their influence on the course of European affairs}'" 
The envoy and Murph do not find it impudent that influence 
on European affairs is ascribed to them, but that Badinot idealises 
his lowly occupation in such a way. 
Let us first recall a scene from Rudolph's domestic life. Rudolph 
tells Murph "he was having moments of pride and bliss". 
Immediately afterwards he becomes furious because Murph will 
not answer a question of his. "Je vous ordonne de parler " b Murph 
will not let himself be ordered. Rudolph says: 'Je n'aime pas les 
réticences." 0 He forgets himself so far as to be base enough to remind 
Murph that he pays him for all his services. He will not be calmed 
until Murph reminds him of January 13. Murph's servile nature 
reasserts itself after its momentary abeyance. He tears out his 
"hair", which he luckily has not got, and is desperate at having 
been somewhat rude to his exalted master who calls him "a model 
servant", "his good old faithful Murph". 
After these samples of evil in him, Rudolph repeats his fixed 
ideas on "good" and "evil" and reports the progress he is making 
in regard to the good. He calls alms and compassion the chaste 
and pious consolers of his wounded soul. It would be horrible, 
impious, a sacrilege, to prostitute them to abject, unworthy beings. 
Of course alms and compassion are the consolers of his soul. That 
is why it would be a sacrilege to desecrate them. It would be "to 
inspire doubt in God, and he who gives must make people believe 
in Him". To give alms to one abject is unthinkable! 
Rudolph considers every motion of his soul as infinitely impor­
tant. That is why he constantly observes and appraises them. Thus 
the simpleton consoles himself as far as his outburst against 
Murph is concerned by the fact that he was moved by Fleur de 
Marie. "I was moved to tears, and I am accused of being blasé, 
hard and inflexible!" After thus proving his own goodness, he 
waxes furious over "evil", over the wickedness of Marie's 
unknown mother, and says with the greatest possible solemnity 
to Murph: 
a "Occult relations that can exist between the most varying interests and the 
destinies of empires".—Ed. 
"I order you to speak." — Ed. 
"I do not like reticences."—Ed. 

=====第230页=====
The Holy Family 205 
"Tu le sais —certaines vengeances me sont bien chères, certaines souffrances bien 
précieuses". 3 
In speaking, he makes such diabolical grimaces that his faithful 
servant cries out in fear: "Hélas, Monseigneur!" This great lord is 
like the members of Young England, 71 who also wish to reform the 
world, perform noble deeds, and are subject to similar hysterical fits. 
The explanation of the adventures and situations in which 
Rudolph finds himself involved is to be found above all in 
Rudolph's adventurous disposition. He loves "the piquancy of novels, 
distractions, adventures, disguise""; his "curiosity" is "insatiable", 
he feels a "need for vigorous, stimulating sensations", he is "eager 
for violent nervous excitement". 
This disposition of Rudolph is reinforced by his craze for playing 
the role of Providence and arranging the world according to his 
fixed ideas. 
His attitude to other persons is determined either by an abstract 
fixed idea or by quite personal, fortuitous motives. 
He frees the Negro doctor David and his beloved, for example, 
not because of the direct human sympathy which they inspire, not 
to free them, but to play Providence to the slave-owner Willis and to 
punish him for not believing in God. In the same way the maître 
d'école seems to him a godsent opportunity for applying the penal 
theory that he invented so long ago. Murph's conversation with 
the envoy Graun enables us from another aspect to see deeply into 
the purely personal motives that determine Rudolph's noble acts. 
The prince's interest in Fleur de Marie is based, as Murph says, 
"apart from" the pity which the poor girl inspires, on the fact that 
the daughter whose loss caused him such bitter grief would now 
be of the same age. Rudolph's sympathy for the Marquise 
d'Harville has, "apart from" his philanthropic idiosyncrasies, the 
personal ground that without the old Marquise d'Harville and his 
friendship with the Emperor Alexander, Rudolph's father would 
have been deleted from the line of German sovereigns. 
His kindness towards Madame George and his interest in 
Germain, her son, have the same motive. Madame George belongs 
to the d'Harville family. 
"C'est non moins à ses malheurs et à ses vertus qu'à cette parenté que la pauvre 
Madame George a dû les incessantes bontés de son Altesse." 
a "You know — some vengeances are very dear to me, some sufferings very 
precious." — Ed. 
"It is no less to her misfortunes and her virtues than to this relationship that 
poor Madame George owes the ceaseless kindness of His Highness." — Ed. 

=====第231页=====
206 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The apologist Murph tries to gloss over the ambiguity of 
Rudolph's motives by such expressions as: "surtout, à part, non 
moins que"  ? 
The whole of Rudolph's character is finally summed up in the 
"pure" hypocrisy by which he manages to see and make others see 
the outbursts of his evil passions as outbursts against the passions of the 
wicked,  in a way similar to that in which Critical Criticism 
represents its own stupidities as the stupidities of the Mass, its spiteful 
rancour at the progress of the world outside itself as the rancour 
of the world outside itself at progress, and finally its egoism, which 
thinks it has absorbed all Spirit in  itself,  as the egoistic opposition 
of the Mass to the Spirit. 
We shall prove Rudolph's "pure" hypocrisy in his attitude to the 
maître d'école, to Countess Sarah MacGregor and to the notary 
Jacques Ferrand. 
In order to lure the maître d'école into a trap and seize him, 
Rudolph persuades him to break into his apartment. The interest 
he has in this is a purely personal one, not a general human one. 
The fact is that the maître d'école has a portfolio belonging to 
Countess MacGregor, and Rudolph is greatly interested in gaining 
possession of it. Speaking of Rudolph's tête-à-tête with the maître 
d'école, the author says explicitly: 
"Rodolphe se trouvait dans une anxiété cruelle; s'il laissait échapper cette occasion 
de s'emparer du maître d'école, il ne la retrouverait sans doute jamais; ce brigand 
emporterait les  secrets  que Rodolphe avait tant d'intérêt a savoir." 
With the maître d'école, Rudolph obtains possession of Countess 
MacGregor's portfolio; he seizes the maître d'école out of purely 
personal interest; he has him blinded out of personal passion. 
When Chourineur tells Rudolph of the struggle of the maître 
d'école with Murph and gives as the reason for his resistance the 
fact that he knew what was in store for him, Rudolph replies: "He 
did not know", and he says it "d'un air sombre, les traits contractés 
par cette expression presque féroce, dont nous avons parlé." c The 
thought of vengeance flashes across his mind, he anticipates the 
savage pleasure that the barbarous punishment of the maître 
d'école will afford him. 
a "Above all", "apart from" and "no less than".— Ed. 
"Rudolph was cruelly anxious; if he let slip this opportunity of seizing the maître 
d'école, he would probably never have another; the brigand would carry away the 
secrets that Rudolph was so keen to find out." — Ed. 
c "With a sombre mien, his features contracted by the almost ferocious 
expression of which we have spoken".— Ed. 

=====第232页=====
The Holy Family 207 
On the entrance of the Negro doctor David, whom he intends to 
make the instrument of his revenge, Rudolph cries out: 
"'Vengeance!... Vengeance!' s'écria Rodolphe avec une fureur froide et con­
centrée."  a 
A cold and concentrated fury is seething in him. Then he 
whispers his plan in the doctor's ear, and when the latter recoils at 
it, he immediately finds a "pure" theoretical motive to substitute 
for personal vengeance. It is only a case, he says, of "applying an 
idea" that has often flashed across his noble mind, and he does not 
forget to add unctuously: "He will still have before him the 
boundless horizon of atonement." He follows the example of the 
Spanish Inquisition which, when handing over to civil justice the 
victim condemned to be burnt at the stake, added a hypocritical 
request for mercy for the repentant sinner. 
Of course, when the interrogation and sentencing of the maître 
d'école is to take place, His Highness is seated in a most comfort­
able study in a long, deep black dressing-gown, his features 
impressively pale, and in order to copy the court of justice more 
faithfully, he is sitting at a long table on which are the exhibits of 
the case. He must now discard the expression of rage and revenge 
with which he told Chourineur and the doctor of his plan for 
blinding the maître d'école. He must show himself "calm, sad and 
composed", and display the extremely comic, solemn attitude of a 
self-styled world judge. 
In order to leave no doubt as to the "pure" motive of the 
blinding, the silly Murph admits to the envoy Graun: 
"The cruel punishment of the maître  d'école  was intended chiefly to give me my 
revenge against the assassin." 
In a tête-à-tête with Murph, Rudolph says: 
"Ma haine des méchants... est devenue plus vivace, mon aversion pour Sarah 
augmente en raison sans doute du chagrin que me cause la mort de ma fille." b 
Rudolph tells us how much stronger his hatred of the wicked 
has become. Needless to say, his hatred is a Critical, pure, moral 
hatred — hatred of the wicked  because  they are wicked. That is why 
he regards this hatred as his own progress in the good. 
a "'Revenge! ... Revenge!' Rudolph cries out with cold and concentrated 
fury."—Ed. 
"My hatred of the wicked ... has become stronger, my aversion for Sarah 
increases, doubtless because of the grief caused by the death of my 
daughter." — Ed. 

=====第233页=====
208 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
At the same time, however, he betrays that this growth of moral 
hatred is nothing but a hypocritical justification to excuse the growth 
of his personal aversion for Sarah. The vague moral idea of his 
increasing hatred of the wicked is only a mask for the definite 
immoral fact of his increased aversion for Sarah. This aversion has 
a very natural and a very personal basis, his personal  grief,  which 
is also the measure of his aversion. Sans doute!* 
Still more repugnant is the hypocrisy to be seen in Rudolph's 
meeting with the dying Countess MacGregor. 
After the revelation of the mystery that Fleur de Marie is the 
daughter of Rudolph and the Countess, Rudolph goes up to her 
"l'air menaçant, impitoyable". b She begs for mercy. 
"Pas de grâce," he replies, "malédiction sur vous ... vous ... mon mauvais génie 
et celui de ma race." c 
So it is his "race" that he wishes to avenge. He goes on to 
inform the Countess how, to atone for his attempted murder of 
his father, he has taken upon himself a world crusade for the 
reward of the good and the punishment of the wicked. He 
tortures the Countess, he abandons himself to his rage, but in his 
own eyes he is only carrying out the task which he took upon 
himself after January 13, of "poursuivre le mal". d 
As he is leaving, Sarah cries out: 
'"Pitié!  Je meurs!' 'Mourez donc, maudite!' dit Rodolphe effrayant de fureur".6 
The last words "effrayant de fureur" betray the pure, Critical and 
moral motives of his actions. It was the same rage that made him 
draw his sword against his father, his  blessed  father, as Herr Szeliga 
calls him. Instead of fighting this evil in himself he fights it, like a 
pure Critic, in others. 
In the end, Rudolph himself discards his Catholic penal theory. 
He wanted to abolish capital punishment, to change punishment 
into penance, but only as long as the murderer murdered 
strangers and spared members of Rudolph's family. He adopts the 
death penalty as soon as one of his kin is murdered; he needs a 
double set of laws, one for his own person and one for ordinary 
persons. 
a Doubtless!— Ed. 
"Looking threatening and pitiless."—Ed. 
c "No mercy. A curse on you ... you ... my evil genius and the evil genius of my 
race."—Ed. 
"Prosecuting  evil."—Ed. 
e "'Have pity! I am dying!' 'Die then, accursed one!' replies Rudolph, terrible in 
his rage."—Ed. 

=====第234页=====
The Holy Family 209 
He learns from Sarah that Jacques Ferrand was the cause of the 
death of Fleur de Marie. He says to  himself: 
"No,  it is not enough!... What a burning desire for revenge!... What a thirst for 
blood!... What calm, deliberate rage!... Until I knew that one of the monster's victims 
was my child I said to  myself:  this man's death would be fruitless.... Life without 
money, life without satisfaction of his frenzied sensuality will be a long and double 
torture.... But it is my daughter!... I shall kill this man!" 
And he rushes out to kill him, but finds him in a state which 
makes murder superfluous. 
The "good" Rudolph! Burning with desire for revenge, thirst 
ing for blood, with calm, deliberate rage, with a hypocrisy which 
excuses every evil impulse with its casuistry, he has all the evil 
passions for which he gouges out the eyes of others. Only 
accidental strokes of luck, money and rank in society save this 
"good"  man from the penitentiary. 
"The power of Criticism", to compensate for the otherwise 
complete nullity of this Don Quixote, makes him "bon locataire", 
"bon voisin", "bon ami", "bon père", "bon bourgeois", "bon 
citoyen", "bon prince", 3 and so on, according to Herr Szeliga's 
gamut of eulogy. That is more than all the results that "mankind in its 
entire history" has achieved. That is enough for Rudolph to save "the 
world"  twice from "downfall"I 
a A "good tenant", a "good neighbour", a "good friend", a "good father", a 
"good bourgeois", a "good citizen", a "good prince".—Ed. 

=====第235页=====
Chapter IX 
THE CRITICAL LAST JUDGMENT 
Through Rudolph, Critical Criticism has twice saved the world 
from downfall, but only that it may now itself decree the end of the 
world. 
And I saw and heard a mighty angel, Herr Hirzel, flying from 
Zurich across the heavens. And he had in his hand a little book 
open like the fifth number of the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung; and 
he set his right foot upon the Mass and his left foot upon 
Charlottenburg; and he cried with a loud voice as when a lion 
roareth, and his words rose like a dove — chirp! chirp!—to the 
regions of pathos and thunder-like aspects of the Critical Last 
Judgment. 
"When, finally, all is united against Criticism and — verily, verily I say unto 
youa—this time is no longer far off—when the whole world in dissolution—to it it 
was given to fight against the Holy—groups around Criticism for the last onslaught; 
then the courage of Criticism and its significance will have found the greatest 
recognition. We can have no fear of the outcome. It will all end by ou*r settling 
accounts with the various groups — and we shall separate them from one another as the 
shepherd separateth the sheep from the goats; and we shall set the sheep on our right hand 
and the goats on our left—and we shall give a general certificate of poverty to the 
hostile knights —  they  are spirits of the devil, they go out into the breadth of the world and 
they gather to fight on the great day of God the Almighty—and all who dwell on earth will 
wonder." 
And when the angel had cried, seven thunders uttered their 
voices: 
a The words in italics between dashes are Marx's ironical insertions.— Ed. 

=====第236页=====
The Holy Family 211 
Dies irae, dies ilia 
Solvet saeclum in fa villa. 
Judex ergo cum sedebit, 
Quidquid latet, adparebit, 
Nil inultum remanebit. 
Quid sum, miser, tunc dicturus? etc.a 
Ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars. All this must first of 
all come to pass. For there shall rise false Christs and false 
prophets, Messieurs Bûchez and Roux from Paris, Herr Friedrich 
Rohmer and Theodor Rohmer from Zurich, and they will say: Here is 
Christ! But then the sign of the Bauer brothers will appear in 
Criticism and the words of the Scripture on Batter's work b will be 
accomplished: 
Quand les boeufs vont deux à deux 
Le labourage en va mieux!c 
HISTORICAL EPILOGUE 
As we learned later, it was not the world, but the Critical Literatur-
Zeitung that came to an end. 
That day of wrath 
Will reduce the world to ashes. 
When the judge takes his seat 
All that is hidden will come to light, 
Nothing will remain unpunished. 
What shall I, wretch, say then?—Ed. 
The author says "Bauernwerk", which literally means "peasant's work".— Ed. 
With the oxen paired together. 
Ploughing goes much better! 
(From a French drinking song.) — Ed. 

=====第237页=====
THE 
NEW MORAL WORLD: 
«NO 
GAZETTE  OF TIE  RATIONAL SOCIETY. 
feraOri mir Ach rfTmHtmnt, It Cn. ir. t. X, mi  4, i, WULIV.  «. «•. 
"1XY atKuÂi cnuucng, no* nijm  TO THE »OUT,  no«  THE W»T IOMOKAKT TO THE MOR  tmawmtv.  MAT  M OITEK TO  »nr numvmTY, 
«TEX  TO THE_WO«>oIFli»01,  EJ.™«.  *:.l;'-iÇ.A„T,.0Jl.0.'..,?2'ïî_¥1 ^^»- »'»«» »«*•» »II»! SUAT IXTMT  AT IUI  COMMA»»  A»V  UXO**  TM4 cbxTnoL or nnu wao  IUTI  wnvtim iv  TB« ATTAIU  or Mi«.--«»»ato»n. 
No. IS. V«. VI TVWSm«. SATURDAY, OCTOBER 9, 1844. 
Frederick Engels 
[CONTINENTAL SOCIALISM] 72 
Continental Socialism seems to deserve and to obtain a consider­
able portion of public attention at present. I forward you a few 
extracts from a letter addressed me from Barmen in Prussia, by a 
former contributor to the New Moral  World. 
"In Paris, on my way home, I visited a Communist Club of the 
mystic school. I was introduced by a Russian who speaks French 
and German perfectly,3 and who very cleverly opposed Feuer-
bach's reasoning,* to them. They mean just as much by the term 
God as the Ham Common folks73  by Love-Spirit. They however 
declared this a secondary question, and to all practical intents 
agreed with us, and said, "enfin, l'athéisme c'est votre religion": — In 
the end, atheism is your religion. Religion, in French, means 
conviction, feeling, not worship. They affirmed, that the noise and 
hubbub of the Bourgeois, or middle class, against England, is all 
nonsense; and they were very anxious to convince us, that they 
had not the slightest national prejudice, that the working men of 
France care nothing about Morocco, 74 but know that the ouvriers, 
workers, of all countries are allies, having the same interests. The 
French middle class are quite as egotistical, as avaricious, and quite 
as insupportable in society as the English, but the French ouvriers 
are fine fellows. We have made much progress among the 
Russians at Paris. There are three or four noblemen and pro­
prietors of serfs now at Paris who are radical Communists and 
Atheists. We have in Paris a German Communist Paper, the 
* The resolution of the God idea into man.— Note by Engels. 
a Evidently, by M. A. Bakunin.— Ed. 

=====第238页=====
Continental Socialism 213 
Vorwärts!, published twice-a-week. In Belgium there is an active 
Communist agitation going on, and a paper, the Débat Social, 
published at Brussels. In Paris there are about half-a-dozen 
Communist papers. Socialiste, Socialitaire , are very fashionable 
names in France; and Louis Philippe, the arch-bourgeois, sup­
ports the Démocratie Pacifique with money and protection. The 
religious exterior of the French Socialists is mostly hypocritical; the 
people are thoroughly irreligious, and the first victims of the next 
revolution will be the parsons. The Cologne folks have made 
enormous progress. When we assembled in a public house we 
filled a good room with our company, mostly lawyers, medical 
men, artists etc., also three or four lieutenants in the artillery, one 
of whom is a very clever fellow. In Düsseldorf we have a few men, 
amongst them a very talented poet. In Elberfeld, about half-a-
dozen of my friends and some others are Communists. In fact 
there is scarcely a town in Northern Germany where we have not 
some radical Anti-Proprietarians and Atheists. Edgar Bauer, of 
Berlin, has just been sentenced to three years imprisonment for 
his last book." a 
Thinking the above facts would be interesting to your readers, I 
forward them for insertion in your paper. 
Written about September 20, 1844 
First published in the newspaper 
The New Moral World No. 15, 
October 5, 1844 
Signed: Anglo-German Printed according to the news­
paper 
3 E. Bauer, Der Streit der Kritik mit Kirche und Staat. — Ed. 

=====第239页=====
Frederick Engels 
DESCRIPTION OF RECENTLY FOUNDED 
COMMUNIST COLONIES STILL IN EXISTENCE 
When one talks to people about socialism or communism, one 
very frequently finds that they entirely agree with one regarding 
the substance of the matter and declare communism to be a very 
fine thing; "but", they then say, "it is impossible ever to put such 
things into practice in real life". One encounters this objection so 
frequently that it seems to the writer both useful and necessary to 
reply to it with a few facts which are still very little known in 
Germany and which completely and utterly dispose of this objec­
tion. For communism, social existence and activity based on 
community of goods, is not only possible but has actually already 
been realised in many communities in America and in one place in 
England, with the greatest success, as we shall see. 
Incidentally, if one goes into this objection somewhat more 
deeply, one finds that it is made up of two further objections; 
these are, firstly: no workers would be prepared to carry out the 
menial and unpleasant manual tasks; and secondly, with everyone 
having an equal claim to the communal possessions, people would 
quarrel about these possessions, and in this way the community 
would break up again. The first objection is overcome very simply, 
as follows: these tasks, being now within the community, are no 
longer menial; and furthermore they can be almost entirely 
dispensed with by improved facilities, machines and so forth. For 
instance, in a large hotel in New York, the boots are cleaned by 
steam, and in the communist colony at Harmony in England (see 
below) not merely are the water-closets, which are so conveniently 

=====第240页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 215 
fitted out in the English fashion, cleaned automatically, but they 
are also provided with pipes which take the waste directly to the 
great dung-pit.— Regarding the second objection, however, all 
communist colonies so far have become so enormously rich after 
ten or fifteen years that they have everything they can desire in 
greater abundance than they can consume, so that no grounds for 
dispute exist. 
The reader will discover that most of the colonies that will be 
described in this article had their origins in all kinds of religious 
sects most of which have quite absurd and irrational views on 
various issues; the author just wants to point out briefly that these 
views have nothing whatsoever to do with communism. It is in any 
case obviously a matter of indifference whether those who prove 
by their actions the practicability of communal living believe in one 
God, in twenty or in none at all; if they have an irrational religion, 
this is an obstacle in the way of communal living, and if communal 
living is successful in real life despite this, how much more feasible 
must it be with others who are free of such inanities. Of the more 
recent colonies, almost all are in any case quite free of religious 
nonsense, and nearly all the English Socialists are despite their 
great tolerance quite without religion, for which very reason they 
are particularly ill-spoken of and slandered in sanctimonious 
England. However, when it comes to providing  proof,  even their 
opponents have to admit that there is no foundation for all the 
evil things that are said of them. 
The first people to set up a society on the basis of community of 
goods in America, indeed in the whole world, were the so-called 
Shakers. These people are a distinct sect who have the strangest 
religious beliefs, do not marry and allow no intercourse between 
the sexes, and these are not their only peculiarities of this kind. 
But this does not concern us here. The sect of the Shakers 
originated some seventy years ago. Its founders were poor people 
who united in order to live together in brotherly love and 
community of goods and to worship their God in their own way. 
Although their religious views and particularly the prohibition on 
marriage deterred many, they nevertheless attracted support and 
now have ten large communities, each of which is between three and 
eight hundred members strong. Each of these communities is a 
fine,  well laid-out town, with dwelling houses, factories, work­
shops,  assembly buildings and barns; they have flower and 
vegetable gardens, fruit trees, woods, vineyards, meadows and 
arable land in abundance; then, livestock of all kinds, horses and 
beef-cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry, in excess of their needs, and 

=====第241页=====
216 Frederick Engels 
of the very best breeds. Their granaries are always full of corn, 
their store-rooms full of clothing materials, so that an English 
traveller who visited them said he could not understand why these 
people still worked, when after all they possessed an abundance of 
everything; unless it was that they worked simply as a pastime, 
having nothing else to do. Amongst these people no one is obliged 
to work against his will, and no one seeks work in vain. They have 
no poor-houses and infirmaries, having not a single person poor 
and destitute, nor any abandoned widows and orphans; all their 
needs are met and they need fear no want. In their ten towns 
there is not a single gendarme or police officer, no judge, lawyer 
or soldier, no prison or penitentiary; and yet there is proper order 
in all their affairs. The laws of the land are not for them and as 
far as they are concerned could just as well be abolished and 
nobody would notice any difference for they are the most 
peaceable citizens and have never yielded a single criminal for the 
prisons. They enjoy, as we said, the most absolute community of 
goods and have no trade and no money among themselves. One 
of these towns, Pleasant Hill near Lexington in the State of 
Kentucky, was visited last year by an English traveller named 
Finch, who gives the following description of it. 
"Pleasant Hill consists of a great number of large, handsome hewn stone and 
brick houses, manufactories, workshops, farm buildings, all in the neatest order, 
some of the best in Kentucky; the Shaker farm-land was easily known by the fine 
stone wall fences by which it was enclosed, and by its superior cultivation; a great 
number of fat cows and sheep were grazing in the fields, and numerous fat swine 
were picking up fallen fruit in the orchards. The Shakers possess nearly four 
thousand acres of land here, of which about two-thirds is under cultivation. This 
colony was commenced by a single family about the year 1806; others joined 
afterwards and they gradually increased in numbers; some brought a little capital 
and others none at all. They had many difficulties to contend with, and suffered 
many privations at the first, being generally very poor persons; but by diligence, 
economy and temperance, they have overcome all and now have a great abundance 
of everything and owe nothing to any man. This Society consists at present of 
about three hundred individuals, out of which some fifty to sixty are children 
under sixteen years of age. They have no masters — no servants; far less do they 
have slaves; they are free, wealthy and happy. They have two schools, a Boys' and a 
Girls'  School, in which are taught reading, writing, arithmetic, grammar and the 
principles of their religion; they do not teach science to the children as they believe 
science is not necessary to salvation. As they tolerate no marriages, they would 
inevitably die out, if new members were not always joining them; but although the 
prohibition on marriage deters many thousands and many of their best members 
leave again for that reason, so many new members nevertheless still come that their 
number constantly increases. They rear livestock and variously cultivate the fields, 
and themselves produce flax, wool and silk, spinning and weaving them in their 
own manufactories. What they produce in excess of their needs they sell or 
exchange amongst their neighbours. They generally labour from sunrise to sunset. 

=====第242页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 217 
The board of trustees keeps all the books and accounts in a public office, and the 
books are open for all members to see, as often as they choose. They do not know 
themselves how wealthy they are, as they never take account of their stock; they are 
satisfied to know that all they have is their own, for they are in debt to no one. All 
they do is to make out a list of the debts their neighbours have with them once a 
year. 
"The Church is divided into five families (divisions) of from forty to eighty in 
each; each family has a separate domestic establishment and lives together in a 
large, handsome mansion; and all get every article required, and as much as they want 
from the common stores of the Society, and without any payment. A deacon is appointed 
to each family, whose business is to see that all are provided with every thing they 
want, and to anticipate their wants as far as possible. They all clothe in 
Quaker-fashion — plain, clean and neat; they have a great variety of articles of food 
and all of the very best description. If a new member seeks admission, he must, 
according to the laws of the Society, give up every thing he has to the community 
and is never allowed to claim it back, even if he leaves; nevertheless it is their 
practice to give back to each as much as he brought in. If a person leaves who has 
brought in no capital, he is not allowed by the laws to claim any thing for services 
either, as he has been fed and clothed at general expense whilst he was working; 
nevertheless it is their custom in this case too to make parting presents to every 
person if they leave in a kind and proper manner. 
"Their government is established in the manner of the first Christians. There is 
a male and a female minister in each Society, and each has an assistant. These four 
ministers are the highest power in the whole Society and decide all cases of 
contention. There are also two elders in each family of the Society, with two 
assistants and a deacon or administrator. The property of the Society is vested in 
the board of trustees, which consists of three persons, oversees the whole 
establishment, directs labour and carries on transactions with neighbours. They 
have no power to buy or sell any land without the consent of the Society. There are 
of course also foremen and managers in each department of labour; however they 
have made it a rule that no commands are ever given by any one, but all are to be 
persuaded by kindness."3 
Another colony of Shakers, New Lebanon in the State of New 
York, was visited by a second English traveller, by the name of 
Pitkeithly, in the year 1842. Mr. Pitkeithly most thoroughly in­
spected the whole town, which numbers some eight hundred 
inhabitants and owns between seven and eight thousand acres of 
land, he examined its workshops and factories, its tanneries, saw­
mills and so on, and declares the whole arrangement to be perfect. 
He too is surprised at the wealth of these people who began with 
nothing and are now becoming richer with each passing year, and 
he says: 
"They are happy and gay among themselves; there is no quarrelling but on the 
contrary friendliness and love prevail throughout their habitation, in every part of 
which reigns an orderliness and regularity which have not their equal." 
So much regarding the Shakers. As we said, they enjoy complete 
a Finch, Letter V, The New Moral  World,  Feb. 10, 1844.—Ed. 

=====第243页=====
218 Frederick Engels 
community of goods and have ten such communities in the United 
States of North America. 
Apart from the Shakers, however, there are other settlements 
in America based on community of goods. In particular the 
Rappites are to be mentioned here. Rapp is a minister from 
Württemberg who in about 1790 dissociated himself and his 
congregation from the Lutheran Church and, being persecuted by 
the government, went to America in 1802. His followers went 
after him in 1804, and thus he settled in Pennsylvania with about 
one hundred families. Their combined fortune amounted to about 
25,000 dollars, and with this they bought land and tools. Their 
land was uncultivated virgin forest and cost them their total 
fortune; however they only paid for it in stages. They now joined 
together in community of goods [Gütergemeinschaft], and made the 
following agreement: 
1) Each member surrenders all his possessions to the communi­
ty, without gaining any privileges from this. All are equal within the 
community. 
2) The laws and regulations of the society are equally binding 
on all. 
3) Each member works only for the benefit of the whole society 
and not each for himself alone. 
4) Whoever leaves the society has no claim to compensation for 
his work, but is given back everything he put in; and those who 
have put nothing in and depart in peace and friendship receive a 
parting gratuity. 
5) In exchange the community undertakes to provide each 
member and his family with the necessities of life and the 
necessary care in sickness and old age, and if the parents die or 
withdraw, leaving their children behind, the community will bring 
up these children. 
In the first years of their communal life, when they had to put a 
wilderness under the plough and also pay off some 7,000 dollars 
of the purchase price of the land each year, times were naturally 
hard for them. Several of the more wealthy were deterred by this, 
withdrew and took out their money, which much aggravated the 
colonists' troubles. But most held out faithfully and in this way 
had paid off all their debts in 1810, within just five years. In 1815 
for various reasons they sold up their whole colony and once more 
bought twenty thousand acres of virgin forest in the State of 
Indiana. Here they built the fine town of New Harmony after a few 
years and put most of the land under the plough, established 
vineyards and corn-fields, built a wool- and cotton-mill, and 

=====第244页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 219 
became richer with each passing day. In 1825 they sold up their 
whole colony to Mr. Robert Owen for twice one hundred 
thousand dollars and set off for the third time into the virgin 
forest. This time they settled by the great river Ohio and built the 
town of Economy, which is larger and more handsome than any in 
which they had previously lived. In 1831 Count Leon came to 
America with a company of some thirty Germans to join them. 
They received these new arrivals gladly, but the Count stirred up 
some of the members against Rapp, and for this reason it was 
decided at a meeting of the whole community that Leon and his 
followers should leave. Those remaining behind paid those who 
were dissatisfied more than one hundred and twenty thousand dollars, 
and with this money Leon founded a second colony, which failed, 
however, on account of mismanagement; its members dispersed 
and Count Leon died shortly afterwards as a tramp in Texas. Rapp's 
settlement, on the other hand, has flourished to the present day. 
The above-mentioned traveller Finch reports about its present 
circumstances: 
"The town of Economy consists of three long wide streets and five equally broad 
streets that cross these three at right angles; it has a church, a public hotel, a 
woollen factory, a cotton factory, and a silk-mill, a cocoonery for rearing silkworms, 
public stores for selling to strangers and for the supply of the members, a museum 
of natural curiosities, workshops for the various trades, agricultural buildings and 
large, handsome houses for the various families, with a large garden by each house. 
The farm-land belonging to it is about six miles in length and about one mile wide, 
contains large vineyards, an orchard of thirty-seven acres, and grain and pasture 
lands.  The number of members is about four hundred and fifty, all well clothed, 
well fed and splendidly lodged, cheerful, contented, happy, and moral people who 
for many years have not known want. 
"For a time marriage was greatly discouraged among them too, but they now 
marry and have families and are very desirous of increasing the number of 
members if proper persons would present themselves. Their religion is the New 
Testament, but they have no special creed and do not interfere with the opinions of the 
members, so long as they let the others be and abstain from sowing dissension on 
matters of faith. They call themselves Harmonists. They have no paid priests; Mr. 
Rapp,  who is above eighty years of age, acts both as priest and governor. They like 
to make music and occasionally have concerts and music-meetings in the evenings. 
They commenced their harvest the day before my arrival with a grand concert in 
the fields. In their schools they teach reading, writing, arithmetic and grammar; 
but, like the Shakers, they do not teach any of the sciences. They labour much 
longer than they need, from sunrise till sunset all the year; all labour and those 
who cannot work in the factories in winter find employment with threshing and 
feeding cattle, etc. They have 75 milking cows, large flocks of sheep, and great 
numbers of horses, hogs and poultry, and from what they have saved, they have 
lent large sums to businessmen and bankers; through bankruptcies they have lost a 
great deal that they lent, but they have still a great amount of  useless  money which is 
constantly increasing. 
"Their endeavour was always to make themselves every article they required so 

=====第245页=====
220 Frederick Engels 
that they should need to buy from others as little as they could and eventually 
made more than they needed; later they acquired a flock of 100 merino sheep to 
improve the strain of their sheep, paying fifteen thousand dollars for them. They 
were among the first in establishing the woollen manufacture in America. Then 
they began to plant the vine, grow flax, erect a cotton factory and rear silkworms 
for manufacture. However in all things they first take care to abundantly supply 
their own wants before they sell anything. 
"They live in families of from twenty to forty individuals, each of which has a 
separate house and domestic establishment. The family gets its supplies as much as 
it requires from the common stores. They have an abundance for all and they get as 
much as they wish without charge. When they need clothing, they apply to the head 
tailor, the head seamstress or shoemaker and are furnished with it made to their 
taste.  Flesh meat and the other foods are divided among the families according to 
the number of individuals in each, and they have everything in abundance and 
plenitude." a 
Another settlement enjoying community of goods was established 
at Zoar in the State of Ohio. These people are also Separatists from 
Württemberg who detached themselves from the Lutheran Church at 
the same time as Rapp and, after being persecuted for ten years by it 
and by the government, likewise emigrated. They were very poor 
and were only able to reach their destination with the support of 
philanthropic Quakers in London and America. Led by their 
minister, Bäumler, they arrived in Philadelphia in the autumn of 
1817 and bought from a Quaker the land which they still own today 
and which is seven thousand acres in area. The purchase price, 
which amounted to some six thousand dollars, was to be paid off 
gradually. When they arrived at the site and counted their money, 
they found that they had just six dollars per person. That was all; not 
a penny of the purchase price of the land had yet been paid, and out 
of these few dollars they had to buy seed-corn, farm-tools and 
provisions until the next harvest. They were confronted with a forest 
with a few log cabins, and this they had to put under the plough; but 
they set to work with a will, soon had their fields ready for ploughing 
and in the very next year built a corn-mill. Initially they divided their 
land into fairly small pieces, each of which was farmed by one family on 
its own account and as its private property. But they soon saw that this 
would not do, because since each one was only working for  himself,  they 
could not clear the forest fast enough and put it under the plough, 
they could give each other no proper  assistance  at all, and in this way 
many got into debt and were in danger of becoming quite impoverished. 
After a year and a half therefore, in April 1819,  they  joined  together  in 
community of goods,  worked out a constitution and unanimously chose 
a Finch, Letters VI and VII. The New Moral  World,  Feb. 17 and Feb. 24, 
1844.—Ed. 

=====第246页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 221 
their minister, Bäumler, as Director. They then paid all the 
members' debts, were allowed two years extension on the purchase 
price of the land and worked with redoubled enthusiasm and united 
efforts. With this new arrangement they did so well that they had 
paid off the whole purchase price of their land together with the 
interest four whole years before the appointed time, and how they 
are faring in other respects, the following description of two 
eyewitnesses will show: 
An American businessman who comes to Zoar very frequently 
portrays the place as a perfect model of cleanliness, order and 
beauty, with a splendid inn, a mansion for the aged Bäumler to live 
in, a fine public garden of two acres, with a large greenhouse, and 
fine,  well-built houses and gardens. He portrays the people as very 
happy and contented, industrious and respectable. His description 
was published in the Pittsburg (Ohio) newspaper (Pittsburg Daily 
Advocate and Advertiser, July 17th 1843). a 
Finch,  whom we have mentioned several times, declares this 
settlement to be the most perfectly organised of all those living in 
community of goods in America. He gives a long list of their wealth, 
and says that they have a flax-spinning mill and a woollen-mill, a 
tannery, iron-foundries, two corn-mills, two sawmills, two threshing-
machines and a host of workshops for every conceivable trade. He 
also says that their arable land is better farmed than anything else he 
had seen in America. The Pfennig Magazin estimates the Separatists' 
property at between one hundred and seventy and one hundred and 
eighty thousand dollars, all of which has been earned in twenty-five 
years,  since they began with nothing at all except six dollars a head. 
There are about two hundred of them. They too had prohibited 
marriages for a time, but like the Rappites they have gone back on 
that and now they do marry. 
Finch reproduces the Constitution of these Separatists, which 
consists principally in the following: 
All the Society's officers are elected, in fact by all its members who 
are above twenty-one years of age, from amongst their own number. 
These officers comprise: 
1) Three managers, one of whom is re-elected each year, and who 
may be dismissed by the Society at any time. They administer all the 
property of the Society and provide the members with the necessities 
of life, dwelling, clothing and food, as well as circumstances permit 
a Here and below in the description of the Separatists' colony, use is made of 
Finch, Letters VIII and IX. The New Moral  World.  March 2 and 9, 1844.— Ed. 

=====第247页=====
222 Frederick Engels 
and without favour for anyone. They appoint assistant managers for 
the different kinds of work, settle small disputes and may, jointly 
with the Council of the Society, promulgate new regulations, which, 
however, must never conflict with the Constitution. 
2) The Director, who remains in office as long as he enjoys the 
confidence of the Society and manages all business as chief officer. 
He has the right to buy and sell, and to conclude contracts, but in all 
matters of importance he can only act with the consent of the three 
managers. 
3) The Council of  the Society,  which consists of five members, one of 
whom resigns each year, and which enjoys the highest power in the 
Society, promulgates laws with the Managers and the Director, 
supervises the other officers and settles disputes when the parties are 
not satisfied with the Managers' decision; and 
4) The Paymaster, who is elected for four years and who alone of 
all the members and officers has the right to have money in his 
keeping. 
Besides this, the Constitution decrees that an educational establish­
ment shall be set up, that all members shall surrender all their 
possessions to the community for ever and can never demand them 
back, that new members may only be accepted after they have lived 
with the Society for a year and if all the members vote for them, and 
the Constitution can only be altered if two-thirds of the members are 
in favour. 
These descriptions could easily be much expanded, for almost all 
the travellers who go into the American interior visit one or other of 
the above-mentioned colonies, and almost all accounts of  these  journeys 
describe them. But not even a single one has been able to report any ill 
of these people, on the contrary, they all have only praise for them 
and the most they can find to criticise are the religious prejudices, 
especially of the Shakers, which, however, clearly have nothing to do 
with the ideal of community of goods. I could thus also quote the 
works of Miss Martineau, Messrs. Melish and Buckingham and many 
others; but as sufficient has been said above and these people anyway 
all tell the same tale, this is not necessary. 
The success enjoyed by the Shakers, Harmonists and Separatists, 
and also the general urge for a new order in human society and the 
efforts of the Socialists and Communists that this has given rise to, 
have caused many other people in America to undertake similar 
experiments in recent years. Thus Herr Ginal, a German minister in 
Philadelphia, has founded a society which has bought 37,000 acres of 
forest in the State of Philadelphia, built more than 80 houses there 
and already settled some five hundred people,  mostly  Germans, there. 

=====第248页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 223 
They have a large tannery and pottery, many workshops and 
storehouses, and they are really thriving. It goes without saying that 
they live in community of goods,  as is the case with all the following 
examples. A Mr. Hizby, an ironmaster of Pittsburg (Ohio) has set up 
in his native town a similar society which last year bought some 4,000 
acres of land in the vicinity of the town and is planning to establish a 
settlement there based on community of goods.— In addition there 
is a similar settlement in the State of New York at Skaneateles which 
was founded by /. A. Collins, an English Socialist, in the spring of 
1843 a with thirty members; then at Minden in the State of Massachu­
setts,  where about a hundred people have been settled since 1842; 
then two in Pike County in the State of Pennsylvania, which were also 
recently set up; then one at Brook Farm, Massachusetts, where fifty 
members and thirty pupils live on about two hundred acres and have 
set up an excellent school under the leadership of the Unitarian 77 
minister G. Ripley; and then one-at Northampton, in the same State, 
which has been in existence since 1842 and provides work for one 
hundred and twenty members on five hundred acres of land, in 
arable and livestock farming as well as in sawmills, silk-mills and 
dyeing, and finally a colony of emigrant English Socialists at Equality 
near Milwaukee in the State of Wisconsin, which was started last year 
by Thomas Hunt and is making rapid progress. Apart from these, 
several other communities are said to have been founded recently, 
but there is as yet no news of them.— This much is however certain: 
the Americans, and particularly the poor workers in the large towns 
of New York, Philadelphia, Boston, etc., have taken the matter to 
their hearts and founded a large number of societies for the 
establishment of such colonies, and all the time new communities are 
being set up. The Americans are tired of continuing as the slaves of 
the few rich men who feed on the labour of the people; and it is 
obvious that with the great energy and endurance of this nation, 
community of goods will soon be introduced over a significant part 
of their country. 
However, it is not just in America but in England too that 
attempts have been made to realise community of goods. Here the 
philanthropist Robert Owen has been preaching this ideal for thirty 
years,  he has sunk the whole of his large fortune in it and given 
everything he had in order to found the present colony at 
Harmony in Hampshire. After he had founded a society with this 
aim, the latter bought up an estate of 1,200 acres and established a 
a In the original: 1813 (probably a misprint).— Ed. 

=====第249页=====
224 Frederick Engels 
community there based on Owen's suggestions. It now numbers 
over one hundred members, who all live together in a large 
building and have been mainly engaged so far in arable farming. 
As it was to be set up from the start as a perfect model for the 
new order of society, considerable capital was required for this, 
and up to now some two hundred thousand talers have already 
been put into it. Some of this money was borrowed and had to be 
paid back from time to time, with the result that many difficulties 
ensued from this, and for lack of money many of the installations 
could not be completed and made profitable. And as the members 
of the community were not the sole owners of the establishment, 
but were governed by the Directors of the Society of Socialists, to 
whom the establishment belongs, misunderstandings and dissatis­
faction arose at intervals from this too. But despite all this, the 
matter is proceeding on its course, the members get on exceeding­
ly well with each other, as every visitor testifies, help each other 
on, and for all the difficulties, the existence of the establishment is 
nevertheless now secured. The main thing is that all the difficul­
ties arise not from within the community but from the fact that 
the community has not yet been fully realised. For if it were, the 
members would not have to use all their earnings to pay off 
interest and borrowed money but could use them to finish 
equipping the establishment and run it better; and then they 
would elect their managers themselves as well and not be always 
dependent on the Directors of the Society. 
The following description of the establishment itself is given by 
a practising economist who has travelled the length and breadth of 
England to acquaint himself with the state of agriculture and 
report on it to the London newspaper Morning Chronicle, signing 
as "One who has whistled at the Plough"a (Morning Chronicle, 
Dec.  13th, 1842). 
After passing through a very poorly cultivated district, where 
more weeds than corn were growing, in a nearby village he heard 
speak for the first time in his life of the Socialists at Harmony. A 
prosperous man there told him that they were farming a large 
estate, and doing it very well too, that all the lying rumours spread 
about them were untrue, that it would be very much to the credit 
of the parish if but half of its inhabitants would conduct 
themselves with as much propriety as these Socialists and that it 
would be equally desirable that the big landowners of the 
a Pseudonym of Alexander Somerville.— Ed. 

=====第250页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 225 
neighbourhood would give the poor as much and as beneficial 
employment as these people. They had their own views on 
property, but for all that they conducted themselves very well and 
set the whole neighbourhood a good example. He added: Their 
religious opinions vary: some go to this and others to that church, 
and they never speak about religion or politics with the people of 
the village. Two of them replied to my inquiries that there was no 
specific religious opinion among them and each man could believe 
what he wished. We were all very disturbed when we heard they 
were coming here; but now we find that they are very good 
neighbours, set our people a good example of morality, employ 
many of our poor, and as they never try to impose their opinions 
on us, we have no cause to be dissatisfied with them. They are all 
distinguished by respectable and well-bred behaviour, and no one 
here in the neighbourhood would dare criticise their moral 
conduct. 
Our reporter heard the same from others too, and then went to 
Harmony. After once more passing through poorly cultivated 
fields,  he came across a very well farmed turnip field with an 
abundant, fine crop, and said to his friend, a local tenant-farmer: 
If those are socialist turnips, they promise well. Shortly after, he 
encountered seven hundred socialist sheep, which were likewise in 
splendid condition, and then came to the large, handsome and 
solid dwelling-house. However, everything was still unfinished, 
bricks and timber, half-completed walls and the ground undug. 
They entered, were received in a courteous and friendly manner, 
and shown round the building. On the ground-floor there was a 
large dining-hall and the kitchen, from which the full dishes were 
taken by a machine to the dining-hall and the empty ones back to 
the kitchen. Some children showed the strangers this machine, and 
they were noticeable for clean, neat clothing, healthy appearance 
and proper behaviour. The women in the kitchen likewise looked 
very tidy and decent, and the visitor was most surprised that amid 
all the unwashed dishes — the midday meal was just over — they 
could still look so smart and clean. The fittings in the kitchen itself 
were finer than words could describe, and the London master-
builder who had made it declared that even in London very few 
kitchens were so perfectly and expensively fitted, a remark with 
which our visitor concurs. Next to the kitchen were convenient 
washhouses, baths, cellars, and separate rooms where each 
member could wash on returning from work. 
On the next floor was a large ball-room and above that the 
bedrooms, all very comfortably furnished. 

=====第251页=====
226 Frederick Engels 
The garden, twenty-seven acres in extent, was in perfect 
condition, and in general there was great activity to be observed 
on every side. Bricks were being made, lime burnt, builders were 
at work and roads were being laid down; a hundred acres of 
wheat had already been sown, and still more land was to be put 
under wheat; a pond to take liquid manure was being dug, and 
from the copse situated on the estate, humus was being gathered 
for spreading as fertiliser; in short, everything was done to 
increase the fertility of the soil. 
Our visitor concludes: 
"I believe their land to be well worth £3" (twenty-one talers) "per acre of rent, 
and they only pay 15s." (five talers). "They have an excellent bargain, if they 
manage it well; and whatever may be said of their social crotchets, it must be said 
of them that their style of farming is of a superior kind." 
Let us add to this description something about the domestic 
arrangements of this community. The members live together in a 
large house, each with a separate bedroom, which is most 
comfortably furnished; the housekeeping is done for all of them 
together by some of the women, and this of course saves a great 
deal of expense, time and trouble, which would be wasted with a 
large number of small homes, and allows for many comforts which 
are quite impossible in small households. For example, the kitchen 
fire heats all the rooms in the building simultaneously with warm 
air, and there are pipes taking warm and cold water to each room, 
and other such agreeable and practical features which are only 
possible in a communal institution. The children are sent to the 
school which is connected with the establishment and educated 
there at communal expense. The parents can see them when they 
wish and the education is designed both for physical and intellec­
tual development and for life in the community. The children are 
not tormented with religious and theological controversies, nor 
with Greek and Latin; instead they become the better acquainted 
with nature, their own bodies and their intellectual capacities, and 
in the fields they relax from the small amount of sitting that is 
expected of them; for the classes are held as often in the open air 
as in enclosed rooms, and work is part of their education. Their 
moral education is restricted to the application of the one 
principle: Do not do to others what you would not have them do 
to you, in other words, the practice of complete equality and 
brotherly love. 
As we said, the colony is under the management of the 
President and Directors of the Society of Socialists; these directors 
are chosen annually by the congress, to which each local Society 

=====第252页=====
Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies 227 
sends a member, and they have full, unrestricted powers within 
the Statutes of the Society, and are responsible to the congress. 
The community is thus governed by people who live outside it, 
and in these circumstances there cannot fail to be misunderstand­
ings and irritations; but even if the experiment at Harmony 
were to fail in consequence of this and of financial problems, 
which however is not in the slightest degree in prospect, this 
would only be one further argument for community of goods, as 
these two difficulties have their cause only in the fact that the 
community has not yet been fully realised. But despite all this 
the existence of the colony is assured, and even if it cannot pro­
gress and reach completion very rapidly, at least the opponents 
of the community will not enjoy the triumph of seeing it 
collapse. 
We see then that community of goods is by no means an 
impossibility but that on the contrary all these experiments have 
been entirely successful. We also see that the people who are living 
communally live better with less work, have more leisure for the 
development of their minds, and that they are better, more moral 
people than their neighbours who have retained private property. 
And all this has already been acknowledged by the Americans, 
British, French and Belgians and by a large number of Germans. 
In every country there are a number of people who are busy 
spreading the ideal and have already taken up the communal 
cause. 
If this question is important for everyone, it is most particularly 
so for the poor workers who own nothing, who tomorrow 
consume the wage they earn today and may at any time become 
destitute through unforeseen and unavoidable contingencies. To 
them it offers the prospect of an independent, secure existence 
without anxiety, of complete equality of rights with those who 
can now through their wealth turn the worker into their slave. 
These workers are the ones to whom the question matters most. 
In other countries the workers form the core of the party 
which is demanding community of goods, and it is the duty of 
the German workers also to take the question seriously to their 
hearts. 
If the workers are united among themselves, hold together and 
pursue one purpose, they are infinitely stronger than the rich. And 
if, moreover, they have set their sights upon such a rational purpose, 
and one which desires the best for all mankind, as community of 
goods, it is self-evident that the better and more intelligent among 
the rich will declare themselves in agreement with the workers and 

=====第253页=====
228 Frederick Engels 
support them. And there are already many prosperous and 
educated people in all parts of Germany who have openly 
declared for community of goods and defend the people's claims 
to the good things of this earth which have been appropriated by 
the wealthy class. 
Written in mid-October 1844 Printed according to the journal 
First published in Deutsches Bürgerbuch Published in English for the first 
für 1845, Darmstadt 1845 time 

=====第254页=====
Frederick Engels 
RAPID PROGRESS OF COMMUNISM IN GERMANY 
1 
[The New Moral World No. 25, December 13, 1844] 
Hoping, as I do, that your countrymen will be glad to hear 
something on the progress of our common cause on this side of 
the channel, I send you a few lines for your paper.3 At the same 
time,  I rejoice in being able to show that the German people, 
though, as usual, rather late in mooting the question of Social 
Reform, are now exerting themselves to make up for lost time. 
Indeed, the rapidity with which Socialism has progressed in this 
country is quite miraculous. Two years ago, there were but two 
solitary individuals who cared at all about Social questions; a year 
ago, the first Socialist publication was printed.b  It is true, there 
were some hundreds of German Communists in foreign countries; 
but being working men, they had little influence, and could not 
get their publications circulated among the "upper classes". 
Besides, the obstacles in the way of Socialism were enormous; the 
censorship of the press, no right of public meeting, no right of 
association, and despotic laws and secret courts of law, with paid 
judges to punish every one who in any way dared to set the 
people about thinking. And notwithstanding all this, what is the 
state of things in Germany now? Instead of the two poor devils 
vho wrote about Socialism to a public no ways acquainted with, or 
interested in the question, we have dozens of clever writers 
preaching the new gospel to thousands who are anxious to hear 
e>erything connected with the subject; we have several papers as 
radically Socialist as the censorship will allow, principally the 
Trler'sche Zeitung (Gazette of Trier), and the Sprecher (Speaker) of 
a The New Moral World.—Ed. 
Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher. —Ed. 
9-762 

=====第255页=====
230 Frederick Engels 
Wesel; we have a paper published under the free press of Paris, 3 
and there is no periodical, save those under the immediate 
influence of the governments, but comments every day, and in 
very creditable terms, upon Socialism and the Socialists. Our very 
opponents want the moral courage to speak their full minds 
against us. Even the governments are obliged to favour all legal 
movements in the direction towards Socialism. Societies are form­
ing everywhere for ameliorating the condition of the working 
people, as well as for giving them the means to cultivate their 
minds, and some of the highest officers of the Prussian Govern­
ment have taken an active part in those associations. In short, 
Socialism is the question of the day in Germany, and in the space 
of a year, a strong Socialist party has grown up, which already 
now commands the respect of all political parties, and is principal­
ly courted by the liberals of this country. Up to the present time 
our stronghold is the middle class, a fact which will perhaps 
astonish the English reader, if he do not know that this class in 
Germany is far more disinterested, impartial, and intelligent, than 
in England, and for the very simple reason, because it is poorer. 
We, however, hope to be in a short time supported by the working 
classes, who always, and everywhere, must form the strength and 
body of the Socialist party, and who have been aroused from their 
lethargy by misery, oppression, and want of employment, as,well 
as by the manufacturing riots in Silesia and Bohemia.79  Let me on 
this occasion mention a painting by one of the best German 
painters, Hübner, which has made a more effectual Socialist 
agitation than a hundred pamphlets might have done. It repre­
sents some Silesian weavers bringing linen cloth to the manufac­
turer, and contrasts very strikingly cold-hearted wealth on one 
side,  and despairing poverty on the other. The well-fed manufac­
turer is represented with a face as red and unfeeling as brass, 
rejecting a piece of cloth which belongs to a woman; the woman, 
seeing no chance of selling the cloth, is sinking down and fainting, 
surrounded by her two little children, and hardly kept up by ar 
old man; a clerk is looking over a piece, the owners of which a e 
with painful anxiety waiting for the result; a young man shows to 
his desponding mother the scanty wages he has received for his 
labour; an old man, a girl, and a boy, are sitting on a stone bench, 
and waiting for their turn; and two men, each with a piece of 
rejected cloth on his back, are just leaving the room, one of whom 
is clenching his fist in rage, whilst the other, putting his hand on 
a Vorwärts.' —Ed. 

=====第256页=====
Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany 231 
his neighbour's arm, points up towards heaven, as if saying: be 
quiet, there is a judge to punish him. This whole scene is going on 
in a cold and unhomely-looking lobby, with a stone floor: only the 
manufacturer stands upon a piece of carpeting; whilst on the 
other side of the painting, behind a bar, a view is opened into a 
luxuriously furnished counting-house, with splendid curtains and 
looking-glasses, where some clerks are writing, undisturbed by 
what is passing behind them, and where the manufacturer's son, a 
young, dandy-like gentleman, is leaning over the bar, with a 
horsewhip in his hand, smoking a cigar, and coolly looking at the 
distressed weavers. The painting has been exhibited in several 
towns of Germany, and, of course, prepared a good many minds 
for Social ideas. At the same time, we have had the triumph of 
seeing the first historical painter of this country, Charles Lessing, 
become a convert to Socialism. In fact, Socialism occupies at this 
moment already a ten times prouder position in Germany than it 
does in England. This very morning, I read an article in a liberal 
paper, the Cologne Journal,3 the author of which had for some 
reasons been attacked by the Socialists, and in which article he 
gives his defence80 ; and to what amounts it? He professes himself 
a Socialist, with the only difference that he wants political reforms 
to begin with, whilst we want to get all at once. And this Cologne 
Journal is the second newspaper of Germany in influence and 
circulation. It is curious, but, at least in the north of Germany, you 
cannot go on board a steamer, or into a railway-carriage, or 
mail-coach, without meeting somebody who has imbibed at least 
some Social idea, and who agrees with you, that something must 
be done to reorganise society. I am just returning from a trip to 
some neighbouring towns, and there was not a single place where 
I did not find at least half-a-dozën or a dozen of out-and-out 
Socialists. Among my own family — and it is a very pious and loyal 
one—I count six or more, each of which has been converted 
without being influenced by the remainder. We have partisans 
among all sorts of men — commercial men, manufacturers, 
lawyers, officers of the government and of the army, physicians, 
editors of newspapers, farmers, etc., a great many of our publica­
tions are in the press, though hardly three or four have as yet 
appeared; and if we make as much progress during the next four 
or five years as we have done in the past twelve months, we shall 
be able to erect forthwith a Community. You see, we German 
theorists are getting practical men of business. In fact, one of our 
a Kölnische Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第257页=====
232 Frederick Engels 
number has been invited to draw up a plan of organisation and 
regulations for a practical Community, with reference to the plans 
of Owen, Fourier, etc., and profiting of the experience gained by 
the American Communities and your own experiment at Har­
mony,3  which I hope goes on prosperously. This plan will be 
discussed by the various localities and printed with the amend­
ments. The most active literary characters among the German 
Socialists are: — Dr. Charles Marx, at Paris; Dr. M. Hess, at 
present at Cologne; Dr. Ch. Grün, at Paris; Frederick Engels, at 
Barmen (Rhénan Prussia); Dr. O. Lüning, Rheda, Westphalia; Dr. 
H. Püttmann, Cologne; and several others. Besides those, Henry 
Heine, the most eminent of all living German poets, has joined 
our ranks, and published a volume of political poetry, which 
contains also some pieces preaching Socialism. He is the author of 
the celebrated Song of the Silesian Weavers, of which I give you a 
prosaic translation, but which, I am afraid, will be considered 
blasphemy in England. At any rate, I will give it you, and only 
remark, that it refers to the battle-cry of the Prussians in 
1813:—"With God for King and fatherland!" which has been ever 
since a favourite saying of the loyal party. But for the song, here it 
is81: — 
Without a tear in their grim eyes, 
They sit at the loom, the rage of despair in their faces; 
"We have suffered and hunger'd long enough; 
Old Germany, we are weaving a shroud for thee 
And weaving it with a triple curse. 
"We are weaving, weaving! 
"The first curse to the God, the blind and deaf god 
Upon whom we relied, as children on their father; 
In whom we hoped and trusted withal, 
He has mocked us, he has cheated us nevertheless. 
"We are weaving, weaving! 
"The second curse for the King of the rich, 
Whom our distress could not soften nor touch; 
The King, who extorts the last penny from us, 
And sends his soldiers, to shoot us like dogs. 
"We are weaving, weaving! 
"A curse to the false fatherland, 
That has nothing for us but distress and shame, 
Where we suffered hunger and misery — 
We are weaving thy shroud, Old Germany! 
"We are weaving, weaving!" 
a See pp. 223-27 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第258页=====
Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany 233 
With this song, which in its German original is one of the most 
powerful poems I know of, I take leave from you for this time, 
hoping soon to be able to report on our further progress and 
social literature. 
Yours sincerely, 
An old friend of yours in Germany 

=====第259页=====
[The New Moral World No. 37, March 8, 1845] 
Barmen, Feb. 2nd, 184582 
Since I last addressed you, the cause of Communism has been 
making the same rapid progress as during the latter part of the 
year 1844. A short time ago I visited several towns on the Rhine, 
and everywhere I found that our ideas had gained, and were daily 
gaining more vantage ground than when I last left those places. 
Everywhere I found fresh proselytes, displaying as much energy in 
discussing and spreading the idea of Communism as could 
possibly be desired. A great many public meetings have been held 
in all the towns of Prussia, for the purpose of forming associations 
to counteract the growing pauperism, ignorance and crime among 
the great mass of the population.83 These meetings, at first 
supported, but when becoming too independent, checked by the 
Government, have, nevertheless, forced the Social question upon 
the public attention, and have done a great deal towards the 
dissemination of our principles. The meeting at Cologne was 
struck so much by the speeches of the leading Communists, that a 
committee for drawing up the rules of the association was elected, 
the majority of which consisted of thorough Communists. The 
abstract of rules was, of course, founded upon Communist 
principles; organisation of labour, protection of labour against the 
power of capital, &c, and those rules were adopted almost 
unanimously by the meeting. Of course the sanction of Govern­
ment, which is necessary in this country for all associations, has 
been refused; but since those meetings have been held, the 
question of communities has been discussed everywhere through-

=====第260页=====
Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany 235 
out Cologne. At Elberfeld, it was pronounced as the fundamental 
principle of the association, that all men had an equal right to 
education, and ought to participate in the fruits of  science.  The rules of 
the association, however, have not yet been confirmed by the 
Government, and in all probability they will share in the lot of the 
Cologne rules, as the parsons got up an association of their own as 
soon as their plan, to make the Society a branch of the town 
mission, had been rejected by the meeting. The liberal association 
will be prohibited, and the parsons' association will be supported 
by Government. This, however, is of the little importance as the 
question having been mooted once, is now generally discussed 
throughout the town. Other associations have been formed at 
Munster, Cleve, Düsseldorf, etc., and it remains to be seen what 
the results will be. As to Communist literature, a collection of 
papers relating to this subject has been published by H. Püttmann, 
of Cologne, containing among the rest, an account of the Ameri­
can communities, as well as of your own Hampshire Establish­
ment, which has done very much towards annihilating the  prej­
udice of the impracticability of our ideas. 84 Mr. Püttmann, at the 
same time, has issued the prospectus of a quarterly review, 85 the 
first number of which he intends issuing in May next, and which 
will be exclusively dedicated to ttie promulgation of our ideas. 
Another monthly periodical86  will be commenced by Messrs. Hess 
of Cologne, and Engels of Barmen, the first number to be 
published on the first of April next; this periodical will contain 
facts only, showing the state of civilised society, and preaching the 
necessity of a radical reform by the eloquence of facts. A new 
work by Dr. Marx, containing a review of the principles of Political 
Economy, and politics in general, will be published shortly. Dr. 
Marx himself has been forced by the French Conservative Govern­
ment, to quit his abode at Paris. 87 He intends to go to Belgium, 
and if the vengeance of the Prussian Government (which has 
induced the French Ministers to expel Marx) follows him even 
there, he must go to England. But the most important fact which 
has come to my knowledge since my last, is, that Dr. Feuerbach, 
the most eminent philosophical genius in Germany at the present 
time,  has declared himself a Communist. A friend of ours lately 
visited him in his retired country seat, in a remote corner of 
Bavaria, and to him he declared his full conviction that Commu­
nism was only a necessary consequence of the principles he had 
proclaimed, and that Communism was, in fact, only the practice of 
what he had proclaimed long before theoretically. Feuerbach said, 
he had never been delighted so much with any other book, as with 

=====第261页=====
236 Frederick Engels 
the first part of Weitling's Guarantees.3  I never dedicated, he said, a 
book to anybody, but I feel much inclined to dedicate to Weitling 
my next work. Thus the union between the German philosophers, 
of whom Feuerbach is the most eminent representative, and the 
German working men represented by Weitling, an union which, a 
year ago, had been predicted by Dr. Marx, b is all but accom­
plished. With the philosophers to think, and the working men to 
fight for us, will any earthly power be strong enough to resist our 
progress? 
An old friend of yours in Germany 
W. Weitling, Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit. — Ed. 
K. Marx, Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction 
(see present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 175-87).— Ed. 

=====第262页=====
Ill 
[The New Moral World No. 46, May 10, 1845] 
Dear sir, 
Having been unable, for a time, from certain causes, to write 
you on the state of affairs in Germany, I now continue my reports, 
hoping that they will interest your readers, and follow each other 
more uninterruptedly than heretofore. I am glad of being enabled 
to tell you that we are making the same rapid and steady progress 
which we made up to my last report. Since I wrote to you last, the 
Prussian Government have found it unsafe to continue their 
support to the "Associations for the Benefit of the Working 
Classes". They have found that everywhere these associations 
became infected with something like Communism, and therefore 
they have done everything in their power to suppress, or at least 
obstruct, the progress of these associations. On the other hand, the 
majorities of the members of those societies, being composed of 
middle-class men, were totally at a loss with regard to the steps 
they might take to benefit the working people. All their meas­
ures—savings-banks, premiums and prizes for the best workers, 
and such like,— were instantly proved by the Communists to be 
good for nothing, and held up to public laughter. Thus the 
intention of the middle classes, to dupe the working classes, by 
hypocrisy and sham philanthropy, has been totally frustrated; 
while to us it gave an opportunity which is rather rare in a country 
of patriarchal police government: thus the trouble of the matter 
has been with the Government and the moneyed men, while we 
have had all the profit. 
But not only these meetings were taken profit of for Communist 
agitation: at Elberfeld, the centre of the manufacturing district of 

=====第263页=====
238 Frederick Engels 
Rhénan Prussia, regular Communist meetings were held. The 
Communists of this town were invited by some of the most 
respectable citizens to discuss their principles with them. The first 
of these meetings took place in February, and was more of a 
private character. About forty or fifty individuals assisted, includ­
ing the attorney-general of the district, and other members of the 
courts of law, as well as representatives of almost all the leading 
commercial and manufacturing firms. Dr. Hess, whose name I 
have had more than once an opportunity of mentioning in your 
columns, opened the proceedings by proposing Mr. Koettgen, a 
Communist, as chairman, to which no opposition was made. 
Dr. Hess then read a lecture on the present state of society, and 
the necessity of abandoning the old system of competition, which 
he called a system of downright robbery. The lecture was received 
with much applause (the majority of the audience being Commu­
nists);  after which Mr. Frederick Engels (who some time ago had 
some papers on Continental Communism 3 printed in your col­
umns) spoke at some length on the practicability and the advan­
tages of the Community system.b He also gave some particulars of 
the American colonies and your own establishment at Harmony in 
proof of his assertions. After which a very animated discussion 
took place, in which the Communist side was advocated by the 
foregoing speakers and several others; while the opposition was 
maintained by the attorney-general, by Dr. Benedix, a literary 
character, and some others. The proceedings, which commenced 
about nine o'clock in the evening, were continued until one in the 
morning. 
The second meeting took place a week after, in the large room 
of the first hotel in the town. The room was filled with the 
"respectables" of the place. Mr. Koettgen, chairman of the former 
meeting, read some remarks on the future state and prospects of 
society, as imagined by the Communists, after which Mr. Engels 
delivered a speech 0 in which he proved (as may be concluded 
from the fact, that not a word was offered in reply), that the 
present state of Germany was such as could not but produce in a 
very short time a social revolution; that this imminent revolution 
was not to be averted by any possible measures for promoting 
commerce and manufacturing industry; and that the only means 
F. Engels, Progress of Social Reform on the Continent (see present edition, Vol. 3, 
pp. 392-408).— Ed. 
See pp. 243-55 of this volume.— Ed. 
See pp. 256-64 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第264页=====
Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany 239 
to prevent such a revolution — a revolution more terrible than any 
of the mere subversions of past history — was the introduction of, 
and the preparation for, the Community system. The discussion, 
in which some gentlemen of the profession of the bar, who had 
come from Cologne and Düsseldorf for the purpose, took part on 
the Communist side, was again very animated, and prolonged till 
after midnight. Some Communist poems, by Dr. Müller of 
Düsseldorf, who was present, were also read. 
A week afterwards a third meeting took place in which Dr. Hess 
again lectured, and besides, some particulars about the American 
communities were read from a printed paper.3 The discussion was 
repeated before the close of the meeting. 
Some days afterwards a rumour was spread through the town 
that the next meeting was to be dispersed by the police, and the 
speakers to be arrested. The mayor of Elberfeld, indeed, went to 
the hotel-keeper, and threatened to withdraw the licence, if any 
such meetings in future should be allowed to take place in his 
house. The Communists instantly communicated with the mayor 
about the matter, and received, the day before the next meeting, a 
circular directed to Messrs. Hess, Engels and Koettgen, by which 
the provincial Government, with a tremendous amount of quota­
tions from ancient and written laws, declared such meetings to be 
illegal, and threatened to put a stop to them by force, if they 
should not be abandoned. The meeting took place next Saturday, 13 
the mayor and the attorney-general (who after the first meeting 
had absented himself) were present, supported by a troop of 
armed police, who had been sent by railroad from Düsseldorf. Of 
course, under such circumstances, no public addresses were 
delivered: the meeting occupied themselves with beef-steaks and 
wine, and gave the police no handle for interference. 
These measures, however, could not but serve our cause: those 
who had not yet heard of the matter were now induced to ask for 
information about it from the importance ascribed to it by the 
Government; and a great many of those who had come to the 
discussion ignorant or scoffing at our proposals, went home with a 
greater respect for Communism. This respect was also partially 
produced by the respectable manner in which our party was 
represented; nearly every patrician and moneyed family of the 
town had one of its members or relatives present at the large table 
occupied by the Communists. In short the effect produced by 
these meetings upon the public mind of the whole manufacturing 
a See pp. 214-28 of this volume.—Ed. 
b March 1, 1845.— Ed. 

=====第265页=====
240 Frederick Engels 
district was truly wonderful; and in a few days afterwards those 
who had publicly advocated our cause were overrun by numbers 
of people who asked for books and papers from which they might 
get a view of the whole system. We understand that the whole 
proceedings will shortly be published. 
As to Communist literature, there has been exhibited a great 
activity in this branch of agitation. The public literally long for 
information: they devour every book published in this line. Dr. 
Püttmann has published a collection of essays, 3 containing an 
excellent paper by Dr. Hess, on the distress of modern society, 
and the means of redressing itb; a detailed description of the 
distressing state of the working people of Silesia, with a history of 
the riots of last spring; some other articles descriptive of the state 
of society in Germany; and, finally, an account of the American 
and Harmony communities (from Mr. Finch's letters and that of 
"One who has whistled at the Plough"c ), by F. Engels. The book, 
though prosecuted by the Prussian Government, met with a rapid 
sale in all quarters. A number of monthly periodicals have been 
established: the Westphalian Steamboat, d published at Bielefeld, by 
Liming, containing popular essays on Socialism and reports on the 
state of the working people; the People's Journal," at Cologne, with 
a more decided Socialist tendency; and the Gesellschaftsspiegel 
(Mirror of Society), at Elberfeld, by Dr. Hess, founded expressly 
for the publication of facts characteristic of the present state of 
society, and for the advocacy of the rights of the working classes. 
A quarterly review, the Rheinische Jahrbücher (Rhenish Annals), by 
Dr. Püttmann, has also been established; the first number is now 
in the press and will shortly be published. 
On the other hand, a war has been declared against those of the 
German philosophers, who refuse to draw from their mere 
theories practical inferences, and who contend that man has 
nothing to do but to speculate upon metaphysical questions. 
Messrs. Marx and Engels have published a detailed refutation of 
the principles advocated by B. Bauer f; and Messrs. Hess and 
Bürgers are engaged in refuting the theory of M. Stirner: — Bauer 
a Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1845.—Ed. 
M. Hess, Über die Noth in unserer Gesellschaft und deren Abhülfe. — Ed. 
See pp. 214-28 of this volume. "One who has whistled at the Plough" is Alexan­
der Somerville's pseudonym.— Ed. 
Das Westphälische Dampfboot. —Ed. 
e Allgemeines Volksblatt. — Ed. 
See pp. 7-211 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第266页=====
Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany 241 
and Stirner being the representatives of the ultimate consequences 
of abstract German philosophy, and therefore the only important 
philosophical opponents of Socialism — or rather Communism, as 
in this country the word Socialism means nothing but the different 
vague, undefined, and undefinable imaginations of those who see 
that something must be done, and who yet cannot make up their 
minds to go the whole length of the Community system. 
In the press are also — Dr. Marx's Review of Politics and Political 
Economy; Mr. F. Engels' Condition of the Working Classes of Great-
Britain 3; Anecdota, or a Collection of Papers on Communism88; and in 
a few days will be commenced a translation of the best French and 
English works on the subject of Social Reform.89 
In consequence of the miserable political state of Germany, and 
the arbitrary proceedings of her patriarchal governments, there is 
hardly a chance of any but a literary connection between the 
Communists of the different localities. The periodicals, principally 
the Rhenish Annals, offer a centre for those who, by the press, 
advocate Communism. Some connection is kept up by travellers, 
but this is all. Associations are illegal, and even correspondence is 
unsafe, as the "secret offices" 90  of late have displayed an unusual 
activity. Thus it is only by the newspapers that we have received 
the news of the existence of two Communist associations in Posen 
and the Silesian mountains. It is reported that at Posen, the capital 
of Prussian Poland, a number of young men had formed them­
selves into a secret society, founded upon Communist principles, 
and with the intention of taking possession of the town; that the 
plot was discovered, and its execution prevented: this is all we 
know about the matter. This much, however, is certain, that a 
great many young men of aristocratic and wealthy Polish families, 
have been arrested; that since (more than two months) all watch 
posts are doubled and provided with ball cartridge; and that two 
youths (of 12 and 19 years respectively), the. brothers Rymar-
kiewicz, have absconded, and not yet been got hold of by the 
authorities. A great number of the prisoners are youths of from 
12 to 20 years. The other so-called conspiracy, in the Silesian 
mountains, is said to have been very extensive, and also for a 
Communist purpose: they are reported to have intended to take 
the fortress of Schweidnitz, to occupy the whole range of moun­
tains,  and to appeal from thence to the suffering workpeople of all 
Germany. How far this may be true, nobody is able to judge; but 
in this unfortunate district, also, arrests have taken place on the 
See pp. 295-583 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第267页=====
242 Frederick Engels 
depositions of a police spy; and a wealthy manufacturer, Mr. 
Schlöffel, has been transported to Berlin, where he is now under 
trial, as the supposed head of the conspiracy. 
The associations of German Communists of the working classes 
in Switzerland, France and England continue to be very active; 
though in France, and some parts of Switzerland, they have much 
to suffer from the police. The papers announce that about sixty 
members of the Communist association of Geneva have been 
expelled from the town and canton. A. Becker, one of the 
cleverest of the Swiss Communists, has published a lecture deliv­
ered at Lausanne, entitled, "What do the Communists Want?"3 
which belongs to the best and most spirited things of the sort we 
know of. I dare say it would merit an English translation, and I 
should be glad if any of your readers were acquainted enough 
with the German language to undertake it. It is, of course, only a 
small pamphlet. 
I expect to continue my reports from time to time, and remain, 
etc. 
An old friend of yours in Germany 
Written between November 9, 1844, and Printed according to the news-
April 5, 1845 paper 
Published in The New Moral World 
Nos.  25, 37 and 46, December 13, 1844, 
March 8 and May 10, 1845 
A. Becker, "Was wollen die Kommunisten?" —Ed. 

=====第268页=====
Frederick Engels 
SPEECHES IN ELBERFELD 9 
FEBRUARY 8, 1845 
Gentlemen! 
As you have just heard and as, moreover, I may assume it to be 
generally known, we live in a world of free competition. Let us 
then look a little closer at this free competition and at the world 
order to which it has given rise. In our present-day society, each 
man works on his own, each strives for his own enrichment and is 
not in the least concerned with what the rest are doing; rational 
organisation, or distribution of jobs, is out of the question; on the 
contrary, each seeks to get the better of the other, seeks to exploit 
any favourable opportunity for his own private advantage and has 
neither time nor inclination to think about the fact that, at bottom, 
his own interests coincide with those of all other people. The 
individual capitalist is involved in struggle with all the other 
capitalists; the individual worker with all the other workers; all 
capitalists fight against the workers just as the mass of workers in 
their turn have, of necessity, to fight against the mass of capitalists. 
In this war of all against all, in this general confusion and mutual 
exploitation, the essence of present-day bourgeois society is to be 
found. But, gentlemen, such an unregulated economic system 
must, in the long run, lead to the most disastrous results for 
society; the disorder which lies at its basis, the disregard for the 
real, general well-being, must sooner or later make itself felt in the 
most striking fashion. The ruin of the small middle class, that 
estate which constituted the main foundation of states during the 
last century, is the first result of this struggle. Daily we see how 
this class in society is crushed by the power of capital, how, for 
example, the individual master tailors and cabinet-makers lose 
their best customers to shops selling ready-made clothes and 

=====第269页=====
244 Frederick Engels 
furniture and from being small capitalists, members of the 
propertied class, are transformed into dependent proletarians work­
ing for others, into members of the  propertyless  class. The ruin of 
the middle class is a much deplored consequence of our much 
lauded freedom of occupation, it is a necessary result of the 
advantages which the big capitalist has over his less affluent 
competitors; it is the most vigorous living expression of capital's 
tendency to become concentrated in a few hands. This tendency is 
likewise widely recognised; there is general lamentation about the 
fact that property is being accumulated daily in fewer hands and 
that on the contrary the great majority of the nation is becoming 
more and more impoverished. Thus there arises the glaring 
contradiction between a few rich people on the one hand, and 
many poor on the other; a contradiction which has already risen 
to a menacing point in England and France and is daily growing 
sharper in our country too. And as long as the present basis of 
society is retained, so long will it be impossible to halt the 
progressing enrichment of a few individuals and the impoverish­
ment of the great majority: the contradiction will develop more 
and more sharply until finally necessity compels society to reor­
ganise itself on more rational principles. 
But these, gentlemen, are far from being all the consequences of 
free competition. Since each man produces and consumes on his 
own without concerning himself much about what others are 
producing and consuming, a crying disproportion between pro­
duction and consumption must, of necessity, quickly develop. 
Since present-day society entrusts the distribution of the goods 
produced to merchants, speculators and shopkeepers, each one of 
whom has only his own advantage in mind, similarly in the 
distribution — even apart from the fact that it is impossible for the 
propertyless man to secure for himself a sufficient share—-similar­
ly in the distribution of the products the same disproportion will 
arise.  How is the manufacturer to discover how much of his 
products are needed in this or that market, and even if he could 
discover this, how could he get to know how much his competitors 
are sending to each of these markets? How can he — who in most 
cases does not even know where the goods he is just producing 
will go—possibly know how much his foreign competitors will 
send to each of the markets in question? He knows nothing about 
all this; like his competitors, he manufactures at haphazard and 
consoles himself with the thought that the others must do likewise. 
He has no other guide than the constantly fluctuating level of 
prices which, in the case of distant markets, is quite different at 

=====第270页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 245 
the moment when he dispatches his goods from what it was when 
the letter informing him about it was written, and which again is 
different at the time the goods arrive from what it was when they 
were despatched. Where you have such irregularity of production 
it is also quite natural that at every moment there are interrup­
tions to trade, which naturally must be all the more serious the 
more advanced the industry and trade of a given country is. In 
this regard England — the country with the most developed 
industry — provides us with the most striking examples. Due to the 
expansion of trade, to the many speculators and commission 
agents who have forced themselves in between the producing 
manufacturer and the actual consumers, it is becoming much 
more difficult for the English than for the German manufacturer 
to obtain even the remotest idea of the relationship between the 
stocks available and production on the one hand and consumption 
on the other; in addition he has to supply nearly all the markets in 
the world, but in hardly a single case does he know where his 
goods go and thus, with the gigantic productive power of British 
industry, it very frequently happens that all the markets are 
suddenly glutted. Trade comes to a standstill, factories work 
half-time or stop altogether; a series of bankruptcies begins, stocks 
must be sold off at ridiculously low prices and a great part of the 
capital, accumulated with great effort, is lost again as a result of 
this kind of trade crisis. We have had a whole series of such trade 
crises in England since the beginning of this century, and one 
every five or six years in the last twenty years.92 The last two, 
gentlemen, those of 1837 and 1842, will still be vividly remem­
bered by most of you. And if our industry were as big, our sales as 
extensive as the industry and trade of England, then we would 
experience the same results, whereas at present the effect of 
competition in industry and in trade is making itself felt here in a 
general, continuous depression in all branches of business, in a 
miserable half-way position between a definite boom and complete 
decline, in a situation of mild stagnation, i.e., of stability. 
Gentlemen, what is the real reason of this deplorable state of 
affairs? What gives rise to the ruin of the middle class, to the 
glaring contradiction between rich and poor, to stagnation in trade 
and the waste of capital resulting therefrom? Nothing else than 
the divergence of interests. All of us work each for his own 
advantage, unconcerned about the welfare of others and, after all, 
it is an obvious, self-evident truth that the interest, the well-being, 
the happiness of every individual is inseparably bound up with 
that of his fellow-men. We must all acknowledge that we cannot 

=====第271页=====
246 Frederick Engels 
do without our fellow-men, that our interests, if nothing else, bind 
us all to one another, and yet by our actions we fly in the face of 
this truth: and yet we arrange our society as if our interests were 
not identical but completely and utterly opposed. We have seen 
what the results of this fundamental mistake were; if we want to 
eliminate these unpleasant consequences then we must correct this 
fundamental mistake, and that is precisely the aim of communism. 
In communist society, where the interests of individuals are not 
opposed to one another but, on the contrary, are united, competi­
tion is eliminated. As is self-evident, there can no longer be any 
question of the ruin of particular classes, nor of the very existence 
of classes such as the rich and the poor nowadays. As soon as 
private gain, the aim of the individual to enrich himself on his 
own, disappears from the production and distribution of the 
goods necessary to life, trade crises will also disappear of them­
selves. In communist society it will be easy to be informed about 
both production and consumption. Since we know how much, on 
the average, a person needs, it is easy to calculate how much is 
needed by a given number of individuals, and since production is 
no longer in the hands of private producers but in those of the 
community and its administrative bodies, it is a trifling matter to 
regulate production according to needs. 
Thus we see how the main evils of the present social situation 
disappear under communist organisation. If, however, we go into 
a little more detail, we will find that the advantages of such a 
social organisation are not limited to this but also include the 
elimination of a host of other defects. I shall only touch today on a 
few of the economic drawbacks. From the economic point of view 
the present arrangement of society is surely the most irrational 
and unpractical we can possibly conceive. The opposition of 
interests results in a great amount of labour power being utilised 
in a way from which society gains nothing, and in a substantial 
amount of capital being unnecessarily lost without reproducing 
itself.  We already see this in the commercial crises; we see how 
masses of goods, all of which men have produced with great 
effort, are thrown away at prices which cause loss to the sellers; we 
see how masses of capital, accumulated with great effort, disap­
pear before the very eyes of their owners as a result of bankrupt­
cies. Let us, however, discuss present-day trade in a little more 
detail. Consider through how many hands every product must go 
before it reaches the actual consumer. Consider, gentlemen, how 
many speculating, swindling superfluous middlemen have now 
forced themselves in between the producer and the consumer! Let 

=====第272页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 247 
us take, for example, a bale of cotton produced in North America. 
The bale passes from the hands of the planter into those of the 
agent on some station or other on the Mississippi and travels down 
the river to New Orleans. Here it is sold — for a second time, for 
the agent has already bought it from the planter—sold, it might 
well be, to the speculator, who sells it once again, to the exporter. 
The bale now travels to Liverpool where, once again, a greedy 
speculator stretches out his hands towards it and grabs it. This 
man then trades it to a commission agent who, let us assume, is a 
buyer for a German house. So the bale travels to Rotterdam, up 
the Rhine, through another dozen hands of forwarding agents, 
being unloaded and loaded a dozen times, and only then does it 
arrive in the hands, not of the consumer, but of the manufacturer, 
who first makes it into an article of consumption, and who 
perhaps sells his yarn to a weaver, who disposes of what he has 
woven to the textile printer, who then does business with the 
wholesaler, who then deals with the retailer, who finally sells the 
commodity to the consumer. And all these millions of inter­
mediary swindlers, speculators, agents, exporters, commission 
agents, forwarding agents, wholesalers and retailers, who actually 
contribute nothing to the commodity itself  — they all want to live 
and make a profit  — and they do make it too, on the average, 
otherwise they could not subsist. Gentlemen, is there no simpler, 
cheaper way of bringing a bale of cotton from America to 
Germany and of getting the product manufactured from it into 
the hands of the real consumer than this complicated business of 
ten times selling and a hundred times loading, unloading and 
transporting it from one warehouse to another? Is this not a 
striking example of the manifold waste of labour power brought 
about by the divergence of interests? Such a complicated way of 
transport is out of the question in a rationally organised society. 
To keep to our example, just as one can easily know how much 
cotton or manufactured cotton goods an individual colony needs, 
it will be equally easy for the central authority to determine how 
much all the villages and townships in the country need. Once 
such statistics have been worked out  — which can easily be done in 
a year or two — average annual consumption will only change in 
proportion to the increasing population; it is therefore easy at the 
appropriate time to determine in advance what amount of each 
particular article the people will need — the entire great amount 
will be ordered direct from the source of supply; it will then be 
possible to procure it directly, without middlemen, without more 
delay and unloading than is really required by the nature of the 

=====第273页=====
248 Frederick Engels 
journey, that is, with a great saving of labour power; it will not be 
necessary to pay the speculators, the dealers large and small, their 
rake-off.  But this is still not all  — in this way these middlemen are 
not only made harmless to society, they are, in fact, made useful to 
it. Whereas they now perform to the disadvantage of everyone else 
a kind of work which is, at best, superfluous but which, neverthe­
less, provides them with a living, indeed, in many cases even with 
great riches, whereas they are thus at present directly prejudicial 
to the general good, they will then become free to engage in 
useful labour and to take up an occupation in which they can 
prove themselves as actual members, not merely apparent, sham 
members, of human society, and as participants in its activity as a 
whole. 
Present-day society, which breeds hostility between the individu­
al man and everyone else, thus produces a social war of all against 
all which inevitably in individual cases, notably among uneducated 
people, assumes a brutal, barbarously violent form — that of crime. 
In order to protect itself against crime, against direct acts of 
violence, society requires an extensive, complicated system of 
administrative and judicial bodies which requires an immense 
labour force. In communist society this would likewise be vastly 
simplified, and precisely because — strange though it may 
sound — precisely because the administrative body in this society 
would have to manage not merely individual aspects of social life, 
but the whole of social life, in all its various activities, in all its 
aspects. We eliminate the contradiction between the individual 
man and all others, we counterpose social peace to social war, we 
put the axe to the root of crime — and thereby render the greatest, 
by far the greatest, part of the present activity of the administra­
tive and judicial bodies superfluous. Even now crimes of passion 
are becoming fewer and fewer in comparison with calculated 
crimes, crimes of interest — crimes against persons are declining, 
crimes against property are on the increase. Advancing civilisation 
moderates violent outbreaks of passion even in our present-day 
society, which is on a war footing; how much more will this be the 
case in communist, peaceful society! Crimes against property cease 
of their own accord where everyone receives what he needs to 
satisfy his natural and his spiritual urges, where social gradations 
and distinctions cease to exist. Justice concerned with criminal 
cases ceases of  itself,  that dealing with civil cases, which are almost 
all rooted in the property relations or at least in such relations as 
arise from the situation of social war, likewise disappears; conflicts 
can then be only rare exceptions, whereas they are now the 

=====第274页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 249 
natural result of general hostility, and will be easily settled by 
arbitrators. The activities of the administrative bodies at present 
have likewise their source in the continual social war  — the police 
and the entire administration do nothing else but see to it that the 
war remains concealed and indirect and does not erupt into open 
violence, into crimes. But if it is infinitely easier to maintain peace 
than to keep war within certain limits, so it is vastly more easy to 
administer a communist community rather than a competitive one. 
And if civilisation has already taught men to seek their interest in 
the maintenance of public order, public security, and the public 
interest, and therefore to make the police, administration and 
justice as superfluous as possible, how much more will this be the 
case in a society in which community of interests has become the 
basic principle, and in which the public interest is no longer 
distinct from that of each individual! What already exists now, in 
spite of the social organisation, how much more will it exist when it 
is no longer hindered, but supported by the social institutions! We 
may thus also in this regard count on a considerable increase in 
the labour force through that part of the labour force of which 
society is deprived by the present social condition. 
One of the most expensive institutions which present-day 
society cannot dispense with are the standing armies, by which the 
nation is deprived of the most vigorous and useful section of the 
population and compelled to feed it since it thereby becomes 
unproductive. We know from our own budget what the standing 
army costs —twenty-four million a year and the withdrawal from 
production of twice one hundred thousand of the most muscular 
arms.  In communist society it would not occur to anyone to have a 
standing army. What for, anyhow? To maintain peace in the 
country? As we saw above, it will not occur to anyone to disturb 
internal peace. Fear of revolutions is, of course, the consequence 
only of the opposition of interests; where the interests of all 
coincide, such fears are out of the question.— For aggressive wars? 
But how could a communist society conceive the idea of undertak­
ing an aggressive war? — this society which is perfectly well aware 
that in war it will only lose men and capital while the most it could 
gain would be a couple of recalcitrant provinces, which would as a 
consequence be disruptive of social order.— For a war of defence? 
For that there is no need of a standing army, as it will be easy to 
train every fit member of society, in addition to his other 
occupations, in real, not barrack-square handling of arms to the 
degree necessary for the defence of the country. And, gentlemen, 
consider this, that in the event of a war, which anyway could only 

=====第275页=====
250 Frederick Engels 
be waged against anti-communist nations, the member of such a 
society has a real Fatherland, a real hearth and home to defend, so 
that he will fight with an enthusiasm, endurance and bravery 
before which the mechanically trained soldiers of a modern army 
must be scattered like  chaff.  Consider what wonders were worked 
by the enthusiasm of the revolutionary armies from 1792 to 1799, 
which only fought for an illusion, for the semblance of a Fatherland, 
and you will be bound to realise how powerful an army must be 
which fights, not for an illusion, but for a tangible reality. Thus 
these immense masses of labour power of which the civilised 
nations are now deprived by the armies, would be returned to 
labour in a communist society; they would not only produce as 
much as they consume, but would be able to supply to the public 
storehouses a great many more products than those necessary for 
their own sustenance. 
An even worse wastage of labour power is to be seen in our 
existing society in the way the rich exploit their social position. I 
will say nothing of all the useless and quite ridiculous luxury 
which arises only from the passion for display and occupies a great 
deal of labour power. But, gentlemen, just go into the house, the 
inmost sanctuary, of a rich man and tell me if it is not the most 
senseless waste of labour power when you have a number of 
people waiting on one single individual, spending their time in 
idleness or, at best, in work which results from the isolation of a 
single man inside his own four walls? This crowd of maids, cooks, 
lackeys, coachmen, domestic servants, gardeners and whatever 
they are called, what do they really do? For how few moments 
during the day they are occupied in making the lives of their 
masters really pleasant, in facilitating the free development and 
exercise of their human nature and inborn capacities — and how 
many hours during the day they are occupied in tasks which arise 
only from the bad arrangement of our social relations—standing 
at the back of the carriage, serving their employers' every whim, 
carrying lap-dogs, and other absurdities. In a rationally organised 
society, where everyone will be in a position to live without 
pandering to the whims of the rich and without lapsing into any 
such whims himself  — in such a society, the labour power now thus 
wasted on the provision of luxury can naturally be used to the 
advantage of all and to its own. 
A further waste of labour power occurs in our present society 
quite directly as a result of competition, for this creates a large 
number of destitute workers who would gladly work, but cannot get 
any work. Since society is not by any means arranged so as to be 

=====第276页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 251 
able to pay attention to the real utilisation of the labour force, 
since it is left to every individual to look for a source of gain, it is 
quite natural that when really or apparently useful work is being 
distributed, a number of workers are left without any. This is all 
the more the case as the competitive struggle compels everyone to 
strain his power to the utmost, to utilise all available advantages, 
to replace dearer labour by cheaper for which advancing 
civilisation provides more and more means or, in other words, 
everyone has to work at making others destitute, at displacing 
other people's labour by one means or another. Thus in every 
civilised society there are large numbers of unemployed people 
who would gladly work but cannot find work and their number 
is larger than is commonly believed. And so we find these people 
prostituting themselves in one way or another, begging, sweeping 
the streets, standing on corners, only barely keeping body 
and soul together by occasional small jobs, hawking and ped­
dling all manner of petty wares or, as we saw a couple of poor 
girls doing this evening, going from place to place with a guitar, 
playing and singing for money, compelled to put up with all kinds 
of shameless talk, every insulting suggestion in order to earn a 
couple of groschen. How many finally fall victims to real prostitu­
tion! Gentlemen, the number of these destitute people who have 
no other course open but to prostitute themselves in one way or 
another is very large — our Poor Relief authorities can tell you all 
about this — and don't forget that society nevertheless feeds these 
people in one way or another despite their uselessness. If, then, 
society has to bear the cost of their maintenance, it should also 
make it possible for these unemployed to earn their keep honour­
ably. But the present competitive society cannot do this. 
If you think about all this, gentlemen — and I could have given 
you many other examples of how our present society wastes its 
labour force — if you think about this, you will find that human 
society has an abundance of productive forces at its disposal which 
only await a rational organisation, regulated distribution, in order 
to go into operation to the greatest benefit for all. After this you 
will be able to judge how totally unfounded is the fear that, given 
a just distribution of social activity, individuals would have to bear 
such a load of labour as would make it impossible for them to 
engage in anything else. On the contrary, we can assume that 
given this kind of organisation, the present customary labour time 
of the individual will be reduced by half simply by making use of 
the labour which is either not used at all or used disadvanta­
geous^. 

=====第277页=====
252 Frederick Engels 
However, the benefits which communist organisation offers 
through the utilisation of wasted labour power are not yet the most 
significant. The greatest saving of labour power lies in the fusing of 
the individual powers into social collective power and in the kind of 
organisation which is based on this concentration of powers 
hitherto opposed to one another. Here I should like to subscribe 
to the proposals of Robert Owen, the English Socialist, since these 
are the most practical and most fully worked out. Owen proposes 
that instead of the present towns and villages with their separate 
individual houses standing in each other's way, we should con­
struct large palaces which, built in the form of a square some 1,650 
feet in length and breadth, would enclose a large garden and com­
fortably accommodate from two to three thousand people. It is 
obvious that such a building, while providing its occupants with 
the amenities of the best contemporary housing, is far cheaper 
and easier to erect than the generally worse individual dwellings 
required under the present system for the same number of 
people. The many rooms which now remain empty in almost every 
decent house, or are only used once or twice a year, disappear 
without any inconvenience; the saving in space for store-rooms, 
cellars, etc., is also very great.— But it is only when we go into 
domestic economy in detail that we will really grasp the advantages 
of community housing. What an amount of labour and material is 
squandered under the present system of separate housing—in 
heating for example! Every room needs to have a separate stove, 
every stove has to be specially heated, kept alight, supervised, the 
fuel for heating has to be brought to all the different places, the 
ashes removed; how much simpler and cheaper it would be to 
install, instead of the present separate heating, large-scale central 
heating with, for example, steam pipes and a single, central 
heating unit, as is already done in big public buildings, factories, 
churches, etc. Gaslighting, again, is expensive at present because 
even the thinner pipes have to be laid underground and owing to 
the large areas to be illuminated in our towns the pipes have to be 
disproportionately long, whereas under the proposed arrangement 
everything would be concentrated in an area of a 1,650 foot 
square and the number of gas burners would nevertheless be as 
great, so that the result would be at least as beneficial as in a 
moderately-sized town. And then the preparation of meals — what 
a waste of space, ingredients, labour, is involved in the present, 
separate households, where every family cooks its little bit of food 
on its own, has its own supply of crockery, employs its own cook, 
must fetch its own supplies separately from the market, from the 

=====第278页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 253 
garden, from the butcher and the baker! One can safely assume 
that under a communal system of preparing and serving meals, 
two-thirds of the labour force now engaged in this work will be 
saved, and the remaining third will nevertheless be able to 
perform it better and more attentively than is the case at present. 
And finally, the housework  itself!  Will not such a building be 
infinitely easier to keep clean and in good condition when, as 
is possible, this kind of work also is organised and regularly 
shared out, than the two to three hundred separate houses 
which would be the equivalent under the present housing 
system? 
These, gentlemen, are a few of the innumerable economic 
advantages which are bound to result from the communist 
organisation of human society. It is not possible for us in a couple 
of hours and in a few words to elucidate our principle and duly 
substantiate it from all points of view. Nor is this by any means 
our intention. All we can and want to do is to shed light on a few 
points and to induce those to whom the matter is still strange to 
study it. And we hope at least that we have made it clear this 
evening that communism is not contrary to human nature, reason, 
or the human heart, and that it is not a theory which, taking no 
account whatever of reality, is rooted in pure fantasy. 
People ask how this theory is to be translated into reality, what 
measures we propose to prepare its introduction. There are 
various ways to this end; the English will probably begin by setting 
up a number of colonies and leaving it to every individual whether 
to join or not; the French, on the other hand, will be likely to 
prepare and implement communism on a national basis. Not much 
can be said about how the Germans will start since the social 
movement in Germany is new. Meanwhile, among the many 
possible ways of preparing, I would like to mention only one 
which has recently been much discussed — the carrying through 
of three measures which are bound to result in practical com­
munism. 
The first would be the general education of all children without 
exception at the expense of the state — an education which is equal 
for all and continues until the individual is capable of emerging as 
an independent member of society. This measure would be only 
an act of justice to our destitute fellow creatures, for clearly, every 
man has the right to the full development of his abilities and 
society wrongs individuals twice over when it makes ignorance a 
necessary consequence of poverty. It is obvious that society gains 
more from educated than from ignorant, uncultured members, 

=====第279页=====
254 Frederick Engels 
and while, as may be well expected, an educated proletariat will 
not be disposed to remain in the oppressed condition in which our 
present proletariat finds  itself,  the calm and composure necessary 
for the peaceful transformation of society can also be expected 
only from an educated working class. But that the uneducated 
proletariat likewise has no wish to remain in its present condition 
is proved also for Germany—not to speak of other peoples—by the 
disorders in Silesia and Bohemia.93 
The second measure would be a complete reorganisation of the 
Poor Relief System, so that all destitute citizens would be housed in 
colonies where they would be employed in agriculture and 
industry and their work organised for the benefit of the whole 
colony. Poor Relief capital has, up to now, been lent out at interest, 
thus providing the rich with new means for exploiting the 
propertyless. Let this capital at last work for the benefit of the 
poor, let the whole yield of this capital, not simply its 3 per cent 
interest, be used for the poor, and thus give a splendid example of 
the association of capital and labour! In this way, the labour power 
of all destitute people would be utilised for the benefit of society 
and the destitute themselves transformed from demoralised, op­
pressed paupers into moral, independent, active people whose 
condition would very soon come to be regarded as enviable by 
isolated workers and would prepare a thoroughgoing reorganisa­
tion of society. 
Both these measures require money. In order to raise it and at 
the same time replace all the present, unjustly distributed taxes, 
the present reform plan proposes a general, progressive tax on 
capital, at a rate increasing with the size of the capital. In this way, 
the burden of public administration would be shared by everyone 
according to his ability and would no longer fall mainly on the 
shoulders of those least able to bear it, as has hitherto been the 
case in all countries. For the principle of taxation is, after all, a 
purely communist one, since the right to levy taxes is derived in all 
countries from so-called national property. For either private 
property is sacrosanct, in which case there is no such thing as 
national property and the state has no right to levy taxes, or the 
state has this right, in which case private property is not sac­
rosanct, national property stands above private property, and the 
state is the true owner. This latter principle is the one generally 
accepted — well then, gentlemen, for the present we demand only 
that this principle be taken seriously, that the state proclaim itself 
the common owner and, as such, administer public property for 
the public good, and that as the first step, it introduce a system of 

=====第280页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 255 
taxation based solely on each individual's ability to pay taxes and 
on the real public good. 
So you see, gentlemen, that it is not intended to introduce 
common ownership [Gütergemeinschaft] overnight and against the 
will of the nation, but that it is only a matter of establishing the aim 
and the ways and means of advancing towards it. But that the 
communist principle will be that of the future is attested by the 
course of development of all civilised nations, it is attested by the 
swiftly advancing dissolution of all hitherto existing social institu­
tions;  it is attested by common sense and, above all, by the human 
heart. 

=====第281页=====
FEBRUARY 15, 1845 
Gentlemen! 
At our last meeting I was accused of taking my examples and 
illustrations almost exclusively from foreign countries, namely 
from England. It was said that England and France were of no 
concern to us, we lived in Germany and it was our business to 
prove the necessity and advantages of communism for Germany. 
We were likewise accused of not having sufficiently demonstrated 
the historical necessity of communism in general. This is quite 
correct and it was not possible to do otherwise. A historical 
necessity cannot be demonstrated in as short a time as the 
congruence of two triangles. It can only be done by study and 
inquiry into all kinds of far-reaching presuppositions. I will, 
however, today do my best to answer these two accusations. I will 
try to show that communism is, if not a historical, at any rate an 
economic necessity for Germany. 
Let us, first of all, consider the present social situation in 
Germany. It is known that a great deal of poverty exists among us. 
Silesia and Bohemia have spoken for^themselves. The Rheinische 
Zeitung had much to tell us about the poverty existing in the Mosel 
and Eifel areas. 3 Large-scale and continuous poverty has prevailed 
in the Erzgebirge from time immemorial. It is no better in the 
Senne and in the Westphalian linen districts. There are complaints 
from all parts of Germany and nothing else is to be expected. Our 
proletariat is numerous and must be so, as we must realise from 
the most superficial examination of our social situation. It is in the 
Karl Marx, "Justification of the Correspondent from the Mosel" (see present 
edition, Vol. 1, pp. 332-58).—Ed. 

=====第282页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 257 
nature of things that there should be a numerous proletariat in 
the industrial districts. Industry cannot exist without a large 
number of workers who are wholly at its disposal, work exclusively 
for it and renounce every other way of making a living. Under 
conditions of competition, industrial employment makes any other 
employment impossible. For this reason we find in all industrial 
districts a proletariat too numerous and too obvious for its 
existence to be denied.— But in the agricultural districts, on the 
other hand, many people assert, no proletariat exists. But how is 
this possible? In areas where big landownership prevails such a 
proletariat is necessary; the big farms need farm-hands and 
servant girls and cannot exist without proletarians. In areas where 
the land has been parcelled out the rise of a propertyless class 
cannot be avoided either; the estates are divided up to a certain 
point, then the division comes to an end; and as then only one 
member of the family can take over the farm the others must, of 
course, become proletarians, propertyless workers. This dividing 
up usually proceeds until the farm becomes too small to feed a 
family and so a class of people comes into existence which, like the 
small middle class in the towns, is in transition from the possessing 
to the non-possessing class, and which is prevented by its property 
from taking up any other occupation, and yet cannot live on it. In 
this class, too, great poverty prevails. 
That this proletariat is bound steadily to increase in numbers is 
guaranteed by the increasing impoverishment of the middle classes 
of which I spoke in detail last week, and by the tendency of capital 
to become concentrated in a few hands. I do not need to return to 
these points today, and will only remark that these causes which 
continually produce and multiply the proletariat will remain the 
same and will have the same consequences as long as there is 
competition. The proletariat must under all circumstances not only 
continue to exist but also enlarge itself continually, become an ever 
more threatening power in our society as long as we continue to 
produce each on his own and in opposition to everyone else. But 
one day the proletariat will attain a level of power and of insight 
at which it will no longer tolerate the pressure of the entire social 
structure always bearing down on its shoulders, when it will 
demand a more even distribution of social burdens and rights; 
and then — unless human nature has changed by that time — a 
social revolution will be inevitable. 
This is a question which our economists have not as yet gone 
into at all. They do not concern themselves with the distribution 
but only with the production of the national wealth. However, let 

=====第283页=====
258 Frederick Engels 
us leave aside for the moment the fact that, as we have just 
demonstrated, a social revolution is the consequence of competi­
tion; let us consider the individual forms in which competition 
appears, the different economic possibilities for Germany, and see 
what the consequences of each must be. 
Germany—or the German Customs Union,94  to be more pre­
cise—has a juste-milieu customs tariff at the moment. Our duties 
are too low to constitute a real protective tariff and too high for 
free trade. So three things are possible. Either we go over to free 
trade completely, or we protect our industry by adequate tariffs, 
or we retain the existing system. Let us examine each of these 
possibilities. 
If we proclaim free trade and do away with our tariffs, then our 
whole industry with the exception of a few branches will be 
ruined. There can then be no question whatsoever of cotton 
spinning, of mechanised weaving, of most branches of the cotton 
and woollen industry, of important branches of the silk industry, 
of almost all production and processing of iron. The workers 
suddenly made destitute in all these branches would be hurled in 
masses into agriculture and the debris of industry, pauperism 
would grow out of the very ground everywhere, the centralisation 
of property in the hands of a few would be speeded up by such a 
crisis and, judging by the events in Silesia, the result of this crisis 
would of necessity be a social revolution. 
Or we provide ourselves with protective tariffs. These have lately 
become the darlings of most of our industrialists and therefore 
deserve closer examination. Herr List has brought the wishes of 
our capitalists into a system 3 and I should like to deal for a little 
while with this system, now almost generally adopted by them as a 
credo. Herr List proposes gradually increasing protective tariffs 
which are finally to become high enough to guarantee the home 
market for the manufacturers; they should then remain at that 
level for a time and then be gradually reduced again so that 
finally, after a number of years, all tariffs are abolished. Let us 
assume for a moment that this plan is adopted and increasing 
protective tariffs are decreed. Industry will expand, idle capital 
will rush into industrial undertakings, the demand for workers will 
increase and so will wages along with it, the poor-houses will 
empty, and to all appearances everything will be in a most 
flourishing state. This will continue until our industry has suffi-
a Friedrich List, Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie (for a detailed analy­
sis of this work see Marx's article on pp. 265-93 of this volume).—Ed. 

=====第284页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 259 
cierltly expanded to supply the home market. It cannot expand 
any further, for since it cannot maintain its hold on the home 
market without protection it will be even less able to do anything 
against foreign competition in neutral markets. But, says Herr 
List, by then home industry will be strong enough to require less 
protection and the reduction of tariffs can commence. Let us 
agree with this for a moment. The tariffs are reduced. Protection 
is decreased to such an extent—if not by the first reduction then 
certainly by the second or third — that foreign, let us say right 
away, English, industry can compete with our own in the German 
market. Herr List himself wishes this. But what will be the result 
of all this? From then on, German industry will have to endure, 
along with the English, all the fluctuations, all the crises, of the 
latter. As soon as the overseas markets are glutted with English 
goods, the English will throw the whole of their surplus stocks on 
the German market, the nearest one available, just as they are 
doing now, and as Herr List reports with great emotion, and so 
transform the German Customs Union into their "second-hand 
shop"  once more. Then English industry will soon rise again 
because it has the whole world for its market, because the whole 
world cannot do without it, while German industry is not indis­
pensable even for its own market and has to fear English 
competition in its own house and is labouring under a profusion 
of English goods thrown to its customers during the crisis. Then 
our industry will have to taste to the dregs all the bad times 
experienced by the English industry while being able to have only 
a modest share in the latter's boom periods — in short, we shall be 
in exactly the same position as we are now. And to come 
straightaway to the final result, there will then ensue the same 
depression in which our half-protected industries now find them­
selves, then one establishment after another will go under without 
new ones arising, then our machines will become obsolete without 
our being able to replace them with new and better ones, then the 
standstill will be transformed into retrogression and, according to 
Herr List's own assertion, one industry after another will decay 
and finally collapse altogether. But then we shall have a numerous 
proletariat which will have been created by industry and will now 
have no food, no work; and then, gentlemen, this proletariat will 
confront the propertied class with the demand to be given work 
and to be fed. 
This is what will happen if the protective tariffs are reduced. 
Let us now assume that they are not reduced but remain in 
operation and that it is proposed to wait until competition between 

=====第285页=====
260 Frederick Engels 
the home manufacturers makes them illusory and then to reduce 
them. The result of this will be that as soon as German industry is 
in a position to supply the German market completely it will stand 
still. New establishments will not be needed since the existing ones 
suffice for the market and, as has been said above, new markets 
are out of the question so long as protection is needed at all. But 
an industry which does not expand cannot improve  itself.  It remains 
stationary both internally and externally. For it there is no such 
thing as improving the machinery. The old machines cannot just 
be scrapped, and there are no new establishments which could 
make use of new ones. Meanwhile other nations go forward, and 
the standstill in our industry again becomes retrogression. The 
English, as a result of their advance, will soon be in a position to 
produce so cheaply that they can compete with our backward 
industry in our own market despite the protective tariffs, and since 
in competition as in every other kind of struggle victory always 
goes to the strongest, our ultimate defeat is certain. The same 
situation then arises about which I have just been speaking: the 
artificially created proletariat will demand from the property-
owners something which, so long as they wish to remain exclusive 
owners, they are unable to provide, and social revolution begins. 
There is yet another possibility, namely, the very improbable 
one that we Germans will be able owing to protective tariffs to 
bring our industry to a point at which it can compete with the 
English without protection. Let us assume that this is so, what 
would be the result? As soon as we begin to compete with the 
English in foreign, neutral markets, a life-and-death struggle will 
arise between our industry and that of the English. They will 
muster all their strength to keep us out of the markets they have 
supplied hitherto; they will have to do so because now they will be 
attacked at their life's source, at the most dangerous spot. And 
with all the means at their disposal, with all the advantages of a 
hundred-year-old industry, they will succeed in defeating us. They 
will keep our industry limited to our own market and thus make it 
stationary — and then the same situation will arise which has 
already been outlined; we shall remain stationary, the English will 
stride forward, and our industry, in view of its unavoidable decay, 
will not be in a position to feed the proletariat it will have 
artificially created — the social revolution begins. 
But assuming that we could beat the English even in neutral 
markets, that we were to win from them one trade outlet after 
another  — what would we have gained in this well-nigh impossible 
case? At best we should repeat the industrial development which 

=====第286页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 261 
England went through before us, and sooner or later we should 
arrive at the point which England has now reached — namely the 
eve of the social revolution. But in all probability it would not take 
as long as that. As a result of the continual victories of German 
industry that of the English would necessarily be ruined and this 
would only speed up the mass uprising of the proletariat against 
the propertied classes, which is imminent in England in any case. 
Rapidly spreading destitution would drive the English workers to 
revolution, and as things stand now, such a social revolution would 
have enormous repercussions in the continental countries, notably 
in France and Germany, which must be all the greater the more a 
proletariat is artificially produced by forcing the pace of industrial 
development in Germany. Such a revolution would immediately 
become a European one and would violently upset our manufac­
turers'  dreams of a German industrial monopoly. And that 
German and English industry should exist peacefully side by side 
is made impossible if only by competition. I repeat, every industry 
must advance in order not to lag behind and go under; it must 
expand, conquer new markets, become enlarged by the addition of 
new establishments in order to be able to advance. But as no new 
markets are being won since the opening up of China, 95 and only 
better exploitation of the existing markets is possible, and as the 
expansion of industry will therefore proceed more slowly in future 
than it has done up to now, England can tolerate a competitor 
even less now than it could in the past. It must hold down the 
industry of all other countries in order to protect its own industry 
from ruin. For England the maintenance of industrial monopoly is 
no longer merely a question of a greater or lesser profit, it has 
become a question of life or death. The competitive struggle between 
nations is, in any case, much fiercer, much more decisive than that 
between individuals, because it is a more concentrated struggle, a 
struggle between masses, which can only be ended by the decisive 
victory of one side and the decisive defeat of the other. And for 
this reason, such a struggle between us and the English, no matter 
what the outcome, would be of no benefit either to our or to the 
English industrialists but, as I have shown, would only bring a 
social revolution in its train. 
We have thus seen, gentlemen, what Germany can expect in all 
possible cases both from free trade and from protection. We still 
have,  however, one economic possibility open to us, namely, that 
we continue with the juste-milieu tariffs now in operation. But we 
have already seen what the results would be. One branch of our 
industry after another would collapse, the industrial workers 
10-762 

=====第287页=====
262 Frederick Engels 
would become destitute,  and  when  the  destitution reached  a 
certain point they would explode into  a revolution against  the 
propertied classes. 
So you see,  gentlemen, substantiated also  in detail what  in the 
beginning, proceeding from competition  in general,  I set out in 
general terms — namely, that  the  unavoidable result  of our  exist­
ing social relations, under  all circumstances,  and in all  cases, will 
be a social revolution. With  the  same certainty with which  we can 
develop from given mathematical principles  a new  mathematical 
proposition, with  the  same certainty  we can  deduce from  the 
existing economic relations  and the  principles  of political economy 
the imminence  of social revolution.  Let us,  however, look  at this 
upheaval  a little closer; what form will  it take, what will  be its 
results,  in what ways will  it differ from  the  previous violent 
upheavals?  A social revolution, gentlemen,  is something quite 
different from  the  political revolutions which have taken place  so 
far. It is not  directed,  as these have been, against  the  property  of 
monopoly,  but  against  the  monopoly  of property;  a social revolu­
tion, gentlemen,  is the  open  war of  the poor against  the rich.  And  such 
a struggle,  in which  all the  mainsprings  and  causes, which  in 
previous historical conflicts  lay  dark  and  hidden  at the  bottom, 
operate openly  and  without concealment, such  a struggle,  to be 
sure,  threatens  to be far  fiercer  and  bloodier than  all those that 
preceded  it. The  result  of this struggle  can be  twofold. Either  the 
rebellious party only attacks  the  appearance,  not the  essence, only 
the form,  not the  thing  itself, or it  goes  for the  thing  itself,  grasps 
the evil itself  by the  root.  In the  first case private property will  be 
allowed  to continue  and  will only  be distributed differently,  so that 
the causes which have  led to the  present situation remain  in 
operation  and  must sooner  or later bring about  a similar situation 
and another revolution.  But,  gentlemen,  is this possible?  Has  there 
been  a revolution which  did not  really carry  out  what  it was out 
for? The  English revolution realised both  the  religious  and the 
political principles whose suppression  by Charles  I caused  it to 
break  out; the  French bourgeoisie  in its  fight against  the aristocra­
cy and the old  monarchy achieved everything that  it aimed  for, 
made  an end to all the  abuses which drove  it to  insurrection.  And 
should  the  insurrection  of the  poor cease before poverty  and its 
causes have been eliminated?  It is not  possible, gentlemen;  it 
would  be flying  in the  face  of all  historical experience  to suppose 
such a thing. Furthermore,  the  level  of education  of the  workers, 
especially  in England  and  France, forbids  us to  consider this 
possible. There only remains, then,  the  other alternative, namely, 

=====第288页=====
Speeches in Elberfeld 263 
that the future social revolution will deal with the real causes of 
want and poverty, of ignorance and crime, that it will therefore 
carry through a real social reform. And this can only happen by 
the proclamation of the principles of communism. Just consider, 
gentlemen, the ideas which actuate the worker in those countries 
where the worker too thinks. Look at France, at the different 
sections of the labour movement, whether they are not all 
communistic; go to England and listen to the kind of proposals 
being made to the workers for the improvement of their posi­
tion— are they not all based on the principle of common proper­
ty; study the different systems of social reform and how many will 
you find that are not communistic? Of all the systems which are 
still of any importance today, the only one which is not communis­
tic is that of Fourier, who devoted more attention to the social 
organisation of human activity than to the distribution of its 
products. All these facts justify the conclusion that a future social 
revolution will end with the implementation of the principles of 
communism and hardly permit any other possibility. 
If, gentlemen, these conclusions are correct, if the social revolu­
tion and practical communism are the necessary result of our 
existing conditions — then we will have to concern ourselves above 
all with the measures by which we can avoid a violent and bloody 
overthrow of the social conditions. And there is only one means, 
namely, the peaceful introduction or at least preparation of 
communism. If we do not want the bloody solution of the social 
problem, if we do not want to permit the daily growing contradic­
tion between the education and the condition of pur proletarians 
to come to a head, which, according to all our experience of 
human nature, will mean that this contradiction will be solved by 
brute force, desperation and thirst for revenge, then, gentlemen, 
we must apply ourselves seriously and without prejudice to the 
social problem; then we must make it our business to contribute 
our share towards humanising the condition of the modern helots. 
And if it should perhaps appear to some of you that the raising of 
the hitherto abased classes will not be possible without an abase­
ment of your own condition, then you ought to bear in mind that 
what is involved is to create for all people such a condition that 
everyone can freely develop his human nature and live in a 
human relationship with his neighbours, and has no need to fear 
any violent shattering of his condition; it must be borne in mind 
that what some individuals have to sacrifice is not their real 
human enjoyment of life, but only the semblance of this enjoy­
ment produced by our bad conditions, something which conflicts 
10* 

=====第289页=====
264 Frederick Engels 
with the reason and the heart of those who now enjoy these 
apparent advantages. Far from wishing to destroy real human life 
with all its requirements and needs, we wish on the contrary really 
to bring it into being. And if, even apart from this, you will only 
seriously consider for a moment what the consequences of our 
present situation are bound to be, into what labyrinths of con­
tradictions and disorders it is leading us — then, gentlemen, you 
will certainly find it worth the trouble to study the social question 
seriously and thoroughly. And if I can induce you to do this, I 
shall have achieved the purpose of my talk. 
Delivered in Elberfeld Printed according to the journal 
on February 8 and 15, 1845 „,,.,,. r ,. , r , r. 
' Published in English lor the lirst 
Published in Rheinische Jahrbücher zur time 
gesellschaftlichen Reform, 1845, Bd. I 

=====第290页=====
Karl Marx 
DRAFT OF AN ARTICLE ON FRIEDRICH LIST'S BOOK 
DAS NATIONALE SYSTEM 
DER POLITISCHEN OEKONOMIE96 
[I. General Characterisation of List] 
... [2] that awareness of the death of the bourgeoisie has already 
penetrated the consciousness even of the German bourgeois, so 
the German bourgeois is naive enough himself to admit this "sad 
fact". 
"For this reason also it is so sad that the evils which in our day accompany 
industry are advanced as a reason for rejecting industry  itself.  There exist far 
greater evils than a social estate [Stand] of proletarians: an empty exchequer— 
national impotence—national slavery—national death" (p.  LXVU). 
It is truly sadder that the proletariat already exists and already 
advances claims, and already inspires fear, before the German 
bourgeois has yet achieved the development of industry. As far as 
the proletarian himself is concerned, he will certainly find his 
social situation [Stand] a happy one when the ruling bourgeoisie 
has a full exchequer and national might. Herr List only speaks 
about what is sadder for the bourgeois. And we admit that for him 
it is very sad that he wants to establish the domination of industry 
precisely at the unsuitable moment when the slavery of the majority 
resulting from this domination has become a generally known fact. 
The German bourgeois is the knight of the rueful countenance, who 
wanted to introduce knight-errantry just when the police and 
money had come to the fore. 
3. A great inconvenience (obstacle)97 affecting the German 
bourgeois in his striving for industrial wealth is his idealism 
professed hitherto. How is it that this nation of the "spirit" 
suddenly comes to find the supreme blessings of mankind in 
calico, knitting yarn, the self-acting mule, in a mass of factory 
slaves, in the materialism of machinery, in the full money-bags of 

=====第291页=====
266 Karl Marx 
Messrs. the factory-owners? The empty, shallow, sentimental ideal­
ism of the German bourgeois, beneath which lies hidden (is 
concealed) the pettiest, dirtiest and most cowardly shopkeeper's 
spirit (soul), has arrived at the epoch when this bourgeois is 
inevitably compelled to divulge his secret. But again he divulges it 
in a truly German, highflown manner. He divulges it with an 
idealistic-Christian sense of shame. He disavows wealth while 
striving for it. He clothes spiritless materialism in an idealistic 
disguise and only then ventures to pursue it. 
The whole theoretical part of List's system is nothing but a 
[ ]a disguising of the industrial materialism of frank 
political economy in idealistic phrases. Everywhere he allows the 
thing to remain in existence but idealises the expression of it. We 
shall trace this in detail. It is just this empty idealistic phraseology 
that enables him to ignore the real barriers standing in the way of 
his pious wishes and to indulge in the most absurd fantasies (what 
would have become of the English and French bourgeoisie if it 
had first to ask a high-ranking nobility, an esteemed bureaucracy 
and the ancient ruling dynasties for permission to give "industry" 
the "force of law"?). 
The German bourgeois is religious even when he is an indus­
trialist. He shrinks from speaking about the nasty exchange values 
which he covets and speaks about productive forces [von Produktiv­
kräften];  he shrinks from speaking about competition and speaks 
of a national confederation of national productive forces; he 
shrinks from speaking of his private interest and speaks about the 
national interest. When one looks at the frank, classic cynicism 
with which the English and French bourgeoisie, as represented by 
its first — at least at the beginning of its domination — scientific 
spokesmen of political economy, elevated wealth into a god and 
ruthlessly sacrificed everything else to it, to this Moloch, in science 
as well, and when, on the other hand, one looks at the idealising, 
phrase-mongering, bombastic manner of Herr List, who in the 
midst of political economy despises the wealth of "righteous 
men" and knows loftier aims, one is bound to find it "also sad" 
that the present day is no longer a day for wealth. 
Herr List always speaks in Molossus metre. 98 He continually 
shows off in a clumsy and verbose rhetoric, the troubled waters of 
which always drive him in the end on to a sandbank, and the 
essence of which consists of constant repetitions about protective 
There are three illegible words in the manuscript here, apparently meaning 
"fallen in front of  him".—Ed. 

=====第292页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 267 
tariffs and true German ["teutsche"] factories. He is continually 
sensuously supersensuous. 
The German idealising philistine who wants to become wealthy 
must, of course, first create for himself a new theory of wealth, 
one which makes wealth worthy of his striving for it. The 
bourgeois in France and England see the approach of the storm 
which will destroy in practice the real life of what has hitherto 
been called wealth, but the German bourgeois, who has not yet 
arrived at this inferior wealth, tries to give a new, "spiritualistic" 
interpretation of it. He creates for himself an "idealising" political 
economy, which has nothing in common with profane French and 
English political economy, in order to justify to himself and the 
world that he, too, wants to become wealthy. The German 
bourgeois begins his creation of wealth with the creation of a 
highflown hypocritically idealising political economy. 
3." How Herr List interprets history and what attitude he 
adopts towards Smith and his school. 
Humble as is Herr List's attitude to the nobility, the ancient 
ruling dynasties and the bureaucracy, he is to the same degree 
"audacious" in opposing French and English political economy, of 
which Smith is the protagonist, and which has cynically betrayed 
the secret of "wealth" and made impossible all illusions about its 
nature, tendency and movement. Herr List lumps them all 
together by calling them "the School". For since the German 
bourgeois is concerned with protective tariffs, the whole develop­
ment of political economy since Smith has, of course, no meaning 
for him, because all its most outstanding representatives presup­
pose the present-day bourgeois society of competition and free 
trade. 
The German philistine here reveals his "national" character in 
many ways. 
1) In the whole of political economy, he sees only systems 
concocted in academic study rooms. That the development of a 
science such as political economy is connected with the real 
movement of society, or is only its theoretical [3] expression, Herr 
List, of course, does not suspect. A German theoretician. 
2) Since his own work (theory) conceals a secret aim, he suspects 
secret aims everywhere. 
Being a true German philistine, Herr List, instead of studying 
real history, looks for the secret, bad aims of individuals, and, 
owing to his cunning, he is very well able to discover them (puzzle 
them out). He makes great discoveries, such as that Adam Smith 
wanted to deceive the world by his theory, and that the whole 

=====第293页=====
268 Karl Marx 
world let itself be deceived by him until the great Herr List woke 
it from its dream, rather in the way that a certain Düsseldorf 
Counsellor of Justice made out that Roman history had been 
invented by medieval monks in order to justify the domination of 
Rome. 
But just as the German bourgeois knows no better way of 
opposing his enemy than by casting a moral slur on him, casting 
aspersions on his frame of mind, and seeking bad motives for his 
actions, in short, by bringing him into bad repute and making him 
personally an object of suspicion, so Herr List also casts aspersions 
on the English and French economists, and retails gossip about 
them. And just as the German philistine does not disdain the 
pettiest profit-making and swindling in trade, so Herr List does 
not disdain to juggle with words from the quotations he gives in 
order to make them profitable. He does not disdain to stick the 
trade-mark of his rival on to his own bad products, in order to 
bring his rival's products into disrepute by falsifying them, or even 
to invent downright lies about his competitor in order to discredit 
him. 
We shall give a few samples of Herr List's mode of procedure. 
It is well known that the German priests believed they could 
inflict no more deadly blow on the Enlightenment than by telling 
us the stupid anecdote and lie that on his death-bed Voltaire had 
renounced his views. Herr List, too, takes us to Adam Smith's 
death-bed and informs us that it turned out that Smith had not 
been sincere in his teaching. However, listen to Herr List himself 
and his further verdict on Smith. We put alongside List's words 
the source of his wisdom. 
List: 
[National System of Political Economy, 
Vol. I: International Trade, Trade Policy 
and the German Customs Union. Stuttgart 
and Tübingen, 1841:] 
"I recalled from the biography by 
Dugald Stewart how this great mind 
[Adam Smith] could not die in peace 
before all his manuscripts had been 
burned, by which I wanted to make it 
understood how serious is the suspicion 
that these papers contained proofs 
against his sincerity" (p. Lviii). "I 
showed that the English Ministers [...] 
made use of his theory in order to 
throw dust into the eyes of other na­
tions for the benefit of England" (loc. Ferner,  F.L.A.,  Du gouvernement considéré 
dans ses rapports avec le commerce, Paris, 
1805: 
"Is it possible that Smith was sin­
cere in heaping up so many false argu­
ments in favour of free trade?... Smith 
had as his secret aim to spread in 
Europe principles the adoption of which 
he knew very well would give his coun­
try the world market" (pp. 385, 386). 
"One is even justified in assuming that 
Smith did not always propound one and 
the same doctrine; and how otherwise is 
one to explain the torment he suffered 
on his death-bed because of the fear 

=====第294页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 269 
cit.).  "As regards its relation to national 
and international conditions, Adam 
Smith's theory is a mere continuation of 
the physiocratic system. Like the latter, 
it ignores the nature of the nations [...] 
and presupposes eternal peace and uni­
versal union as already in existence" (p. 
475). that the manuscripts of his lectures 
would survive him" (p. 386). He [Fer­
ner] loc. cit. (p. 388) reproaches Smith 
for having been a commissaire des 
douanes. 3 "Smith almost always argued 
like the economists" (physiocrats), 
"without taking into account the di­
vergence between the interests of the 
different nations, and on the assump­
tion of a situation where there would be 
only one society in the world" (p. 381). 
"Let us set aside all these projects of 
union" (p. 15). 
(Monsieur Ferrier was an inspecteur 
des douanes under Napoleon and loved 
his profession.) 
J.-B.  Say's political economy is interpreted by Herr List as an 
unsuccessful speculation. We shall give below in full his categorical 
verdict on the life of Say. But before doing so, one more example 
of the way in which List copies from other authors and in copying 
falsifies them in order to hit at his opponents. 
Count Pecchio, History of Political 
Economy in Italy, etc. Paris, 1830c: 
"Foreigners tried to rob Serra of the 
merit of having been the first found­
er of the principles of this science" 
(political economy). "What I have just 
said cannot be applied at all to Mon­
sieur Say, who while always reproaching 
Serra for having regarded only the 
materials of gold and silver as wealth, 
nevertheless allowed him the glory of 
having been the first to make known 
the productive power of industry.... My 
reproach is addressed to Mr. McCul-
loch.... If Mr. McCulloch had read a 
little more than the title [of Serra's 
book]",  etc. (pp. 76, 77). 
One sees how Herr List deliberately  falsifies Pecchio, from whom 
he copies, in order to discredit Monsieur Say. No less fatee is the 
biographical information given about Say. List: 
"Say and McCulloch seem not to have 
seen or read more than the title of this 
book" (that of Antonio Serra from 
Naples); "both loftily throw it aside with 
the remark: it treats only of money, and 
the title by itself proves that the author 
laboured under the delusion that the 
precious metals were the sole objects of 
wealth. If they had read on further," 
etc. (p. 456). 
a Customs officer.— Ed. 
Customs inspector.— Ed. 
c Pecchio, J. (comte), Histoire de l'économie politique en Italie, Paris, 1830. (In the 
manuscript the title of the book is given in German.)  — Ed. 

=====第295页=====
270 Karl Marx 
Herr List says about him: 
"First  a merchant, then  a factory-owner, then  an unsuccessful politician,  Say 
took up political economy,  as people take  up some  new  enterprise when  the old 
one no  longer succeeds.... Hatred  of the  Continental System, which ruined  his 
factory,  and of the  originator  of this system,  who  drove  him out of the  Tribunate, 
caused  him to  come  out in  support  of absolute freedom  of trade"  (pp. 488, 489). 
So Say supported the system of free trade because his factory was 
ruined by the Continental System! But what if he had written his 
Traite' d'économie politique* before he owned a factory? Say became a 
supporter of the system of free trade because Napoleon drove him 
out of the Tribunate! 10° But what if he had written his book while 
he was a tribune} What if Say, who according to Herr List was an 
unsuccessful businessman who saw in literature only a branch of 
business,  had from his early youth played a part in the French 
literary world? 
Where did Herr List obtain his new information? From the 
Historical Note on the Life and Works of J.-B. Say by Charles Comte, XÜX 
which was published as an introduction to Say's Cours complet 
d'économie politique. What does this note tell us? It contains the 
opposite of all List's statements. Listen: 
"J.-B.  Say was  intended  by his  father,  who was a  merchant,  [4] to  engage  in 
trade. However,  his  inclination drew  him to  literature.  In 1789 he  published  a 
pamphlet  in behalf  of freedom  of the  press. From  the  outset  of the  revolution  he 
contributed  to the  newspaper Courrier de Provence, published  by Mirabeau.  He also 
worked  in the  office  of the  Minister Clavière.  His penchant  'for the  moral  and 
political sciences',  as also  his  father's bankruptcy, caused  him to  give  up trade 
completely  and to  make scientific activity  his  sole occupation.  In 1794 he  became 
editor-in-chief  of the  Décade philosophique, littéraire  et politique.  In 1799  Napoleon 
appointed  him a  member  of the  Tribunate.  The  spare time left  him  from  his 
function  as tribune  he used  to work  on his  Traité politique, which  he published  in 
1803.  He was  dismissed from  the  Tribunate because  he belonged  to the few who 
dared  to be in  opposition.  He was  offered  a lucrative post  in the  finance 
department,  but he  refused although chargé  de six  enfants  et n'ayant presque point  de 
fortune  ..., since  he would  not  have been able  to carry  out the  duties  of the  post 
offered  him  without taking part  in  implementing  a system which  he had 
condemned  as being disastrous  for  France.  He  preferred  to start  up a  cotton-
spinning mill,  etc." 
If the slur which Herr List here casts on J.-B. Say owes its origin 
to falsification, this is no less the case with the praise List bestows 
on the brother, Louis Say. To prove that Louis Say shares the 
crafty [listig] c view, List falsifies a passage from this author. 
Herr List says on p. 484: 
a Published  in 1803.—Ed. 
Burdened with  six children  and  having almost  no fortune.—Ed. 
c A pun:  "listig" means crafty,  but  could also  be an  adjective from  "List".—Ed. 

=====第296页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 271 
"In his" (Louis Say's) "opinion, the wealth of nations consists not in material 
goods and their exchange value, but in the ability continually to produce these goods." 
According to Herr List, the following are Louis Say's own 
words: 
The Louis Say of Herr List: The real Louis Say: 
"La richesse ne consiste pas dans les "Quoique la richesse ne consiste pas 
choses qui satisfont nos besoins ou nos dans les choses qui satisfont nos besoins 
goûts,  mais dans le pouvoir d'en jouir ou nos goûts, mais dans le revenu ou 
annuellement" (Etudes sur la richesse des dans le pouvoir d'en jouir annuelle-
notions, p. 10).a ment."b 
Thus,  Say is not speaking of the ability to produce, but of the 
ability to enjoy, of the ability which provides the "income" (revenu) 
of a nation. From the disproportion between the growing productive 
force and the income of the nation as a whole, and of all its classes 
in particular, there arose precisely the theories most inimical to 
Herr List as, for example, those of Sismondi and Cherbuliez. 
Let us now give an example of Herr List's ignorance in his 
verdict on the "School". He says about Ricardo (List on productive 
forces): 
"In general, since Adam Smith, the School has been unfortunate in its 
researches into the nature of rent. Ricardo, and following him Mill, McCulloch 
and others, hold that rent is paid for the natural productivity inherent in plots of 
land. Ricardo based a whole system on this view.... Since he considered only 
English conditions, he was misled into the erroneous view that these English 
ploughed fields and meadows, for the apparently natural productivity of which 
such fine rent is paid at the present time, have been the very same ploughed fields 
and meadows at all times" (p. 360). 
Ricardo says: 
"If the surplus produce which land affords in the form of rent be an 
advantage, it is desirable that, every year, the machinery newly constructed should 
be less efficient than the old, as that would undoubtedly give a greater exchange­
able value to the goods manufactured ... in the kingdom; and a rent would be paid 
to all those who possessed the most productive machinery." "Rent increases most 
rapidly, as the disposable land decreases in its productive powers. Wealth increases 
most rapidly in those countries ... where through agricultural improvements, 
productions can be multiplied without any increase in the proportional quantity of 
labour, and where consequently the progress of .ent is slow." (Ricardo, Principles of 
Political Economy, etc. Paris, 1835, Vol. I, pp. 77 and 80-82.) c 
"Wealth consists not in the objects which satisfy our requirements or our 
tastes,  but in the possibility of enjoying them annually." (Researches into the Wealth of 
Nations, p.  10.)—Ed. 
"Although wealth consists not in the objects which satisfy our requirements or 
our tastes, but in income, or in the possibility of enjoying it annually."—Ed. 
c David Ricardo, Des principes de l'économie politique et de l'impôt. Traduit de 
l'anglais par Constancio. In the manuscript Marx gives an abridged German trans­
lation of the  title.—Ed. 

=====第297页=====
272 Karl Marx 
According to Ricardo's theory, rent, far from being the conse­
quence of the natural productivity inherent in the soil, is rather a 
consequence of the constantly increasing unproductiveness of the 
soil, a consequence of civilisation and the increasing population. 
According to Ricardo, as long as the most fertile land is still 
available in an unlimited amount, there is still no land rent. Hence 
rent is determined by the ratio of the population to the amount of 
available land. 
Ricardo's theory, which serves as the theoretical basis for the 
whole Anti-Corn-Law League3 in England and the anti-rent 
movement in the free states of North America,102  had to be 
falsified by Herr List — assuming he had more than hearsay 
knowledge of it—if only because it proves how little the "free, 
mighty and wealthy bourgeois" are inclined to work "diligently" 
for [the increase of] "land rents" and to bring them [the landowners] 
honey from the hive. 103 Ricardo's theory of land rent is nothing 
but the economic expression of a life-and-death struggle of the 
industrial bourgeois against the landowners. 
Herr List instructs us further about Ricardo as follows: 
"At the present time the theory of exchange value has fallen into such 
impotence ... that Ricardo ... could say: 'to determine the laws by which the yield 
from land is distributed between landowners, tenant-farmers and workers is the 
chief task of political economy'" (p. 493). 
The necessary observations on this are to be made in the 
appropriate place.b 
[5] Herr List reaches the height of infamy in his verdict on 
Sismondi. 
List: Sismondi: 
"He"  (Sismondi) "wants, for exam- "My objections are not to machines, 
pie, the spirit of inventiveness to be not to inventions, not to civilisation, but 
curbed and bridled" (p. xxix). only to the modern organisation of  society, 
which deprives the working man of any 
property other than his hands, and 
gives him no guarantee against compe­
tition, of which he will inevitably be­
come a victim. Suppose that all people 
share equally in the product of the 
labour in which they have participated, 
then every technical invention will in all 
possible cases be a blessing for all of 
them" (Nouveaux principes d.'économie 
politique, Paris, 1827, t. Il, p. 433). 
Here and below Marx gives the name of the League in English.— Ed. 
b See pp. 284-88 of this, volume.—Ed. 

=====第298页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 2/3 
Whereas Herr List casts moral aspersions on Smith and Say he 
can only explain the theory of Monsieur Sismondi from the latter's 
bodily defects. He says: 
"Monsieur de Sismondi sees with his bodily eyes everything red as black; it 
seems that his spiritual sight in matters of political economy suffers from the same 
defect" (p. xxix). 
In order to appreciate to the full the vileness of this outburst, 
one must know the passage from which Herr List derived his 
remark. Sismondi says in his Etudes sur l'économie politique, where 
he speaks of the devastation of the Roman Campagna: 
"The rich tints of the Roman Campagna ... even entirely escape our eyes, for 
which the red ray is non-existent" (p. 6). Brussels reprint, 1838 [Vol. II]. 
Sismondi explains this by saying: "the charm which attracts all 
other travellers to Rome" is destroyed for him and he "therefore 
has eyes that are all the more open to see the real, miserable 
condition of the inhabitants of the Campagna." 
If de Sismondi did not see the rosy tints of the sky which 
magically illumine the whole (factory) industry for Herr List, he 
did see the red cock on the gables (roofs) of these factories. We 
shall have an opportunity later 3 [to examine] List's verdict that 
"Monsieur de Sismondi's writings on international trade and trade policy are 
without any value" [p.  xxix]. 
Whereas Herr List explains Smith's system from the latter's per­
sonal vanity (p. 476) and the hidden English shopkeeper's mental­
ity, and Say's system from a desire for revenge and as a business 
enterprise, in regard to Sismondi he descends so low as to explain 
Sismondi's system from the defects of his bodily constitution. 
[5] 4. Herr List's Originality 
It is highly characteristic of Herr List that, despite all his 
boasting, he has put forward not a single proposition that had not 
been advanced long before him not only by the defenders of the 
prohibitive system, but even by writers of the "School" invented 
by Herr List — if Adam Smith is the theoretical starting-point of 
political economy, then its real point of departure, its real school, 
is "civil society" [die bürgerliche  Gesellschaft],  of which the different 
phases of development can be accurately traced in political 
economy. Only the illusions and idealising language (phrases) 
a Apparently, the reference is to a part of the manuscript which is missing.—Ed. 

=====第299页=====
274 Karl Marx 
belong to Herr List. We consider it important to give detailed 
proof of this to the reader and must claim his attention for this 
tedious labour. He will derive from it the conviction that the 
German bourgeois comes on the scene post festum, that it is just as 
impossible for him to advance further the political economy 
exhaustively developed by the English and French as it would 
probably be for them to contribute anything new to the develop­
ment of philosophy in Germany. The German bourgeois can only 
add his illusions and phrases to the French and English reality. 
But little possible as it is for him to give a new development to 
political economy, it is still more impossible for him to achieve in 
practice a further advance of industry, of the by now almost 
exhausted development on the present foundations of society. 
5. We therefore restrict our criticism to the theoretical part of 
List's book, and in fact only to his main discoveries. 
What are the main propositions which Herr List has to prove? 
Let us inquire into the aim he wants to achieve. 
1) The bourgeois wants protective tariffs from the state in order 
to lay his hands on state power and wealth. But since [in 
Germany],  unlike in England and France, he does not have state 
power at his disposal and therefore cannot arbitrarily guide it as 
he likes, but has to resort to requests, it is necessary for him in 
relation to the state, the activity (mode of action) of which he 
wants to control for his own benefit, to depict his dem.and from it 
as a concession that he makes to the state, whereas [in reality] he 
demands concessions from the state. Therefore, through the 
medium of Herr List, he [the German bourgeois] proves to the 
state that his theory differs from all others in that he allows the 
state to interfere in and control industry, in that he has the 
highest opinion of the economic wisdom of the state, and only asks 
it to give full scope for its wisdom, on condition, of course, that 
this wisdom is limited to providing "strong" protective tariffs. His 
demand that the state should act in accordance with his interests is 
depicted by him as recognition of the state, recognition that the 
state has the right to interfere in the sphere of civil society. 
2) The bourgeois [Bürger] wants to become rich, to make money; 
but at the same time he must come to terms with the present idealism 
of the German public and with his own conscience. Therefore he 
tries to prove that he does not strive for unrighteous material 
goods, but for a spiritual essence, for an infinite productive force, 
instead of bad, finite exchange values. Of course, this spiritual 
essence involves the circumstance that the "citizen" ["Bürger"] takes 
this opportunity to fill his own pockets with worldly exchange values. 

=====第300页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 275 
[6] a Since the bourgeois now hopes to become rich mainly 
through "protective tariffs", and since protective tariffs can enrich 
him only insofar as no longer Englishmen, but the German 
bourgeois  himself,  will exploit his fellow-countrymen, indeed exploit 
them even more than they were exploited from abroad, and since 
protective tariffs demand a sacrifice of exchange values from the 
consumers (chiefly from the workers who are to be superseded by 
machines, from all those who draw a fixed income, such as 
officials, recipients of land rent, etc.), the industrial bourgeois has 
therefore to prove that, far from hankering after material goods, 
he wants nothing else but the sacrifice of exchange values, 
material goods, for a spiritual essence. Fundamentally, therefore, 
it is solely a matter of self-sacrifice, of asceticism, of Christian 
grandeur of the soul. It is pure accident that A makes the sacrifice, 
but B puts the sacrifice in his pocket. The German bourgeois is 
much too unselfish to think in this connection of his private gain, 
which accidentally proves to be linked with this sacrifice. But if it 
should turn out that a class whose permission the German 
bourgeois thinks he requires for his emancipation, cannot go along 
with this spiritual theory, then this theory must be abandoned and, 
in opposition to the School [which advocates freedom of trade], 
precisely the theory of exchange values be brought into play. 
3) Since the whole desire of the bourgeoisie amounts, in essence, 
to bringing the factory system to the level of "English" prosperity 
and making industrialism the regulator of society, i.e., to bringing 
about the disorganisation of society, the bourgeois has to prove 
that he is only concerned for the harmonisation of all social 
production, and for the organisation of society. He restricts 
foreign trade by means of protective tariffs, while agriculture, he 
maintains, will rapidly attain its highest prosperity owing to 
manufacturing industry. The organisation of society, therefore, is 
summed up in the factories. They are the organisers of society, 
and the system of competition which they bring into being is the 
finest confederation of society. 104 The organisation of society 
which the factory system creates is the true organisation of society. 
The bourgeoisie is certainly right in conceiving in general its 
interests as identical interests, just as the wolf as a wolf has an 
identical interest with his fellow wolves, however much it is to the 
interest of each individual wolf that he and not another should 
pounce on the prey. 
6. Finally, it is characteristic of Herr List's theory, as also of the 
a The manuscript here has a new sheet marked  2.—Ed. 

=====第301页=====
276 Karl Marx 
entire German bourgeoisie, that in order to defend their desires to 
exploit they are compelled everywhere to resort to "socialist" 
phrases and thus forcibly to maintain a deception that has long 
been refuted. We shall show in various passages3  that Herr List's 
phrases, if the consequences are drawn from them, are communis­
tic. We, of course, are far from accusing someone like Herr List 
and his German bourgeoisie of communism, but this affords us 
fresh proof of the internal weakness, falsity and infamous hypoc­
risy of the "good-natured", "idealistic" bourgeois. It proves to us 
that his idealism in practice is nothing but the unscrupulous, 
unthinking disguise of a repulsive materialism. 
Finally, it is characteristic that the German bourgeoisie begins 
with the lie with which the French and English bourgeoisie 
ends,—  after reaching a position where it is compelled to apologise 
for itself,  to offer excuses for its existence. 
7. Since Herr List distinguishes the present, ostensibly cos­
mopolitan, political economy from his own (national-political) 
economy by the former being based on exchange values and the 
latter on productive forces, we have to start with this theory. 
Furthermore, since the confederation of productive forces is 
supposed to represent the nation in its unity, we have also to 
examine this theory prior to the above-mentioned distinction. 
These two theories form the real basis of [List's] national economy 
as distinct from political economy. 6 
* * * 
It can never occur to Herr List that the real organisation of 
society is a soulless materialism, an individual spiritualism, indi­
vidualism. It can never occur to him that the political economists 
have only given this social state of affairs a corresponding 
theoretical expression. Otherwise, he would have to direct his 
criticism against the present organisation of  society  instead of against 
the political economists. He accuses them of not having found any 
The reference is to parts of the manuscript which either were not written or 
have not been found.—Ed. 
This paragraph is followed in the manuscript by an incomplete third of 
the third page of the sixth sheet and a blank whole page (the fourth of the sixth 
sheet).  The first chapter, which ends here, is followed immediately by a separate 
unnumbered sheet containing a small fragment to which the author has given no 
title and which is placed in this edition after three asterisks inserted by the 
editors.—Ed. 

=====第302页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 277 
embellishing expression for a cheerless reality. Hence he wants to 
leave this reality everywhere just as it is and only change the 
expression of it. Nowhere does he criticise real society, but like a 
true German, he criticises the theoretical expression of this society 
and reproaches it for expressing the real thing and not an 
imaginary notion of the real thing. 
The factory is transformed into a goddess, the goddess of 
manufacturing power. 
The factory-owner is the priest of this power.3 
[7] II. The Theory of Productive Forces 
and the Theory of Exchange Values 
1) ( Herr List's theory of "productive forces" is limited to the 
following main propositions: 
a) The causes of wealth are something quite different from wealth  itself;  the 
force capable of creating* wealth is infinitely more important than wealth itself 
[p. 201];> ; 
(, b) List is far from rejecting the theory of cosmopolitan economy; he is merely 
of the opinion that political economy also should be scientifically developed 
[p. 187]; 
c) What then is the cause of labour?..., what impels these minds and these arms 
and hands to undertake production and what gives efficacy to these efforts? What 
else can it be but the spirit which animates the individuals, the social system which 
makes their activity fruitful, the natural forces the use of which is at their disposal? 
Lp- 205J.) 
( 6) Smith "went astray by explaining spiritual forces from material conditions" 
[p. 207].) 
< 7) "That science which teaches how productive forces are aroused and 
cultivated and how they are suppressed or destroyed" (ibid.).) 
8) An example [of the distinction] between two fathers of families, Christian 
religion, monogamy, etc. [pp. 208-209]. 
(9) "One can establish the concepts of value and capital, profit, wages, land 
rent, resolve them into their component parts, and speculate about what could 
influence their rise and fall, etc., without in so doing taking into account the 
political conditions of the nations" [p. 211].) 
Transition. 
10) Workshops and factories are the mothers and children of scientific (civic) 
freedom [p.  212]. 106 
11) The theory of productive and non-productive classes. The former produce 
exchange values, the latter produce productive forces [p. 215]. 
12) Foreign trade must not be judged solely from the standpoint of the theory 
of values [p. 216]. 
13) The nation must sacrifice material forces in order to acquire spiritual or 
social forces. Protective tariffs for raising manufacturing power [pp. 216-217]. 
14) "If therefore a sacrifice of values is made owing to protective tariffs, that 
sacrifice is compensated by the acquisition of productive forces, and this not only 
a Here this fragment written on a separate unnumbered sheet breaks  off.—Ed. 

=====第303页=====
278 Karl Marx 
ensures the nation an infinitely greater sum of material goods for the future, but 
also industrial independence in the event of war" [p. 217]. 
15) "In all these respects, however, the chief thing depends on the state of the 
society in which the individual takes shape, on whether crafts and sciences flourish" 
(p. 206). 
2) Herr List is so much a prey to the economic prejudices of the 
old political economy—more so, as we shall see, than other 
economists of the "School"—that for him "material goods" and 
"exchange values" completely coincide. But exchange value is 
entirely independent of the specific nature of the "material 
goods". It is independent of both the quality and the quantity of 
material goods. Exchange value falls when the quantity of material 
goods rises, although both before and afterwards these bear the 
same relation to human needs. Exchange value is not connected 
with quality. The most useful things, such as knowledge, have no 
exchange value. Herr List therefore ought to have understood 
that the conversion of material goods into exchange values is a 
result of the existing social system, of the society of developed 
private property. The abolition of exchange value is the abolition of 
private property and of private acquisition. Herr List, on the other 
hand, is so naive as to admit that by means of the theory of 
exchange values 
"one can establish the concepts of value and capital, profit, wages, land rent, 
resolve them into their component parts, and speculate about what could influence 
their rise and fall, etc., without in so doing taking into account the political 
conditions of the nations" (p. 211). 
Hence, without taking into account the "theory of productive 
forces" and the "political conditions of the nations", all this 
can be "established". What is established thereby? Reality. What 
is established, for example, by wages? The life of the worker. 
Furthermore, it is established thereby that the worker is the slave 
of capital, that he is a "commodity''', an exchange value, the 
higher or lower level of which, the rise or fall of which, de­
pends on competition, on supply and demand; it is established 
thereby that his activity is not a free manifestation of his human 
life, that it is, rather, a huckstering sale of his forces, an alienation 
(sale) to capital of his one-sidedly developed abilities, in a word, that 
it is "labour". One is supposed to forget this. "Labour" is the living 
basis of private property, it is private property as the creative 
source of  itself.  Private property is nothing but objectified labour. If 
it is desired to strike a mortal blow at private property, one must 
attack it not only as a material state of affairs, but also as activity, as 
labour. It is one of the greatest misapprehensions to speak of free, 

=====第304页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 279 
human, social labour, of labour without private property. 
"Labour" by its very nature is unfree, unhuman, unsocial activity, 
determined by private property and creating private property. 
Hence the abolition of private property will become a reality only 
when it is conceived as the abolition of "labour" (an abolition 
which, of course, has become possible only as a result of labour 
itself,  that is to say, has become possible as a result of the material 
activity of society and which should on no account be conceived as 
the replacement of one category by another).107 An "organisation 
of labour", therefore, is a contradiction. The best organisation that 
labour can be given is the present organisation, free competi­
tion, the dissolution of all its previous apparently "social" organi­
sation. 
Thus,  if wages can be "established" according to the theory of 
values, if it is thereby "established" that man himself is an 
exchange value, that the overwhelming majority of people in the 
nations constitutes a commodity, which can be determined without 
taking "the political conditions of the nations" into account, what 
does all this prove but that this overwhelming majority of people 
in the nations does not have to take "political conditions" into 
account, that these are for it a sheer illusion, that a theory which in 
reality sinks to this sordid materialism of making the majority of 
people in the nations into a "commodity", into an "exchange 
value", and of subjecting this majority to the wholly material 
conditions of exchange value, is an infamous hypocrisy and 
idealistic eye-wash (embellishment), when in relation to other 
nations it looks down contemptuously on the bad "materialism" of 
"exchange values", and is itself ostensibly only concerned with 
"productive forces"? Furthermore, if the conditions of capital, 
land rent, etc., can be "established" without taking the "political 
conditions" of the nations into account, what does this prove but 
that the industrial capitalist and the recipient of land rent are 
guided in their actions in real life by profit, exchange values, and 
not by considerations about "political conditions" and "productive 
forces", and that their talk about civilisation and productive forces 
is only an embellishment of narrow-minded egoistic tendencies? 
The bourgeois says: Of course, the theory of exchange values 
should not be undermined within the country, the majority of the 
nation should remain a mere "exchange value", a "commodity", 
one which must find its own buyer, one which is not sold, but 
which sells  itself.  In relation to you proletarians, and even in our 
mutual relations, we regard ourselves as exchange values, here the 
law of universal huckstering holds good. But in relation to other 

=====第305页=====
280 Karl Marx 
nations we must interrupt the operation of this law. As a nation 
we cannot huckster ourselves to other nations. Since the majority 
of people in the nations has become subject to the laws of 
huckstering "without taking into account" the "political conditions 
of the nations", that proposition has no other meaning than the 
following: We German bourgeois do not want to be exploited by 
the English bourgeois in the way that you German proletarians are 
exploited by us and that we exploit one another. We do not want 
to subject ourselves to the same laws of exchange value as those to 
which we subject you. We do not want any longer to'recognise 
outside the country the economic laws which we recognise inside 
the country. 
[8] What then does the German philistine want? He wants to be 
a bourgeois, an exploiter, inside the country, but he wants also not 
to be exploited outside the country. He puffs himself up into 
being the "nation" in relation to foreign countries and says: I do 
not submit to the laws of competition; that is contrary to my 
national dignity; as the nation I am a being superior to huck­
stering. 
The nationality of the worker is neither French, nor English, 
nor German, it is labour, free slavery, self-huckstering. His government 
is neither French, nor English, nor German, it is capital. His native 
air is neither French, nor German, nor English, it is factory air. 
The land belonging to him is neither French, nor English, nor 
German, it lies a few feet below the  ground.  Within the country, 
money is the fatherland of the industrialist. Thus, the German 
philistine wants the laws of competition, of exchange value, of 
huckstering, to lose their power at the frontier barriers of his 
country! He is willing to recognise the power of bourgeois society 
only in so far as it is in accord with his interests, the interests of his 
class!  He does not want to fall victim to a power to which he wants 
to sacrifice others, and to which he sacrifices himself inside his own 
country! Outside the country he wants to show himself and be 
treated as a different being from what he is within the country 
and how he himself behaves within the country! He wants to leave 
the cause in existence and to abolish one of its effects! We shall 
prove to him that selling oneself out inside the country has as its 
necessary consequence selling out outside, that competition, which 
gives him his power inside the country, cannot prevent him from 
becoming powerless outside the country; that the state, which he 
subordinates to bourgeois society inside the country, cannot 
protect him from the action of bourgeois society outside the 
country. 

=====第306页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 28 1 
However much the individual bourgeois fights against the 
others, as a class the bourgeois have a common interest, and this 
community of interest, which is directed against the proletariat 
inside the country, is directed against the bourgeois of other 
nations outside the country. This the bourgeois calls his nationality. 
2)a It is possible, of course, to regard industry from a completely 
different point of view than that of sordid huckstering interest, 
from which it is nowadays regarded not only by the individual 
merchant and the individual manufacturer, but also by the 
manufacturing nations and the trading nations. Industry can be 
regarded as a great workshop in which man first takes possession 
of his own forces and the forces of nature, objectifies himself and 
creates for himself the conditions for a human existence. When 
industry is regarded in this way, one abstracts from the cir­
cumstances in which it operates today, and in which it exists as 
industry; one's standpoint is not from within the industrial epoch, 
but above it; industry is regarded not by what it is for man today, 
but by what present-day man is for human history, what he is 
historically; it is not its present-day existence (not industry as such) 
that is recognised, but rather the power which industry has 
without knowing or willing it and which destroys it and creates 
the basis for a human existence. (To hold that every nation 
goes through this development internally would be as absurd as 
the idea that every nation is bound to go through the political 
development of France or the philosophical development of 
Germany. What the nations have done as nations, they have done 
for human society; their whole value consists only in the fact that 
each single nation has accomplished for the benefit of other 
nations one of the main historical aspects (one of the main 
determinations) in the framework of which mankind has accom­
plished its development, and therefore after industry in England, 
politics in France *and philosophy in Germany have been de­
veloped, they have been developed for the world, and their 
world-historic significance, as also that of these nations, has 
thereby come to an end.) 
This assessment of industry is then at the same time the 
recognition that the hour has come for it to be done away with, or 
for the abolition of the material and social conditions in which 
mankind has had to develop its abilities as a slave. For as soon as 
industry is no longer regarded as a huckstering interest, but as the 
development of man, man, instead of huckstering interest, is made 
a In the manuscript point 2 occurs twice in this chapter.—Ed. 

=====第307页=====
282 Karl Marx 
the principle and what in industry could develop only in con­
tradiction with industry itself is given the basis which is in 
harmony with that which is to be developed. 
But the wretched individual who [in his ideas] remains within 
the present system, who desires only to raise it to a level which it 
has not yet reached in his own country, and who looks with greedy 
envy on another nation that has reached this level — has this 
wretched individual the right to see in industry anything else but 
huckstering interest? Has he the right to say that he is concerned 
only for the development of man's abilities and man's mastery of 
the forces of nature? For this is just as vile as if a slave-driver were 
to boast that he flourished his whip over his slaves in order that 
the slaves should have the pleasure of exercising their muscular 
power. The German philistine is the slave-driver who flourishes the 
whip of protective tariffs in order to instil in his nation the spirit 
of "industrial education" 108 and teach it to exercise its muscular 
powers. 
The Saint-Simon school has given us an instructive example of 
what it leads to if the productive force that industry creates 
unconsciously and against its will is put to the credit of present-
day industry and the two are confused: industry and the forces 
which industry brings into being unconsciously and without its 
will, but which will only become human forces, man's power, when 
industry is abolished. This is as much an absurdity as if the 
bourgeois wanted to take the credit for his industry creating the 
proletariat, and in the shape of the proletariat the power of a new 
world order. The forces of nature and the social forces which 
industry brings into being (conjures up), stand in the same 
relation to it as the proletariat. Today they are still the slaves of 
the bourgeois, and in them he sees nothing but the instruments 
(the bearers) of his dirty (selfish) lust for profit; tomorrow they 
will break their chains and reveal themselves as the bearers of 
human development which will blow him sky-high together with 
his industry, which assumes the dirty outer shell  — which he 
regards as its essence — only until the human kernel has gained 
sufficient strength to burst this shell and appear in its own shape. 
Tomorrow they will burst the chains by which the bourgeois 
separates them from man and so distorts (transforms) them from 
a real social bond into fetters of society. 
The Saint-Simon school glorified in dithyrambs the productive 
power of industry. The forces which industry calls into being it 
lumped together with industry  itself,  that is to say, with the 
present-day conditions of existence that industry gives to these 

=====第308页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 283 
forces. We are of course far from putting the Saint-Simonists on 
the same level as someone like List or the German philistine. The 
first step towards breaking the spell cast on industry was to 
abstract from the conditions, the money fetters, in which the 
forces of industry operate today and to examine these forces in 
themselves. This was the first call to the people to emancipate 
their industry from huckstering and to understand present-day 
industry as a transitional epoch. The Saint-Simonists, moreover, 
did not stop at this interpretation. They went further — to attack 
exchange value, private property, the organisation of present-day 
society. They put forward association in place of competition. But 
they were punished for their original error. Not only did the 
above-mentioned confusion lead them further into the illusion 
of seeing the dirty bourgeois as a priest, but it also caused them [9], 
after the first external struggles, to fall back into the old illusion 
(confusion) — but now hypocritically, because precisely in the 
course of the struggle the contradiction of the two forces which 
they had confused became manifest. Their glorification of indus­
try (of the productive forces of industry) became a glorification of 
the bourgeoisie, and Monsieur Michel Chevalier, Monsieur 
Duveyrier, Monsieur Dunoyer have pilloried themselves and the 
bourgeoisie in the eyes of the whole of Europe — after which the 
rotten eggs that history throws in their faces became transformed 
by the magic of the bourgeoisie into golden eggs—since the first 
of those named above has retained the old phrases but has 
endowed them with the content of the present-day bourgeois 
regime, the second is himself engaged in huckstering on a 
wholesale scale and presides over the selling-out of French 
newspapers, while the third has become the most rabid apologist 
for the present state of affairs and surpasses in inhumanity (in 
shamelessness) all previous English and French economists. — The 
German bourgeois and Herr List begin where the Saint-Simon 
school left off — with hypocrisy, deception and phrase-mongering. 
England's industrial tyranny over the world is the domination of 
industry over the world. England dominates us because industry 
dominates us. We can free ourselves from England abroad only if 
we free ourselves from industry at home. We shall be able to put 
an end to England's domination in the sphere of competition only 
if we overcome competition within our borders. England has 
power over us because we have made industry into a power over 
us. 
3) That the industrial social order is the best world for the 
bourgeois, the order most suitable for developing his "abilities" as 

=====第309页=====
284 Karl Marx 
a bourgeois and the ability to exploit both people and na­
ture-—who will dispute this tautology? Who will dispute that all that 
is nowadays called "virtue", individual or social virtue, is a source 
of profit for the bourgeois? Who will dispute that political power 
is a means for his enrichment, that even science and intellectual 
pleasures are his slaves? Who will dispute it? That for him 
everything is excellently [adapted3]? That for him everything has 
become a means of wealth, a "productive force of wealth"? 
4) Modern political economy starts out from the social system of 
competition. Free labour, that is to say, indirect slavery which 
offers itself for sale, is its principle. Its primary propositions are 
division of labour and the machine. And this can be given its 
highest development only in the factories, as modern political 
economy itself admits. Thus political economy today, starts out 
from the factories as its creative principle. It presupposes present-
day social conditions. Hence it does not need to expatiate on 
"manufacturing force".109 
If the "School" made no "scientific elaboration"110 of the theory 
of productive forces alongside and separately from the theory of 
exchange values, it acted in this way because such a separation is 
an arbitrary abstraction, because it is impossible and cannot go 
beyond general phrases. 
5) "The causes of wealth are something quite different from wealth  itself.  The 
force capable of creating wealth is infinitely more important than wealth  itself" 
[List, op. cit., p. 201]. 
Productive force appears as an entity infinitely superior to 
exchange value. This force claims the position of inner essence, 
whereas exchange value claims that of a transient phenomenon. 
The force appears as infinite, exchange value as finite, the former 
as non-material, the latter as material — and we find all these 
antitheses in Herr List. Hence the supernatural world of forces 
takes the place of the material world of exchange values. Whereas 
the baseness of a nation sacrificing itself for exchange values, of 
people being sacrificed for things, is quite obvious, forces, on the 
other hand, appear to be independent spiritual essences — phan­
toms—  and pure personifications, deities, and after all one may 
very well demand of the German people that it should sacrifice 
the bad exchange values for phantoms! An exchange value, 
money, always seems to be an external aim, but productive force 
seems to be an aim which arises from my very nature, a self-aim. 
Thus,  what I sacrifice in the form of exchange values is 
a There are one or two illegible words in the manuscript  here.—Ed. 

=====第310页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 285 
something external to me; what I gain in the form of productive 
forces is my self-acquisition.— That is how it seems if one is 
satisfied with a word or, like an idealising German, does not worry 
about the dirty reality which lies behind this grandiloquent word. 
In order to destroy the mystical radiance which transfigures 
"productive force", one has only to consult any book of statistics. 
There one reads about water-power, steam-power, manpower, 
horse-power. All these are "productive forces". Is it a high 
appreciation of man for him to figure as a "force" alongside 
horses, steam and water? 
Under the present system, if a crooked spine, twisted limbs, a 
one-sided development and strengthening of certain muscles, etc., 
make you more capable of working (more productive), then your 
crooked spine, your twisted limbs, your one-sided muscular move­
ment are a productive force. If your intellectual vacuity is more 
productive than your abundant intellectual activity, then your 
intellectual vacuity is a productive force, etc., etc. If the monotony 
of an occupation makes you better suited for that occupation, then 
monotony is a productive force. 
Is the bourgeois, the factory-owner, at all concerned for the 
worker developing all his abilities, exercising his productive 
capacities, fulfilling himself as a human being, and thereby at the 
same time fulfilling his human nature? 
We will leave it to the English Pindar of the factory system, 
Mr. Ure, to reply to this question: 
"It is, in fact, the constant aim and tendency of every improvement in 
machinery to supersede human labour altogether, or to diminish its cost, by 
substituting the industry of women and children for that of men; or that of 
ordinary labourers, for trained artisans"  (Philosophie  des manufactures, etc., Paris, 1836, 
t. I, p. 34). "By the infirmity of human nature it happens, that the more skilful 
the workman, the more self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and, of 
course, the less fit a component of a mechanical system ... therefore [the main point] 
of the modern manufacturer is, through the union of capital and science, to reduce 
the task of his work-people to the exercise of vigilance and dexterity, etc." (loc. cit., 
t. I, p. 30). 
Force, Productive Force, Causes 
"The causes of wealth are something quite different from wealth  itself." 
But if the effect is different from the cause, must not the nature 
of the effect be contained already in the cause? The cause must 
already carry with it the determining feature that is manifested 
later in the effect. Herr List's philosophy goes as far as knowing that 
cause and effect are "something quite different". 

=====第311页=====
286 Karl Marx 
["The force capable of creating wealth is infinitely more important than wealth 
itself."] 
It is a fine recognition of man that degrades him to a "force" 
capable of creating wealth! The bourgeois sees in the proletarian 
not a human being, but a force capable of creating wealth, a force 
which moreover he can then compare with other productive 
forces—an animal, a machine — and if the comparison proves unfa­
vourable to man, the force of which man is the bearer must give 
place to the force of which the bearer is an animal or a machine, 
although in that case man still has (enjoys) the honour of figuring 
as a "productive force". 
If I characterise man as an "exchange value", this expression 
already implies that social conditions have transformed him into a 
"thing". If I treat him as a "productive force", I am putting in the 
place of the real subject a different subject, I am substituting 
another person for him, and he now exists only as a cause of 
wealth. 
The whole of human society becomes merely a machine for the 
creation of wealth. 
The cause is in no way superior to the effect. The effect is 
merely the openly manifested cause. 
List pretends that he is everywhere interested in productive 
forces for their own sake, quite apart from bad exchange values. 
Some light is already thrown for us on the essence of the 
present-day "productive forces" by the fact that in the present 
state of affairs productive force consists not only in, for instance, 
making man's labour more efficient or natural and social forces 
more effective, but just as much in making labour cheaper or more 
unproductive for the worker. Hence productive force is from the 
outset determined by exchange value. It is just as much an 
increase  of.... a 
[III. From Chapter Three] 
[The Problem of Land Rent] 
...[22] land rent disappears. These higher grain prices — since 
the worker always consumes a certain amount of grain, however 
dear it may be, and therefore his nominal wage increases even 
when in reality it decreases—must be deducted from the profits 
of Messrs. the industrialists; Ricardo is wise enough to assume that 
Here the text occupying the fourth page of the ninth manuscript sheet ends. 
Sheets 10-21 have not come down to us. These missing sheets should contain the 
end of Chapter II and the beginning of Chapter  III.—Ed. 

=====第312页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 287 
wages cannot be depressed further. Hence, when there is a rise in 
the price of grain, there follows a reduction in profits and an 
increase in wages, without the latter increasing in reality. However, 
the increase in the price of grain raises the production costs of the 
industrialists, thereby making accumulation and competition more 
difficult for them, in a word, cripples the productive force of the 
country. Therefore the bad "exchange value", which falls in the 
form of land rent into the pockets of the landowners without 
any advantage (to the greatest detriment) to the country's productive 
force, must in one way or another be sacrificed to the general 
good—by free trade in grain, by shifting all taxes on to land rent, 
or by outright appropriation of land rent, i.e. of landed property, 
by the state (this conclusion has been drawn by, among others, 
[James] Mill, Hilditch and Cherbuliez). 
Herr List, of course, did not dare to tell the German landed 
aristocracy of this frightening consequence of industrial productive 
force for landed property. Hence he berates Ricardo, who dis­
closed such unpleasant truths, and ascribes to him the opposite 
view, that of the physiocrats, according to which land rent is 
nothing but a proof of the natural productive force of land, and 
falsifies him. 
List: 
"In general, since Adam Smith, the 
School has been unfortunate in its re­
searches into the nature of rent. Ricar­
do, and following him Mill, McCulloch 
and others, hold that rent is paid for 
the natural productivity inherent in plots 
of land. Ricardo based a whole system 
on this view.... Since he considered only 
English conditions, he was misled into 
the erroneous view that these English 
ploughed fields and meadows, for the 
apparently natural productivity of 
which such fine rent is paid at the 
present time, have been the very same 
ploughed fields and meadows at all 
times"  (p. 360). Ricardo: 
"If the surplus produce which land 
affords in the form of rent be an 
advantage, it is desirable that, every year, 
the machinery newly constructed should 
be less  efficient than the old, as that would 
undoubtedly give a greater exchangeable 
value to the goods manufactured ... in the 
kingdom; and a rent would be paid to all 
those who possessed the most productive 
machinery" (Des principes de l'économie 
politique, etc., Paris, 1835, t. I, p. 77). 
"Wealth increases most rapidly in 
those countries ... where through agricul­
tural improvements, productions can be 
multiplied without any increase in the 
proportional quantity of labour, and 
where consequently the progress of rent 
is only gradual" (p. 81 et seq.). a 
a Marx quoted these passages from List and Ricardo above (see pp. 12-13). In 
repeating the quotation from Ricardo, Marx translated the end differently.—Ed. 

=====第313页=====
288 Karl Marx 
Hence, in relation to the higher nobility, Herr List does not 
dare to keep up his shadow play with "productive forces". He 
wants to lure this nobility with "exchange values" and therefore 
slanders the School of Ricardo, who neither judges land rent from 
the standpoint of productive force, nor judges the latter from the 
standpoint of the modern large-scale factory system. 
Thus Herr List is doubly a liar. Nevertheless we must not do 
Herr List an injustice in this matter. In one large Württemberg 
factory (Köchlin, if we are not mistaken) the King of Württem­
berg 3 himself participates, having invested a large sum in it. In the 
Württemberg factories, and to a greater or lesser extent in those 
of Baden as well, the landed nobility plays an important role by 
holding shares. Here, therefore, the nobility participates monetari­
ly in the "manufacturing force", not as landowners but as 
bourgeois and manufacturers themselves, and b... 
...[24] "productive forces" and the "continuity and permanence 
of production" of a whole generation arises—the disguised 
Communist List teaches this as well — and is therefore also a 
hereditary feature of the generation and not of Messrs. the 
industrialists (see, for example, Bray111). 
In England, high land rents were ensured for the landlords only 
through ruining the tenant-farmers and reducing the farm labour­
ers to the level (of real beggars) of an Irish poverty. All this in 
spite of the various Corn Laws, and apart from the fact that the 
landlords in receipt of rent were often compelled to allow the 
tenant-farmers a remission of one-third to one-half of the rent. 
Since 1815, three various Corn Laws have been passed to improve 
the position of the tenant-farmers and encourage them. During 
this period, five parliamentary committees were appointed to 
establish the existence of the distressed state of agriculture and to 
investigate its causes. The continual ruin of the tenant-farmers, on 
the one hand, in spite of the total (full) exploitation of the farm 
labourers and the utmost possible reduction of their wages, and, 
on the other hand, the frequent necessity for the landowners to 
forego part of the rent, are themselves proof that not even in 
England — in spite of all its manufacturing industry — have high 
land rents been produced. For, from the economic point of view, 
it cannot be regarded as land rent when part of the costs of 
production,112 by means of agreements and other circumstances 
lying outside the sphere of economics, is drawn into the pocket 
a The reference is to Wilhelm I, King of Württemberg. —Ed. 
The text breaks off here, as the 23rd manuscript sheet is missing.—Ed. 

=====第314页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 289 
of the landlord instead of that of the tenant-farmer. If the 
landowner himself cultivated his land, he would certainly take care 
not to enter part of the ordinary profit of working capital under 
the heading "land rent". 
Writers of the 16th, 17th and even the first two-thirds of the 
18th century, still regarded the export of grain by England as the 
main source of its wealth. The old English industry — the main 
branch of which was the woollen industry, and the less important 
branches of which processed mostly materials supplied by the 
main branch itself  — was wholly subordinated to agriculture. Its 
chief raw material was the product of English agriculture. As a 
matter of course, therefore, this industry promoted agriculture. 
Later, when the factory system proper developed, already in a 
short space of time the necessity for customs duties on corn began 
to be felt. But they remained nominal. The rapid growth of the 
population, the abundance of fertile land which had yet to be 
made cultivable, the inventions, at first, of course, raised also the 
level of agriculture. It especially profited from the war against 
Napoleon, which established a regular system of prohibition for it. 
But 1815 revealed how little the "productive force" of agriculture 
had really increased. A general outcry arose among landowners and 
tenant-farmers, and the present Corn Laws were enacted.113  It is 
in the nature of modern factory industry, firstly, to estrange 
industry from the native soil since it processes mainly raw 
materials from abroad and bases itself on foreign trade. It is in the 
nature of this industry [secondly] to cause the population to grow 
in a ratio which, under the system of private property, does not 
correspond to the exploitation of the soil. It is furthermore in its 
nature, if it gives rise to Corn Laws, as it has always done in 
Europe up to now, to convert the peasants into the very poorest 
proletarians through high rents and factory methods of exploiting 
landed property. If, on the other hand, it succeeds in preventing 
the passing of Corn Laws, it puts a mass of land out of cultivation, 
subjects the price of grain to external contingencies, and complete­
ly alienates the country [entäussert das Land völlig] by making its 
most essential means of subsistence dependent on trade, which 
undermines landed property as an independent source of property. 
This last feature is the aim of the Anti-Corn-Law League in 
England and the anti-rent movement in North America, for land 
rent is the economic expression of landed property. Therefore the 
Tories continually draw attention to the danger of England being 
made dependent for its means of subsistence on, for example, 
Russia. 

=====第315页=====
290 Karl Marx 
Large-scale factory industry — of course, countries like North 
America which have a huge amount of land still to be brought 
under cultivation (and protective duties by no means increase the 
amount of land) do not count here — certainly has a tendency to 
paralyse the productive force of the soil, as soon as its exploitation 
has reached a certain level, just as, on the other hand, the conduct 
of agriculture on factory lines has a tendency to oust people and 
to convert all the land — of course, within certain limits — into 
pasture, so that cattle take the place of people. 
Ricardo's theory of land rent, in a few words, amounts to the 
following: 
Land rent adds nothing to the productivity of land. On the 
contrary, rising land rent is proof that the productive force of 
land is falling. It is in fact determined by the relation of the area 
of land suitable for cultivation to the number of the population 
and to the level of civilisation in general. The price of grain is 
determined by the cost of production on the least fertile land that 
has to be cultivated because of the needs of the population. If land 
of a poorer quality has to be resorted to, or if amounts of capital 
have to be applied with a lesser yield to the same piece of land, 
then the owner of the most fertile land sells his product as dearly 
as the peasant who has the worst. He pockets the difference 
between the cost of production on the best land and that on the 
most infertile. Thus, the less productive the land that is put into 
cultivation, or the less the yield from second and third amounts of 
capital applied to the same piece of land, in short, the more the 
relative productive force of the land decreases, the higher the land 
rent rises. The land made fruitful everywhere....3 
IV. Herr List and Ferrier h 
The book by Ferrier, sous-inspecteur des douanes 0 under 
Napoleon, Du gouvernement considéré dans ses rapports avec le 
commerce, Paris, 1805, is the work from which Herr List copied. In 
List's book there is not a single basic idea that has not been stated, 
and better stated, in Ferrier's book. 
Ferrier was one of Napoleon's officials. He defended the 
Continental System. He does not speak about the system of  protection 
a The text of the fourth page of the last numbered sheet in Marx's manuscript 
breaks off  here.—Ed. 
This chapter of the manuscript occupies four pages of an unnumbered 
sheet.—Ed. 
c Sub-inspector of customs.—Ed. 

=====第316页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 291 
but about the prohibitive system. He is far from making phrases 
about a union of all nations or eternal peace within the country. 
Nor, of course, has he any socialist phrases yet. We shall give a 
short extract from his book in order to throw light on this secret 
source of List's wisdom. Whereas Herr List falsifies Louis Say so as 
to be able to present him as his ally, nowhere, on the other hand, 
does he quote Ferrier, whom he has copied out everywhere. He 
wanted to lead the reader on a false trail. 
We have already quoted Ferrier's judgment on Smith.3 Ferrier 
still adheres to the old prohibitive system, but more honestly. 
State Intervention. The Thrift of Nations 
"There is a thrift and an extravagance (prodigalité) of nations, but a nation is 
extravagant or thrifty only in its relations with other peoples" (p. 143). 
"It is untrue that the most profitable use of capital for the person who owns it 
is necessarily also the most profitable for industry.... The interest of the capitalists, 
far from coinciding with the general interest, is almost always in opposition to it" 
(pp. 168, 169). 
"There is a thrift of nations, but it is very different from Smith's.... It consists in 
buying foreign products only in so far as they can be paid for by one's own 
products. Sometimes it consists in completely foregoing them" (pp.  [174],  175). 
Productive Forces and Exchange Value 
"The principles of the thrift of nations which Smith laid down (set) are all based 
on the distinction between productive and unproductive labour.... This distinction 
is essentially incorrect. There is no unproductive labour" (p. 141). 
"He"  (Gamier) "saw in silver only the value of the silver, without thinking about 
its property, as silver, to make circulation more active and, consequently, to multiply 
the products of labour" (p. 18). "Therefore, when governments seek to prevent the 
outflow of money ... this is not on account of its value ..., but because the value that 
is received in exchange for it cannot have the same effect in circulation ..., because 
it cannot cause a new creation at each transition" (pp. 22, 23). "The word 'wealth', 
as applied to money that circulates as money, must be understood from the acts of 
reproduction that it facilitates ..., and in this sense a country enriches itself when it 
increases the quantity of its money, because with this increase of money all the 
productive forces of labour increase" (p. 71). "When it is said that a country can lay 
out (expend) an income of two milliards, ... what is meant is that the country has 
the means, with the aid of these two milliards, to support a circulation 10, 20, 30 
times greater in values or, what is the same thing, that it can produce these values. It 
is these means of production, which the country owes to money, that are called 
wealth" (p. 22). 
You see: Ferrier distinguishes the exchange value possessed by 
money from the productive force of money. Apart from the fact that 
See pp. 268-69 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第317页=====
292 Karl Marx 
in general he calls the means of production wealth, there was in 
any case nothing easier than to apply to all capital the distinction 
which he drew between the value and the productive force of 
money. 
But Ferrier goes still farther, he defends the prohibitive system, 
in general on the grounds that it safeguards for the nations their 
means of production: 
"Thus prohibitions are useful whenever they make it easier for nations to 
acquire the means to satisfy their needs.... I compare a nation which with its money 
buys abroad commodities it can make  itself,  although of poorer quality, with a 
gardener who, dissatisfied with the fruit he gathers, would buy juicier fruits from 
his neighbours, giving them his gardening tools in exchange" (p. 288). "Foreign 
trade is always profitable when it endeavours to enlarge productive capital. It is 
unprofitable when instead of multiplying capital it demands its alienation" 
(pp. 395-96). 
Agriculture, Manufacture, Trade 
"Should a government promote trade and factories in preference to agricul­
ture? This question is still one of those on which governments and writers cannot 
agree" (p. 73). 
"The progress of industry and trade is bound up with that of civilisation, the 
arts, the sciences, and shipping. A government, which can do almost nothing for 
agriculture, can do almost everything for industry. If a nation has habits or tastes 
capable of holding back its development, the government must use all its means to 
combat them" (p. 84). 
"The true means of encouraging agriculture is the encouragement of manufac­
tures"  (p. 225). "Its domain" (that of industry, by which M. Ferrier means 
manufacturing industry) "is not limited, whether in its successes or in its means of 
improvement.... Far-reaching like imagination, and like imagination mobile and 
fruitful, its creative power has no limits other than those of the human mind  itself, 
from which it daily receives fresh eclat" (p. 85). 
"The true source of wealth for an agricultural-manufacturing nation is 
reproduction and labour. It must apply its capital to this end and be concerned to 
transport and sell its own commodities before it can engage in transporting and 
selling those of other nations" (p. 186). "This growth of man's wealth is to be 
ascribed primarily to internal trade, which long preceded the exchange of nation 
with nation" (p. 145). "According to Smith  himself,  of two capitals, one of which is 
invested in home trade and the other in foreign trade, the first gives the country's 
industry 24 times greater support and encouragement" (p. [145J-146). 
But M. Ferrier at least understands that home trade cannot exist 
without foreign trade (loc. cit.). 
"If some private persons import from England 50,000 pieces of velvet, they will 
make a great deal of money by this transaction and will be very well able to market 
their wares. But they reduce the home industry and put 10,000 workers out of 
work" (p. 170; cf. pp. 155, 156). 
Like List, M. Ferrier draws attention to the difference between 
towns engaged in manufacture and trade and towns which only 

=====第318页=====
On Friedrich List's Book Das Nationale System der Politischen Oekonomie 293 
consume (p. 91), but in so doing he is at least honest enough to 
refer to Smith  himself.  He refers to the Methuen Treaty,114  so dear to 
Herr List, and the subtlety of Smith's judgment of that treaty 
(p. 159). We have already seen how in general his judgment of 
Smith coincides almost word for word with List's. See also on 
carrying trade (p. 186 et passim). 
The difference between Ferrier and List is that the former 
writes in support of an undertaking of world-historic impor­
tance—the Continental System, whereas the latter writes in support 
of a petty, weak-minded bourgeoisie. 
The reader will admit that the whole of Herr List is contained 
in nuce in the extracts quoted from Ferrier. If, moreover, one adds 
the phrases he borrows from the development of political 
economy since Ferrier, then all that remains as his share is empty 
idealising, the productive force of which consists in words — and 
the clever hypocrisy of the German bourgeois striving for domina­
tion. 
Written in March 1845 Published from the manuscript 
First published in Russian translation Published in English for the first 
in the magazine Voprosy Istorii K.P.S.S. time 
No. 12, 1971 
11-762 

=====第319页=====

=====第320页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE CONDITION 
OF THE WORKING-CLASS 
IN ENGLAND 
FROM PERSONAL OBSERVATION 
AND AUTHENTIC SOURCES 115 

=====第321页=====
Written September 1844 to March 1845 
Published in Leipzig in 1845 
Signed: Frederick Engels Printed according to the text of 
the authorised English edition of 
1892,  checked with the German 
editions of 1845 and 1892 

=====第322页=====
TO THE WORKING-CLASSES OF GREAT-BRITAIN1 
Working Men! 
To you I dedicate a work, in which I have tried to lay before my 
German Countrymen a faithful picture of your condition, of your 
sufferings and struggles, of your hopes and prospects. I have lived 
long enough amidst you to know something about your cir­
cumstances; I have devoted to their knowledge my most serious 
attention, I have studied the various official and non-official 
documents as far as I was able to get hold of them—I have not 
been satisfied with this, I wanted more than a mere abstract 
knowledge of-my subject, I wanted to see you in your own homes, 
to observe you in your every-day life, to chat with you on your 
condition and grievances, to witness your struggles against the 
social and political power of your oppressors. I have done so: I 
forsook the company and the dinner-parties, the port-wine and 
champaign of the middle-classes, and devoted my leisure-hours 
almost exclusively to the intercourse with plain Working-Men ; I 
am both glad and proud of having done so. Glad, because thus I 
was induced to spend many a happy hour in obtaining a 
knowledge of the realities of life — many an hour, which else 
would have been wasted in fashionable talk and tiresome etiquette; 
proud, because thus I got an opportunity of doing justice to an 
oppressed and calumniated class of men who with all their faults 
and under all the disadvantages of their situation, yet command 
the respect of every one but an English money-monger; proud, 
too, because thus I was placed in a position to save the English 
people from the growing contempt which on the Continent has 

=====第323页=====
298 Frederick Engels 
been the necessary consequence of the brutally selfish policy and 
general behaviour of your ruling middle-class. 
Having, at the same time, ample opportunity to watch the. 
middle-classes, your opponents, I soon came to the conclusion that 
you are right, perfectly right in expecting no support whatever 
from them. Their interest is diametrically opposed to yours, 
though they always will try to maintain the contrary and to make 
you believe in their most hearty sympathy with your fates. Their 
doings give them the lie. I hope to have collected more than 
sufficient evidence of the fact, that—be their words what they 
please — the middle-classes intend in reality nothing else but to 
enrich themselves by your labour while they can sell its produce, 
and to abandon you to starvation as soon as they cannot make a 
profit by this indirect trade in human flesh. What have they done 
to prove their professed good-will towards you? Have they ever 
paid any serious attention to your grievances? Have they done 
more than paying the expenses of half-a-dozen commissions of 
inquiry, whose voluminous reports are damned to ever-lasting 
slumber among heaps of waste paper on the shelves of the Home 
Office? Have they even done as much as to compile from those 
rotting blue-books a single readable book from which everybody 
might easily get some information on the condition of the great 
majority of "free-born Britons"? Not they indeed, those are things 
they do not like to speak of—they have left it to a foreigner to 
inform the civilised world of the degrading situation you have to 
live in. 
A foreigner to them, not to you, I hope. Though my English may 
not be pure, yet, I hope, you will find it plain English. No 
working-man in England — nor in France either, by-the-by — ever 
treated me as a foreigner. With the greatest pleasure I observed 
you to be free from that blasting curse, national prejudice and 
national pride, which after all means nothing but wholesale selfish­
ness—I observed you to sympathise with every one who earnestly 
applies his powers to human progress—may he be an Englishman 
or not — to admire every thing great and good, whether nursed on 
your native soil or not—I found you to be more than mere 
Englishmen, members of a single, isolated nation, I found you to be 
Men,  members of the great and universal family of Mankind, who 
know their interest a'nd that of all the human race to be the same. 
And as such, as members of this Family of "One and Indivisible" 
Mankind, as Human Beings in the most emphatical meaning of 
the word, as such I, and many others on the Continent, hail your 
progress in every direction and wish you speedy success. 

=====第324页=====
Cover of the first edition of The Condition of the Working-Class in England 

=====第325页=====

=====第326页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 301 
Go on then, as you have done hitherto. Much remains to be 
undergone; be firm, be undaunted — your success is certain, and 
no step you will have to take in your onward march, will be lost to 
our common cause, the cause of Humanity! 
Barmen (Rhénan Prussia) 
March 15th, 1845 
Frederick Engels 

=====第327页=====
Preface 
The book prefaced by the following pages treats of a subject 
which I originally intended to deal with in a single chapter of a 
more comprehensive work on the social history of England.118 
However, the importance of that subject soon made it necessary 
for me to investigate it separately. 
The condition of the working-class is the real basis and point of 
departure of all social movements of the present because it is the 
highest and most unconcealed pinnacle of the social misery 
existing in our day. French and German working-class Commu­
nism are its direct, Fourierism and English Socialism, as well as the 
Communism of the German educated bourgeoisie, are its indirect 
products. A knowledge of proletarian conditions is absolutely 
necessary to be able to provide solid ground for socialist theories, 
on the one hand, and for judgments about their right to exist, on 
the other; and to put an end to all sentimental dreams and fancies 
pro and con. But proletarian conditions exist in their  classical  form, 
in their perfection, only in the British Empire, particularly in 
England proper. Besides, only in England has the necessary 
material been so completely collected and put on record by official 
enquiries as is essential for any in the least exhaustive presentation 
of the subject. 
Twenty-one months I had the opportunity to become ac­
quainted with the English proletariat, its strivings, its sorrows and 
its joys, to see them from near, from personal observation and 
personal intercourse, and at the same time to supplement my 
observations by recourse to the requisite authentic sources. What I 
have seen, heard and read has been worked up in the present 
book. I am prepared to see not only my standpoint attacked in 

=====第328页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 303 
many quarters but also the facts I have cited, particularly when the 
book gets into the hands of the English. I know equally well that 
here and there I may be proved wrong in some particular of no 
importance, something that in view of the comprehensive nature 
of the subject and its far-reaching assumptions even an English­
man might be unable to avoid; so much the more so since even in 
England there exists as yet not a single piece of writing which, like 
mine, takes up all the workers. But without a moment's hesitation 
I challenge the English bourgeoisie to prove that even in a single 
instance of any consequence for the exposition of my point of view 
as a whole I have been guilty of any inaccuracy, and to prove it by 
data as authentic as mine. 
A description of the classical form which the conditions of 
existence of the proletariat have assumed in Britain is very 
important, particularly for Germany and precisely at the present 
moment. German Socialism and Communism have proceeded, 
more than any other, from theoretical premises; we German 
theoreticians still knew much too little of the real world to be 
driven directly by the real relations to reforms of this "bad 
reality". At any rate almost none of the avowed champions of such 
reforms arrived at Communism otherwise than by way of the 
Feuerbachian dissolution of Hegelian speculation. The real condi­
tions of the life of the proletariat are so little known among us 
that even the well-meaning "societies for the uplift of the 
working-classes",119 in which our bourgeoisie is now mistreating 
the social question, constantly start out from the most ridiculous 
and preposterous judgments concerning the condition of the 
workers. We Germans more than anybody else stand in need of a 
knowledge of the facts concerning this question. And while the 
conditions of existence of Germany's proletariat have not assumed 
the classical form that they have in England, we nevertheless have, 
at bottom, the same social order, which sooner or later must 
necessarily reach the same degree of acuteness as it has already 
attained across the North Sea, unless the intelligence of the nation 
brings about in time the adoption of measures that will provide a 
new basis for the whole social system. The root-causes whose effect 
in England has been the misery and oppression of the proletariat 
exist also in Germany and in the long run must engender the 
same results. In the meantime, however, the established fact of 
wretched conditions in England will impel us to establish also the 
fact of wretched conditions in Germany and will provide us with a 
yardstick wherewith to measure their extent and the magnitude of 
the danger  — brought to light by the Silesian and Bohemian 

=====第329页=====
304 Frederick Engels 
disturbances120—which directly threatens the tranquillity of Ger­
many from that quarter. 
Finally, there are still two remarks I wish to make. Firstly, that I 
have used the word Mittelklasse all along in the sense of the 
English word middle-class (or middle-classes, as is said almost al­
ways).  Like the French word  bourgeoisie  it means the possessing class, 
specifically that possessing class which is differentiated from the 
so-called aristocracy — the class which in France and England is 
directly and in Germany, figuring as "public opinion", indirectly 
in possession of political power. Similarly, I have continually used 
the expressions working-men (Arbeiter) and proletarians, working-
class,  propertyless class and proletariat as equivalents. Secondly, 
that in the case of most of the quotations I have indicated the 
party to which the respective authors belong, because in nearly 
every instance the Liberals try to emphasise the distress in the 
rural areas and to argue away that which exists in the factory 
districts, while the Conservatives, conversely, acknowledge the 
misery in the factory districts but disclaim any knowledge of it in 
the agricultural areas. For the same reason, whenever I lacked 
official documents for describing the condition of the industrial 
workers, I always preferred to present proof from Liberal sources 
in order to defeat the liberal bourgeoisie by casting their own 
words in their teeth. I cited Tories or Chartists in my support only 
when I could confirm their correctness from personal observation 
or was convinced of the truthfulness of the facts quoted because of 
the personal or literary reputation of the authorities I referred to. 
Barmen, March 15, 1845 
F. Engels 

=====第330页=====
TO THE  WORKING CLASSES 
OF 
Working Menl 
To you I dedicate a work, in which I have tried to lay before 
my German Countrymen a faithful picture of your condition, of 
your sufferings and struggles, of your hopes and prospects. I have 
lived long enough amidst you to know something about your circum­
stances  ; I have devoted to their knowledge my most serious atten­
tion,  I have studied the various official and non-official documents 
as far as I was able to get hold of them — I have not been satisfied 
with this, I wanted more than a mere abstract knowledge of my 
subject, I wanted to see you in your own homes, to observe you in 
your every-day life, to chat with you on your condition and grie­
vances, to witness your struggles against the social and political 
power of your oppressors. I have done so: I forsook the company 
and the dinner-parties, the port-wine and champaign of the middle -
classes, and devoted my leisure-hours almost exclusively to the inter­
course with plain Working  Men  ; I am both glad and proud of having 
done so. Glad, because thus I was induced to spend many a happy 
hour in obtaining  a knowledge of the realities of life — many an hour, 
First page of Engels' address 
To the Working-Classes of Great-Britain 

=====第331页=====

=====第332页=====
INTRODUCTION 
The history of the proletariat3 in England begins with the 
second half of the last century, with the invention of the 
steam-engine and of machinery for working cotton. These inven­
tions gave rise, as is well known, to an industrial revolution, a 
revolution which altered the whole civil society; one, the historical 
importance of which is only now beginning to be recognised. 
England is the classic soil of this transformation, which was all the 
mightier, the more silently it proceeded; and England is, there­
fore,  the classic land of its chief product also, the proletariat. Only 
in England can the proletariat be studied in all its relations and 
from all sides. 
We have not, here and now, to deal with the history of this 
revolution, nor with its vast importance for the present and the 
future. Such a delineation must be reserved for a future, more 
comprehensive work. For the moment, we must limit ourselves to 
the little that is necessary for understanding the facts that follow, 
for comprehending the present state of the English proletariat. 
Before the introduction of machinery, the spinning and weaving 
of raw materials was carried on in the working-man's home. Wife 
and daughter spun the yarn that the father wove or that they sold, 
if he did not work it up  himself.  These weaver families lived in the 
country in the neighbourhood of the towns, and could get on 
fairly well with their wages, because the home market was almost 
the only one,b and the crushing power of competition that came 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the working-class".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 enlarge on this phrase: "because the 
home market was still the decisive one as regards the demand for fabrics and 
almost the only  one."—Ed. 

=====第333页=====
308 Frederick Engels 
later, with the conquest of foreign markets and the extension of 
trade, did not yet press upon wages. There was, further, a constant 
increase in the demand for the home market, keeping pace with the 
slow increase in population and employing all the workers; and there 
was also- the impossibility of vigorous competition of the workers 
among themselves, consequent upon the rural dispersion of their 
homes. So it was that the weaver was usually in a position to lay by 
something, and rent a little piece of land, that he cultivated in his 
leisure hours, of which he had as many as he chose to take, since he 
could weave whenever and as long as he pleased. True, he was a bad 
farmer and managed his land inefficiently, often obtaining but poor 
crops;  nevertheless, he was no proletarian, he had a stake in the 
country, he was permanently settled, and stood one step higher in 
society than the English workman of today. 
So the workers vegetated throughout a passably comfortable 
existence, leading a righteous and peaceful life in all piety and 
probity; and their material position was far better than that of 
their successors. They did not need to overwork; they did no 
more than they chose to do, and yet earned what they needed. 
They had leisure for healthful work in garden or field, work 
which, in  itself,  was recreation for them, and they could take part 
besides in the recreations and games of their neighbours, and 
all these games—bowling, cricket,3 football, etc., contributed to 
their physical health and vigour. They were, for the most 
part, strong, well-built people, in whose physique little or no 
difference from that of their peasant neighbours was discoverable. 
Their children grew up in the fresh country air, and, if 
they could help their parents at work, it was only occasionally; 
while of eight or twelve hours work for them there was no 
question. 
What the moral and intellectual character of- this class was may 
be guessed. Shut off from the towns, which they never entered, 
their yarn and woven stuff being delivered to travelling agents for 
payment of wages — so shut off that old people who lived quite in 
the neighbourhood of the town never went thither until they were 
robbed of their trade by the introduction of machinery and 
obliged to look about them in the towns for work  — the weavers 
stood upon the moral and intellectual plane of the yeomen with 
whom they were usually immediately connected through their little 
holdings. They regarded their squire, the greatest landholder of 
The word "cricket" does not occur in the German editions of 1845 and 
1892.—Ed. 

=====第334页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 309 
the region, as their natural superior; they asked advice of him, 
laid their small disputes before him for settlement, and gave him 
all honour, as this patriarchal relation involved. They were 
"respectable" people, good husbands and fathers, led moral lives 
because they had no temptation to be immoral, there being no 
gTOggeries or low houses in their vicinity, and because the host, at 
whose inn they now and then quenched their thirst, was also a 
respectable man, usually a large tenant-farmer who took pride in 
his good order, good beer, and early hours. They had their 
children the whole day at home, and brought them up in 
obedience and the fear of God; the patriarchal relationship 
remained undisturbed so long as the children were unmarried. 
The young people grew up in idyllic simplicity and intimacy with 
their playmates until they married; and even though sexual 
intercourse before marriage almost unfailingly took place, this 
happened only when the moral obligation of marriage was 
recognised on both sides, and a subsequent wedding made 
everything good. In short, the English industrial workers of those 
days lived and thought after the fashion still to be found here and 
there in Germany, in retirement and seclusion, without mental 
activity and without violent fluctuations in their position in life. 
They could rarely read and far more rarely write; went regularly 
to church, never talked politics, never conspired, never thought, 
delighted in physical exercises, listened with inherited reverence 
when the Bible was read, and were, in their unquestioning 
humility, exceedingly well-disposed towards the "superior" classes. 
But intellectually, they were dead; lived only for their petty, 
private interest, for their looms and gardens, and knew nothing of 
the mighty movement which, beyond their horizon, was sweeping 
through mankind. They were comfortable in their silent vegeta­
tion, and but for the industrial revolution they would never have 
emerged from this existence, which, cosily romantic as it was, was 
nevertheless not worthy of human beings. In truth, they were not 
human beings; they were merely toiling machines in the service of 
the few aristocrats who had guided history down to that time. The 
industrial revolution has simply carried this out to its logical end 
by making the workers machines pure and simple, taking from 
them the last trace of independent activity, and so forcing them to 
think and demand a position worthy of men. As in France politics, 
so in England manufacture and the movement of civil society in 
general drew into the whirl of history the last classes which had 
remained sunk in apathetic indifference to the universal interests 
of mankind. 

=====第335页=====
310 Frederick Engels 
The first invention which gave rise to a radical change in the 
state of the English workers was the jenny, invented in the year 
1764 by a weaver, James Hargreaves, of Stanhill,a near Blackburn, 
in North Lancashire. This machine was the rough beginning of 
the later invented mule, and was moved by hand. Instead of one 
spindle like the ordinary spinning-wheel, it carried sixteen or 
eighteen manipulated by a single workman. This invention made it 
possible to deliver more yarn than heretofore. Whereas, though 
one weaver had employed three spinners, there had never been 
enough yarn, and the weaver had often been obliged to wait for it, 
there was now more yarn to be had than could be woven by the 
available workers. The demand for woven goods, already increas­
ing, rose yet more in consequence of the cheapness of these goods, 
which cheapness, in turn, was the outcome of the diminished cost 
of producing the yarn. More weavers were needed, and weavers' 
wages rose. Now that the weaver could earn more at his loom, he 
gradually abandoned his farming, and gave his whole time to 
weaving. At that time a family of four grown persons and two 
children (who were set to spooling) could earn, with eightb hours' 
daily work, four pounds sterling0 in a week, and often more if 
trade was good and work pressed. It happened often enough that 
a single weaver earned two pounds a week at his loom. By degrees 
the class of farming weavers wholly disappeared, and was merged 
in the newly arising class of weavers who lived wholly upon wages, 
had no property whatever, not even the pretended property of a 
holding, and so became working-men,d proletarians. Moreover, the 
old relation between spinner and weaver was destroyed. Hitherto, 
so far as this had been possible, yarn had been spun and woven 
under one  roof.  Now that the jenny as well as the loom required a 
strong hand, men began to spin, and whole families lived by 
spinning, while others laid the antiquated, superseded spinning-
wheel aside; and, if they had not means of purchasing a jenny, 
were forced to live upon the wages of the father alone. Thus 
began with spinning and weaving that division of labour which has 
since been so infinitely perfected. 
a In the editions which appeared during Engels' lifetime the name of this place 
was given wrongly as Standhill (as in Ure's book The Cotton Manufacture of Great 
Britain).—  Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "ten".— Ed. 
c After this the German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "(28 Prussian 
talers)." —Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this word in English in 
brackets after the word "proletarians".—Ed. 

=====第336页=====
The Condition of the Working-CIass in England 311 
While the industrial proletariat was thus developing with the 
first still very imperfect machine, the same machine gave rise to 
the agricultural proletariat. There had, hitherto, been a vast 
number of small landowners, yeomen, who had vegetated in the 
same unthinking quiet as their neighbours, the farming weavers. 
They cultivated their scraps of land quite after the ancient and 
inefficient fashion of their ancestors, and opposed every change 
with the obstinacy peculiar to such creatures of habit, after 
remaining stationary from generation to generation. Among them 
were many small holders also, not tenants in the present sense of 
the word, but people who had their land handed down from their 
fathers, either by hereditary lease, or by force of ancient custom, 
and had hitherto held it as securely as if it had actually been their 
own property. When the industrial workers withdrew from ag­
riculture, a great number of small holdings fell idle, and upon 
these the new class of large tenants established themselves, 
tenants-at-will,a holding fifty, one hundred, two hundred or 
more acres,b liable to be turned out at the end of the year, but 
able by improved tillage and larger farming to increase the yield of 
the land. They could sell their produce more cheaply than the 
yeoman, for whom nothing remained when his farm no longer 
supported him but to sell it, procure a jenny or a loom, or take 
service as an agricultural labourer in the employ of a large farmer. 
His inherited slowness and the inefficient methods of cultivation 
bequeathed by his ancestors, and above which he could not rise, 
.left him no alternative when forced to compete with men who 
managed their holdings on sounder principles and with all the 
advantages bestowed by farming on a large scale and the invest­
ment of capital for the improvement of the soil. 
Meanwhile, the industrial movement did not stop here. Single 
capitalists began to set up spinning jennies in great buildings and 
to use water-power for driving them, so placing themselves in a 
position to diminish the number of workers, and sell their yarn 
more cheaply than single spinners could do who moved their own 
machines by hand. There were constant improvements in the 
jenny, so that machines continually became antiquated, and must 
be altered or even laid aside; and though the capitalists could hold 
out by the application of water-power even with the old machin­
ery, for the single spinner this was impossible. And the factory 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have this expression in English.— Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "Morgen" instead of "acres". 
One Morgen is rather less than 2/3 of an  acre.—Ed. 

=====第337页=====
312 Frederick Engels 
system, the beginning of which was thus made, received a fresh 
extension in 1767, through the spinning throstle invented by 
Richard Arkwright, a barber, in Preston, in North Lancashire. 
After the steam-engine, this is the most important mechanical 
invention of the 18th century.3 It was calculated from the 
beginning for mechanical motive power, and was based upon 
wholly new principles. By the combination of the peculiarities of 
the jenny and throstle, Samuel Crompton, of Firwood, Lancashire, 
contrived the mule in 1785,b and as Arkwright invented the 
carding engine, and preparatory ("slubbing and roving")c frames 
about the same time, the factory system became the prevailing one 
for the spinning of cotton. By means of trifling modifications 
these machines were gradually adapted to the spinningd of flax, 
and so to the superseding of hand-work here, too. But even then, 
the end was not yet. In the closing years of the last century, Dr. 
Cartwright, a country parson, had invented the power-loom, and 
about 1804 had so far perfected it, that it could successfully 
compete with the hand-weaver; and all this machinery was made 
doubly important by James Watt's steam-engine, invented in 1764 
and used for supplying motive power for spinning since 1785. 
With these inventions, since improved from year to year, the 
victory of machine-work over hand-work in the chief branches of 
English industry was won; and the history of the latter from that 
time forward simply relates how the hand-workers have been 
driven by machinery from one position after another. The 
consequences of this were, on the one hand, a rapid fall in price 
of all manufactured commodities, prosperity of commerce and 
manufacture, the conquest of nearly all the unprotected foreign 
markets, the sudden multiplication of capital and national wealth; 
on the other hand, a still more rapid multiplication of the 
proletariat, the destruction of all property-holding and of all 
security of employment for the working-class, demoralisation, 
political excitement, and all those facts so highly repugnant to 
Englishmen in comfortable circumstances, which we shall have to 
consider in the following pages. Having already seen what a 
transformation in the social condition of the lower classes a single 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "usually called Kettenstuhl 
in German" to explain the word spinning throstle given above in English.— Ed. 
1779 according to more precise data.— Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have no words given in brackets.— 
Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "of wool and later (in the first 
decade of the present century) also" after "to the spinning".—Ed. 

=====第338页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 313 
such clumsy machine as the jenny had wrought, there is no cause 
for surprise as to that which a complete and interdependent 
system of finely adjusted machinery has brought about, machinery 
which receives raw material and turns out woven goods. 
Meanwhile, let us trace the development of English manufac­
ture*  somewhat more minutely, beginning with3 the cotton indus­
try. In the years 1771-1775, there were annually imported into 
England rather less than 5,000,000 pounds of raw cotton; in the 
year 1841 there were imported 528,000,000 pounds, and the 
import for 1844 will reach at least 600,000,000 pounds. In 1834 
England exported 556,000,000 yards of woven cotton goods, 
76,500,000 pounds of cotton yarn, and cotton hosiery to the value 
of £1,200,000. In the same year over 8,000,000 mule spindles 
were at work, 110,000 power and 250,000 hand-looms, throstle 
spindles not included, in the service of the cotton industry; and, 
according to McCulloch's reckoning,13 nearly a million and a half 
human beings were supported by this branch,c of whom but 
220,000 worked in the mills; the power used in these mills was 
steam, equivalent to 33,000 horse-power, and water, equivalent to 
11,000 horse-power. At present these figures are far from ade­
quate, and it may be safely assumed that, in the year 1845, the 
power and number of the machines and the number of the 
workers is greater by one-half than it was in 1834. The chief 
centre of this industry is Lancashire, where it originated; it has 
thoroughly revolutionised this county, converting it from an 
obscure, ill-cultivated swamp into a busy, lively region, multiplying 
its population tenfold in eighty years, and causing giant cities such 
as Liverpool and Manchester, containing together 700,000 inhab­
itants,  and their neighbouring towns, Bolton with 60,000, Rochdale 
with 75,000, Oldham with 50,000, Preston with 60,000, Ashton 
and Stalybridge with 40,000, and a whole list of other manufactur­
ing towns to spring up as if by a magic touch. The history of 
South Lancashire contains some of the greatest marvels of modern 
* According to Porter's  Progress  of the Nation, London, 1836, Vol. I; 1838, Vol. II; 
1843,  Vol. Ill (official data), and other sources, chiefly official.— Note by Engels. 
(1892) The historical outline of the industrial revolution given above is not exact in 
certain details; but in 1843-44 no better sources were available.— Added  by Engels in the 
German edition of 1892. 
a Here the German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "its main branch".—Ed. 
J. R. McCulloch, A Dictionary of Commerce.—Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "directly or indi­
rectly".—Ed. 

=====第339页=====
314 Frederick Engels 
times,  yet no one ever mentions them and all these miracles are 
the product of the cotton industry. Glasgow, too, the centre3 for 
the cotton district of Scotland, for Lanarkshire and Renfrewshire, 
has increased in population from 30,000 to 300,000 since the 
introduction of the industry. The hosiery manufacture of Notting­
ham and Derby also received one fresh impulse from the lower 
price of yarn, and a second one from an improvement of the 
stocking loom, by means of which two stockings could be woven at 
once.  The manufacture of lace, too, became an important branch 
of industry after the invention of the lace machine in 1777; soon 
after that date Lindley invented the point-net machine, and in 
1809 Heathcoat invented the bobbin-net machine, in consequence 
of which the production of lace was greatly simplified, and the 
demand increased proportionately in consequence of the di­
minished cost, so that now, at least 200,000 persons are supported 
by this industry. Its chief centres are Nottingham, Leicester, and 
the West of England, Wiltshire, Devonshire, etc. A corresponding 
extension has taken place in the branches dependent upon the 
cotton industry, in dyeing, bleaching, and printing. Bleaching by 
the application of chlorine in place of the oxygen of the atmo­
sphere, dyeing and printing by the rapid development of chemis­
try, and printing by a series of most brilliant mechanical inven­
tions,  received a yet greater advance which, with the extension of 
these branches caused by the growth of the cotton industry, raised 
them to a previously unknown degree of prosperity. 
The same activity manifested itself in the manufacture of wool. 
This had hitherto been the leading department of English indus­
try, but the quantities formerly produced are as nothing in 
comparison with that which is now manufactured. In 1782 the 
whole wool crop of the preceding three years lay unused for want 
of workers, and would have continued so to lie if the newly 
invented machinery had not come to its assistance and spun it. 
The adaptation of this machinery to the spinning of wool was 
most successfully accomplished. Then began the same sudden 
development in the wool districts which we have already seen in 
the cotton districts. In 1738 there were 75,000 pieces of woollen 
cloth produced in the West Riding of Yorkshire; in 1817 there 
were 490,000 pieces, and so rapid was the extension of the 
industry that in 1834, 450,000 more pieces were producedb than 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "a second centre".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "exported" instead of 
"produced".— Ed. 

=====第340页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 315 
in 1825. In 1801, 101,000,000 pounds of wool (7,000,000 pounds 
of. it imported) were worked up; in 1835, 180,000,000 pounds 
were worked up, of which 42,000,000 pounds were imported. The 
principal centre of this industry is the West Riding of Yorkshire, 
where, especially at Bradford, long English wool is converted into 
worsted yarns, etc., while in the other cities, Leeds, Halifax, 
Huddersfield, etc., short wool is converted into hard-epun yarn 
and cloth. Then come the adjacent part of Lancashire, the region 
of Rochdale, where in addition to the cotton industry much 
flannel is produced, and the West of England, which supplies the 
finest cloths. Here also the growth of population is worthy of 
observation: 
in 1801 and in 1831 
Bradford contained 29,000, 77,000 inhabitants 
Halifax » 63,000, 110,000 .. 
Huddersfield » 15,000, 34,000 .. 
Leeds " 53,000, 123,000 .. 
And the whole 
West Riding » 564,000, 980,000 » 
A population which, since 1831, must have increased at least 20 
to 25 per cent further. In 1835 the spinning of wool employed in 
the United Kingdom 1,313 mills, with 71,300 workers, these last 
being but a small portion of the multitude who are supported 
directly or indirectly by the manufacture of wool, and excluding 
nearly all weavers. 
Progress in the linen trade developed later, because the nature 
of the raw material made the application of spinning machinery 
very difficult. Attempts had been made in the last years of the last 
century in Scotland, but the Frenchman Girard, who introduced 
flax spinning in 1810, was the first who succeeded practically, and 
even Girard's machines first attained on British soil the impor­
tance they deserved by means of improvements which they 
underwent in England, and of their universal application in Leeds, 
Dundee, and Belfast. From this time the British linen trade 
rapidly extended. In 1814, 3,000 tons* of flax were imported 3; in 
1833,  nearly 19,000 tons of flax and 3,400 tons of hemp. The 
export of Irish linen to Great Britain rose from 32,000,000 yards 
in 1800 to 53,000,000 in 1825, of which a large part was 
* The English ton weighs 2,240 English pounds, almost 1,000 kilo­
grammes.—Note by Engels to the 1845 German edition (the last three words being 
added in the 1892 German edition— Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "to Dundee".—Ed. 

=====第341页=====
316 Frederick Engels 
re-exported. The export of English and Scotch woven linen goods 
rose from 24,000,000 yards in 1820 to 51,000,000 yards in 1833. 
The number of flax spinning establishments in 1835 was 347, 
employing 33,000 workers, of which one-half were in the South of 
Scotland, more than 60 in the West Riding of Yorkshire, Leeds, 
and its environs, 25 in Belfast, Ireland, and the rest in Dorset and 
Lancashire. Weaving is carried on in the South of Scotland, here 
and there in England, but principally in Ireland. 
With like success did the English turn their attention to the 
manufacture of silk. Raw material was imported from Southern 
Europe and Asia ready spun, and the chief labour lay in the 
twisting of fine threads.3 Until 1824 the heavy import duty, four 
shillings per pound on raw material, greatly retarded the develop­
ment of the English silk industry, while only the markets of 
England and the Colonies were protected for it. In that year the duty 
was reduced to one penny, and the number of mills at once 
largely increased. In a single year the number of throwing 
spindles rose from 780,000 to 1,180,000; and, although the 
commercial crisis of 1825 crippled this branch of industry for the 
moment, yet in 1827 more was produced than ever, the mechani­
cal skill and experience of the English having secured their 
twisting machinery the supremacy over the awkward devices of 
their competitors. In 1835 the British Empire possessed 263 
twisting mills, employing 30,000 workers, located chiefly in Che­
shire, in Macclesfield, Congleton, and the surrounding districts, 
and in Manchester and Somersetshire. Besides these, there are 
numerous mills for working up waste, from which a peculiar 
article known as spun silkb is manufactured, with which the 
English supply even the Paris and Lyons weavers. The weaving of 
the silk so twisted and spun is carried on in Paisley and elsewhere 
in Scotland, and in Spitalfields, London, but also in Manchester 
and elsewhere. 
Nor is the gigantic advance achieved in English manufacture 
since 1760 restricted to the production of clothing materials. The 
impulse, once given, was communicated to all branches of industri­
al activity, and a multitude of inventions wholly unrelated to those 
here cited received double importance from the fact that they 
were made in the midst of the universal movement. But as soon as 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets the German 
word "Trainieren" .—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this English term in 
brackets.—Ed. 

=====第342页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 317 
the immeasurable importance of mechanical power was practically 
demonstrated, every energy was concentrated in the effort to 
exploit this power in all directions, and to exploit it in the interest 
of individual inventors and manufacturers; and the demand for 
machinery, fuel, and materials called a mass of workers and a 
number of trades into redoubled activity. The steam-engine first 
gave importance to the broad coal-fields of England; the produc­
tion of machinery began now for the first time, and with it arose a 
new interest in the iron mines which supplied raw material for it. 
The increased consumption of wool stimulated English sheep 
breeding, and the growing importation of wool, flax, and silk 
called forth an extension of the British ocean carrying trade. 
Greatest of all was the growth of production of iron. The rich iron 
deposits of the English hills had hitherto been little developed; 
iron had always been smelted by means of charcoal, which became 
gradually more expensive3 as agriculture improved and forests 
were cut away. The beginning of the use of cokeb in iron smelting 
had been made in the last century, and in 1780 a new method was 
invented of converting into available wrought-iron coke-smelted 
iron, which up to that time had been convertible into cast-iron 
only. This process, known as "puddling", consisted in withdrawing 
the carbon which had mixed with the iron during the process of 
smelting, and opened a wholly new field for the production of 
English iron. Smelting furnaces were built fifty times larger than 
before, the process of smelting was simplified by the introduction 
of hot blasts, and iron could thus be produced so cheaply that a 
multitude of objects which had before been made of stone or 
wood were now made of iron. 
In 1788, Thomas Paine, the famous democrat, built in York­
shire the first iron bridge,121  which was followed by a great 
number of others, so that now nearly all bridges, especially for 
railroad traffic, are built of cast-iron, while in London itself a 
bridge across the Thames, the Southwark bridge, has been built of 
this material. Iron pillars, supports for machinery, etc., are 
universally used, and since the introduction of gas-lighting and 
railroads, new outlets for English iron products are opened. Nails 
and screws gradually came to be made by machinery. Huntsman, a 
Sheffielder, discovered in 1740 a method for casting steel, by 
which much labour was saved, and the production of wholly new 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and scarce".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have the English word in brackets 
after its German equivalent.—Ed. 

=====第343页=====
318 Frederick Engels 
cheap goods rendered practicable; and through the greater purity 
of the material placed at its disposal, and the more perfect tools, 
new machinery and minute division of labour, the metal trade of 
England now first attained importance. The population of Birming­
ham grew from 73,000 in 1801 to 200,000 in 1844; that of 
Sheffield from 46,000 in 1801 to 110,000 in 1844, and the 
consumption of coal in the latter city alone reached in 1836, 
515,000 tons. In 1805 there were exported 4,300 tons of iron 
products and 4,600 tons of pig-iron; in 1834, 16,200 tons of iron 
products and 107,000 tons of pig-iron, while the whole iron 
product, reaching in 1740 but 17,000 tons, had risen in 1834 to 
nearly 700,000 tons. The smelting of pig-iron alone consumes 
'yearly more than 3,000,000 tons of coal,122 and the importance 
which coal-mining has attained in the course of the last 60 years 
can scarcely be conceived. All the English and Scotch deposits are 
now worked, and the mines of Northumberland and Durham 
alone yield annually more than 5,000,000 tons for shipping, and 
employ from 40 to 50,000 men. According to the Durham 
Chronicle, there were worked in these two counties: 
In 1753, 14 mines; in 1800, 40 mines; in 1836, 76 mines; in 1843, 130 mines. 
Moreover, all mines are now much more energetically worked 
than formerly. A similarly increased activity was applied to the 
working of tin, copper, and lead, and alongside of the extension 
of glass manufacture arose a new branch of industry in the 
production of pottery, rendered important by the efforts of Josiah 
Wedgwood, about 1763. This inventor placed the whole manufac­
ture of stoneware on a scientific basis, introduced better taste, and 
founded the potteries of North Staffordshire, a district of eight 
English miles square, which, formerly a desert waste, is now sown 
with works and dwellings, and supports more than 60,000 people. 
Into this universal whirl of activity everything was drawn. 
Agriculture made a corresponding advance. Not only did landed 
property pass, as we have already seen, into the hands of new 
owners and cultivators, agriculture was affected in still another 
way. The great holders applied capital to the improvement of the 
soil, tore down needless fences, drained, manured, employed 
better tools, and applied a rotation of crops.3 The progress of 
science came to cheir assistance also; Sir Humphry Davy applied 
chemistry to agriculture with success, and the development of 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have in brackets the English term 
"cropping by rotation" after the corresponding German term.— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 319 
mechanical science bestowed a multitude of advantages upon the 
large farmer. Further, in consequence of the increase of popula­
tion, the demand for agricultural products increased in such 
measure that from 1760 to 1834, 6,840,540 acres of waste land 
were reclaimed; and, in spite of this, England was transformed 
from a grain exporting to a grain importing country. 
The same activity was developed in the establishment of com­
munication. From 1818 to 1829, there were built in England and 
Wales, 1,000 English miles of roadway of the width prescribed by 
law, 60 feet, and nearly all the old roads were reconstructed on 
the new system of McAdam. In Scotland, the Department of 
Public Works built since 1803 nearly 900 miles of «roadway and 
more than 1,000 bridges, by which the population of the High­
lands was suddenly placed within reach of civilisation. The 
Highlanders had hitherto been chiefly poachers and smugglers; 
they now became farmers3 and hand-workers. And, though Gaelic 
schools were organised for the purpose of maintaining the Gaelic 
language, yet Gaelic-Celtic customs and speech are rapidly vanish­
ing before the approach of English civilisation. So, too, in Ireland; 
between the counties of Cork, Limerick, and Kerry, lay hitherto a 
wilderness wholly without passable roads, and serving, by reason 
of its inaccessibility, as the refuge of all criminals and the chief 
protection of the Celtic Irish nationality in the South of Ireland. It 
has now been cut through by public roads, and civilisation has 
thus gained admission even to this savage region. The whole 
British Empire, and especially England, which, sixty years ago, had 
as bad roads as Germany or France then had, is now covered by a 
network of the finest roadways; and these, too, like almost 
everything else in England, are the work of private enterprise, the 
State having done very little in this direction. 
Before 1755 England possessed almost no canals. In that year a 
canal was built in Lancashire from Sankey Brook to St. Helen's; 
and in 1759, James Brindley built the first important one, the 
Duke of Bridgewater's Canal from Manchester and the coal-mines 
of the district to the mouth of the Mersey passing, near Barton, by 
aqueduct, over the river Irwell. From this achievement dates the 
canal building of England, to which Brindley first gave impor­
tance. Canals were now built, and rivers made navigable in all 
directions. In England alone, there are 2,200 miles of canals and 
1,800 miles of navigable river. In Scotland, the Caledonian Canal 
was cut directly across the country, and in Ireland several canals 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "industrious farmers".—Ed. 

=====第345页=====
320 Frederick Engels 
were built. These improvements, too, like the railroads and 
roadways, are nearly all the work of private individuals and 
companies. 
The railroads have been only recently built. The first great one 
was opened from Liverpool to Manchester in 1830, since which all 
the great cities have been connected by rail. London with South­
ampton, Brighton, Dover, Colchester, Exeter,3 and Birmingham; 
Birmingham with Gloucester, Liverpool, Lancaster (via Newton 
and Wigan, and via Manchester and Bolton); also with Leeds (via 
Manchester and Halifax, and via Leicester, Derby, and Sheffield); 
Leeds with Hull and Newcastle (via York). There are also many 
minor lines building or projected, which will soon make it possible 
to travel from Edinburgh to London in one day. 
As it had transformed the means of communication by land, so 
did the introduction of steam revolutionise travel by sea. The first 
steamboat was launched in 1807, in the Hudson, in North 
America; the first in the British Empire, in 1811, on the Clyde. 
Since then, more than 600 have been built in England; and in 
1836 more than 500 were plying to and from British ports. 
Such, in  brief,  is the history of English industrial development 
in the past sixty years, a history which has no counterpart in the 
annals of humanity. Sixty, eighty years ago, England was a country 
like every other, with small towns, few and simple industries, and 
a thin but proportionally large agricultural population. Today it is a 
country like no other, with a capital of two and a half million 
inhabitants; with vast manufacturing cities; with an industry that 
supplies the world, and produces almost everything by means of 
the most complex machinery; with an industrious, intelligent, 
dense population, of which two-thirds are employed in trade and 
commerce,6  and composed of classes wholly different; forming, in 
fact, with other customs and other needs, a different nation from 
the England of those days. The industrial revolution is of the same 
importance for England as the political revolution for France, and 
the philosophical revolution for Germany; and the difference 
between England in 1760 and in 1844 is at least as great as that 
between France under the ancien régime and during the revolution 
of July. But the mightiest result of this industrial transformation is 
the English proletariat. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "Colchester, Cambridge, Exeter 
(via Bristol)".— Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "and commerce" do 
not occur.—Ed. 

=====第346页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 321 
We have already seen how the proletariat was called into 
existence by the introduction of machinery. The rapid extension 
of manufacture demanded hands, wages rose, and troops of 
workmen migrated from the agricultural districts to the towns. 
Population multiplied enormously, and nearly all the increase took 
place in the proletariat. Further, Ireland had entered upon an 
orderly development only since the beginning of the eighteenth 
century. There, too, the population, more than decimated by 
English cruelty in earlier disturbances, now rapidly multiplied, 
especially after the advance in manufacture began to draw masses 
of Irishmen towards England. Thus arose the great manufacturing 
and commercial cities of the British Empire, in which at least 
three-fourths of the population belong to the working-class, while 
the lower middle-class consists only of small shop-keepers, and 
very very few handicraftsmen. For, though the rising manufacture 
first attained importance by transforming tools into machines, 
work-rooms into factories, and consequently, the toiling lower 
middle-class into the toiling proletariat, and the former large 
merchants into manufacturers, though the lower middle-class was 
thus early crushed out, and the population reduced to the two 
opposing elements, workers and capitalists, this happened outside 
of the domain of manufacture proper, in the province of handi­
craft and retail trade as well. In the place of the former masters 
and apprentices, came great capitalists and working-men who had 
no prospect of rising above their class. Hand-work was carried on 
after the fashion of factory work, the division of labour was strictly 
applied, and small employers who could not compete with great 
establishments were forced down into the proletariat. At the same 
time the destruction of the former organisation of hand-work, and 
the disappearance of the lower middle-class deprived the working-
man of all possibility of rising into the middle-class  himself. 
Hitherto he had always had the prospect of establishing himself 
somewhere as master artificer, perhaps employing journeymen 
and apprentices; but now, when master artificers were crowded 
out by manufacturers, when large capital had become necessary 
for carrying on work independently, the working-class became, for 
the first time, an integral, permanent class of the population, 
whereas it had formerly often been merely a transition leading to 
the bourgeoisie. Now, he who was born to toil had no other 
prospect than that of remaining a toiler all his life. Now, for the 
first time, therefore, the proletariat was in a position to undertake 
an independent movement. 
In this way were brought together those vast masses of working-

=====第347页=====
322 Frederick Engels 
men who now fill the whole British Empire, whose social condition 
forces itself every day more and more upon the attention of the 
civilised world. 
The condition of the working-class is the condition of the vast 
majority of the English people. The question: What is to become 
of those destitute millions, who consume today what they earned 
yesterday; who have created the greatness of England by their 
inventions and their toil; who become with every passing day more 
conscious of their might, and demand, with daily increasing 
urgency, their share of the advantages of society?—This, since 
the Reform Bill,123 has become the national question. All Parlia­
mentary debates, of any importance, may be reduced to this; and, 
though the English middle-class will not as yet admit it, though 
they try to evade this great question, and to represent their 
own particular interests as the truly national ones, their action 
is utterly useless. With every session of Parliament the working-
class gains ground, the interests t*f the middle-class diminish in 
importance; and, in spite of the fact that the middle-class is the 
chief,  in fact, the only power in Parliament, the last session 
of 1844 was a continuous debate upon subjects affecting the 
working-class, the Poor Relief Bill, the Factory Act, the Masters' 
and Servants' Act3 ; and Thomas Duncombe, the representative 
of the working-men in the House of Commons, was the great 
man of the session; while the Liberal middle-class with its 
motion for repealing the Corn Laws, and the Radical middle-class 
with its resolution for refusing the taxes, played pitiable rôles. 
Even the debates about Ireland were at bottom debates about the 
Irish proletariat, and the means of coming to its assistance. It is 
high time, too, for the English middle-class to make some 
concessions to the working-men who no longer plead but threat­
en15; for in a short time it may be too late. 
In spite of all this, the English middle-class, especially the 
manufacturing class, which is enriched directly by means of the 
poverty of the workers, persists in ignoring this poverty. This 
class,  feeling itself the mighty representative class of the nation, is 
ashamed to lay the sore spot of England bare before the eyes of 
the world; will not confess, even to  itself,  that the workers are in 
distress, because it, the property-holding, manufacturing class, 
must bear the moral responsibility for this distress. Hence the 
Concerning the Parliamentary Session of 1844 see below, pp. 464-65, 569-
70, 57'8.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "threaten and de­
mand".—Ed. 

=====第348页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 323 
scornful smile which intelligent Englishmen (and they, the middle-
class,  alone are known on the Continent) assume when any one 
begins to speak of the condition of the working-class; hence the 
utter ignorance on the part of the whole middle-class of every­
thing which concerns the workers; hence the ridiculous blunders 
which men of this class, in and out of Parliament, make when the 
position of the proletariat comes under discussion; hence the 
absurd freedom from anxiety, with which the middle-class dwells 
upon a soil that is honeycombed, and may any day collapse, the 
speedy collapse of which is as certain as a mathematical or 
mechanical demonstration; hence the miracle that the English have 
as yet no single book upon the condition of their workers, 
although they have been examining and mending the old state of 
things no one knows how many years. Hence also the deep wrath 
of the whole working-class, from Glasgow to London, against the 
rich, by whom they are systematically plundered and mercilessly 
left to their fate, a wrath which before too long a time goes by, a 
time almost within the power of man to predict,3 must break out 
into a revolution in comparison with which the French Revolution, 
and the year 1794, will prove to have been child's play. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "calculate" instead of "pre­
dict".— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
THE INDUSTRIAL PROLETARIAT 
The order of our investigation of the different sections of the 
proletariat follows naturally from the foregoing history,of its rise. 
The first proletarians were connected with manufacture, were 
engendered by it, and accordingly, those employed in manufac­
ture,  in the working up of raw materials, will first claim our 
attention. The production of raw materials and of fuel for 
manufacture attained importance only in consequence of the 
industrial change, and engendered a new proletariat, the coal and 
metal miners. Then, in the third place, manufacture influenced 
agriculture, and in the fourth, the condition of Ireland; and the 
fractions of the proletariat belonging to each, will find their place 
accordingly. We shall find, too, that with the possible exception of 
the Irish, the degree of intelligence of the various workers is in 
direct proportion to their relation to manufacturer and that the 
factory-hands are most enlightened as to their own interests, the 
miners somewhat less so, the agricultural labourers scarcely at all. 
We shall find the same order again among the industrial workers, 
and shall see how the factory-hands, eldest children of the 
industrial revolution, have from the beginning to the present day 
formed the nucleus of the Labour Movement, and how the others 
have joined this movement just in proportion as their handicraft 
has been invaded by the progress of machinery.3 We shall thus 
learn from the example which England offers, from the equal 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the industrial revolution" 
instead of "the progress of machinery".— Ed. 

=====第350页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 325 
pace which the Labour Movement has kept with the movement of 
industrial development, the historical significance of manufacture. 
Since, however, at the present moment, pretty much the whole 
industrial proletariat is involved in the movement, and the 
condition of the separate sections has much in common, because 
they all are industrial, we shall have first to examine the condition 
of the industrial proletariat as a whole, in order later to notice 
more particularly each separate division with its own peculiarities. 
It has been already suggested that manufacture centralises 
property in the hands of the few. It requires large capital with 
which to erect the colossal establishments that ruin the petty 
trading bourgeoisie and with which to press into its service the 
forces of Nature, so driving the hand-labour of the independent 
workman out of the market. The division of labour, the applica­
tion of water and especially steam, and the application of machin­
ery, are the three great levers with which manufacture, since the 
mid-die of the last century, has been busy putting the world out of 
joint. Manufacture, on a small scale, created the middle-class; on a 
large scale, it created the working-class, and raised the elect of the 
middle-class to the throne, but only to overthrow them the more 
surely when the time comes. Meanwhile, it is an undenied and 
easily explained fact that the numerous petty middle-class of the 
"good old times" has been annihilated by manufacture, and 
resolved into rich capitalists on the one hand and poor workers on 
the other.* 
The centralising tendency of manufacture does not, however, 
stop here. Population becomes centralised just as capital does; and, 
very naturally, since the human being, the worker, is regarded in 
manufacture simply as a piece of capital for the use of which the 
manufacturer pays interest under the name of wages. A manufac­
turing establishment3 requires many workers employed together in 
a single building, living near each other and forming a village of 
themselves in the case of a good-sized factory. They have needs 
for satisfying which other people are necessary; handicraftsmen, 
shoemakers, tailors, bakers, carpenters, stonemasons, settle at 
* Compare on this point my "Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy" in 
the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher. In this essay "free competition" is the starting-
point; but industry is only the practice of free competition and the latter is only the 
principle on which industry is based.— Note by Engels. (The American and English 
authorised editions give only the first sentence of this footnote. See present 
edition, Vol. 3.—Ed.) 
3 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "A big manufacturing establish­
ment".—Ed. 
12-762 

=====第351页=====
326 Frederick Engels 
hand. The inhabitants of the village, especially the younger 
generation, accustom themselves to factory work, grow skilful in it, 
and when3 the first mill can no longer employ them all, wages fall, 
and the immigration of fresh manufacturers is the consequence. 
So the village grows into a small town, and the small town into a 
large one. The greater the town, the greater its advantages. It 
offers roads, railroads, canals; the choice of skilled labour in­
creases constantly, new establishments can be built more cheaply, 
because of the competition among builders and machinists who 
are at hand, than in remote country districts, whither timber, 
machinery, builders, and operatives must be brought; it offers a 
market0 to which buyers crowd, and direct communication with 
the markets supplying raw material or demanding finished goods. 
Hence the marvellously rapid growth of the great manufacturing 
towns. The country, on the other hand, had the advantage that 
wages are usually lower than in town, and so town and country are 
in constant competition; and, if the advantage is on the side of the 
town today, wages sink so low in the country tomorrow that new 
investments are most profitably made there. But the centralising 
tendency of manufacture continues in full force, and every new 
factory built in the country bears in it the germ of a manufactur­
ing town. If it were possible for this mad rush of manufacture to 
go on at this rate for another century, every manufacturing 
district of England would be one great manufacturing town, and 
Manchester and Liverpool would meet at Warrington or Newton; 
for in commerce, too, this centralisation of the population works 
in precisely the same way, and hence it is that one or two great 
harbours, such as Hull and Liverpool, Bristol and London, 
monopolise almost the whole maritime commerce of Great Britain. 
Since commerce and manufacture attain their most complete 
development in these great towns, their influence upon the 
proletariat is also most clearly observable here. Here the centralisa­
tion of property has reached the highest point; here the morals 
and customs of the good old times are most completely obliter­
ated; here it has gone so far that the name Merry Old England0 
conveys no meaning, for Old England itself is unknown to 
memory and to the tales of our grandfathers. Hence, too, there 
exist here only a rich and a poor class, for the lower middle-class 
vanishes more completely with every passing day. Thus the class 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "as is natural".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "a stock exchange".—Ed. 
c. Given in English in the German editions of 1845 and 1892.— Ed. 

=====第352页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 327 
formerly most stable has become the most restless one. It consists 
today of a few remnants of a past time, and a number of people 
eager to make fortunes, industrial Micawbers'1 and speculators of 
whom one may amass a fortune, while ninety-nine become 
insolvent, and more than half of the ninety-nine live by perpetual­
ly repeated failure. 
But in these towns the proletarians are the infinite majority, and 
how they fare, what influence the great town exercises upon them, 
we have now to investigate. 
a Instead of "Micawbers" (from David Copperfield by Ch. Dickens) the German 
editions of 1845 and 1892 have "knights of industry".— Ed. 

=====第353页=====
THE GREAT TOWNS 
A town, such as London, where a man may wander for hours 
together without reaching the beginning of the end, without 
meeting the slightest hint which could lead to the inference that 
there is open country within reach, is a strange thing. This colossal 
centralisation, this heaping together of two and a half millions of 
human beings at one point, has multiplied the power of this two 
and a half millions a hundredfold; has raised London to the 
commercial capital of the world, created the giant docks and assem­
bled the thousand vessels that continually cover the Thames. I 
know nothing more imposing than the view which the Thames 
offers during the ascent irom the sea to London Bridge. The 
masses of buildings, the wharves on both sides, especially from 
Woolwich upwards, the countless ships along both shores, crowd­
ing ever closer and closer together, until, at last, only a narrow 
passage remains in the middle of the river, a passage through 
which hundreds of steamers shoot by one another; all this is so 
vast, so impressive, that a man cannot collect  himself,  but is lost in 
the marvel of England's greatness before he sets foot upon English 
soil.* 
But the sacrifices which all this has cost become apparent later. 
After roaming the streets of the capital a day or two, making 
* This applies to the time of sailing vessels. The Thames now is a dreary 
collection of ugly steamers.— F. E. —Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 
(reproduced in the English edition of 1892— Ed.). 
(1892) This was written nearly fifty years ago, in the days of the picturesque 
sailing vessels. In so far as such ships still ply to and from London they are now to 
be found only in the docks, while the river itself is covered with ugly, sooty 
steamers.—Note by Engels to the German edition of 1892. 

=====第354页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 329 
headway with difficulty through the human turmoil and the 
endless lines of vehicles, after visiting the slums of the metropolis, 
one realises for the first time that these Londoners have been 
forced to sacrifice the best qualities of their human nature, to 
bring to pass all the marvels of civilisation which crowd their city; 
that a hundred powers which slumbered within them have 
remained inactive, have been suppressed in order that a few might 
be developed more fully and multiply through union with those of 
others. The very turmoil of the streets has something repulsive, 
something against which human nature rebels. The hundreds of 
thousands of all classes and ranks crowding past each other, are 
they not all human beings with the same qualities and powers, and 
with the same interest in being happy? And have they not, in the 
end, to seek happiness in the same way, by the same means? And 
still they crowd by one another as though they had nothing in 
common, nothing to do with one another, and their only agree­
ment is the tacit one, that each keep to his own side3 of the 
pavement, so as not to delay the opposing streams of the crowd, 
while it occurs to no man to honour another with so much as a 
glance. The brutal indifference, the unfeeling isolation of each in 
his private interest, becomes the more repellent and offensive, the 
more these individuals are crowded together, within a limited 
space. And, however much one may be aware that this isolation of 
the individual, this narrow self-seeking, is the fundamental princi­
ple of our society everywhere, it is nowhere so shamelessly 
barefaced, so self-conscious as just here in the crowding of the 
great city. The dissolution of mankind into monads, of which each 
one has a separate principle,b the world of atoms, is here carried 
out to its utmost extreme. 
Hence it comes, too, that the social war, the war of each against 
all, is here openly declared. Just as in Stirner's recent book,0 
people regard each other only as useful objects; each exploits the 
other, and the end of it all is that the stronger treads the weaker 
under foot,' and that the powerful few, the capitalists, seize 
everything for themselves, while to the weak many, the poor, 
scarcely a bare existence remains. 
What is true of London, is true of Manchester, Birmingham, 
Leeds, is true of all great towns. Everywhere barbarous indiffer-
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "to the right  side".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "and a separate purpose".—Ed. 
Max Stirner, Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum. —Ed. 

=====第355页=====
330 Frederick Engels 
ence,  hard egotism on one hand, and nameless misery on the 
other, everywhere social warfare, every man's house in a state of 
siege, everywhere reciprocal plundering under the protection of 
the law, and all so shameless, so openly avowed that one shrinks 
before the consequences of our social state as they manifest 
themselves here undisguised, and can only wonder that the whole 
crazy fabric still hangs together. 
Since capital, the direct or indirect control of the means of 
subsistence and production, is the weapon with which this social 
warfare is carried on, it is clear that all the disadvantages of such a 
state must fall upon the poor. For him no man has the slightest con­
cern. Cast into the whirlpool, he must struggle through as well as he 
can. If he is so happy as to find work, i.e., if the bourgeoisie does 
him the favour to enrich itself by means of him, wages await him 
which scarcely suffice to keep body and soul together; if he can 
get no work he may steal, if he is not afraid of the police, or 
starve, in which case the police will take care that he does so in a 
quiet and inoffensive manner.3 buring my residence in England, at 
least twenty or thirty persons have died of simple starvation under 
the most revolting circumstances, and a jury has rarely been found 
possessed of the courage to speak the plain truth in the matter. Let 
the testimony of the witnesses be never so clear and unequivocal, the 
bourgeoisie, from which the jury is selected, always finds some 
backdoor through which to escape the frightful verdict, death from 
starvation. The bourgeoisie dare not speak the truth in these cases, 
for it would speak its own condemnation. But indirectly, far more 
than directly, many have died of starvation, where long-continued 
want of proper nourishment has called forth fatal illness,b when it 
has produced such debility that causes which might otherwise have 
remained inoperative brought on severe illness and death. The 
English working-men call this "social murder", and accuse our 
whole society of perpetrating this crime perpetually. Are they 
wrong? 
True,  it is only individuals who starve, but what security has the 
working-man that it may not be his turn tomorrow? Who assures 
him employment, who vouches for it that, if for any reason or no 
reason his lord and master discharges him tomorrow, he can 
struggle along with those dependent upon him, until he may find 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "without offending the 
bourgeoisie".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and thus snatched away 
its victim".—Ed. 

=====第356页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 331 
some one else "to give him bread"? Who guarantees that willing­
ness to work shall suffice to obtain work, that uprightness, 
industry, thrift, and the rest of the virtues recommended by the 
bourgeoisie, are really his road to happiness? No one. He knows 
that he has something today and that it does not depend upon 
himself whether he shall have something tomorrow. He knows 
that every breeze that blows, every whim of his employer, every 
bad turn of trade may hurl him back into the fierce whirlpool 
from which he has temporarily saved  himself,  and in which it is 
hard and often impossible to keep his head above water. He 
knows that, though he may have the means of living today, it is 
very uncertain whether he shall tomorrow. 
Meanwhile, let us proceed to a more detailed investigation of 
the position in which the social war has placed the non-possessing 
class.  Let us see what pay for his work society does give the 
working-man in the form of dwelling, clothing, food, what sort of 
subsistence it grants those who contribute most to the maintenance 
of society; and, first, let us consider the dwellings. 
Every great city has one or more slums, where the working-class 
is crowded together. True, poverty often dwells in hidden alleys 
close to the palaces of the rich; but, in general, a separate territory 
has been assigned to it, where, removed from the sight of the 
happier classes, it may struggle along as it can. These slums are 
pretty equally arranged in all the great towns of England, the 
worst houses in the worst quarters of the towns; usually one- or 
two-storied cottages3 in long rows, perhaps with cellars used as 
dwellings, almost always irregularly built. These houses of three or 
four rooms and a kitchenb form, throughout England, some parts 
of London excepted, the general dwellings of the working-class. 
The streets are generally unpaved, rough, dirty, filled with 
vegetable and animal refuse, without sewers or gutters, but 
supplied with foul, stagnant pools instead. Moreover, ventilation is 
impeded by the bad, confused method of building of the whole 
quarter, and since many human beings here live crowded into a 
small space, the atmosphere that prevails in these working-men's 
quarters may readily be imagined. Further, the streets serve as 
drying grounds in fine weather; lines are stretched across from 
house to house, and hung with wet clothing. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "brick buildings" instead of 
"cottages".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "are called cottages 
and".—Ed. 

=====第357页=====
332 Frederick Engels 
Let us investigate some of the slums in their order. London 
comes first,* and in London the famous rookery3 of St. Giles 
which is now, at last, about to be penetrated by a couple of broad 
streets.b St. Giles is in the midst of the most populous part of the 
town, surrounded by broad, splendid avenues in which the gay 
world of London idles about, in the immediate neighbourhood of 
Oxford Street, Regent Street, of Trafalgar Square and the Strand. 
It is a disorderly collection of tall, three- or four-storied houses, 
with narrow, crooked, filthy streets, in which there is quite as 
much life as in the great thoroughfares of the town, except that, 
here,  people of the working-class only are to be seen. A vegetable 
market is held in the street, baskets with vegetables and fruits, 
naturally all bad and hardly fit to use obstruct the sidewalk still 
further, and from these, as well as from the fish-dealers' stalls, 
arises a horrible smell. The houses are occupied from cellar to 
garret, filthy within and without, and their appearance is such that 
no human being could possibly wish to live in them. But all this is 
nothing in comparison with the dwellings in the narrow courts and 
alleys between the streets, entered by covered passages between 
the houses, in which the filth and tottering ruin surpass all 
description. Scarcely a whole window-pane can be found, the walls 
are crumbling, door-posts and window-frames loose and broken, 
doors of old boards nailed together, or altogether wanting in this 
thieves' quarter, where no doors are needed, there being nothing 
to steal. Heaps of garbage and ashes lie in all directions, and the 
foul liquids emptied before the doors gather in stinking pools. 
Here live the poorest of the poor, the worst paid workers with 
thieves and the victims of prostitution0 indiscriminately huddled 
together, the majority Irish, or of Irish extraction, and those who 
have not yet sunk in the whirlpool of moral ruin which surrounds 
* The description given below had already been written when I came across an 
article in the Illuminated Magazine (October 1844) dealing with the working-class 
districts in London which coincides — in many places almost literally and everywhere 
in general tenor — with what I had said. The article was entitled "The Dwellings of the 
Poor, from the notebook of an M.D." — Note  by Engels. (This note is reproduced in the 
German edition of 1892 but is missing in the American edition of 1887 and the 
English edition of 1892.—Ed.) 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this English word is given in 
brackets after the corresponding German word.— Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and thus done away 
with".—Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "with thieves, rogues and victims 
of prostitution".—Ed. 

=====第358页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 333 
them, sinking daily deeper, losing daily more and more of their 
power to resist the demoralising influence of want, filth, and evil 
surroundings. 
Nor is St. Giles the only London slum. In the immense tangle of 
streets, there are hundreds and thousands of alleys and courts 
lined with houses too bad for anyone to live in, who can still spend 
anything whatsoever upon a dwelling fit for human beings. Close 
to the splendid houses of the rich such a lurking-place of the 
bitterest poverty may often be found. So, a short time ago, on the 
occasion of a coroner's inquest, a region close to Portman Square, 
one of the very respectable squares, was characterised as an abode 
"of a multitude of Irish demoralised by poverty and filth". So, 
too, may be found in streets, such as Long Acre and others, which, 
though not fashionable, are yet "respectable", a great number of 
cellar dwellings out of which puny children and half-starved, 
ragged women emerge into the light of day. In the immediate 
neighbourhood of Drury Lane Theatre, the second in London, are 
some of the worst streets of the whole metropolis, Charles, King, 
and Park Streets, in which the houses are inhabited from cellar to 
garret exclusively by poor families. In the parishes of St. John and 
St. Margaret3 there lived in 1840, according to the Journal of the 
Statistical Society,  5,366  working-men's families in  5,294  "dwellings" 
(if they deserve the name!), men, women, and children thrown 
together without distinction of age or sex, 26,830 persons all told; 
and of these families three-fourths possessed but one room. In the 
aristocratic parish of St. George, Hanover Square, there lived, 
according to the same authority, 1,465 working-men's families, 
nearly 6,000 persons, under similar conditions, and here, too, 
more than two-thirds of the whole number crowded together at 
the rate of one family in one room. And how the poverty of these 
unfortunates, among whom even thieves find nothing to steal, is 
exploited by the property-holding class in lawful ways! The 
abominable dwellings in Drury Lane, just mentioned, bring in the 
following rents: two cellar dwellings, 3s.b; one room, ground-floor, 
4s.; second-storey, 4s. 6d.; third-floor, 4s.; garret-room, 3s. weekly, 
so that the starving occupants of Charles Street alone, pay the 
house-owners a yearly tribute of £2,000,c and the  5,366  families 
above mentioned in Westminster, a yearly rent of £40,000.124 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in Westminster".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 here give "1 taler" in brackets.—Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give in brackets 14,000 taler after 
£2,000 and 270,000 taler after £40,000.—Ed. 

=====第359页=====
334 Frederick Engels 
The most extensive working-people's district lies east of the 
Tower in Whitechapel and Bethnal Green, where the greatest 
masses of London working-people live. Let us hear Mr. G. Alston, 
preacher of St. Philip's, Bethnal Green, on the condition of his 
parish. He says: 
"It contains 1,400 houses, inhabited by 2,795 families, comprising a population 
of 12,000. The space within which this large amount of population are living is less 
than 400 yards square (1,200 feet), and it is no uncommon thing for a man and his 
wife,  with four or five children, and sometimes the grandfather and grandmother, 
to be found living in a room from ten to twelve feet square, and which serves them 
for eating and working in. I believe that till the Bishop of London called the 
attention of the public to the state of Bethnal Green, about as little was known at 
the West-end of the town of this most destitute parish as the wilds of Australia 
or the islands of the South Seas. If we really desire to find out the most destitute 
and deserving, we must lift the latch of their doors, and find them at their scanty 
meal; we must see them when suffering from sickness and want of work; and if we 
do this from day to day in such a neighbourhood as Bethnal Green, we shall 
become acquainted with a mass of wretchedness and misery such as a nation like 
our own ought to be ashamed to permit. I was Curate of a parish near 
Huddersfield during the three years of the greatest manufacturing distress; but I 
never witnessed such a thorough prostration of the poor as I have seen since I 
have been in Bethnal Green. There is not one father of a family in ten throughout 
the entire district that possesses any clothes but his working dress, and that too 
commonly in the worst tattered condition; and with many this wretched clothing 
forms their only covering at night, with nothing better than a bag of straw or 
shavings to lie upon." 
The foregoing description furnishes an idea of the aspect of the 
interior of the dwellings. But let us follow the English officials, 
who occasionally stray thither, into one or two of these working-
men's homes. 
On the occasion of an inquest held Nov. 16th, 1843, by Mr. 
Carter, coroner for Surrey, upon the body of Ann Galway, aged 
45 years, the newspapers related the following particulars concern­
ing the deceased 126: She had lived at No. 3 White Lion Court, 
Bermondsey Street, London, with her husband and a nineteen-
year-old son in a little room, in which neither a bedstead nor any 
other furniture was to be seen. She lay dead beside her son upon 
a heap of feathers which were scattered over her almost naked 
body, there being neither sheet nor coverlet. The feathers stuck so 
fast over the whole body that the physician could not examine 
the corpse until it was cleansed, and then found it starved and 
scarred from the bites of vermin. Part of the floor of the 
room was torn up, and the hole used by the family as a 
privy. 
On Monday, Jan. 15th, 1844, two boys were brought before the 

=====第360页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 335 
police magistrate3 because, being in a starving condition, they had 
stolen and immediately devoured a half-cooked calf's foot from a 
shop.  The magistrate felt called upon to investigate the case 
further, and received the following details from the policeman: 
The mother of the two boys was the widow of an ex-soldier, 
afterwards policeman, and had had a very hard time since the 
death of her husband, to provide for her nine children. She lived 
at No. 2 Pool's Place, Quaker Court, Spitalfields, in the utmost 
poverty. When the policeman came to her, he found her with six 
of her children literally huddled together in a little back room, 
with no furniture but two old rush-bottomed chairs with the seats 
gone, a small table with two legs broken, a broken cup, and a small 
dish. On the hearth was scarcely a spark of fire, and in one corner 
lay as many old rags as would fill a woman's apron, which served 
the whole family as a bed. For bed clothing they had only their 
scanty day clothing. The poor woman told him that she had been 
forced to sell her bedstead the year before to buy food. Her 
bedding she had pawned with the victualler for food. In short, 
everything had gone for food. The magistrate ordered the woman 
a considerable provision from the poor-box. 
In February, 1844, Theresa Bishop, a widow 60 years old, was 
recommended, with her sick daughter, aged 26, to the compassion 
of the police magistrate in Marlborough Street. She lived at No. 5 
Brown Street, Grosvenor Square, in a small back room no larger 
than a closet, in which there was not one single piece of furniture. 
In one corner lay some rags upon which both slept; a chest served 
as table and chair. The mother earned a little by charring. The 
owner of the house said that they had lived in this way since May, 
1843,  had gradually sold or pawned everything that they had, and 
had still never paid any rent. The magistrate assigned them £1 
from the poor-box.127 
I am far from asserting that all London working-people live in 
such want as the foregoing three families. I know very well that 
ten are somewhat better off, where one is so totally trodden under 
foot by society; but I assert that thousands of industrious and 
worthy people — far worthier and more to be respected than all 
the rich of London — do find themselves in a condition unworthy 
of human beings; and that every proletarian, everyone, without 
exception, is exposed to a similar fate without any fault of his own 
and in spite of every possible effort. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in Worship Street, 
London".—Ed. 

=====第361页=====
336 Frederick Engels 
But in spite of all this, they who have some kind of a shelter are 
fortunate, fortunate in comparison with the utterly homeless. In 
London fifty thousand human beings get up every morning, not 
knowing where they are to lay their heads at night. The luckiest of 
this multitude, those who succeed in keeping a penny or two until 
evening, enter a lodging-house, such as abound in every great city, 
where they find a bed. But what a bed! These houses are filled 
with beds from cellar to garret, four, five, six beds in a room; as 
many as can be crowded in. Into every bed four, five, or six 
human beings are piled, as many as can be packed in, sick and 
well, young and old, drunk and sober, men and women, just as 
they come, indiscriminately. Then come strife, blows, wounds, or, 
if these bedfellows agree, so much the worse; thefts are arranged 
and things done which our language, grown more humane than 
our deeds, refuses to record. And those who cannot pay for such a 
refuge? They sleep where they find a place, in passages, arcades, 
in corners where the police and the owners leave them undis­
turbed. A few individuals find their way to the refuges which are 
managed, here and there, by private charity, others sleep on the 
benches in the parks close under the windows of Queen Victoria. 
Let us hear the London Times: 
"It appears from the report of the proceedings at Marlborough Street Police 
Court in our columns of yesterday, that there is an average number of 50 human 
beings of all ages, who huddle together in the parks every night, having no other 
shelter than what is supplied by the trees and a few hollows of the embankment. 
Of these, the majority are young girls who have been seduced from the country by 
the soldiers and turned loose on the world in all the destitution of friendless 
penury, and all the recklessness of early vice. 
"This is truly horrible! Poor there must be everywhere. Indigence will find its 
way and set up its hideous state in the heart of a great and luxurious city. Amid 
the thousand narrow lanes and by-streets of a populous metropolis there must 
always, we fear, be much suffering — much that offends the eye—much that lurks 
unseen. 
"But that within the precincts of wealth, gaiety, and fashion, nigh the regal 
grandeur of St. James, close on the palatial splendour of Bayswater, on the 
confines of the old and new aristocratic quarters, in a district where the cautious 
refinement of modern design has refrained from creating one single tenement for 
poverty; which seems, as it were, dedicated to the exclusive enjoyment of wealth, 
that there want, and famine, and disease, and vice should stalk in all their kindred 
horrors, consuming body by body, soul by soul! 
"It is indeed a monstrous state of things! Enjoyment the most absolute, that 
bodily ease, intellectual excitement, or the more innocent pleasures of sense can 
supply to man's craving, brought in close contact with the most unmitigated misery! 
Wealth, from its bright saloons, laughing — an insolently heedless laugh  — at the 
unknown wounds of want! Pleasure, cruelly but unconsciously mocking the pain 
that moans below! All contrary things mocking one another  — all contrary, save the 
vice which tempts and the vice which is tempted! 

=====第362页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 337 
"But let all men remember this — that within the most courtly precincts of the 
richest city of God's earth, there may be found, night after night, winter after 
winter, women — young in years — old in sin and suffering — outcasts from soci­
ety—ROTTING FROM FAMINE, FILTH, AND DISEASE. Let them remember 
this, and learn not to theorise but to act. God knows, there is much room for action 
nowadays."* 
I have referred to the refuges for the homeless. How greatly 
overcrowded these are, two examples may show. A newly erected 
Refuge for the Houseless3 in Upper Ogle Street, that can shelter 
three hundred persons every night, has received since its opening, 
January 27th to March 17th, 1844, 2,740 persons for one or more 
nights; and, although the season was growing more favourable, 
the number of applicants in this, as well as in the asylums of 
Whitecross Street and Wapping, was strongly on the increase, and 
a crowd of the homeless had to be sent away every night for want 
of room. In another refuge, the Central Asylum in Playhouse 
Yard, there were supplied on an average 460 beds nightly, during 
the first three months of the year 1844, 6,681 persons being 
sheltered, and 96,141 portions of bread were distributed. Yet the 
committee of directors declare this institution began to meet the 
pressure of the needy to a limited extent only when the Eastern 
Asylum also was opened.128 
Let us leave London and examine the other great cities of the 
three kingdoms in their order. Let us take Dublin first, a city the 
approach to which from the sea is as charming as that of London 
is imposing. The Bay of Dublin is the most beautiful of the whole 
British Island Kingdom, and is even compared by the Irish with 
the Bay of Naples. The city, too, possesses great attractions, and its 
aristocratic districts are better and more tastefully laid out than 
those of any other British city. By way of compensation, however, 
the poorer districts of Dublin are among the most hideous and 
repulsive to be seen in the world. True, the Irish character, which, 
under some circumstances, is comfortable only in the dirt, has 
some share in this; but as we find thousands of Irish in every 
great city in England and Scotland, and as every poor population 
must gradually sink into the same uncleanliness, the wretchedness 
of Dublin is nothing specific, nothing peculiar to Dublin, but 
something common to all great towns. The poor quarters of 
Dublin are extremely extensive, and the filth, the uninhabitable-
* Times, Oct. 12th, 1843.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 and the 
English edition of 1892. (The German editions of 1845 and 1892 refer, before this 
citation, to the Times, October 1843, without any date.—Ed.) 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this in English.—Ed. 

=====第363页=====
338 Frederick Engels 
ness of the houses and the neglect of the streets surpass all 
description. Some idea of the manner in which the poor are here 
crowded together may be formed from the fact that, in 1817, 
according to the report of the Inspector of Workhouses,* 1,318 
persons lived in 52 houses with 390 rooms in Barrack Street, and 
1,997 persons in 71 houses with 393 rooms in and near Church 
Street; that: 
"foul lanes, courts, and yards, are interposed between this and the adjoining 
streets.... There are many cellars which have no light but from the door.... In some 
of these cellars the inhabitants sleep on the floors which are all earthen; but in 
general, they have bedsteads.... Nicholson's Court ... contains 151 persons in 28 
small apartments ... their state is very miserable, there being only two bedsteads 
and two blankets in the whole court." 
The poverty is so great in Dublin, that a single benevolent 
institution, the Mendicity Association,3 gives relief to 2,500 persons 
or one per cent of the population daily, receiving and feeding 
them for the day and dismissing them at night. 
Dr. Alison describes a similar state of things in Edinburgh, 
whose superb situation, which has won it the title of the modern 
Athens, and whose brilliant aristocratic quarter in the New Town, 
contrast strongly with the foul wretchedness of the poor in the 
Old Town. Alison asserts that this extensive quarter is as filthy and 
horrible as the worst districts of Dublin, while the Mendicity 
Association would have as great a proportion of needy persons to 
assist in Edinburgh as in the Irish capital. He asserts, indeed, that 
the poor in Scotland, especially in Edinburgh and Glasgow, are 
worse off than in any other region of the three kingdoms, and 
that the poorest are not Irish, but Scotch. The preacher of the Old 
Church of Edinburgh, Dr. Lee, testified in 1836, before the 
Commission of Religious Instruction, that: 
"I have never seen such a concentration of misery as in this parish," where the 
people are without furniture, without everything. "I frequently see the same room 
occupied by two married couples. I have been in one day in seven houses where 
there was no bed, in some of them not even straw. I found people of eighty years 
of age lying on the boards. Many sleep in the same clothes which they wear 
during the day. I may mention the case of two Scotch families living in a cellar, who 
had come from the country within a few months.... Since they came they had had 
* Quoted by Dr. W. P. Alison, F.R.S.E., Fellow and late President of the 
Royal College of Physicians, etc., etc. Observations on the Management of the Poor in 
Scotland and its Effects on the Health of Great Towns, Edinburgh, 1840. The author is 
a religious Tory, brother of the historian, Archibald Alison.— Note by Engels. 
a Here and below the name of this association is given in English in the 
German original.— Ed. 

=====第364页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 339 
two children dead, and another apparently dying. There was a little bundle of 
dirty straw in one corner, for one family, and in another for the other. In the 
place they inhabit it is impossible at noonday to distinguish the features of the 
human face without artificial light. An ass stood in one corner.— It would almost 
make a heart of adamant bleed to see such an accumulation of misery in a 
country like this." 
In the Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal,1  Dr. Hennen 
reports a similar state of things. From a Parliamentary Report,* it 
is evident that in the dwellings of the poor of Edinburgh a want of 
cleanliness reigns, such as must be expected under these condi­
tions.  On the bed-posts chickens roost at night, dogs and horses 
share the dwellings of human beings, and the natural consequence 
is a shocking stench, with filth and swarms? of vermin. The 
prevailing construction of Edinburgh favours these atrocious 
conditions as far as possible. The Old Town is built upon both 
slopes of a hill, along the crest of which runs the High Street. Out 
of the High Street there open downwards multitudes of narrow, 
crooked alleys, called wynds b from their many turnings, and these 
wynds form the proletarian district of the city. The houses of the 
Scotch cities, in general, are five or six-storied buildings, like those 
of Paris, and in contrast with England where, so far as possible, 
each family has a separate house.c The crowding of human beings 
upon a limited area is thus intensified. 
"...the houses," says an English journal in an article upon the sanitary condition 
of the working-people in cities,** "are often so close together, that persons may step 
from the window of one house to that of the house opposite—so high, piled story 
after story, that the light can scarcely penetrate to the court beneath. In this part of 
the town there are neither sewers nor any private conveniences whatever belonging 
to the dwellings; and hence the excrementitious and other refuse of at least 50,000 
persons is, during the night, thrown into the gutters, causing (in spite of the 
scavengers' daily labours) an amount of solid filth and foetid exhalation disgusting 
* Report to the Home Secretary from the Poor-Law Commissioner, on an Inquiry into 
the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Classes in Great Britain, with Appendix. 
Presented to both Houses of Parliament in July, 1842, 3 vols. Folio. Assembled and 
arranged from medical reports by Edwin Chadwick, Secretary of the Poor-Law 
Commissioners.—Note by Engels. (The last sentence is omitted in the American 
edition of 1887 and in the English edition of 1892.—Ed.) 
** The Artisan, October, 1843. A monthly journal.—Note by Engels. ("A monthly 
journal" is omitted in the American edition of 1887 and the English edition of 
1892.—Ed.) 
a Vol. 14, 1818.—Ed. 
b This word is in English in the German original.—Ed. 
c In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the end of the sentence reads: "and 
in contrast with England, where, as far as possible, each family has a separate 
house, are occupied by a number of families".—Ed. 

=====第365页=====
340 Frederick Engels 
to both sight and smell, as well as exceedingly prejudicial to health. Can it be 
wondered that, in such localities, health, morals, and common decency should be 
at once neglected? No; all who know the private condition of the inhabitants will 
bear testimony to the immense amount of their disease, misery, and demoralisa­
tion. Society in these quarters has sunk to a state indescribably vile and wretched.... 
The dwellings of the poorer classes are generally very filthy, apparently never 
subjected to any cleaning process whatever, consisting, in most cases, of a single 
room, ill-ventilated and yet cold, owing to broken, ill-fitting windows, sometimes 
damp and partially under ground, and always scantily furnished and altogether 
comfortless, heaps of straw often serving for beds, in which a whole family— 
male and female, young and old, are huddled together in revolting confusion. The 
supplies of water are obtained only from the public pumps, and the trouble of 
procuring it of course favours the accumulation of all kinds of abominations." 
In the other great seaport towns the prospect is no better. 
Liverpool, with all its commerce, wealth, and grandeur yet treats 
its workers with the same barbarity. A full fifth of the population, 
more than 45,000 human beings, live in narrow, dark, damp, 
badly-ventilated cellar dwellings, of which there are 7,862 in the 
city. Besides these cellar dwellings there are 2,270 courts, small 
spaces built up on all four sides and having but one entrance, a 
narrow, covered passage-way,3 the whole ordinarily very dirty and 
inhabited exclusively by proletarians. Of such courts we shall have 
more to say when we come to Manchester. In Bristol, on one 
occasion, 2,800 families were visited,12'' of whom 46 per cent 
occupied but one room each. 
Precisely the same state of things prevails in the factory towns. 
In Nottingham there are in all 11,000 houses, of which between 
7,000 and  8,000  are built back to back with a rear party-wall so 
that no through ventilation is possible, while a single privy usually 
serves for several houses. During an investigation made a short 
time since, many rows of houses were found to have been built 
over shallow drains covered only by the boards of the ground-
floor. In Leicester, Derby, and Sheffield, it is no better. Of 
Birmingham, the article above cited from the Artisan states: 
"In the older parts of the town there are many inferior streets and courts, 
which are dirty and neglected, filled with stagnant water and heaps of refuse. The 
courts of Birmingham are very numerous in every direction, exceeding 2,000, and 
comprising the residence of a large portion of the working-classes. They are for the 
most part narrow, filthy, ill-ventilated, and badly drained, containing from eight to 
twenty houses each, the houses being built against some other tenement and the end 
of the courts being pretty constantly occupied by ashpits, etc., the filth of which 
would defy description. It is but just, however, to remark that the courts of more 
modern date are built in a more rational manner, and kept tolerably respectable; 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "allowing no ventilation at 
all".—Ed. 

=====第366页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 341 
and the cottages, even in old courts, are far less crowded than in Manchester and 
Liverpool, the result of which is, that the inhabitants, in epidemic seasons, have been 
much less visited by death than those of Wolverhampton, Dudley, and Bilston, at 
only a few miles distance. Cellar residences, also, are unknown in Birmingham, 
though some few are, very improperly, used as workshops. The low lodging-houses 
are pretty numerous (somewhat exceeding 400), chiefly in courts near the centre of 
the town; they are almost always loathsomely filthy and close, the resorts of beggars, 
trampers,a thieves and prostitutes, who here, regardless alike of decency or comfort, 
eat, drink, smoke and sleep in an atmosphere unendurable by all except the 
degraded, besotted inmates." 
Glasgow is in many respects similar to Edinburgh, possessing the 
same wynds, the same tall houses. Of this city the Artisan observes: 
The working-class forms here some 78 per cent of the whole population (about 
300,000), and lives in parts of the city "which, in abject wretchedness, exceed the 
lowest purlieus of St. Giles' or Whitechapel, the liberties of Dublin, or the wynds of 
Edinburgh. Such localities exist most abundantly in the heart of the city  — south of 
the Trongate and west of the Saltmarket, as well as in the Calton, off the High 
Street,  etc.  — endless labyrinths of narrow lanes or wynds, into which almost at 
every step débouche courts or closes formed by old, ill-ventilated, towering houses 
crumbling to decay, destitute of water and crowded with inhabitants, comprising 
three or four families (perhaps twenty persons) on each flat, and sometimes each 
flat let out in lodgings that confine  — we dare not say accommodate — from fifteen 
to twenty persons in a single room. These districts are occupied by the poorest, 
most depraved, and most worthless portion of the population, and they may be 
considered as the fruitful source of those pestilential fevers which thence spread 
their destructive ravages over the whole of Glasgow." 
Let us hear how J. C. Symons, Government Commissioner for 
the investigation of the condition of the hand-weavers, describes 
these portions of the city*: 
"I have seen human degradation in some of its worst phases, both in England 
and abroad, but I did not believe until I visited the wynds of Glasgow, that so large 
an amount of filth, crime, misery, and disease existed in any civilised country. 
In the lower lodging-houses ten, twelve, and sometimes twenty persons of both 
sexes and all ages sleep promiscuously on the floor in different degrees of 
nakedness. These places are, generally, as regards dirt, damp and decay, such as no 
person would stable his horse in." 
And in another place: 
"The wynds of Glasgow house a fluctuating population of between 15,000 and 
30,000 persons. This district is composed of many narrow streets and square courts 
and in the middle of each court there is a dung-hill. Although the outward 
appearance of these places was revolting, I was nevertheless quite unprepared for 
* Arts and Artisans at Home and  Abroad,  by J. C. Symons, Edinburgh, 1839. The 
author, as it seems, himself a Scotchman, is a Liberal, and consequently fanatically 
opposed to every independent movement of working-men. The passages here cited 
are to be found p. 116 et seq. —Note by Engels. 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the quotation is broken by the 
author's remark "(concerning the exact meaning of this word see below)".—Ed. 

=====第367页=====
342 Frederick Engels 
the filth and misery that were to be found inside. In some of these bedrooms we 
[i.e. Police Superintendent Captain Miller and Symons] visited at night we found a 
whole mass of humanity stretched out on the floor. There were often 15 to 20 men 
and women huddled together, some being clothed and others naked. Their bed 
was a heap of musty straw mixed with rags. There was hardly any furniture there 
and the only thing which gave these holes the appearance of a dwelling was fire 
burning on the hearth. Thieving and prostitution are the main sources of income 
of these people. No one seems to have taken the trouble to clean out these Augean 
stables, this pandemonium, this nucleus of crime, filth and pestilence in the second 
city of the empire. A detailed investigation of the most wretched slums of other 
towns has never revealed anything half so bad as this concentration of moral 
iniquity, physical degradation and gross overcrowding.... In this part of Glasgow 
most of the houses have been condemned by the Court of Guild as dilapidated and 
uninhabitable—but it is just these dwellings which are filled to overflowing, 
because, by law no rent can be charged on them." 
The great manufacturing district in the centre of the British 
Islands, the thickly peopled stretch of West Yorkshire and South 
Lancashire, with its numerous factory towns, yields nothing to the 
other great manufacturing centres. The wool district of the West 
Riding of Yorkshire is a charming region, a beautiful green hill 
country, whose elevations grow more rugged towards the west 
until they reach their highest point in the bold ridge of Blackstone 
Edge, the watershed between the Irish Sea and the German 
Ocean. The valleys of the Aire, along which stretches Leeds, and 
of the Calder, through which the Manchester-Leeds railway runs, 
are among the most attractive in England, and are strewn in all 
directions with the factories, villages, and towns. The houses of 
rough grey stone look so neat and clean in comparison with the 
blackened brick buildings of Lancashire, that it is a pleasure to 
look at them. But on coming into the towns themselves, one finds 
little to rejoice over. Leeds lies, as the Artisan describes it, a and as I 
found confirmed upon examination: 
"on a slope running down towards the river Aire, which meanders about 
a-mile-and-a-half* through the town, and is liable to overflows during thaws or 
after heavy rains. The higher or western districts are clean for so large a town, but 
the lower parts contiguous to the river and its becks or rivulets are dirty, confined, 
and, in themselves, sufficient to shorten life, especially infant life; add to this the 
disgusting state of the lower parts of the town about Kirk-gate, March-lane, 
Cross-street and Richmond-road, principally owing to a general want of paving and 
draining, irregularity of building, the abundance of courts and blind alleys, as well 
* Whenever miles are mentioned in the text the author refers—unless otherwise 
specified—to English miles; 69 /^ of these correspond to one degree of the Equator, 
hence 5 English miles roughly equal one German mile.—Note by Engels. (This note 
is omitted from the American edition of 1887 and the English edition of 1892.—Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets: "else­
where".—Ed. 

=====第368页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 343 
as the almost total absence of the commonest means for promoting cleanliness, and 
we have then quite sufficient data to account for the surplus mortality in these 
unhappy regions of filth and misery.... In consequence of the floods from the 
Aire"  (which, it must be added, like all other rivers in the service of manufacture, 
flows into the city at one end clear and transparent, and flows out at the other end 
thick, black, and foul, smelling of all possible refuse), "the dwelling-houses and 
cellars are not infrequently so inundated that the water has to be pumped out by 
hand-pumps, on to the surface of the streets; and at such times, even where there 
are sewers, the water rises through them into the cellars,* creating miasmatic 
exhalations, strongly charged with sulphuretted hydrogen, and leaving offensive 
refuse, exceedingly prejudicial to human health. Indeed, during a season of 
inundation in the spring of 1839, so fatal were the effects of such an engorgement 
of the sewers, that the registrar of the North district made a report, that during 
that quarter there were, in that neighbourhood, two births to three deaths, whilst in 
all the other districts there were three to two deaths." Other populous districts 
are wholly without sewers, or so inadequately provided as to derive no advantage 
therefrom. "In some rows of houses, the cellar dwellings are seldom dry"; in 
certain districts there are several streets covered with soft mud a foot deep. "The 
inhabitants have from time to time vainly attempted to repair these streets with 
shovelfuls of ashes; and soil, refuse-water, etc., stand in every hole, there to 
remain until absorbed by wind or sun....** An ordinary cottage, in Leeds, extends 
over no more than about five yards square, and consists usually of a cellar, 
a sitting-room, and a sleeping chamber. This small size of the houses crammed with 
human beings both day and night, is another point dangerous alike to the morals 
and the health of the inhabitants." 
And how greatly these cottages are crowded, the Report on the 
Health of the Working-Classes, quoted above,3 bears testimony: 
"In Leeds, brothers and sisters, and lodgers of both sexes, are found 
occupying the same sleeping-room with the parents, and consequences occur which 
humanity shudders to contemplate." 
So, too, Bradford, which, but seven miles from Leeds at the 
junction of several valleys, lies upon the banks of a small, 
coal-black, foul-smelling stream. On week-days the town is en­
veloped in a grey cloud of coal smoke, but on a fine Sunday it 
offers a superb picture, when viewed from the surrounding 
heights. Yet within reigns the same filth and discomfort as in 
Leeds. The older portions of the town are built upon steep 
hillsides, and are narrow and irregular. In the lanes, alleys, and 
courts lie filth and débris in heaps; the houses are ruinous, dirty, 
and miserable, and in the immediate vicinity of the river and the 
valley bottom I found many a one whose ground-floor, half-buried 
* It must be borne in mind that these cellars are not mere storing-rooms for 
rubbish, but dwellings of human beings.—Note by Engels. 
** Compare Report of the Town Council in the Statistical Journal, Vol. 2, 
p. 404.—Note by Engels. (In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this reference is 
given in the text as an author's remark.—Ed.) 
a See p. 339 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第369页=====
344 Frederick Engels 
in the hillside, was totally abandoned. In general, the portions of 
the valley bottom in which working-men's cottages have crowded 
between the tall factories, are among the worst-built and dirtiest 
districts of the whole town. In the newer portions of this, as of 
every other factory town, the cottages are more regular, being 
built in rows, but they share here, too, all the evils incident to the 
customary method of providing working-men's dwellings, evils of 
which we shall have occasions to speak more particularly in 
discussing Manchester. The same is true of the remaining towns of 
the West Riding, especially of Barnsley, Halifax, and Hudders-
field. The last named, the handsomest by far of all the factory 
towns of Yorkshire and Lancashire by reason of its charming 
situation and modern architecture, has yet its bad quarter; for a 
committee appointed by a meeting of citizens to survey the town 
reported August 5th, 1844: 
"It is notorious that there are whole streets in the town of Huddersfield, and many 
courts and alleys, which are neither flagged, paved, sewered, nor drained; where 
garbage and filth of every description are left on the surface to ferment and rot; 
where pools of stagnant water are almost constant, where the dwellings adjoining 
are thus necessarily caused to be of an inferior and even filthy description; 
thus where disease is engendered, and the health of the whole town perilled." 
If we cross Blackstone Edge or penetrate it with the railroad, we 
enter upon that classic soil on which English manufacture has 
achieved its masterwork and from which all labour movements 
emanate, namely, South Lancashire with its central city Manches­
ter. Again we have beautiful hill country, sloping gently from the 
watershed westwards towards the Irish Sea, with the charming 
green valleys of the Ribble, the Irwell, the Mersey, and their 
tributaries, a country which, a hundred years ago chiefly swamp 
land, thinly populated, is now sown with towns and villages, and is 
the most densely populated strip of country in England. In 
Lancashire, and especially in Manchester, English manufacture 
finds at once its starting-point and its centre. The Manchester 
Exchange is the thermometer for all the fluctuations of trade. The 
modern art of manufacture has reached its perfection in Manches­
ter. In the cotton industry of South Lancashire, the application of 
the forces of Nature, the superseding of hand-labour by machin­
ery (especially by the power-loom and the self-acting mule), and the 
division of labour, are seen at the highest point; and, if we 
recognise in these three elements that which is characteristic of 
modern manufacture, we must confess that the cotton industry has 
remained in advance of all other branches of industry from the 
beginning down to the present day. The effects of modern 

=====第370页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 345 
manufacture upon the working-class must necessarily develop here 
most freely and perfectly, and the manufacturing proletariat 
present itself in its fullest classic perfection. The degradation to 
which the application of steam-power, machinery and the division 
of labour reduce the working-man, and the attempts of the 
proletariat to rise above this abasement, must likewise be carried to 
the highest point and with the fullest consciousness. Hence 
because Manchester is the classic type of a modern manufacturing 
town, and because I know it as intimately as my own native town, 
more intimately than most of its residents know it, we shall make a 
longer stay here. 
The towns surrounding Manchester vary little from the central 
city, so far as the working-people's quarters are concerned, except 
that the working-class forms, if possible, a larger proportion of 
their population. These towns are purely industrial and conduct 
all their business through Manchester upon which they are in 
every respect dependent, whence they are inhabited only by 
working-men and petty tradesmen, while Manchester has a very 
considerable commercial population, especially of commission and 
"respectable" retail dealers. Hence Bolton, Preston, Wigan, Bury, 
Rochdale, Middleton, Heywood, Oldham, Ashton, Stalybridge, 
Stockport, etc., though nearly all towns of thirty, fifty, seventy to 
ninety thousand inhabitants, are almost wholly working-people's 
districts, interspersed only with factories, a few thoroughfares 
lined with shops, and a few lanes along which the gardens and 
houses of the manufacturers are scattered like villas. The towns 
themselves are badly and irregularly built with foul courts, lanes, 
and back alleys, reeking of coal smoke, and especially dingy from 
the originally bright red brick, turned black with time, which is 
here the universal building material. Cellar dwellings are general 
here;  wherever it is in any way possible, these subterranean dens 
are constructed, and a very considerable portion of the population 
dwells in them. 
Among the worst of these towns after Preston and Oldham is 
Bolton, eleven miles north-west of Manchester. It has, so far as I 
have been able to observe in my repeated visits, but one main 
street, a very dirty one, Deansgate, which serves as a market, and 
is even in the finest weather a dark, unattractive hole in spite of 
the fact that, except for the factories, its sides are formed by low 
one and two-storied houses. Here, as everywhere, the older part of 
the town is especially ruinous and miserable. A dark-coloured 
body of water, which leaves the beholder in doubt whether it is a 
brook or a long string of stagnant puddles, flows through the 

=====第371页=====
346 Frederick Engels 
town and contributes its share to the total pollution of the air, by 
no means pure without it. 
There is Stockport, too, which lies on the Cheshire side of the 
Mersey, but belongs nevertheless to the manufacturing district of 
Manchester. It lies in a narrow valley along the Mersey, so that the 
streets slope down a steep hill on one side and up an equally steep 
one on the other, while the railway from Manchester to Birming­
ham passes over a high viaduct above the city and the whole 
valley. Stockport is renowned throughout the entire district as one 
of the duskiest, smokiest holes, and looks, indeed, especially when 
viewed from the viaduct, excessively repellent. But far more 
repulsive are the cottages and cellar dwellings of the working-class, 
which stretch in long rows through all parts of the town from the val­
ley bottom to the crest of the hill. I do not remember to have seen 
so many cellars used as dwellings in any other town of this district. 
A few miles north-east of Stockport is Ashton-under-Lyne, one 
of the newest factory towns of this region. It stands on the slope 
of a hill at the foot of which are the canal and the river Tame, 
and is, in general, built on the newer, more regular plan. Five or 
six parallel streets stretch along the hill, intersected at right angles 
by others leading down into the valley. By this method, the 
factories would be excluded from the town proper, even if the 
proximity of the river and the canal-way did not draw them all 
into the valley where they stand thickly crowded, belching forth 
black smoke from their chimneys. To this arrangement Ashton 
owes a much more attractive appearance than that of most factory 
towns; the streets are broader and cleaner, the cottages look new, 
bright red, and comfortable. But the modern system of building 
cottages for working-men has its own disadvantages; every street 
has its concealed back lane to which a narrow paved path leads, and 
which is all the dirtier. And, although I saw no buildings, except 
a few on entering, which could have been more than fifty years 
old, there are even in Ashton streets in which the cottages are 
getting bad, where the bricks in the house-corners are no longer 
firm but shift about, in which the walls have cracks and will not hold 
the chalk whitewash inside; streets, whose dirty, smoke-begrimed 
aspect is nowise different from that of the other towns of the 
district, except that in Ashton this is the exception, not the rule. 
A mile eastward lies Stalybridge, also on the Tame. In coming 
over the hill from Ashton, the traveller has, at the top, both right 
and left, fine large gardens with superb villa-like houses in their 
midst, built usually in the Elizabethan style, which is to the Gothic 
precisely what the Anglican Church is to the Apostolic Roman 

=====第372页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 347 
Catholic. A hundred paces farther and Stalybridge shows itself in 
the valley, in sharp contrast with the beautiful country seats, in 
sharp contrast even with the modest cottages of Ashton! Staly­
bridge lies in a narrow, crooked ravine, much narrower even than 
the valley at Stockport, and both sides of this ravine are occupied 
by an irregular group of cottages, houses, and mills. On entering, 
the very first cottages are narrow, smoke-begrimed, old and 
ruinous; and as the first houses, so the whole town. A few streets 
lie in the narrow valley bottom, most of them run criss-cross, 
pell-mell, up hill and down, and in nearly all the houses, by reason 
of this sloping situation, the ground-floor is half-buried in the 
earth; and what multitudes of courts, back lanes, and remote 
nooks arise out of this confused way of building may be seen from 
the hills, whence one has the town, here and there, in a bird's-eye 
view almost at one's feet. Add to this the shocking filth, and the 
repulsive effect of Stalybridge, in spite of its pretty surroundings, 
may be readily imagined. 
But enough of these little towns. Each has its own peculiarities, 
but in general, the v, jrking-people live in them just as in 
Manchester. Hence I have especially sketched only their peculiar 
construction, and would observe that all more general observations 
as to the condition of the labouring population in Manchester are 
fully applicable to these surrounding towns as well.3 
Manchester lies at the foot of the southern slope of a range of 
hills,  which stretch hither from Oldham,b their last peak, Kersall-
moor, being at once the racecourse and the Mons Sacer of 
Manchester.132 Manchester proper lies on the left bank of the 
Irwell, between that stream and the two smaller ones, the Irk and 
the Medlock, which here empty into the Irwell. On the right bank 
of the Irwell, bounded by a sharp curve of the river, lies Salford, 
and farther westward Pendleton; northward from the Irwell lie 
Upper and Lower Broughton; northward of the Irk, Cheetham 
Hill; south of the Medlock lies Hulme; farther east Chorlton on 
Medlock; still farther, pretty well to the east of Manchester, 
Ardwick. The whole assemblage of buildings is commonly called 
Manchester, and contains about four hundred thousand inhabit­
ants,  rather more than less. The town itself is peculiarly built, so 
that a person may live in it for years, and go in and out daily 
without coming into contact with a working-people's quarter or 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here one more sentence: "We 
now turn our attention to the principal town."—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "between the valleys of the 
Irwell and the Medlock".—Ed. 

=====第373页=====
348 Frederick Engels 
even with workers, that is, so long as he confines himself to his 
business or to pleasure walks. This arises chiefly from the fact, 
that by unconscious tacit agreement, as well as with outspoken 
conscious determination, the working-people's quarters are sharply 
separated from the sections of the city reserved for the middle-
class;  or, if this does not succeed, they are concealed with the cloak 
of charity. Manchester contains, at its heart, a rather extended 
commercial district, perhaps half a mile long and about as broad, 
and consisting almost wholly of offices and warehouses. Nearly the 
whole district is abandoned by dwellers, and is lonely and deserted 
at night; only watchmen and policemen traverse its narrow lanes 
with their dark lanterns. This district is cut through by certain 
main thoroughfares upon which the vast traffic concentrates, and 
in which the ground level is lined with brilliant shops. In these 
streets the upper floors are occupied, here and there, and there is 
a good deal of life upon them until late at night. With the 
exception of this commercial district, all Manchester proper, all 
Salford and Hulme, a great part of Pendleton and Chorlton, 
two-thirds of Ardwick, and single stretches of Cheetham Hill and 
Broughton are all unmixed working-people's quarters, stretching 
like a girdle, averaging a mile and a half in breadth, around the 
commercial district. Outside, beyond this girdle, lives the upper 
and middle bourgeoisie, the middle bourgeoisie in regularly laid 
out streets in the vicinity of the working quarters, especially in 
Chorlton and the lower lying portions of Cheetham Hill; the 
upper bourgeoisie in remoter villas with gardens in Chorlton and 
Ardwick, or on the breezy heights of Cheetham Hill, Broughton, 
and Pendleton, in free, wholesome country air, in fine, comforta­
ble homes, passed once every half or quarter hour by omnibuses 
going into the city. And the finest part of the arrangement is this, 
that the members of this money aristocracy can take the shortest 
road through the middle of all the labouring districts to their 
places of business without ever seeing that they are in the midst of 
the grimy misery that lurks to the right and the left. For the 
thoroughfares leading from the Exchange in all directions out of 
the city are lined, on both sides, with an almost unbroken series of 
shops,  and are so kept in the hands of the middle and lower 
bourgeoisie, which, out of self-interest, cares for a decent and 
cleanly external appearance and can care for it. True, these shops 
bear some relation to the districts which lie behind them, and are 
more elegant in the commercial and residential quarters than 
when they hide grimy working-men's dwellings; but they suffice to 
conceal from the eyes of the wealthy men and women of strong 

=====第374页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 349 
stomachs and weak nerves the misery and grime which form the 
complement of their wealth.3 So, for instance, Deansgate, which 
leads from the Old Church directly southward, is lined first with 
mills and warehouses, then with second-rate shops and alehouses; 
farther south, when it leaves the commercial district, with less 
inviting shops, which grow dirtier and more interrupted by 
beerhouses and gin-palaces the farther one goes, until at the 
southern end the appearance of the shops leaves no doubt that 
workers and workers only are their customers. So Market Street 
running south-east from the Exchange; at first brilliant shops of 
the best sort, with counting-houses or warehouses above; in the 
continuation, Piccadilly, immense hotels and warehouses; in the 
farther continuation, London Road, in the neighbourhood of the 
Medlock, factories, beerhouses, shops for the humbler bourgeoisie 
and the working populationb; and from this point onward, large 
gardens and villas of the wealthier merchants and manufacturers. 
In this way any one who knows Manchester can infer the 
adjoining districts from the appearance of the thoroughfare, but 
one is seldom in a position to catch from the street a glimpse of 
the real labouring districts. I know very well that this hypocritical 
plan is more or less common to all great cities; I know, too, that 
the retail dealers are forced by the nature of their business to take 
possession of the great highways; I know that there are more good 
buildings than bad ones upon such streets everywhere, and that 
the value of land is greater near them than in remoter districts; 
but at the same time I have never seen so systematic a shutting out 
of the working-class from the thoroughfares, so tender a conceal­
ment of everything which might affront the eye and the nerves of 
the bourgeoisie, as in Manchester. And yet, in other respects, 
Manchester is less built according to a plan, after official0 
regulations, is more an outgrowth of accident than any other city; 
and when I consider in this connection the eager assurances of the 
middle-class, that the working-class is doing famously, I cannot 
help feeling that the Liberal manufacturers, the "Big Wigs"d of 
Manchester, are not so innocent after all, in the matter of this 
shameful method of construction. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "wealth and luxury".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "then along Ardwick 
Green are houses for the higher and middle bourgeoisie".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "police" instead of "offi­
cial".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have these two words in 
English.—Ed. 

=====第375页=====
350 Frederick Engels 
I may mention just here that the mills almost all adjoin the 
rivers or the different canals that ramify throughout the city, 
before I proceed at once to describe the labouring quarters. First 
of all, there is the Old Town of Manchester, which lies between 
the northern boundary of the commercial district and thelrk. Here 
the streets, even the better ones, are narrow and winding, as Todd 
Street, Long Millgate, Withy Grove, and Shude Hill, the houses 
dirty, old, and tumble­
down, and the construc­
tion of the side streets ut­
terly horrible. Going from 
the Old Church to Long 
Millgate, the stroller has at 
once a row of old-fashioned 
houses at the right, of 
which not one has kept its 
original level; these are-
remnants of the old pre-
manufacturing Manchester, 
whose former inhabitants 
have removed with their descendants into better-built districts, and 
have left the houses, which were not good enough for them, to a 
population strongly mixed with Irish blood. Here one is in an 
almost undisguised working-men's quarter, for even the shops and 
beerhouses hardly take the trouble to exhibit a trifling degree of 
cleanliness. But all this is nothing in comparison with the courts 
and lanes which lie behind, to which access can be gained only 
through covered passages, in which no two human beings can pass 
at the same time. Of the irregular cramming together of dwellings 
in ways which defy all rational plan, of the tangle in which they 
are crowded literally one upon the other, it is impossible to convey 
an idea. And it is not the buildings surviving from the old times of 
Manchester which are to blame for this; the confusion has only 
recently reached its height when every scrap of space left by the 
old way of building has been filled up and patched over until not 
a foot of land is left to be further occupied. 
To confirm my statement I have drawn here a small section of the 
plan of Manchester—not the worst spot and not one-tenth of the 
whole Old Town.3 
The drawings reproduced in the book as well as the relevant texts here and 
below are taken from the German editions of 1845 and 1892. In the American 
edition of 1887 and the English edition of 1892 they are omitted.—Ed. 

=====第376页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 351 
This drawing will suffice to characterise the irrational manner in 
which the entire district was built, particularly the part near the 
Irk. 
The south bank of the Irk is here very steep and between 
fifteen and thirty feet high. On this declivitous hillside there are 
planted three rows of houses, of which the lowest rise directly out 
of the river, while the front walls of the highest stand on the crest 
of the hill in Long Millgate. Among them are mills on the river, in 
short, the method of construction is as crowded and disorderly 
here as in the lower part of Long Millgate. Right and left a 
multitude of covered passages lead from the main street into 
numerous courts, and he who turns in thither gets into a filth and 
disgusting grime, the equal of which is not to be found—espe­
cially in the courts which lead down to the Irk, and which contain 
unqualifiedly the most horrible dwellings which I have yet beheld. 
In one of these courts there stands directly at the entrance, at the 
end of the covered passage, a privy without a door, so dirty that 
the inhabitants can pass into and out of the court only by passing 
through foul pools of stagnant urine and excrement. This is the 
first court on the Irk above Ducie Bridge — in case any one should 
care to look into it. Below it on the river there are several 
tanneries which fill the whole neighbourhood with the stench of 
animal putrefaction. Below Ducie Bridge the only entrance to 
most of the houses is by means of narrow, dirty stairs and over 
heaps of refuse and filth. The first court below Ducie Bridge, 
known as Allen's Court, was in such a state at the time of the 
cholera that the sanitary police ordered it evacuated, swept, and 
disinfected with chloride of lime. Dr. Kay gives a terrible descrip­
tion of the state of this court at that time.* Since then, it seems to 
have been partially torn away and rebuilt; at least looking down 
from Ducie Bridge, the passer-by sees several ruined walls and 
heaps of débris with some newer houses. The view from this 
bridge, mercifully concealed from mortals of small stature by a 
parapet as high as a man, is characteristic for the whole district. At 
the bottom flows, or rather stagnates, the Irk, a narrow, coal-black, 
foul-smelling stream, full of débris and refuse, which it deposits on 
the shallower right bank. In dry weather, a long string of the most 
disgusting, blackish-green, slime pools are left standing on this 
* The Moral and Physical Condition of the Working Classes employed in the Cotton 
Manufacture in Manchester. By James Ph. Kay, M.D. 2nd Ed. 1832. 
Dr. Kay confuses the working-class in general with the factory workers, 
otherwise an excellent pamphlet.—Note by Engels. 

=====第377页=====
352 Frederick Engels 
bank, from the depths of which bubbles of miasmatic gas constant­
ly arise and give forth a stench unendurable even on the bridge 
forty or fifty feet above the surface of the stream. But besides this, 
the stream itself is checked every few paces by high weirs, behind 
which slime and refuse accumulate and rot in thick masses. Above 
the bridge are tanneries,3  bonemills, and gasworks, from which all 
drains and refuse find their way into the Irk, which receives 
further the contents of all the neighbouring sewers and privies. It 
may be easily imagined, therefore, what sort of residue the stream 
deposits. Below the bridge you look upon the piles of débris, the 
refuse, filth, and offal from the courts on the steep left bank; here 
each house is packed close behind its neighbour and a piece of 
each is visible, all black, smoky, crumbling, ancient, with broken 
panes and window-frames. The background is furnished by old 
barrack-like factory buildings. On tne lower right bank stands a 
long row of houses and mills; the second house being a ruin 
without a  roof,  piled with débris; the third stands so low that the 
lowest floor is uninhabitable, and therefore without windows or 
doors.  Here the background embraces the pauper burial-ground, 
the station of the Liverpool and Leeds railway, and, in the rear of 
this, the Workhouse, the "Poor-Law Bastille" of Manchester, 
which, like a citadel, looks threateningly down from behind its 
high walls and parapets on the hilltop, upon the working-people's 
quarter below. 
Above Ducie Bridge, the left bank grows more flat and the right 
bank steeper, but the condition of the dwellings on both banks 
grows worse rather than better. He who turns to the left here 
from the main street, Long Millgate, is lost; he wanders from one 
court to another, turns countless corners, passes nothing but 
narrow, filthy nooks and alleys, until after a few minutes he has 
lost all clue, and knows not whither to turn. Everywhere half or 
wholly ruined buildings, some of them actually uninhabited, which 
means a great deal here; rarely a wooden or stone floor to be seen in 
the houses, almost uniformly broken, ill-fitting windows and doors, 
and a state of filth! Everywhere heaps of débris, refuse, and offal; 
standing pools for gutters, and a stench which alone would make it 
impossible for a human being in any degree civilised to live in 
such a district. The newly built extension of the Leeds railway, 
which crosses the Irk here, has swept away some of these courts 
and lanes, laying others completely open to view. Immediately 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "dye-works" after "tanneries".— 
Ed. 

=====第378页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 353 
under the railway bridge there stands a court, the filth and 
horrors of which surpass all the others by far, just because it was 
hitherto so shut off, so secluded that the way to it could not be 
found without a good deal of trouble. I should never have 
discovered it  myself,  without the breaks made by the railway, 
though I thought I knew this whole region thoroughly. Passing 
along a rough bank, among stakes and washing-lines, one pene­
trates into this chaos of small one-storied, one-roomed huts, in 
most of which there is no artificial floor; kitchen, living and 
sleeping-room all in one. In such a hole, scarcely five feet long by 
six broad, I found two beds — and such bedsteads and beds! 
— which, with a staircase and chimney-place, exactly filled the 
room. In several others I found absolutely nothing, while the door 
stood open, and the inhabitants leaned against it. Everywhere 
before the doors refuse and offal; that any sort of pavement lay 
underneath could not be seen but only felt, here and there, with 
the feet. This whole collection of cattle-sheds for human beings 
was surrounded on two sides by houses and a factory, and on the 
third by the river, and besides the narrow stair up the bank, a 
narrow doorway alone led out into another almost equally ill-built, 
ill-kept labyrinth of dwellings. 
Enough! The whole side of the Irk is built in this way, a 
planless, knotted chaos of houses, more or less on the verge of 
uninhabitableness, whose unclean interiors fully correspond with 
their filthy external surroundings. And how could the people be 
clean with no proper opportunity for satisfying the most natural 
and ordinary wants? Privies are so rare here that they are either 
filled up every day, or are too remote for most of the inhabitants 
to use. How can people wash when they have only the dirty Irk 
water at hand, while pumps and water pipes can be found in 
decent parts of the city alone? In truth, it cannot be charged to 
the account of these helots of modern society if their dwellings are 
not more cleanly than the pig-sties which are here and there to be 
seen among them. The landlords are not ashamed to let dwellings 
like the six or seven cellars on the quay directly below Scotland 
Bridge, the floors of which stand at least two feet below the 
low-water level of the Irk that flows not six feet away from them; 
or like the upper floor of the corner-house on the opposite shore 
directly above the bridge, where the ground-floor, utterly unin­
habitable, stands deprived of all fittings for doors and windows, a 
case by no means rare in this region, when this open ground-floor 
is used as a privy by the whole neighbourhood for want of other 
facilities! 

=====第379页=====
354 Frederick Engels 
If we leave the Irk and penetrate once more on the opposite 
side from Long Millgate into the midst of the working-men's 
dwellings, we shall come into a somewhat newer quarter, which 
stretches from St. Michael's Church to Withy Grove and Shude 
Hill. Here there is somewhat better order. In place of the chaos of 
buildings, we find at least long straight lanes and alleys or courts, 
built according to a plan and usually square. But if, in the former 
case,  every house was built according to caprice, here each lane 
and court is so built, without reference to the situation of the 
adjoining ones. The lanes run now in this direction, now in that, 
while every two minutes the wanderer gets into a blind alley, or, 
on turning a corner, finds himself back where he started from; 
certainly no one who has not lived a considerable time in this 
labyrinth can find his way through it. 
If I may use the word at all in speaking of this district, the 
ventilation of these streets and courts is, in consequence of this 
confusion, quite as imperfect as in the Irk region; and if this 
quarter may, nevertheless, be said to have some advantage over 
that of the Irk, the houses being newer and the streets occasionally 
having gutters, nearly every house has, on the other hand, a cellar 
dwelling, which is rarely found in the Irk district, by reason of the 
greater age and more careless construction of the houses. As for 
the rest, the filth, débris, and offal heaps, and the pools in the 
streets are common to both quarters, and in the district now under 
discussion, another feature most injurious to the cleanliness of the 
inhabitants, is the multitude of pigs walking about in all the alleys, 
rooting into the offal heaps, or kept imprisoned in small pens. 
Here, as in most of the working-men's quarters of Manchester, the 
pork-raisers rent the courts and build pig-pens in them. In almost 
every court one or even several such pens may be found, into 
which the inhabitants of the court throw all refuse and offal, 
whence the swine grow fat; and the atmosphere, confined on all 
four sides, is utterly corrupted by putrefying animal and vegetable 
substances. Through this quarter, a broad and measurably decent 
street has been cut, Millers Street, and the background has been 
pretty successfully concealed. But if any one should be led by 
curiosity to pass through one of the numerous passages which lead 
into the courts, he will find this piggery repeated at every twenty 
paces. 
Such is the Old Town of Manchester, and on re-reading my 
description, I am forced to admit that instead of being exagger­
ated, it is far from black enough to convey a true impression of 
the filth, ruin, and uninhabitableness, the defiance of all consider-

=====第380页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 355 
ations of cleanliness, ventilation, and health which characterise the 
construction of this single district, containing at least twenty to 
thirty thousand inhabitants. And such a district exists in the heart 
of the second city of England, the first manufacturing city of the 
world. If any one wishes to see in how little space a human being 
can move, how little air—and such air! — he can breathe, how little 
of civilisation he may share and yet live, it is only necessary to 
travel hither. True, this is the Old Town, and the people of 
Manchester emphasise the fact whenever any one mentions to 
them the frightful condition of this Hell upon Earth; but what 
does that prove? Everything which here arouses horror and 
indignation is of recent origin, belongs to the industrial epoch The 
couple of hundred houses, which belong to old Manchester, have 
been long since abandoned by their original inhabitants; the 
industrial epoch alone has crammed into them the swarms of 
workers whom they now shelter; the industrial epoch alone has 
built up every spot between these old houses to win a covering for 
the masses whom it has conjured hither from the agricultural 
districts and from Ireland; the industrial epoch alone enables the 
owners of these cattlesheds to rent them for high prices to human 
beings, to plunder the poverty of the workers, to undermine the 
health of thousands, in order that they alone, the owners, may 
grow rich. In the industrial epoch alone has it become possible 
that the worker scarcely freed from feudal servitude could be used 
as mere material, a mere chattel; that he must let himself be 
crowded into a dwelling too bad for every other, which he for his 
hard-earned wages buys the right to let go utterly to ruin. This 
manufacture has achieved, which, without these workers, this 
poverty, this slavery could not have lived. True, the original 
construction of this quarter was bad, little good could have been 
made out of it; but, have the landowners, has the municipality 
done anything to improve it when rebuilding? On the contrary, 
wherever a nook or corner was free, a house has been run up; 
where a superfluous passage remained, it has been built up; the 
value of land rose with the blossoming out of manufacture, and 
the more it rose, the more madly was the work of building up 
carried on, without reference to the health or comfort of the 
inhabitants, with sole reference to the highest possible profit on 
the principle that no hole is so bad but that some poor creature must 
take it who can pay for nothing better. However, it is the Old Town, 
and with this reflection the bourgeoisie is comforted. Let us see, 
therefore, how much better it is in the New Town. 

=====第381页=====
356 Frederick Engels 
The New Town, known also as Irish Town, stretches up a hill 
of clay, beyond the Old Town, between the Irk and St. George's 
Road. Here all the features of a city are lost. Single rows of houses 
or groups of streets stand, here and there, like little villages 
on the naked, not even grass-grown clay soil; the houses, or rather 
cottages, are in bad order, never repaired, filthy, with damp, 
unclean, cellar dwellings; the lanes are neither paved nor supplied 
with sewers, but harbour numerous colonies of swine penned in 
small sties or yards, or wandering unrestrained through the neigh­
bourhood. The mud in the streets is so deep that there is never a 
chance, except in the dryest weather, of walking without sinking into 
it ankle deep at every step. In the vicinity of St. George's Road, the 
separate groups of buildings approach each other more closely, 
ending in a continuation of lanes, blind alleys, back lanes and courts, 
which grow more and more crowded and irregular the nearer they 
approach the heart of the town. True, they are here oftener paved 
or supplied with paved sidewalks and gutters; but the filth, the bad 
order of the houses, and especially of the cellars, remain the same. 
It may not be out of place to make some general observations 
just here as to the customary construction of working-men's 
quarters in Manchester. We have seen how in the Old Town pure 
accident determined the grouping of the houses in general. Every 
house is built without reference to any other, and the scraps of 
space between them are called courts for want of another name. 
In the somewhat newer por-
""—"""•"~"~~~—"""""-~" tions of the same quarter, and 
in other working-men's quar­
ters, dating from the early 
days of industrial activity, a 
somewhat more orderly ar­
rangement may be found. 
The space between two streets 
is divided into more regular, 
usually square courts. 
These courts were built in this way from the beginning,3 and 
communicate with the streets by means of covered passages. If the 
totally planless construction is injurious to the health of the 
workers by preventing ventilation, this method of shutting them 
up in courts surrounded on all sides by buildings is far more so. 
The air simply cannot escape; the chimneys of the houses are the 
a The accompanying drawing is reproduced according to the German editions 
of 1845 and 1892.--Ed. 

=====第382页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 357 
sole drains for the imprisoned atmosphere of the courts, and they 
serve the purpose only so long as fire is kept burning.* Moreover, 
the houses surrounding such courts are usually built back to back, 
having the rear wall in common; and this alone suffices to prevent 
any sufficient through ventilation. And, as the police charged with 
care of the streets does not trouble itself about the condition of 
these courts, as everything quietly lies where it is thrown, there is 
no cause for wonder at the filth and heaps of ashes and offal to be 
found here. I have been in courts, in Millers Street, at least half a 
foot below the level of the thoroughfare, and without the slightest 
drainage for the water that accumulates in them in rainy weather! 
More recently another different method of building was 
adopted, and has now become general. Working-men's cottages 
are almost never built singly, but always by the dozen or score; a 
single contractor building up one or two streets at a time. These 
are then arranged as follows: One front is formed of cottages of 
the best class, so fortunate as to possess a back door and small 
court, and these command the highest rent. In the rear of these 
cottages runs a narrow alley, the back street, built up at both ends, 
into which either a narrow roadway or a covered passage leads 
from one side. The cottages which face this back street command 
least rent, and are most neglected. These have their rear walls in 
common with the third row of cottages, which face a second street 
and command less rent than the first row and more than the sec­
ond. The streets are laid out somewhat in the following manner:d 
* And yet an English Liberal wiseacre asserts, in the Report of the Children's 
Employment Commission, that these courts are the masterpiece of municipal architec­
ture,  because, like a multitude of little parks, they improve ventilation, the 
circulation of air! Certainly, if each court had two or four broad open entrances 
facing each other, through which the air could pour; but they never have two, 
rarely one, and usually only a narrow covered passage.— Note by Engels. (The 
reference is to Grainger's assertion concerning Birmingham courts.— Ed.) 
a The drawing and the words referring to it are reproduced according to the 
German editions' of 1845 and  1892.—  Ed. 
13-762 

=====第383页=====
358 Frederick Engels 
By this method of construction, comparatively good ventilation 
can be obtained for the first row of cottages, and the third row is 
no worse off than in the former method. The middle row, on the 
other hand, is at least as badly ventilated as the houses in the 
courts, and the'back street is always in the same filthy, disgusting 
condition as they. The contractors prefer this method because it 
saves them space, and furnishes the means of fleecing better-paid 
workers through the higher rents of the cottages in the first and 
third rows. 
These three different forms of cottage building are found all 
over Manchester and throughout Lancashire and Yorkshire, often 
mixed up together, but usually separate enough to indicate the 
relative age of parts of towns. The third system, that of the back 
alleys,  prevails largely in the great working-men's district east of 
St. George's Road and Ancoats Street,3 and is the one most often 
found in the other working-men's quarters of Manchester and its 
suburbs. 
In the last-mentioned broad district included under the name 
Ancoats, stand the largest mills of Manchester lining the canals, 
colossal six and seven-storied buildings towering with their slender 
chimneys far above the low cottages of the workers. The popula­
tion of the district consists, therefore, chiefly of mill-hands, and in 
the worst streets, of hand-weavers. The streets nearest the heart of 
the town are the oldest, and consequently the worst; they are, 
however, paved, and supplied with drains. Among them I include 
those nearest to and parallel with Oldham Road and Great 
Ancoats Street. Farther to the north-east lie many newly built-up 
streets; here the cottages look neat and cleanly, doors and 
windows are new and freshly painted, the rooms within newly 
whitewashed; the streets themselves are better aired, the vacant 
building lots between them larger and more numerous. But this 
can be said of a minority of the houses only, while cellar dwellings 
are to be found under almost every cottage; many streets are 
unpaved and without sewers; and, worse than all, this  _ neat 
appearance is all pretence, a pretence which vanishes within the 
first ten years. For the construction of the cottages individually is 
no less to be condemned than the plan of the streets. All such 
cottages look neat and substantial at first; their massive brick walls 
deceive the eye, and, on passing through a newly built working-
men's street, without remembering the back alleys and the con-
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 read as follows: "east of St. George's 
Road on both sides of Oldham Road and Great Ancoats Street".— Ed. 

=====第384页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 359 
struction of the houses themselves, one is inclined to agree with 
the assertion of the Liberal manufacturers that the working 
population is nowhere so well housed as in England. But on closer 
examination, it becomes evident that the walls of these cottages are 
as thin as it is possible to make them. The outer walls, those of the 
cellar, which bear the weight of the ground-floor and  roof,  are 
one whole brick thick at most, the bricks lying with their long sides 
touching (1111111); but I have seen many a cottage of the same 
height, some in process of building, whose outer walls were but 
one-half brick thick, the bricks lying not sidewise but lengthwise, 
their narrow ends touching  (1 1 1 1 1 i).a The object of this is to 
spare material, but there is also another reason for it; namely, the 
fact that the contractors never own the land but lease it, according to 
the English custom, for twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, or ninety-nine 
years,  at the expiration of which time it falls, with everything upon 
it, back into the possession of the original holder, who pays 
nothing in return for improvements upon it. The improvements 
are therefore so calculated by the lessee as to be worth as little as 
possible at the expiration of the stipulated term. And as such 
cottages are often built but twenty or thirty years before the 
expiration of the term, it may easily be imagined that the 
contractors make no unnecessary expenditures upon them. 
Moreover, these contractors, usually carpenters and builders, or 
manufacturers, spend little or nothing in repairs, partly to avoid 
diminishing their rent receipts, and partly in view of the ap­
proaching surrender of the improvement to the landowner; while 
in consequence of commercial crises and the loss of work that 
follows them, whole streets often stand empty, the cottages falling 
rapidly into ruin and uninhabitableness. It is calculated in general 
that working-men's cottages last only forty years on the average. 
This sounds strangely enough when one sees the beautiful, 
massive walls of newly built ones, which seem to give promise of 
lasting a couple of centuries; but the fact remains that the 
niggardliness of the original expenditure., the neglect of all 
repairs, the frequent periods of emptiness, the constant change of 
inhabitants, and the destruction carried on by the dwellers during 
the final ten years, usually Irish families, who do not hesitate to 
use the wooden portions for firewood — all this, taken together, 
accomplishes the complete ruin of the cottages by the end of forty 
years.  Hence it comes that Ancoats, built chiefly since the sudden 
The drawings are reproduced according to the German editions of 1845 and 
1892.—Ed. 
13* 

=====第385页=====
360 Frederick Engels 
growth of manufacture, chiefly indeed within the present century, 
contains a vast number of ruinous houses, most of them being, in 
fact, in the last stages of inhabitableness. I will not dwell upon the 
amount of capital thus wasted, the small additional expenditure 
upon the original improvement and upon repairs which would 
suffice to keep this whole district clean, decent, and inhabitable for 
years together. I have to deal here with the state of the houses and 
their inhabitants, and it must be admitted that no more injurious 
and demoralising method of housing the workers has yet been 
discovered than precisely this. The working-man is constrained to 
occupy such ruinous dwellings because he cannot pay for others, 
and because there are no others3 in the vicinity of his mill; 
perhaps, too, because they belong to the employer, who engages 
him only on condition of his taking such a cottage. The calculation 
with reference to the forty years' duration of the cottage is, of 
course, not always perfectly strict; for, if the dwellings are in a 
thickly built-up portion of the town, and there is a good prospect 
of finding steady occupants for them, while the ground-rent is 
high, the contractors do a little something to keep the cottages 
inhabitable after the expiration of the forty years. They never do 
anything more, however, than is absolutely unavoidable, and the 
dwellings so repaired are the worst of all. Occasionally when an 
epidemic threatens, the otherwise sleepy conscience of the sanitary 
police is a little stirred, raids are made into the working-men's 
districts, whole rows of cellars and cottages are closed, as hap­
pened in the case of several lanes near Oldham Road; but this 
does not last long: the condemned cottages soon find occupants 
again, the owners are much better off by letting them, and the 
sanitary police won't come again so soon. These east and north­
east sides of Manchester are the only ones on which the 
bourgeoisie has not built, because ten or eleven months of the 
year the west and south-west wind drives the smoke of all the 
factories hither,b and that the working-people alone may 
breathe. 
Southward from Great Ancoats Street, lies a great, straggling, 
working-men's quarter, a hilly, barren stretch of land, occupied by 
detached, irregularly built rows of houses or squares, between 
these, empty building lots, uneven, clayey, without grass and 
scarcely passable in wet weather. The cottages are all filthy and 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "no better ones" instead of "no 
others".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "—and there is plenty of 
it—".— Ed. 

=====第386页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 361 
old,3 and recall the New Town to mind. The stretch cut through 
by the Birmingham railway is the most thickly built-up and the 
worst. Here flows the Medlock with countless windings through a 
valley, which is, in places, on a level with the valley of the Irk. 
Along both sides of the stream, which is coal-black, stagnant and 
foul,b stretches a broad belt of factories and working-men's dwell­
ings,  the latter all in the worst condition. The bank is chiefly 
declivitous and is built over to the water's edge, just as we saw 
along the Irk; while the houses are equally bad, whether built on 
the Manchester side or in Ardwick, Chorlton, or Hulme. But the 
most horrible spot (if I should describe all the separate spots in 
detail I should never come to the end) lies on the Manchester side, 
immediately south-west of Oxford Road, and is known as Little 
Ireland. In a rather deep hole, in a curve of the Medlock and 
surrounded on all four sides by tall factories and high embank­
ments, covered with buildings, stand two groups of about two 
hundred cottages, built chiefly back to back, in which live about 
four thousand human beings, most of them Irish. The cottages are 
old, dirty, and of the smallest sort, the streets uneven, fallen into 
ruts and in part without drains or pavement; masses of refuse, 
offal and sickening filth lie among standing pools in all directions; 
the atmosphere is poisoned by the effluvia from these, and laden 
and darkened by the smoke of a dozen tall factory chimneys. A 
horde of ragged women and children swarm about here, as filthy 
as the swine that thrive upon the garbage heaps and in the 
puddles. In short, the whole rookery furnishes such a hateful and 
repulsive spectacle as can hardly be equalled in the worst court on 
the Irk. The race that lives in these ruinous cottages, behind broken 
windows, mended with oilskin, sprung doors, and rotten door­
posts,  or in dark, wet cellars, in measureless filth and stench, in 
this atmosphere penned in as if with a purpose, this race must 
really have reached the lowest stage of humanity. This is the 
impression and the line of thought which the exterior of this 
district forces upon the beholder. But what must one think when 
he hears that in each of these pens, containing at most two rooms, 
a garret and perhaps a cellar, on the average twenty human beings 
live; that in the whole region, for each one hundred and twenty 
persons, one usually inaccessible privy is provided; and that in 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "often lie in hol­
lows".—  Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "from where it enters the town 
until it joins the Irwell".— Ed. 

=====第387页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
spite of all the preachings of the physicians, in spite of the 
excitement into which the cholera epidemic plunged the sanitary 
police by reason of the condition of Little Ireland, in spite of 
everything, in this year of grace 1844, it is in almost the same state 
as in 1831! Dr. Kay asserts* that not only the cellars but the first 
floors of all the houses in this district are damp; that a number of 
cellars once filled up with earth have now been emptied and are 
occupied once more by Irish people; that in one cellar the water 
constantly wells up through a hole stopped with clay, the cellar 
lying below the river level, so that its occupant, a hand-loom 
weaver, had to bale out the water from his dwelling every morning 
and pour it into the street! 
Farther down, on the left side of the Medlock, lies Hulme, 
which properly speaking, is one great working-people's district, the 
condition of which coincides almost exactly with that of Ancoats; 
the more thickly built-up regions chiefly bad and approaching 
ruin, the less populous of more modern structure, but generally 
sunk in filth.a On the other side of the Medlock, in Manchester 
proper, lies a second great working-men's district which stretches 
on both sides of Deansgate as far as the business quarter, and in 
certain parts rivals the Old Town. Especially in the immediate 
vicinity of the business quarter, between Bridge and Quay Streets, 
Princess and Peter Streets, the crowded construction exceeds in 
places the narrowest courts of the Old Town. Here are long, 
narrow lanes between which run contracted, crooked courts and 
passages, the entrances to which are so irregular that the explorer 
is caught in a blind alley at every few steps, or comes out where he 
least expects to, unless he knows every court and every alley 
exactly and separately. According to Dr. Kay, the most demoral­
ised class of all Manchester lived in these ruinous and filthy 
districts, people whose occupations are thieving and prostitution; 
and, to all appearances, his assertion is still true at the present 
moment. When the sanitary police made its expedition hither in 
1831,  it found the uncleanness as great as in Little Ireland or 
along the Irk (that it is not much better today, I can testify); and, 
among other items, they found in Parliament Street for three 
* Dr. Kay, loc. cit.—Note by Engels. (It is omitted in the English and American 
editions.—Ed.) 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the end of the sentence reads as 
follows: "of more modern structure, better ventilated, but generally sunk in filth". 
Then follows one more sentence omitted in the authorised American and English 
editions: "In both places the site of the cottages is damp and the type of building 
includes back alleys and cellar dwellings".—Ed. 

=====第388页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 363 
hundred and eighty persons, and in Parliament Passage for thirty 
thickly populated houses, but a single privy. 
If we cross the Irwell to Salford, we find on a peninsula formed 
by the river a town of eighty thousand inhabitants, which, 
properly speaking, is one large working-men's quarter, penetrated 
by a single wide avenue. Salford, once more important than 
Manchester, was then the leading town of the surrounding district 
to which it still gives its name, Salford Hundred. Hence it is that 
an old and therefore very unwholesome, dirty, and ruinous 
locality is to be found here, lying opposite the Old Church of 
Manchester, and in as bad a condition as the Old Town on the 
other side of the Irwell. Farther away from the river lies the newer 
portion, which is, however, already beyond the limit of its forty 
years of cottage life,a and therefore ruinous enough. All Salford is 
built in courts or narrow lanes, so narrow, that they remind me of 
the narrowest I have ever seen, the little lanes of Genoa. The 
average construction of Salford is in this respect much worse than 
that of Manchester, and so, too, in respect to cleanliness. If, in 
Manchester, the police, from time to time, every six or ten years, 
makes a raid upon the working-people's districts, closes the worst 
dwellings, and causes the filthiest spots in these Augean stables to 
be cleansed, in Salford it seems to have done absolutely nothing. 
The narrow side lanes and courts of Chapel Street, Greengate, 
and Gravel Lane have certainly never been cleansed since they 
were built. Of late, the Liverpool railway has been carried through 
the middle of them, over a high viaduct, and has abolished many 
of the filthiest nooks; but what does that avail? Whoever passes 
over this viaduct and looks down, sees filth and wretchedness 
enough; and, if any one takes the trouble to pass through these 
lanes and glance through the open doors and windows into the 
houses and cellars, he can convince himself afresh with every step 
that the workers of Salford live in dwellings in which cleanliness 
and comfort are impossible. Exactly the same state of affairs is 
found in the more distant regions of Salford, in Islington, along 
Regent Road, and back of the Bolton railway. The working-men's 
dwellings between Oldfield Road and Cross Lane, whereb a mass 
of courts and alleys are to be found in the worst possible state, vie 
with the dwellings of the Old Town in filth and overcrowding. In 
this district I found a man, apparently about sixty years old, living 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "of cottage life" do not 
occur.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "on both sides of Hope 
Street".—Ed. 

=====第389页=====
364 Frederick Engels 
in a cow-stable. He had constructed a sort of chimney for his 
square pen, which had neither windows, floor, nor ceiling, had 
obtained a bedstead and lived there, though the rain dripped 
through his rotten  roof.  This man was too old and weak for 
regular work, and supported himself by removing manure with a 
hand-cart; the dung-heaps lay next door to his palace! 
Such are the various working-people's quarters of Manchester as 
I had occasion to observe them personally during twenty months. 
If we briefly formulate the result of our wanderings, we must 
admit that 350,000 working-people of Manchester and its environs 
live, almost all of them, in wretched, damp, filthy cottages, that the 
streets which surround them are usually in the most miserable and 
filthy condition, laid out without the slightest reference to ventila­
tion, with reference solely to the profit secured by the contrac­
tor. In a word, we must confess that in the working-men's dwell­
ings of Manchester, no cleanliness, no convenience, and conse­
quently no comfortable family life is possible; that in such 
dwellings only a physically degenerate race, robbed of all humani­
ty, degraded, reduced morally and physically3 to bestiality, could 
feel comfortable and at home. And I am not alone in making this 
assertion. We have seen that Dr. Kay gives precisely the same 
description; and, though it is superfluous, I quote further the 
words of a Liberal, recognised and highly valued as an authority 
by the manufacturers, and a fanatical opponent of all independent 
movements of the workers*: 
"But when I went through their [i.e., the Manchester operatives'] habitations in 
Irish Town, and Ancoats, and Little Ireland, my only wonder was that tolerable 
health could be maintained by the inmates of such houses. These towns, for such 
they are in extent and population, have been erected by small speculators with an 
utter disregard to everything except immediate profit. A carpenter and a bricklayer 
club to buy a patch of ground [i.e., they lease it for a number of years], and cover 
it with what they call houses. In one place we saw a whole street following the 
course of a ditch, in order to have deeper cellars (cellars for people, not for 
lumber) without the expense of excavations. Not a house in this street  escaped  cholera. 
And generally speaking, throughout these suburbs the streets are unpaved, with a 
dung-hill or a pond in the middle; the houses built back to back, without 
ventilation or drainage; and whole families occupy a corner of a cellar or of a 
garret." 
* Nassau W. Senior, Letters on the Factory Act to the Rt. Hon., the President of the 
Board of Trade (Chas. Poule« Thomson, Esq.), London, 1837, p. 24.—Note by 
Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "intellectually" instead of 
"physically".—Ed. 
b Italics by Engels. —Ed. 

=====第390页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 365 
I have already referred to the unusual activity which the 
sanitary police manifested during the cholera visitation. When the 
epidemic was approaching, a universal terror seized the 
bourgeoisie of the city. People remembered the unwholesome 
dwellings of the poor, and trembled before the certainty that each 
of these slums would become a centre for the plague, whence it 
would spread desolation in all directions through the houses of the 
propertied class. A Health Commission was appointed at once to 
investigate these districts, and report upon their condition to the 
Town Council. Dr. Kay, himself a member of this Commission, 
who visited in person every separate police district except one, the 
eleventh, quotes extracts from their reports: There were in­
spected, in all, 6,951 houses—naturally in Manchester proper 
alone, Salford and the other suburbs being excluded. Of these, 
2,565 urgently needed whitewashing within; 960 were out of 
repair3 ; 939 had insufficient drains; 1,435 were damp; 452 were 
badly ventilated; 2,221 were without privies. Of the 687 streets 
inspected, 248 were unpaved, 53 but partially paved, 112 ill-
ventilated, 352 containing standing pools, heaps of débris, refuse, 
etc. To cleanse such an Augean stable before the arrival of the 
cholera was, of course, out of the question. A few of the worst 
nooks were therefore cleansed, and everything else left as before.In 
the cleansed spots, as Little Ireland proves, the old filthy condition 
was naturally restored in a couple of months. As to the internal 
condition of these houses, the same Commission reports a state of 
things similar to that which we have already met with in London, 
Edinburgh, and other cities.* 
"A whole Irish family is often accommodated on a single bed, and sometimes 
a heap of filthy straw and a covering of old sacking hide them in one 
undistinguished heap, debased alike by penury, want of economy and dissolute 
habits. Frequently the inspectors found two families crowded into one small house, 
containing only two apartments, one in which they slept, and another in which they 
eat; and often more than one family lived in a damp cellar, containing only one 
room, in whose pestilential atmosphere from twelve to sixteen persons were crowded. 
To these fertile sources of disease were sometimes added the keeping of the 
pigs and other animals in the house, with other nuisances of the most revolting 
character." 
We must add that many families, who had but one room for 
themselves, receive boarders and lodgers in it, that such lodgers of 
* Kay, loc. cit., p. 32.—Note by Engels. (The word "Irish" in the quotation below 
was added by Engels. —Ed.) 
3 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the English expression "were out 
of repair" in brackets.—Ed. 

=====第391页=====
366 Frederick Engels 
both sexes by no means rarely sleep in the same bed with the 
married couple; and that the single case of a man and his wife and 
his adult sister-in-law sleeping in one bed was found, according to 
the "Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Popula­
tion", six times repeated in Manchester. Common lodging-houses, 
too, are very numerous; Dr. Kay gives their number in 1831 as 
267 in Manchester proper, and they must have increased greatly 
since then. Each of these receives from twenty to thirty guests, so 
that they shelter all told, nightly, from five to seven thousand 
human beings. The character of the houses and their guests is the 
same as in other cities. Five to seven beds in each room lie on the 
floor — without bedsteads, and on these sleep, mixed indiscrimi­
nately, as many persons as apply. What physical and moral 
atmosphere reigns in these holes I need not state. Each of these 
houses is a focus of crime, the scene of deeds against which 
human nature revolts, which would perhaps never have been 
executed but for this forced centralisation of vice. Gaskell* gives 
the number of persons living in cellars in Manchester proper as 
20,000. The Weekly Dispatch gives the number, "according to 
official reports", as twelve per cent of the working-class, which 
agrees with Gaskell's number; the workers being estimated at 
175,000, 21,000 would form twelve per cent of it.133 The cellar 
dwellings in the suburbs are at least as numerous, so that the 
number of persons living in cellars in Manchester — using its name 
in the broader sense — is not less than forty to fifty thousand. So 
much for the dwellings of the workers in the largest cities and 
towns. The manner in which the need of a shelter is satisfied 
furnishes a standard for the manner in which all other necessities 
are supplied. That in these filthy holes a ragged, ill-fed population 
alone can dwell is a safe conclusion, and such is the fact. The 
clothing of the working-people, in the majority of cases, is in a 
* P. Gaskell, The Manufacturing Population of England: its Moral, Social and 
Physical Condition, and the Changes which have arisen from the Use of Steam Machinery; 
with an Examination of Infant Labour. Fiat Justitia,  1833.—  Depicting chiefly the 
state of the working-class in Lancashire. The author is a Liberal, but wrote at a 
time when it was not a feature of Liberalism to chant the happiness of the workers. 
He is therefore unprejudiced, and can afford to have eyes for the evils of the 
present state of things, and especially for the factory system. On the other hand, he 
wrote before the Factories Enquiry Commission, and adopts from untrustworthy 
sources many assertions afterwards refuted by the report of the Commission. This 
work, although on the whole a valuable one, can therefore only be used with 
discretion, especially as the author, like Kay, confuses the whole working-class with 
the mill-hands. The history of the development of the proletariat contained in the 
introduction to the present work, is chiefly taken from this work of Gaskell's.— Note 
bv Ens els. 

=====第392页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 367 
very bad condition. The material used for it is not of the best 
adapted. Wool and linen have almost vanished from the wardrobe 
of both sexes, and cotton has taken their place. Shirts are made of 
bleached or coloured cotton goods; the dresses of the women are 
chiefly of cotton print goods, and woollen petticoats are rarely to 
be seen on the washline. The men wear chiefly trousers of fustian 
or other heavy cotton goods, and jackets or coats of the same. 
Fustian has become the proverbial costume of the working-men, 
who are called "fustian jackets",3 and call themselves so in 
contrast to the gentlemen who wear broadcloth, which latter words 
are used as characteristic for the middle-class. When Feargus 
O'Connor, the Chartist leader, came to Manchester during the 
insurrection of 1842,'» he appeared, amidst the deafening applause 
of the working-men, in a fustian suit of clothing. Hats are the 
universal head-covering in England, even for working-men, hats 
of the most diverse forms, round, high, broad-brimmed, narrow-
brimmed, or without brims — only the younger men in factory 
towns wearing caps. Any one who does not own a hat folds 
himself a low, square paper cap. 
The whole clothing of the working-class, even assuming it to be 
in good condition, is little adapted to the climate. The damp air of 
England, with its sudden changes of temperature, more calculated 
than any other to give rise to colds, obliges almost the whole 
middle-class to wear flannel next to the skin, about the body, and 
flannel scarfs and shirts are in almost universal use. Not only is 
the working-class deprived of this precaution, it is scarcely ever in 
a position to use a thread of woollen clothing; and the heavy 
cotton goods, though thicker, stiffer, and heavier than woollen 
clothes, afford much less protection against cold and wet, remain 
damp much longer because of their thickness and the nature of 
the stuff,  and have nothing of the compact density of fulled 
woollen cloths. And, if a working-man once buys himself a woollen 
coat for Sunday, he must get it from one of the "cheap shops" 
where he finds bad, so-called "Devil's-dust"c cloth, manufactured 
for sale and not for use, and liable to tear or grow threadbare in a 
fortnight, or he must buy of an old clothes'-dealer a half-worn 
coat which has seen its best days, and lasts but a few weeks. 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this expression is given in English; the 
word "broadcloth" is given in brackets after its German equivalent.—Ed. 
b See below, pp. 508, 512-14, 520-22.—Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this expression is given in En­
glish.— Ed. 

=====第393页=====
368 Frederick Engels 
Moreover, the working-man's clothing is, in most cases, in bad 
condition, and there is the oft-recurring necessity for placing the 
best pieces in the pawnbroker's shop. But among very large 
numbers, especially among the Irish, the prevailing clothing 
consists of perfect rags often beyond all mending, or so patched 
that the original colour can no longer be detected. Yet the English 
and Anglo-Irish go on patching, and have carried this art to a 
remarkable pitch, putting wool or bagging on fustian, or the 
reverse—it's all the same to them. But the true, transplanted Irish 
hardly ever patch except in the extremest necessity, when the 
garment would otherwise fall apart. Ordinarily the rags of the 
shirt protrude through the rents in the coat or trousers. They 
wear, as Thomas Carlyle says,—* 
"a suit of tatters, the getting on or off which is said to be a difficult operation, 
transacted only in festivals and the high tides of the calendar." 
The Irish have introduced, too, the custom, previously unknown 
in England, of going barefoot. In every manufacturing town there 
is now to be seen a multitude of people, especially women and 
children, going about barefoot, and their example is gradually 
being adopted by the poorer English. 
As with clothing, so with food. The workers get what is too bad 
for the property-holding class. In the great towns of England 
everything may be had of the best, but it costs money; and the 
workman, who must keep house on a couple of pence, cannot 
afford much expense. Moreover, he usually receives his wages on 
Saturday evening, for, although a beginning has been made in the 
payment of wages on Friday, this excellent arrangement is by no 
means universal; and so he comes to market at five or even seven 
o'clock,3 while the buyers of the middle-class have had the first 
choice during the morning, when the market teems with the best 
of everything. But when the workers reach it, the best has 
vanished, and, if it was still there, they would probably not be able 
to buy it. The potatoes which the workers buy are usually poor, 
the vegetables wilted, the cheese old and of poor quality, the 
bacon rancid, the meat lean, tough, taken from old, often 
diseased, cattle, or such as have died a natural death, and not 
fresh even then, often half decayed. The sellers are usually small 
* Thomas Carlyle, Chartism, London, 1840, p. 28. Concerning Thomas Carlyle 
see below.—Note by Engels. (In the American edition of 1887 and the English 
edition of 1892 the last phrase is omitted.—Ed.) 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "at four, five or even 
seven  o'clock".—Ed. 

=====第394页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 369 
hucksters who buy up inferior goods, and can sell them cheaply by 
reason of their badness. The poorest workers are forced to use 
still another device to get together the things they need with their 
few pence. As nothing can be sold on Sunday, and all shops must 
be closed at twelve o'clock on Saturday night, such things as would 
not keep until Monday are sold at any price between ten o'clock 
and midnight. But nine-tenths of what is sold at ten o'clock is past 
using by Sunday morning, yet these are precisely the provisions 
which make up the Sunday dinner of the poorest class. The meat 
which the workers buy is very often past using; but having bought 
it, they must eat it. On the 6th of January, 1844 (if I am not 
greatly mistaken), a court leeta was held in Manchester, when 
eleven meat-sellers were fined for having sold tainted meat. Each 
of them had a whole ox or pig, or several sheep, or from fifty to 
sixty pounds of meat, which were all confiscated in a tainted 
condition. In one case, fifty-four stuffed Christmas geese were 
seized which had proved unsaleable in Liverpool, and had been 
forwarded to Manchester, where they were brought to market foul 
and rotten. All the particulars, with names and fines, were 
published at the time in the Manchester Guardian.™4 In the six 
weeks, from July 1st to August 14th [1844], the same sheet 
reported three similar cases. According to the Guardian for July 
3rd, a pig, weighing 200 pounds, which had been found dead and 
decayed, was cut up and exposed for sale by a butcher at 
Heywood, and was then seized. According to the number for July 
31st, two butchers at Wigan, of whom one had previously been 
convicted of the same offence, were fined £2 and £4 respectively, 
for exposing tainted meat for sale; and, according to the number 
for August 10th, twenty-six tainted hams seized at a dealer's in 
Bolton, were publicly burnt, and the dealer fined twenty shillings. 
But these are by no means all the cases; they do not even form a 
fair average for a period of six weeks, according to which to form 
an average for the year. There are often seasons in which every 
number of the semi-weekly Guardian mentions a similar case 
found in Manchester or its vicinity. And when one reflects upon 
the many cases which must escape detection in the extensive 
markets that stretch along the front of every main street, under 
the slender supervision of the market inspectors—and how else 
can one explain the boldness with which whole animals are 
exposed for sale?—when one considers how great the temptation 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this English term is given in 
brackets.—Ed. 

=====第395页=====
370 Frederick Engels 
must be, in view of the incomprehensibly small fines mentioned in 
the foregoing cases; when one reflects what condition a piece of 
meat must have reached to be seized by the inspectors, it is 
impossible to believe that the workers obtain good and nourishing 
meat as a usual thing. But they are victimised in yet another way 
by the money-greed of the middle-class. Dealers and manufacturers 
adulterate all kinds of provisions in an atrocious manner, and 
without the slightest regard to the health of the consumers. We 
have heard the Manchester Guardian upon this subject, let us hear 
another organ of the middle-class—I delight in the testimony of 
my opponents—let us hear the Liverpool Mercury: 
"Salt butter is moulded into the form of pounds of fresh butter, and cased over 
with fresh. In other instances a pound of fresh is conspicuously placed to be 
tasted; but that pound is not sold; and in other instances salt butter, washed, is 
moulded and sold as fresh.... Pounded rice and other cheap materials are mixed in 
sugar, and sold at full monopoly price. A chemical substance—the refuse of the 
soap manufactories—is also mixed with other substances and sold as sugar.... 
Chicory is mixed in good coffee. Chicory, or some similarly cheap substance, is 
skilfully moulded into the form of the coffee berry, and is mixed with the bulk 
very liberally.... Cocoa is extensively adulterated with fine brown earth, wrought 
up with mutton fat, so as to amalgamate with portions of the real article.... The 
leaves of tea are mingled with sloe leaves and other abominations. Used leaves are 
also re-dried, and re-coloured on hot copper plates, and sold as tea. Pepper is 
adulterated with dust from husks etc.; port wine is altogether manufactured" 
(from spirits, dyes, etc.) "it being notorious that more port wine is drunk in this 
country than is made in Portugal. Nasty things of all sorts are mixed with the weed 
tobacco in all its manufactured forms". 
I can add that several of the most respected tobacco dealers in 
Manchester announced publicly last summer, that, by reason of 
the universal adulteration of tobacco, no firm could carry on 
business without adulteration, and that no cigar costing less than 
threepence is made wholly from tobacco. These frauds are 
naturally not restricted to articles of food, though I could mention 
a dozen more, the villainy of mixing gypsum or chalk with flour 
among them. Fraud is practised in the sale of articles of every 
sort: flannel, stockings, etc., are stretched, and shrink after the 
first washing; narrow cloth is sold as being from one and a half to 
three inches broader than it actually is; stoneware is so thinly 
glazed that the glazing is good for nothing and cracks at once, and 
a hundred other rascalities, tout comme chez nous. But the lion's 
share of the evil results of these frauds falls to the workers. The 
rich are less deceived, because they can pay the high prices of the 
large shops which have a reputation to lose, and would injure 
themselves more than their customers if they kept poor or 

=====第396页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 371 
adulterated wares; the rich are spoiled, too, by habitual good 
eating, and detect adulteration more easily with their sensitive 
palates. But the poor, the working-people, to whom a couple of 
farthings are important, who must buy many things with little 
money, who cannot afford to inquire too closely into the quality of 
their purchases, and cannot do so in any case because they have 
had no opportunity of cultivating their taste—to their share fall 
all the adulterated, poisoned provisions. They must deal with the 
small retailers, must buy perhaps on credit, and these small retail 
dealers who cannot sell even the same quality of goods so cheaply 
as the largest retailers, because of their small capital and the large 
proportional expenses of their business, must knowingly or un­
knowingly buy adulterated goods in order to sell at the lower 
prices required, and to meet the competition of the others. 
Further, a large retail dealer who has extensive capital invested in 
his business is ruined with his ruined credit if detected in a 
fraudulent practice; but what harm does it do a small grocer, who 
has customers in a single street only, if frauds are proved against 
him? If no one trusts him in Ancoats, he moves to Chorlton or 
Hulme, where no one knows him, and where he continues to 
defraud as before; while legal penalties attach to very few 
adulterations unless they involve revenue frauds. Not in the 
quality alone, but in the quantity of his goods as well, is the 
English working-man defrauded. The small dealers usually have 
false weights and measures, and an incredible number of convic­
tions for such offences may be read in the police reports. How 
universal this form of fraud is in the manufacturing districts, a 
couple of extracts from the Manchester Guardian may serve to 
show. They cover only a short period, and, even here, I have not 
all the numbers at hand: 
Guardian, June 15, 1844, Rochdale Sessions.— Four dealers 
fined five to ten shillings for using light weights. Stockport 
Sessions.—Two dealers fined one shilling, one of them having 
seven light weights and a false scale, and both having been 
warned. 
Guardian, June 19, Rochdale Sessions.—One dealer fined five, 
and two farmers ten shillings. 
Guardian, June 22, Manchester Justices of the Peace.—Nineteen 
dealers fined two shillings and sixpence to two pounds. 
Guardian, June 26, Ashton Sessions.— Fourteen dealers and 
farmers fined two shillings and sixpence to one pound. Hyde Petty 
Sessions.— Nine farmers and dealers condemned to pay costs and 
five shillings fines. 

=====第397页=====
372 Frederick Engels 
Guardian, July 6, Manchester. — Sixteen dealers condemned to 
pay costs and fines not exceeding ten shillings. 
Guardian, July 13, Manchester.— Nine dealers fined from two 
shillings and sixpence to twenty shillings. 
Guardian, July 24, Rochdale.— Four dealers fined ten to twenty 
shillings. 
Guardian, July 27, Bolton.—Twelve dealers and innkeepers 
condemned to pay costs. 
Guardian, August 3, Bolton.—Three dealers fined two shillings 
and sixpence, and five shillings. 
Guardian, August 10, Bolton.—One dealer fined five shillings. 
And the same causes which make the working-class the chief 
sufferers from frauds in the quality of goods make them the usual 
victims of frauds in the question of quantity too. 
The habitual food of the individual working-man naturally 
varies according to his wages. The better-paid workers, especially 
those in whose families every member is able to earn something, 
have good food as long as this state of things lasts; meat daily and 
bacon and cheese for supper. Where wages are less, meat is used 
only two or three times a week,3 and the proportion of bread and 
potatoes increases. Descending gradually, we find the animal food 
reduced to a small piece of bacon cut up with the potatoes; lower 
still, even this disappears, and there remain only bread, cheese, 
porridge, and potatoes, until on the lowest round of the ladder, 
among the Irish, potatoes form the sole food, As an accompani­
ment, weak tea, with perhaps a little sugar, milk, or spirits, is 
universally drunk. Tea is regarded in England, and even in 
Ireland, as quite as indispensable as coffee in Germany, and where 
no tea is used, the bitterest poverty reigns. But all this presupposes 
that the workman has work. When he has none, he is wholly at the 
mercy of accident, and eats what is given him, what he can beg or 
steal. And, if he gets nothing, he simply starves, as we have seen. 
The quantity of food varies, of course, like its quality, according to 
the rate of wages, so that among ill-paid workers, even if they 
have no large families,6 hunger prevails in spite of full and regular 
work; and the number of the ill-paid is very large. Especially in 
London, where the competition of the workers rises with the 
increase of population, this class is very numerous, but it is to be 
found in other towns as well. In these cases all sorts of devices are 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "on Sundays or two or three 
times a week".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "especially if they have large 
families".— Ed. 

=====第398页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 373 
used; potato parings, vegetable refuse, and rotten vegetables* are 
eaten for want of other food, and everything greedily gathered up 
which may possibly contain an atom of nourishment. And, if the 
week's wages are used up before the end of the week, it often 
enough happens that in the closing days the family gets only as 
much food, if any, as is barely sufficient to keep off starvation. Of 
course such a way of living unavoidably engenders a multitude of 
diseases, and when these appear, when the father from whose 
work the family is chiefly supported, whose physical exertion most 
demands nourishment, and who therefore first succumbs—when 
the father is utterly disabled, then misery reaches its height, and 
then the brutality with which society abandons its members, just 
when their need is greatest, comes out fully into the light of day. 
To sum up briefly the facts thus far cited. The great towns are 
chiefly inhabited by working-people, since in the best case there is 
one bourgeois for two workers, often for three, here and there for 
four; these workers have no property whatsoever of their own, 
and live wholly upon wages, which usually go from hand to 
mouth. Society, composed wholly of atoms, does not trouble itself 
about them; leaves them to care for themselves and their families, 
yet supplies them no means of doing this in an efficient and 
permanent manner. Every working-man, even the best, is there­
fore constantly exposed to loss of work and food, that is to death 
by starvation, and many perish in this way. The dwellings of the 
workers are everywhere badly planned, badly built, and kept in 
the worst condition, badly ventilated, damp, and unwholesome. 
The inhabitants are confined to the smallest possible space, and at 
least one family usually sleeps in each room. The interior 
arrangement of the dwellings is poverty-stricken in various de­
grees,  down to the utter absence of even the most necessary 
furniture. The clothing of the workers, too, is generally scanty, 
and that of great multitudes is in rags. The food is, in general, 
bad; often almost unfit for use, and in many cases, at least at 
times,  insufficient in quantity, so that, in extreme cases, death by 
starvation results. Thus the working-class of the great cities offers 
a graduated scale of conditions in life, in the best cases a 
temporarily endurable existence for hard work and good wages,3 
* Weekly Dispatch, April or May, 1844, according to a report by Dr. Southwood 
Smith on the condition of the poor in London.—Note by Engels. (In the American 
edition of 1887 and in the English edition of 1892 this note is omitted.—Ed.) 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "good housing and 
generally good  food".—Ed. 

=====第399页=====
374 Frederick Engels 
good and endurable, that is, from the worker's standpoint; in the 
worst cases, bitter want, reaching even homelessness and death by 
starvation. The average is much nearer the worst case than the 
best. And this series does not fall into fixed classes, so that one can 
say, this fraction of the working-class is well  off, a has always been 
so, and remains so. If that is the case here and there, if single 
branches of work have in general an advantage over others, yet 
the condition of the workers in each branch is subject to such 
great fluctuations that a single working-man may be so placed as 
to pass through the whole range from comparative comfort to the 
extremest need, even to death by starvation, while almost every 
English working-man can tell a tale of marked changes of fortune. 
Let us examine the causes of this somewhat more closely. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "and that fraction is badly 
off".—Ed. 

=====第400页=====
COMPETITION 
We have seen in the introduction how competition created the 
proletariat at the very beginning of the industrial movement by 
increasing the wages of weavers in consequence of the increased 
demand for woven goods, so inducing the weaving peasants to 
abandon their farms and earn more money by devoting them­
selves to their looms. We have seen how it crowded out the small 
farmers by means of the large farm system, reduced them to the 
rank of proletarians, and attracted them in part into the towns; 
how it further ruined the small bourgeoisie in great measure and 
reduced its members also to the ranks of the proletariat; how it 
centralised capital in the hands of the few, and population in the 
great towns. Such are the various ways and means by which 
competition, as it reached its full manifestation and free develop­
ment in modern industry, created and extended the proletariat. 
We shall now have to observe its influence on the working-class 
already created. And here we must begin by tracing the results of 
competition of single workers with one another. 
Competition is the completest expression of the battle of all 
against all which rules in modern civil society. This battle, a battle 
for life, for existence, for everything, in case of need a battle of 
life and death, is fought not between the different classes of 
society only, but also between the individual members of these 
classes. Each is in the way of the other, and each seeks to crowd 
out all who are in his way, and to put himself in their place. The 
workers are in constant competition among themselves as the 
members of the bourgeoisie among themselves. The power-loom 
weaver is in competition with the hand-loom weaver, the unem-

=====第401页=====
376 Frederick Engels 
ployed or ill-paid hand-loom weaver with him who has work or is 
better paid, each trying to supplant the other. But this competition 
of the workers among themselves is the worst side of the present 
state of things in its effect upon the worker, the sharpest weapon 
against the proletariat in the hands of the bourgeoisie. Hence the 
effort of the workers to nullify this competition by associations, 
hence the hatred of the bourgeoisie towards these associations, 
and its triumph in every defeat which befalls them. 
The proletarian is helpless; left to  himself,  he cannot live a 
single day. The bourgeoisie has gained a monopoly of all means of 
existence in the broadest sense of the word. What the proletarian 
needs,  he can obtain only from this bourgeoisie, which is protected 
in its monopoly by the power of the state. The proletarian is, 
therefore, in law and in fact, the slave of the bourgeoisie, which can 
decree his life or death. It offers him the means of living, but only 
for an "equivalent", for his work. It even lets him have the 
appearance of acting from a free choice, of making a contract with 
free,  unconstrained consent, as a responsible agent who has 
attained his majority. 
Fine freedom, where the proletarian has no other choice than 
that of either accepting the conditions which the bourgeoisie offers 
him, or of starving, of freezing to death, of sleeping naked among 
the beasts of the forests! A fine "equivalent" valued at pleasure by 
the bourgeoisie! And if one proletarian is such a fool as to starve 
rather than agree to the "equitable" propositions of the 
bourgeoisie, his "natural superiors",* another is easily found in his 
place; there are proletarians enough in the world, and not all so 
insane as to prefer dying to living. 
Here we have the competition of the workers among themselves. 
If all the proletarians announced their determination to starve 
rather than work for the bourgeoisie, the latter would have to 
surrender its monopoly. But this is not the case — is, indeed, a 
rather impossible case — so that the bourgeoisie still thrives. To 
this competition of the workers there is but one limit; no worker 
will work for less than he needs to subsist. If he must starve, he 
will prefer to starve in idleness rather than in toil. True, this limit 
is relative; one needs more than another, one is accustomed to 
more comfort than another; the Englishman, who is still somewhat 
civilised, needs more than the Irishman, who goes in rags, eats 
* A favourite expression of the English manufacturers.— Note by Engels. (In the 
American edition of 1887 and the English edition of 1892 this note is 
omitted.—Ed.) 

=====第402页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 377 
potatoes, and sleeps in a pig-sty. But that does not hinder the 
Irishman's competing with the Englishman, and gradually forcing 
the rate of wages, and with it the Englishman's level of civilisation, 
down to the Irishman's level. Certain kinds of work require a 
certain grade of civilisation, and to these belong almost all forms 
of industrial occupation; hence the interest of the bourgeoisie 
requires in this case that wages should be high enough to enable 
the workman to keep himself upon the required plane. 
The newly immigrated Irishman, encamped in the first stable 
that offers, ora turned out in the street after a week because he 
spends everything upon drink and cannot pay rent, would be a 
poor mill-hand. The mill-hand must, therefore, have wages 
enough to enable him to bring up his children to regular work; 
but no more, lest he should be able to get on without the wages of 
his children, and so make something else of them than mere 
working-men. Here, too, the limit, the minimum'wage, is relative. 
When every member of the family works, the individual worker 
can get on with proportionately less, and the bourgeoisie has made 
the most of the opportunity of employing and making profitable 
the labour of women and children afforded by machine-work. Of 
course it is not in every family that every member can be set to 
work, and those in which the case is otherwise would be in a bad 
way if obliged to exist upon the minimum wage possible to a 
wholly employed family. Hence the usual wages form an average 
according to which a fully employed family gets on pretty well, 
and one which embraces few members able to work, pretty badly. 
But in the worst case, every working-man prefers surrendering the 
trifling luxury to which he was accustomed to not living at all; 
prefers a pig-pen to no  roof,  wears rags in preference to going 
naked, confines himself to a potato diet in preference to starva­
tion. He contents himself with half-pay and the hope of better 
times rather than be driven into the street to perish before the 
eyes of the world, as so many have done who had no work 
whatever. This trifle, therefore, this something more than nothing, 
is the minimum of wages. And if there are more workers at hand 
than the bourgeoisie thinks well to employ — if at the end of the 
battle of competition there yet remain workers who find nothing 
to do, they must simply starve; for the bourgeois will hardly give 
them work if he cannot sell the produce of their labour at a profit. 
d The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here: "or, even if he has a 
tolerable dwelling, is turned"  etc.—Ed. 

=====第403页=====
378 Frederick Engels 
From this it is evident what the minimum of wages is. The 
maximum is determined by the competition of the bourgeoisie 
among themselves; for we have seen how they, too, must compete 
with each other. The bourgeois can increase his capital only in 
commerce and manufacture, and in both cases he needs workers. 
Even if he invests his capital at interest, he needs them indirectly; 
for without commerce and manufacture, no one would pay him 
interest upon his capital, no one could use it. So the bourgeois 
certainly needs workers, not indeed for his immediate living, for at 
need he could consume his capital, but as we need an article of 
trade or a beast of burden — as a means of profit. The proletarian 
produces the goods which the bourgeois sells with advantage. 
When, therefore, the demand for these goods increases so that all 
the competing working-men are employed, and a few more might 
perhaps be useful, the competition among the workers falls away, 
and the bourgeoisie begin to compete among themselves. The 
capitalist in search of workmen knows very well that his profits 
increase as prices rise in consequence of the increased demand for 
his goods, and pays a trifle higher wages rather than let the whole 
profit escape him. He sends the butter to fetch the cheese, and 
getting the latter, leaves the butter ungrudgingly to the workers.3 
So one capitalist after another goes in chase of workers, and wages 
rise; but only as high as the increasing demand permits. If the 
capitalist, who willingly sacrificed a part of his extraordinary 
profit, runs into danger of sacrificing any part of his ordinary 
average profit, he takes very good care not to pay more than 
average wages. 
From this we can determine the average rate of wages. Under 
average circumstances, when neither workers nor capitalists have 
reason to compete, especially among themselves, when there are 
just as many workers at hand as can be employed in producing 
precisely the goods that are demanded, wages stand a little above 
the minimum. How far they rise above the minimum will depend 
upon the average needs and the grade of civilisation of the 
workers. If the workers are accustomed to eat meat several times 
in the week, the capitalists must reconcile themselves to paying 
wages enough to make this food attainable; not less, because the 
workers are not competing among themselves and have no 
occasion to content themselves with less; not more, because the 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have instead of this sentence: "He 
gives the worker the butter to make profits sooner, and when he gets them he 
ungrudgingly leaves the worker the butter."—Ed. 

=====第404页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 379 
capitalists, in the absence of competition among themselves, have 
no occasion to attract working-men by extraordinary favours. 
This standard of the average needs and the average civilisation 
of the workers has become very complicated by reason of the 
complications of English industry, and is different for different 
sorts of workers, as has been pointed out. Most industrial 
occupations demand a certain skill and regularity, and for these 
qualities, which involve a certain grade of civilisation, the rate of 
wages3 must be such as to induce the worker to, acquire such skill 
and subject himself to such regularity. Hence it is that the average 
wages of industrial workers are higher than those of mere porters, 
day-labourers, etc., higher especially than those of agricultural 
labourers, a fact to which the additional cost of the necessities of 
life in cities contributes somewhat. In other words, the worker is, 
in law and in fact, the slave of the property-holding class,b so 
effectually a slave that he is sold like a piece of goods, rises and 
falls in value like a commodity. If the demand for workers 
increases, the price of workers rises; if it falls, their price falls. If it 
falls so greatly that a number of them become unsaleable, if they 
are left in stock, they are simply left idle; and as they cannot live 
upon that, they die of starvation. For, to speak in the words of the 
economists, the expense incurred in maintaining them would not 
be reproduced, would be money thrown away, and to this end no 
man advances capital; and, so far, Malthus was perfectly right in 
his theory of population. The only difference as compared with 
the old, outspoken slavery is this, that the worker of today seems 
to be free because he is not sold once for all, but piecemeal by the 
day, the week, the year, and because no one owner sells him to 
another, but he is forced to sell himself in this way instead, being 
the slave of no particular person, but of the whole property-
holding class. For him the matter is unchanged at bottom, and if 
this semblance of liberty necessarily gives him some real freedom 
on the one hand, it entails on the other the disadvantage that no 
one guarantees him a subsistence, he is in danger of being 
repudiated at any moment by his master, the bourgeoisie, and left 
to die of starvation, if the bourgeoisie ceases to have an interest in 
his employment, his existence. The bourgeoisie, on the other 
hand, is far better off under the present arrangement than under 
the old slave system; it can dismiss its employees at discretion 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "average wages" instead of 
"rate of wages".— Ed. 
h The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the bourgeoisie" after "class'.' — 
Ed. 

=====第405页=====
380 Frederick Engels 
without sacrificing invested capital, and gets its work done much 
more cheaply than is possible with slave labour, as Adam Smith 
comfortingly pointed out.* 
Hence it follows, too, that Adam Smith was perfectly right in 
making the assertion: 
"That the demand for men, like that for any other commodity, necessarily 
regulates the production of men, quickens it when it goes on too slowly, and stops 
it when it advances too fast." 
Just as in the case of any other commodity! If there are too few 
labourers on hand, prices, i.e., wages, rise, the workers are more 
prosperous, marriages multiply, more children are born and more 
live to grow up, until a sufficient number of labourers has been 
secured. If there are too many on hand, prices fall, want of work, 
poverty, and starvation, and consequent diseases arise, and the 
"surplus population" is put out of the way. And Malthus, who 
carried the foregoing proposition of Smith farther, was also right, 
in his way, in asserting that there is always a "surplus population"; 
that there are always too many people in the world; he is wrong 
only when he asserts that there are more people on hand than can 
be maintained from the available means of subsistence.3 Surplus 
population is engendered rather by the competition of the workers 
among themselves, which forces each separate worker to labour as 
much each day as his strength can possibly admit. If a manufac­
turer can employ ten hands nine hours daily, he can employ nine 
if each works ten hours, and the tenth goes hungry. And if a 
manufacturer can force the nine hands to work an extra hour 
* Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations, I., McCulloch's edition in one volume, sect. 
8, p. 36: "The wear and tear of a slave, it has been said, is at the expense of his 
master, but that of a free servant is at his own expense. The wear and tear of the 
latter, however, is, in reality, as much at the expense of his master as that of the 
former. The wages paid to journeymen and servants of every kind, must be such as 
may enable them, one with another, to continue the race of journeymen and 
servants, according as the increasing, diminishing, or stationary demand of the 
society may happen to require. But though the wear and tear of a free servant be 
equally at the expense of his master, it generally costs him much less than that of a 
slave. The fund for replacing or repairing, if I may say so, the wear and tear of the 
slave, is commonly managed by the negligent master or careless overseer."—Note by 
Engels. (The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this quotation according to 
the four-volume edition of 1828, Vol. I, p. 134.—Ed.) 
a This sentence is given according to the German editions of 1845 and 1892. 
In the American and English editions it is given abridged: "And Malthus, who 
carried the foregoing proposition of Smith farther, was also right, in his way, in 
asserting that there are always more people on hand than can be maintained from 
the available means of subsistence."—Ed. 

=====第406页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 381 
daily3 for the same wages by threatening to discharge them at a 
time when the demand for hands is not very great, he discharges 
the tenth and saves so much wages. This is the process on a small 
scale, which goes on in a nation on a large one. The productive­
ness of each hand raised to the highest pitch by the competition of 
the workers among themselves, the division of labour, the intro­
duction of machinery, the subjugation of the forces of Nature, 
deprive a multitude of workers of bread. These starving workers 
are then removed from the market, they can buy nothing, and the 
quantity of articles of consumption previously required by them is 
no longer in demand, need no longer be produced; the workers 
previously employed in producing them are therefore driven out 
of work, and are also removed from the market, and so it goes on, 
always the same old round, or rather, so it would go if other 
circumstances did not intervene. The introduction of the industrial 
forces already referred to for increasing production leads, in the 
course of time, to a reduction of prices of the articles produced 
and to consequent increased consumption, so that a large part of 
the displaced workers finally, after long suffering, find work 
again.b If, in addition to this, the conquest of foreign markets 
constantly and rapidly increases the demand for manufactured 
goods, as has been the case in England during the past sixty years, 
the demand for hands increases, and-, in proportion to it, the 
population. Thus, instead of diminishing, the population of the 
British Empire has increased with extraordinary rapidity, and is 
still increasing. Yet, in spite of the extension of industry, in spite 
of the demand for working-men which, in general, has increased, 
there is, according to the confession of all the official political 
parties (Tory, Whig, and Radical), permanent surplus, superfluous 
population; the competition among the workers is constantly 
greater than the competition to secure workers. 
Whence comes this incongruity? It lies in the nature of industri­
al competition and the commercial crises which arise from it. In 
the present unregulated production and distribution of the means 
of subsistence, which is carried on not directly for the sake of 
supplying needs, but for profit, in the system under which every 
one works for himself to enrich  himself,  disturbances inevitably 
arise at every moment. For example, England supplies a number 
of countries with most diverse goods. Now, although the manufac-
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have after this  "i.e.,  in our example, 
ten hours".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have after this "in new branches of 
labour".—Ed. 

=====第407页=====
382 Frederick Ehgels 
turer may know how much of each article is consumed in each 
country annually, he cannot know how much is on hand at every 
given moment, much less can he know how much his competitors 
export thither. He can only draw most uncertain inferences from 
the perpetual fluctuations in prices, as to the quantities on hand 
and the needs of the moment. He must trust to luck in exporting 
his goods. Everything is done blindly, as guess-work, more or less 
at the mercy of accident. Upon the slightest favourable report, 
each one exports what he can, and before long such a market is 
glutted, sales stop, capital remains inactive, prices fall, and English 
manufacture has no further employment for its hands. In the 
beginning of the development of manufacture, these checks were 
limited to single branches and single markets; but the centralising 
tendency of competition, which drives the hands thrown out of 
one branch into such other branches as are most easily accessible, 
and transfers the goods which cannot be disposed of in one 
market to other markets, has gradually brought the single minor 
crises nearer together and united them into one periodically 
recurring crisis. Such a crisis usually recurs once in five years after 
a brief period of activity and general prosperity136; the home 
market, like all foreign ones, is glutted with English goods, which 
it can only slowly absorb, the industrial movement comes to a 
standstill in almost every branch, the small manufacturers and 
merchants who cannot survive a prolonged inactivity of their 
invested capital fail, the larger ones suspend business during the 
worst season, close their mills3 or work short time, perhaps half 
the day; wages fall by reason of the competition of the unem­
ployed, the diminution of working-time and the lack of profitable 
sales;  want becomes universal among the workers, the small 
savings, which individuals may have made, are rapidly consumed, 
the philanthropic institutions are overburdened, the poor-rates are 
doubled, trebled, and still insufficient, the number of the starving 
increases, and the whole multitude of "surplus" population presses 
in terrific numbers into the foreground. This continues for a 
time;  the "surplus" exist as best they may, or perish; philanthropy 
and the Poor Law help many of them to a painful prolongation of 
their existence. Others find scant means of subsistence here and 
there in such kinds of work as have been least open to competi­
tion, are most remote from manufacture. And with how little can 
a human being keep body and soul together for a time! Gradually 
the state of things improves; the accumulations of goods are 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "stop their machines" instead of 
"close their mills".—Ed. 

=====第408页=====
The Condition  of the  Working-Class  in England  383 
consumed, the general depression among the men of commerce 
and manufacture prevents a too hasty replenishing of the markets, 
and at last rising prices and favourable reports from all directions 
restore activity. Most of the markets are distant ones; demand 
increases and prices rise constantly while the first exports are 
arriving; people struggle for the first goods, the first sales enliven 
trade still more, the prospective ones promise still higher prices; 
expecting a further rise, merchants begin to buy upon speculation, 
and so to withdraw from consumption the articles intended for it, 
just when they are most needed. Speculation forces prices still 
higher, by inspiring others to purchase, and appropriating new 
importations at once. All this is reported to England, manufactur­
ers begin to produce with a will, new mills are built, every means 
is employed to make the most of the favourable moment. 
Speculation arises here, too, exerting the same influence as upon 
foreign markets, raising prices, withdrawing goods from consump­
tion, spurring manufacture in both ways to the highest pitch of 
effort. Then come the daring speculators working with fictitious 
capital, living upon credit, ruined if they cannot speedily sell; they 
hurl themselves into this universal, disorderly race for profits, 
multiply the disorder and haste by their unbridled passion, which 
drives prices and production to madness. It is a frantic struggle, 
which carries away even the most experienced and phlegmatic; 
goods are spun, woven, hammered, as if all mankind were to be 
newly equipped, as though two thousand million new consumers 
had been discovered in the moon. All at once the shaky 
speculators abroad, who must have money, begin to sell, below 
market price, of course, for their need is urgent; one sale is 
followed by others, prices fluctuate, speculators throw their goods 
upon the market in terror, the market is disordered, credit 
shaken, one house after another stops payments, bankruptcy 
follows bankruptcy, and the discovery is made that three times 
more goods are on hand or under way than can be consumed. 
The news reaches England, where production has been going on 
at full speed meanwhile, panic seizes all hands, failures abroad 
cause others in England, the panic crushes a number of firms, all 
reserves are thrown upon the market here, too, in the moment of 
anxiety, and the alarm is still further exaggerated. This is the be­
ginning of the crisis, which then takes precisely the same course as 
its predecessor, and gives place in turn to a season of prosperity. 
So it goes on perpetually,— prosperity, crisis, prosperity, crisis, and 
this perennial round in which English industry moves is, as has 
been before observed, usually completed once in five or six years. 

=====第409页=====
384 Frederick Engels 
From this it is clear that English manufacture must have, at all 
times save the brief periods of highest prosperity, an unemployed 
reserve army of workers, in order to be able to produce the 
masses of goods required by the market in the liveliest months. 
This reserve army is larger or smaller, according as the state of 
the market occasions the employment of a larger or smaller 
proportion of its members. And if at the moment of highest 
activity of the market the agricultural districts and the branches 
least affected by the general prosperity3 temporarily supply to 
manufacture a number of workers, these are a mere minority, and 
these too belong to the reserve army, with the single difference 
that the prosperity of the moment was required to reveal their 
connection with it. When they enter upon the more active 
branches of work, their former employers draw in somewhat, in 
order to feel the loss less, work longer hours, employ women and 
younger workers, and when the wanderers discharged at the 
beginning of the crisis return, they find their places filled and 
themselves superfluous — at least in the majority of cases. This 
reserve army, which embraces an immense multitude during the 
crisis and a large number during the period which may be 
regarded as the average between the highest prosperity and the 
crisis,  is the "surplus population" of England, which keeps body 
and soul together by begging, stealing, street-sweeping, collecting 
manure, pushing hand-carts, driving donkeys, peddling, or per­
forming occasional small jobs. In every great town a multitude of 
such people may be found.b It is astonishing in what devices this 
"surplus population" takes refuge. The London crossing-sweepers 
are known all over the world; but hitherto the principal streets in 
all the great cities, as well as the crossings, have been swept by 
people out of other work, and employed by the Poor Law 
guardians or the municipal authorities for the purpose. Now, 
however, a machine has been invented which rattles through the 
streets daily, and has spoiled this source of income for the 
unemployed. Along the great highways leading into the cities, on 
which there is a great deal of waggon traffic, a large number of 
people may be seen with small carts, gathering fresh horse-dung at 
the risk of their lives among the passing coaches and omnibuses, 
often paying a couple of shillings a week to the authorities for the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "the agricultural districts, 
Ireland and the branches least affected by the general prosperity". —Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have after this "who keep body and 
soul together," as the English say, "by performing small occasional  jobs".—  Ed. 

=====第410页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 385 
privilege. But this occupation is forbidden in many places, because 
the ordinary street-sweepings thus impoverished cannot be sold as 
manure. Happy are such of the "surplus" as can obtain a 
push-cart and go about with it. Happier still those to whom it is 
vouchsafed to possess an ass in addition to the cart. The ass must 
get his own food or is given a little gathered refuse, and can yet 
bring in a trifle of money. 
Most of the "surplus" betake themselves to huckstering. On 
Saturday afternoons, especially, when the whole working popula­
tion is on the streets, the crowd who live from huckstering and 
peddling may be seen. Shoe and corset laces, braces, twine, cakes, 
oranges, every kind of small articles are offered by men, women, 
and children; and at other times also, such peddlers are always to 
be seen standing at the street corners, or going about with cakes 
and ginger-beer or nettle-beer.* Matches and such things, sealing-
wax, and patent mixtures for lighting fires are further resources 
of such vendors. Others, so-called jobbers/ go about the streets 
seeking small jobs. Many of these succeed in getting a day's work, 
many are not so fortunate. 
"At the gates of each of the [London] docks," says the Rev. W. Champneys, 
preacher of the East End, "hundreds of poor men may be seen before day-break 
waiting for the opening of the gates in the hope of obtaining a day's work; and 
when the youngest and most able-bodied, and those best known, have been 
engaged, hundreds still may be seen returning to their destitute families with that 
sickness of heart which arises from hope deferred." 
When these people find no work and will not rebel against 
society, what remains for them but to beg? And surely no one can 
wonder at the great army of beggars, most of them able-bodied 
men, with whom the police carries on perpetual war. But the 
beggary of these men has a peculiar character. Such a man usually 
goes about with his family singing a pleading song in the streets or 
appealing, in a speech, to the benevolence of the passers-by. And 
it is a striking fact that these beggars are seen almost exclusively in 
the working-people's districts, that it is almost exclusively the gifts 
of the poor from which they live. Or the family takes up its 
position in a busy street, and without uttering a word, lets the 
mere sight of its helplessness plead for it. In this case, too, they 
reckon upon the sympathy of the workers alone, who know from 
* Two cooling effervescent drinks, the former made of water, sugar and some 
ginger, the latter of water, sugar and nettles. They are much liked by the workers, 
especially the teetotallers.—  Note  by Engels. (This note is omitted in the American 
and English editions.—Ed.) 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this word is given in English.— Ed. 

=====第411页=====
386 Frederick Engels 
experience how it feels to be hungry, and are liable to find 
themselves in the same situation at any moment; for this dumb, 
yet most moving appeal, is met with almost solely in such streets as 
are frequented by working-men, and at such hours as working-
men pass by; but especially on summer3 evenings, when the 
"secrets" of the working-people's quarters are generally revealed,b 
and the middle-class withdraws as far as possible from the district 
thus polluted. And he among the "surplus" who has courage and 
passion enough openly to resist society, to reply with declared war 
upon the bourgeoisie to the disguised war which the bourgeoisie 
wages upon him, goes forth to rob, plunder, murder, and burn!0 
Of this surplus population there are, according to the reports of 
the Poor Law commissioners, on an average, a million and a half 
in England and Wales; in Scotland the number cannot be 
ascertained for want of Poor Law regulations, and with Ireland we 
shall deal separately. Moreover, this million and a half includes 
only those who actually apply to the parish for  relief;  the great 
multitude who struggle on without recourse to this most hated 
expedient, it does not embrace. On the other hand, a good part of 
the number belongs to the agricultural districts, and does not 
enter into the present discussion. During a crisis this number 
naturally increases markedly, and want reaches its highest pitch. 
Take, for instance, the crisis of 1842, which, being the latest, was 
the most violent; for the intensity of the crisis increases with each 
repetition, and the next, which may be expected not later than 
1847,*  will probably be still more violent and lasting. During this 
crisis the poor-rates rose in every town to a hitherto unknown 
height. In Stockport, among other towns, for every pound paid in 
house-rent, eight shillings of poor-rate had to be paid, so that the 
rate alone formed forty per cent of the house-rent. Moreover, 
whole streets stood vacant, so that there were at least twenty 
thousand fewer inhabitants than usual, and on the doors of the 
empty houses might be read: "Stockport to let."d In Bolton, 
* And it came in  1847.—  Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 and the 
English edition of 1892. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "on Saturday evenings".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in the main 
streets".— Ed. 
The words "and burn" do not occur in the German editions of 1845 and 
1892.—  Ed. 
<l In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 these words are given in English 
and in German.— Ed. 

=====第412页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 387 
where, in ordinary years, the rents from which rates are paid 
average £86,000, they sank to £36,000. The number of the poor 
to be supported rose, on the other hand, to 14,000, or more than 
twenty per cent of the whole number of inhabitants. In Leeds, the 
Poor Law guardians had a reserve fund of £10,000. This, with a 
contribution of £7,000, was wholly exhausted before the crisis 
reached its height. So it was everywhere. A report drawn up in 
January, 1843, by a committee of the Anti-Corn Law League, on 
the condition of the industrial districts in 1842, which was based 
upon detailed statements of the manufacturers, asserts that the 
poor-rate was, taking the average, twice as high as in 1839, and 
that the number of persons requiring relief has trebled, even 
quintupled, since that time; that a multitude of applicants belong 
to a class which had never before solicited  relief;  that the 
working-class commands more than two-thirds less of the means of 
subsistence than from 1834-1836; that the consumption of meat 
had been decidedly less, in some places twenty per cent, in others 
reaching sixty per cent less; that even handicraftsmen, smiths, 
bricklayers, and others, who usually have full employment in the 
most depressed periods, now suffered greatly from want of work 
and reduction of wages; and that, even now, in January, 1843, 
wages are still steadily falling. And these are the reports of 
manufacturers! 
The starving workmen, whose mills were idle, whose employers 
could give them no work, stood in the streets in all directions, 
begged singly or in crowds, besieged the sidewalks in armies, and 
appealed to the passers-by for help; they begged, not cringing like 
ordinary beggars, but threatening by their numbers, their ges­
tures,  and their words. Such was the state of things in all the 
industrial districts, from Leicester to Leeds, and from Manchester 
to Birmingham. Here and there disturbances arose, as in the 
Staffordshire potteries,3 in July. The most frightful excitement 
prevailed among the workers until the general insurrection broke 
out throughout the manufacturing districts in August. When I 
came to Manchester in November, 1842, there were crowds of 
unemployed working-men at every street corner, and many mills 
were still standing idle. In the following months these unwilling 
corner loafers gradually vanished, and the factories came into 
activity once more. 
1 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "potteries of North Stafford­
shire".— Ed. 

=====第413页=====
388 Frederick Engels 
To what extent want and suffering prevail among these unem­
ployed during such a crisis, I need not describe. The poor-rates 
are insufficient, vastly insufficient; the philanthropy of the rich is 
a rain-drop in the ocean, lost in the moment of falling, beggary 
can support but few among the crowds. If the small dealers did 
not sell to the working-people on credit at such times as long as 
possible — paying themselves liberally afterwards, it must be con­
fessed— and if the working-people did not help each other, every 
crisis would remove a multitude of the surplus through death by 
starvation. Since, however, the most depressed period is  brief, 
lasting, at worst, but one, two, or two and a half years, most of 
them emerge from it with their lives after dire privations. But 
indirectly by disease, etc., every crisis finds a multitude of victims, 
as we shall see. First, however, let us turn to another cause of 
abasement to which the English worker is exposed, a cause 
permanently active in forcing the whole class downwards. 

=====第414页=====
IRISH IMMIGRATION 
We have already referred several times in passing to the Irish 
who have immigrated into England; and we shall now have to 
investigate more closely the causes and results of this immigration. 
The rapid extension of English industry could not have taken 
place if England had not possessed in the numerous and im­
poverished population of Ireland a reserve at command. The Irish 
had nothing to lose at home, and much to gain in England; and 
from the time when it became known in Ireland that the east side 
of St. George's Channel offered steady work and good pay for 
strong arms, every year has brought armies of the Irish hither. It 
has been calculated that more than a million have already 
immigrated, and not far from fifty thousand still come every year, 
nearly all of whom enter the industrial districts, especially the 
great cities, and there form the lowest class of the population. 
Thus there are in London, 120,000; in Manchester, 40,000; in 
Liverpool, 34,000; Bristol, 24,000; Glasgow, 40,000; Edinburgh, 
29,000, poor Irish people.* These people having grown up almost 
without civilisation, accustomed from youth to every sort of 
privation, rough, intemperate, and improvident, bring all their 
brutal habits with them among a class of the English population 
which has, in truth, little inducement to cultivate education and 
morality. Let us hear Thomas Carlyle upon this subject**: 
* Archibald Alison, The Principles of Population, and their Connection with Human 
Happiness, two vols., 1840. This Alison is the historian of the French Revolution, 
and, like his brother, Dr. W. P. Alison, a religious Tory.— Note by Engels. 
** Chartism, pp. 28, 31, etc.—Note by Engels. 
14-762 

=====第415页=====
390 Frederick Engels 
"The wild Milesian* features, looking false ingenuity, restlessness, unreason, 
misery, and mockery, salute you on all highways and byways. The English 
coachman, as he whirls past, lashes the Milesian with his whip, curses him with his 
tongue; the Milesian is holding out his hat to beg. He is the sorest evil this country 
has to strive with. In his rags and laughing savagery, he is there to undertake all 
work that can be done by mere strength of hand and back — for wages that will 
purchase him potatoes. He needs only salt for condiment, he lodges to his mind in 
any pig-hutch or dog-hutch, roosts in outhouses, and wears a suit of tatters, the 
getting on and off of which is said to be a difficult operation, transacted only in 
festivals and the high tides of the calendar. The Saxon-man, if he cannot work on 
these terms, finds no work. The uncivilised Irishman, not by his strength, but by 
the opposite of strength, drives the Saxon native out, takes possession in his room. 
There abides he, in his squalor and unreason, in his falsity and drunken violence, 
as the ready-made nucleus of degradation and disorder. Whoever struggles, 
swimming with difficulty, may now find an example how the human being can 
exist not swimming, but sunk.... That the condition of the lower multitude of 
English labourers approximates more and more to that of the Irish, competing 
with them in all the markets: that whatsoever labour, to which mere strength with 
little skill will suffice, is to be done, will be done not at the English price, but at an 
approximation to the Irish price; at a price superior as yet to the Irish, that is, 
superior to scarcity of potatoes for thirty weeks yearly; superior, yet hourly, with 
the arrival of every new steamboat, sinking nearer to an equality with that." 
If we except his exaggerated and one-sided condemnation of 
the Irish national character, Carlyle is perfectly right. These 
Irishmen who migrate for fourpence3 to England, on the deck of a 
steamship on which they are often packed like cattle, insinuate 
themselves everywhere. The worst dwellings are good enough for 
them; their clothing causes them little trouble, so long as it holds 
together by a single thread; shoes they know not; their food 
consists of potatoes and potatoes only; whatever they earn beyond 
these needs they spend upon drink. What does such a race want 
with high wages? The worst quarters of all the large towns are 
inhabited by Irishmen. Whenever a district is distinguished for 
especial filth and especial ruinousness,* the explorer may safely 
count upon meeting chiefly those Celtic faces which one recognises 
at the first glance as different from the Saxon physiognomy of the 
native, and the singing, aspirate brogue which the true Irishman 
never loses. I have occasionally heard the Irish-Celtic language 
spoken in the most thickly populated parts of Manchester. The 
majority of the families who live in cellars are almost everywhere 
of Irish origin. In short, the Irish have, as Dr. Kay says, 
* Milesian—the name of an ancient family of Celtic kings of Ireland.— Note by 
Engels (omitted in the American and English editions— Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "$ll$ silver groschen" 
in brackets.—Ed. 

=====第416页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 391 
discovered the minimum of the necessities of life, and are now 
making the English workers acquainted with it. Filth and drunken­
ness,  too, they have brought with them. The lack of cleanliness, 
which is not so injurious in the country, where population is 
scattered, and which is the Irishman's second nature, becomes 
terrifying and gravely dangerous through its concentration here in 
the great cities. The Milesian deposits all garbage and filth before 
his house door here, as he was accustomed to do at home, and so 
accumulates the pools and dirt-heaps which disfigure the working-
people's quarters and poison the air. He builds a pig-sty against 
the house wall as he did at home, and if he is prevented from 
doing this, he lets the pig sleep in the room with  himself.  This 
new and unnatural method of cattle-raising in cities is wholly of 
Irish origin. The Irishman loves his pig as the Arab his horse, with 
the difference that he sells it when it is fat enough to kill. 
Otherwise, he eats and sleeps with it, his children play with it, ride 
upon it, roll in the dirt with it, as any one may see a thousand 
times repeated in all the great towns of England. The filth and 
comfortlessness that prevail in the houses themselves it is impossi­
ble to describe. The Irishman is unaccustomed to the presence of 
furniture; a heap of straw, a few rags, utterly beyond use as 
clothing, suffice for his nightly couch. A piece of wood, a broken 
chair, an old chest for a table, more he needs not; a tea-kettle, a 
few pots and dishes, equip his kitchen, which is also his sleeping 
and living room. When he is in want of fuel, everything combusti­
ble within his reach, chairs, door-posts, mouldings, flooring, finds 
its way up the chimney. Moreover, why should he need much 
room? At home in his mud-cabin there was only one room for all 
domestic purposes; more than one room his family does not need 
in England. So the custom of crowding many persons into a single 
room, now so universal, has been chiefly implanted by the Irish 
immigration. And since the poor devil must have one enjoyment, 
and society has shut him out of all others, he betakes himself to 
the drinking of spirits. Drink is the only thing which makes the 
Irishman's life worth having, drink and his cheery care-free 
temperament; so he revels in drink to the point of the most bestial 
drunkenness. The southern facile character of the Irishman, his 
crudity, which places him but little above the savage, his contempt 
for all humane enjoyments, in which his very crudeness makes 
him incapable of sharing, his filth and poverty, all favour 
drunkenness. The temptation is great, he cannot resist it, and so 
when he has money he gets rid of it down his throat. What else 
should he do? How can society blame him when it places him in a 
11* 

=====第417页=====
392 Frederick Engels 
position in which he almost of necessity becomes a drunkard; 
when it leaves him to  himself,  to his savagery? 
With such a competitor the English working-man has to strug­
gle, with a competitor upon the lowest plane possible in a civilised 
country, who for this very reason requires less wages than any 
other. Nothing else is therefore possible than that, as Carlyle says, 
the wages of English working-man should be forced down further 
and further in every branch in which the Irish compete with him. 
And these branches are many. All such as demand little or no skill 
are open to the Irish. For work which requires long training or 
regular, pertinacious application, the dissolute, unsteady, drunken 
Irishman is on too low a plane. To become a mechanic,3 a 
mill-hand, he would have to adopt the English civilisation, the 
English customs, become, in the main, an Englishman. But for all 
simple, less exact work, wherever it is a question more of strength 
than skill, the Irishman is as good as the Englishman. Such 
occupations are therefore especially overcrowded with Irishmen: 
hand-weavers, bricklayers, porters, jobbers, and such workers, 
count hordes of Irishmen among their number, and the pressure 
of this race has done much to depress wages and lower the 
working-class. And even if the Irish, who have forced their way 
into other occupations, should become more civilised, enough of 
the old habits would cling to them to have a strong, degrading 
influence upon their English companions in toil, especially in view 
of the general effect of being surrounded by the Irish. For when, 
in almost every great city, a fifth or a quarter of the workers are 
Irish, or children of Irish parents, who have grown up among 
Irish filth, no one can wonder if the life, habits, intelligence, moral 
status — in short, the whole character of the working-class assimi­
lates a great part of the Irish characteristics. On the contrary, it is 
easy to understand how the degrading position of the English 
workers, engendered by our modern history,b and its immediate 
consequences, has been still more degraded by the presence of 
Irish competition. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets: "a mechanic is 
the name given in England to any worker engaged in producing machinery".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "industry" instead of 
"history".—Ed. 

=====第418页=====
RESULTS 
Having now investigated, somewhat in detail, the conditions 
under which the English working-class lives,3 it is time to draw 
some further inferences from the facts presented, and then to 
compare our inferences with the actual state of things. Let us see 
what the workers themselves have become under the given 
circumstances, what sort of people they are, what their physical, 
mental, and moral status. 
When one individual inflicts bodily injury upon another such 
injury that death results, we call the deed manslaughter; when the 
assailant knew in advance that the injury would be fatal, we call 
his deed murder. But when society* places hundreds of pro-
* When as here and elsewhere I speak of society as a responsible whole, having 
rights and duties, I mean, of course, the ruling power of society, the class which at 
present holds social and political control, and bears, therefore, the responsibility for 
the condition of those to whom it grants no share in such control. This ruling class 
in England, as in all other civilised countries, is the bourgeoisie. But that this 
society, and especially the bourgeoisie, is charged with the duty of protecting every 
member of society, at least, in his life, to see to it, for example, that no one starves, 
I need not now prove to my German readers. If I were writing for the English 
bourgeoisie, the case would be different.— Note by Engels to the German edition of 
1845. 
And so it is now in Germany. Our German capitalists are fully up to the English 
level, in this respect at least, in the year of grace, 1886.—Added by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892— Ed.). 
(1892) How things have changed in the last fifty years! Today there are 
members of the English middle-classes who recognise that society has duties to the 
individual citizen — but as for the German middle-classes?!? — Added by Engels to the 
German edition of 1892. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the English urban factory 
workers".—Ed. 

=====第419页=====
394 Frederick Engels 
letarians in such a position that they inevitably meet a too early 
and an unnatural death, one which is quite as much a death by 
violence as that by the sword or bullet; when it deprives thousands 
of the necessaries of life, places them under conditions in which 
they cannot live—forces them, through the strong arm of the law, 
to remain in such conditions until that death ensues which is the 
inevitable consequence — knows that these thousands of victims 
must perish, and yet permits these conditions to remain, its deed is 
murder just as surely as the deed of the single individual; 
disguised, malicious murder, murder against which none can 
defend  himself,  which does not seem what it is, because no man 
sees the murderer,3 because the death of the victim seems a nat­
ural one, since the offence is more one of omission than of com­
mission. But murder it remains. I have now to prove that society in 
England daily and hourly commits what the working-men's organs, 
with perfect correctness, characterise as social murder, that it has 
placed the workers under conditions in which they can neither 
retain health nor live long; that it undermines the vital force of 
these workers gradually, little by little, and so hurries them to the 
grave before their time. I have further to prove that society knows 
how injurious such conditions are to the health and the life of the 
workers, and yet does nothing to improve these conditions. That it 
knows the consequences of its deeds; that its act is, therefore, not 
mere manslaughter, but murder, I shall have proved, when I cite 
official documents, reports of Parliament and of the Government, 
in substantiation of my charge. 
That a class which lives under the conditions already sketched 
and is so ill-provided with the most necessary means of subsist­
ence,  cannot be healthy and can reach no advanced age, is 
self-evident. Let us review the circumstances once more with 
especial reference to the health of the workers. The centralisation 
of population in great cities exercises of itself an unfavourable 
influence; the atmosphere of London can never be so pure, so 
rich in oxygen, as the air of the country; two and a half million 
pairs of lungs, two hundred and fifty thousand fires, crowded 
upon an area three to four miles square,b consume an enormous 
amount of oxygen, which is replaced with difficulty, because the 
method of building cities in itself impedes ventilation. The 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "because everyone is 
responsible for the murder and yet no one is responsible".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "geographical square miles" 
(the German mile is 7.42 km, or 4.64 English miles).—Ed. 

=====第420页=====
The Condition  of the  Working-Class  in England  395 
carbonic acid  gas,  engendered  by respiration  and  fire, remains  in 
the streets  by reason  of its  specific gravity,  and the  chief  air 
current passes over  the  roofs  of the  city.  The  lungs  of the 
inhabitants fail  to receive  the due  supply  of oxygen,  and the 
consequence  is mental  and  physical lassitude  and low  vitality.  For 
this reason,  the  dwellers  in cities  are far  less exposed  to acute,  and 
especially  to inflammatory, affections than rural populations,  who 
live in a  free, normal atmosphere;  but  they suffer  the  more from 
chronic affections.  And if  life in large cities  is, in itself,  injurious 
to health,  how  great must  be the  harmful influence  of an 
abnormal atmosphere  in the  working-people's quarters, where,  as 
we have seen, everything combines  to poison  the air. In the 
country,  it may,  perhaps,  be comparatively innoxious  to keep  a 
dung-heap adjoining one's dwelling, because  the air has  free 
ingress from  all sides;  but in the  midst  of a  large town, among 
closely built lanes  and  courts that shut  out all  movement  of the 
atmosphere,  the  case  is different.  All  putrefying vegetable  and 
animal substances give  off gases decidedly injurious  to health,  and 
if these gases have  no free  way of  escape, they inevitably poison 
the atmosphere.  The  filth  and  stagnant pools  of the  working-
people's quarters  in the  great cities have, therefore,  the  worst 
effect upon  the  public health, because they produce precisely 
those gases which engender disease;  so, too, the  exhalations from 
contaminated streams.  But  this  is by no  means  all. The  manner  in 
which  the  great multitude  of the  poor  is treated  by society today  is 
revolting. They  are  drawn into  the  large cities where they breathe 
a poorer atmosphere than  in the  country; they  are  relegated  to 
districts which,  by reason  of the  method  of construction,  are worse 
ventilated than  any  others; they  are  deprived  of all  means  of 
cleanliness,  of water  itself,  since pipes  are laid only when paid  for, 
and the  rivers  so polluted that they  are useless  for such purposes; 
they are  obliged  to throw  all offal  and  garbage,  all dirty water, 
often  all disgusting drainage  and  excrement into  the streets, being 
without other means  of disposing  of them; they  are thus compelled 
to infect  the  region  of their  own  dwellings.  Nor is  this enough. 
All conceivable evils  are heaped upon  the  heads  of the  poor.  If the 
population  of great cities  is too  dense  in general,  it is  they  in 
particular  who are  packed into  the  least space.  As though  the 
vitiated atmosphere  of the  streets were  not  enough, they  are 
penned  in dozens into single rooms,  so that  the air  which they 
breathe  at night  is enough  in itself  to stifle them. They  are  given 
damp dwellings, cellar dens that  are not  waterproof from below, 
or garrets that leak from above. Their houses  are so  built that  the 

=====第421页=====
396 Frederick Engels 
clammy air cannot escape. They are supplied bad, tattered, or 
rotten clothing, adulterated and indigestible food. They are 
exposed to the most exciting changes of mental condition, the 
most violent vibrations between hope and fear; they are hunted 
like game, and not permitted to attain peace of mind and quiet 
enjoyment of life. They are deprived of all enjoyments except that 
of sexual indulgence and drunkenness, are worked every day to 
the point of complete exhaustion of their mental and physical 
energies, and are thus constantly spurred on to the maddest excess 
in the only two enjoyments at their command. And if they 
surmount all this,3 they fall victims to want of work in a crisis 
when all the little is taken from them that had hitherto been 
vouchsafed them. 
How is it possible, under such conditions, for the lower class to 
be healthy and long lived? What else can be expected than an 
excessive mortality, an unbroken series of epidemics, a progressive 
deterioration in the physique of the working population? Let us 
see how the facts stand. 
That the dwellings of the workers in the worst portions of the 
cities,  together with the other conditions of life of this class, 
engender numerous diseases, is attested on all sides. The article 
already quoted from the Artisan asserts with perfect truth, that 
lung diseases must be the inevitable consequence of such condi­
tions,  and that, indeed, cases of this kind are disproportionately 
frequent in this class. That the bad air of London, and especially 
of the working-people's districts, is in the highest degree favoura­
ble to the development of consumption, the hectic appearance of 
great numbers of persons sufficiently indicates. If one roams the 
streets a little in the early morning, when the multitudes are on 
their way to their work, one is amazed at the number of persons 
who look wholly or half-consumptive. Even in Manchester the 
people have not the same appearance; these pale, lank, narrow-
chested, hollow-eyed ghosts, whom one passes at every step, these 
languid, flabby faces, incapable of the slightest energetic expres­
sion, I have seen in such startling numbers only in London, 
though consumption carries off a horde of victims annually in the 
factory towns of the North. In competition with consumption 
stands typhus, to say nothing of scarlet fever,b a disease which 
brings most frightful devastation into the ranks of the working-
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "And if this is not enough, 
if they survive all  this".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "to say nothing of other lung 
diseases and scarlet fever".—Ed. 

=====第422页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 397 
class.  Typhus, that universally diffused affliction, is attributed 
by the official report on the sanitary condition of the working-
class,  directly to the bad state of the dwellings in the matters of 
ventilation, drainage, and cleanliness. This report compiled, it must 
not be forgotten, by the leading physicians of England from 
the testimony of other physicians, asserts that a single ill-ven­
tilated court, a single blind alley without drainage, is enough to 
engender fever, and usually does engender it138 especially if the 
inhabitants are greatly crowded.3 This fever has the same char­
acter almost everywhere, and develops in nearly every case 
into specific typhus. It is to be found in the working-people's 
quarters of all great towns and cities, and in single ill-built, 
ill-kept streets of smaller places,b though it naturally seeks out 
single victims in better districts also. In London it has now 
prevailed for a considerable time; its extraordinary violence in the 
year 1837 gave rise to the report already referred to. 
According to the annual report of Dr. Southwood Smith on the 
London Fever Hospital, the number of patients in 1843 was  1,462, 
or 418 more than in any previous year.139 In the damp, 
dirty regions of the north, south, and east districts of London, 
this disease raged with extraordinary violence. Many of the patients 
were working-people from the country, who had endured 
the severest privation while migrating, and, after their arrival, had 
slept hungry and half-naked in the streets, and so fallen victims to 
the fever. These people were brought into the hospital in such a 
state of weakness, that unusual quantities of wine, cognac, and 
preparations of ammonia and other stimulants were required for 
their treatment; I6V2 Per cent of all patients died. This malignant 
fever is to be found in Manchester; in the worst quarters of the 
Old Town, Ancoats, Little Ireland, etc., it is rarely extinct; though 
here,  as in the English towns generally, it prevails to a less extent 
than might be expected. In Scotland and Ireland, on the other 
hand, it rages with a violence that surpasses all conception. In 
Edinburgh and Glasgow it broke out in 1817, after the famine,c and 
in 1826 and 1837 with especial violence, after the commercial 
crisis,  subsiding somewhat each time after having raged about 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "and if organic refuse is allowed 
to decay there".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "where its effects are, of 
course, felt most severely".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "during the period of dearth" 
instead of "after the famine".—Ed. 

=====第423页=====
398 Frederick Engels 
three years. In Edinburgh about 6,000 persons were attacked by 
the fever during the epidemic of 1817, and about 10,000 in 
that of 1837, and not only the number of persons attacked but 
the violence of the disease3 increased with each repetition.* 
But the fury of the epidemic in all former periods seems to have 
been child's play in comparison with its ravages after the crisis of 
1842.  One-sixth of the whole indigent population of Scotland was 
seized by the fever, and the infection was carried by wandering 
beggars with fearful rapidity from one locality to another. It did 
not reach the middle and upper classes of the population, yet in 
two months there were more fever cases than in twelve years 
before. In Glasgow, twelve per cent of the population were seized 
in the year 1843; 32,000 persons, of whom thirty-two per cent 
perished, while this mortality in Manchester and Liverpool does 
not ordinarily exceed eight per cent. The illness reached a crisis 
on the seventh and fifteenth days; on the latter, the patient usually 
became yellow, which our authority regards as an indication 
that the cause of the malady was to be sought in mental excite­
ment and anxiety.** In Ireland, too, these fever epidemics have 
become domesticated. During twenty-one months of the years 
1817-1818, 39,000 fever patients passed through the Dublin hos­
pital; and in a more recent year, according to Sheriff Alison, 
60,000.*** In Cork the fever hospital received one-seventh of 
the population in 1817-1818, in Limerick in the same time 
one-fourth, and in the bad quarter of Waterford, nineteen-
twentieths of the whole population were ill of the fever at 
one time.**** 
When one remembers under what conditions the working-
people live, when one thinks how crowded their dwellings are, 
how every nook and corner swarms with human beings, how sick 
and well sleep in the same room, in the same bed, the only 
wonder is that a contagious disease like this fever does not spread 
* Dr. Alison, Management of the Poor in Scotland.—Note by Engels. 
** Dr. Alison in an article read before the British Association for the Advance­
ment of Science. October, 1844, in York.—Note by Engels. 
*** Alison, Principles of Population, vol. ii.—Note by Engels to the American edition 
of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892; in the German editions of 1845 
and 1892 the reference is given in the text— Ed.). 
**** rjr  Alison, Management of the Poor in Scotland.—Note by Engels. (This note is 
not given in the 1887 American and 1892 English editions.—Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and the mortality 
rate".—Ed. 

=====第424页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England- 399 
yet farther. And when one reflects how little medical assistance the 
sick have at command, how many are without any medical advice 
whatsoever, and ignorant of the most ordinary precautionary 
measures,3 the mortality seems actually small. Dr. Alison, who has 
made a careful study of this disease, attributes it directly to the 
want and the wretched condition of the poor, as in the report 
already quoted. He asserts that privations and the insufficient 
satisfaction of vital needs are what prepare the frame for conta­
gion and make the epidemic widespread and terrible. He proves 
that a period of privation, a commercial crisis or a bad harvest, has 
each time produced the typhus epidemic in Ireland as in Scotland, 
and that the fury of the plague has fallen almost exclusively on the 
working-class. It is a noteworthy fact, that according to his 
testimony, the majority of persons who perish by typhus are 
fathers of families, precisely the persons who can least be spared 
by those dependent upon them; and several Irish physicians whom 
he quotes bear the same testimony. 
Another category of diseases arises directly from the food rather 
than the dwellings of the workers. The food of the labourer, 
indigestible enough in  itself,  is utterly unfit for young children, 
and he has neither means nor time to get his children more 
suitable food. Moreover, the custom of giving children spirits, and 
even opium, is very general; and these two influences, with the 
rest of the conditions of life prejudicial to bodily development, 
give rise to the most diverse affections of the digestive organs, 
leaving life-long traces behind them. Nearly all workers have 
stomachs more or less weak, and are yet forced to adhere to the 
diet which is the root of the evil. How should they know what is to 
blame for it? And if they knew, how could they obtain a more 
suitable regimen so long as they cannot adopt a different way of 
living and are not better educated? But new disease arises during 
childhood from impaired digestion. Scrofula is almost universal 
among the working-class, and scrofulous parents have scrofulous 
children, especially when the original influences continue in full 
force to operate upon the inherited tendency of the children. A 
second consequence of this insufficient bodily nourishment, dur­
ing the years of growth and development, is rachitis,b which is 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "rules of diet" instead of 
"precautionary measures".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets: "The English 
disease: knotty excrescences on the joints".—Ed. 

=====第425页=====
400 Frederick Engels 
extremely common among the children of the working-class. The 
hardening of the bones is delayed, the development of the 
skeleton in general is restricted, and deformities of the legs and 
spinal column are frequent, in addition to the usual rachitic 
affections. How greatly all these evils are increased by the changes 
to which the workers are subject in consequence of fluctuations in 
trade, want of work, and the scanty wages in time of crisis, it is not 
necessary to dwell upon. Temporary want of sufficient food, to 
which almost every working-man is exposed at least once in the 
course of his life, only contributes to intensify the effects of his 
usually sufficient but bad diet. Children who are half-starved, just 
when they most need ample and nutritious food — and how many 
such there are during every crisis and even when trade is at its 
best — must inevitably become weak, scrofulous and rachitic in a 
high degree. And that they do become so, their appearance amply 
shows. The neglect to which the great mass of working-men's 
children are condemned leaves ineradicable traces and brings the 
enfeeblement of the whole race of workers with it. Add to this the 
unsuitable clothing of this class, the impossibility of precautions 
against colds, the necessity of toiling so long as health permits, 
want made more dire when sickness appears, and the only too 
common lack of all medical assistance; and we have a rough idea 
of the sanitary condition of the English working-class. The 
injurious effects peculiar to single employments as now conducted, 
I shall not deal with here. 
Besides these, there are other influences which enfeeble the 
health of a great number of workers, intemperance most of all. All 
possible temptations, all allurements combine to bring the workers 
to drunkenness. Liquor is almost their only source of pleasure, 
and all things conspire to make it accessible to them. The 
working-man comes from his work tired, exhausted, finds his 
home comfortless, damp, dirty, repulsive; he has urgent need of 
recreation, he must have something to make work worth his 
trouble, to make the prospect of the next day endurable. His 
unnerved, uncomfortable, hypochondriac state of mind and body 
arising from his unhealthy condition, and especially from indiges­
tion, is aggravated beyond endurance by the general conditions of 
his life, the uncertainty of his existence, his dependence upon all 
possible accidents and chances, and his inability to do anything 
towards gaining an assured position. His enfeebled frame, 
weakened by bad air and bad food, violently demands some 
external stimulus; his social need can be gratified only in the 
public-house, he has absolutely no other place where he can meet 

=====第426页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 401 
his friends. How can he be expected to resist the temptation?3 It is 
morally and physically inevitable that, under such circumstances, a 
very large number of working-men should fall into intemperance. 
And apart from the chiefly physical influences which drive the 
working-man into drunkenness, there is the example of the great 
mass,  the neglected education, the impossibility of protecting the 
young from temptation, in many cases the direct influence of 
intemperate parents, who give their own children liquor, the 
certainty of forgetting for an hour or two the wretchedness and 
burden of life, and a hundred other circumstances so mighty that 
the workers can, in truth, hardly be blamed for yielding to such 
overwhelming pressure. Drunkenness has here ceased to be a vice, 
for which the vicious can be held responsible; it becomes a 
phenomenon, the necessary, inevitable effect of certain conditions 
upon an object possessed of no volition in relation to those 
conditions. They who have degraded the working-man to a mere 
object have the responsibility to bear. But as inevitably as a great 
number of working-men fall a prey to drink, just so inevitably 
does it manifest its ruinous influence upon the body and mind of 
its victims. All the tendencies to disease arising from the conditions 
of life of the workers are promoted by it, it stimulates in the 
highest degree the development of lung and digestive troubles, the 
rise and spread of typhus epidemics. 
Another source of physical mischief to the working-class lies in 
the impossibility of employing skilled physicians in cases of illness. 
It is true that a number of charitable institutions strive to supply 
this want, that the infirmary in Manchester, for instance, receives 
or gives advice and medicine to 22,000 patients annually. But what 
is that in a city in which, according to Gaskell's calculation,* 
three-fourths of the population need medical aid every year? 
English doctors charge high fees, and working-men are not in a 
position to pay them. They can therefore do nothing, or are 
compelled to call in cheap charlatans, and use quack remedies, 
which do more harm than good. An immense number of such 
quacks thrive in every English town, securing their clientèle among 
the poor by means of advertisements, posters, and other such 
* The Manufacturing Population of England, c:h.  8.—Note  by Engels. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have instead of this sentence: "How 
can the worker be expected not to have the strongest temptation of intemperance, 
to be able to resist the at traction of drink?"—Ed. 

=====第427页=====
402 Frederick Engels 
devices. Besides these, vast quantities of patent medicines3 are 
sold, for all conceivable ailments: Morrison's Pills, Parr's Life Pills, 
Dr. Mainwaring's Pills, and a thousand other pills, essences, and 
balsams, all of which have the property of curing all the ills 
that flesh is heir to. These medicines rarely contain actually inju­
rious substances, but, when taken freely and often, they af­
fect the system prejudicially; and as the unwary purchasers 
are always recommended to take as much as possible, it is not to be 
wondered at that they swallow them wholesale whether wanted 
or not. 
It is by no means unusual for the manufacturer of Parr's Life 
Pills to sell twenty to twenty-five thousand boxes of these salutary 
pills in a week, and they are taken for constipation by this one, for 
diarrhoea by that one, for fever, weakness, and all possible 
ailments. As our German peasants are cupped or bled at certain 
seasons, so do the English working-people now consume patent 
medicines to their own injury and the great profit of the 
manufacturer. One of the most injurious of these patent 
medicines is a drink prepared with opiates, chiefly laudanum, 
under the name Godfrey's Cordial.6 Women who work at home, 
and have their own and other people's children to take care of, 
give them this drink to keep them quiet, and, as many believe, to 
strengthen them. They often begin to give this medicine to 
newly born children, and continue, without knowing the effects of 
this "heart's-ease", until the children die. The less susceptible the 
child's system to the action of the opium, the greater the quantities 
administered. When the cordial ceases to act, laudanum alone is 
given, often to the extent of fifteen to twenty drops at a dose. The 
Coroner of Nottingham testified before a Parliamentary Commis­
sion * that one apothecary had, according to his own statement, 
* Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of Children and Young 
Persons in Mines and Collieries and in the Trades and Manufactures' in which numbers of 
them work together, not being included under the terms of the Factories' Regulation Act. 
First and Second Reports, Grainger's Report. Second Report, usually cited as 
Children's Employment Commission's Report, is one of the best official reports of its 
kind and contains an immense quantity of evidence which is both valuable and 
horrifying. First Report, 1841; Second Report, 1843.—Note by Engels. (The 
assessment of the report is omitted in the American edition of 1887 and the 
English edition of 1892.—Ed.) 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "patent medicines" are 
given in brackets.—Ed. 
b In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the name of the medicine is given 
in English.—Ed. 

=====第428页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 403 
used thirteen hundredweight of treacle in one year in the prepara­
tion of Godfrey's Cordial. The effects upon the children so 
treated may be readily imagined. They are pale, feeble, wilted, 
and usually die before completing the second year. The use of this 
cordial is very extensive in all great towns and industrial districts 
in the kingdom. 
The result of all these influences is a general enfeeblement of 
the frame in the working-class. There are few vigorous, well-built, 
healthy persons among the workers, i.e. among the factory 
operatives, who are employed in confined rooms, and we are here 
discussing these only. They are almost all weakly, of angular but 
not powerful build, lean, pale, and of relaxed fibre, with the 
exception of the muscles especially exercised in their work. Nearly 
all suffer from indigestion, and consequently from a more or less 
hypochondriac, melancholy, irritable, nervous condition.3 Their 
enfeebled constitutions are unable to resist disease, and are 
therefore seized by it on every occasion. Hence they age prema­
turely, and die early. On this point the mortality statistics supply 
unquestionable testimony. 
According to the Report of Registrar-General Graham, the 
annual death-rate of all England and Wales is something less than 
2V4 per cent. That is to say, out of forty-five persons, one dies 
every year.* This was the average for the year 1839-40. In 
1840-41 the mortality diminished somewhat, and the death-rate 
was but one in forty-six. But in the great cities the proportion is 
wholly different. I have before me official tables of mortality 
(Manchester Guardian, July 31st, 1844140), according to which the 
death-rate of several large towns is as follows: — In Manchester, in­
cluding Chorlton and Salford, one in 32.72; and excluding Chorlton 
and Salford, one in 30.75. In Liverpool, including West Derby (sub­
urb),  31.90, and excluding West Derby, 29.90; while the average 
of all the districts of Cheshire, Lancashire, and Yorkshire cited, 
including a number of wholly or partially rural districts and many 
small towns, with a total population of 2,172,506 for the whole, is 
one death in 39.80 persons. How unfavourably the workers are 
placed in the great cities, the mortality for Prescott in Lancashire 
shows: a district inhabited by miners, and showing a lower sanitary 
* Fifth Annual Report of the Reg. Gen. of Births, Deaths, and Marriages.— Note by 
Engels . 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the second part of this sentence 
reads:  "and consequently are more or less hypochondriac and of a gloomy, uneasy 
disposition".—Ed. 

=====第429页=====
404 Frederick Engels 
condition than that of the agricultural districts, mining being by 
no means a healthful occupation. But these miners live in the 
country, and the death-rate among them is but one in 47.54, or 
nearly two-and-a-half per cent better than that for all England. All 
these statements are based upon the mortality tables for 1843. Still 
higher is the death-rate in the Scotch cities; in Edinburgh, in 
1838-39, one in 29; in 1831, in the Old Town alone, one in 22. In 
Glasgow, according to Dr. Cowan,* the average has been, since 
1830,  one in 30; and in single years, one in 22 to 24. That this 
enormous shortening of life falls chiefly upon the working-class, 
that the general average is improved by the smaller mortality of 
the upper and middle-classes, is attested upon all sides. One of the 
most recent depositions is that of a physician, Dr. P. H. Holland, 
in Manchester, who investigated Chorlton-on-Medlock, a suburb of 
Manchester, under official commission. He divided the houses and 
streets into three classes each, and ascertained the following 
variations in the death-rate: 
First 
Second 
Third class of streets. Houses I. 
11. 
III. 
I. 
II. 
III. 
I. 
II. 
III. class. Mortality one in 51 
" " " 45 
" 36 
" " " 55 
" " " 38 
" " " 35 
Wanting — 
Mortality 35 
" " " 25 
It is clear from other tables given by Holland that the mortality 
in the streets of the second class is 18 per cent greater, and in the 
streets of the third class 68 per cent greater than in those of the 
first class; that the mortality in the houses of the second class is 31 
per cent greater, and in the third class 78 per cent greater than in 
those of the first class; that the mortality in those bad streets which 
were improved, decreased 25 per cent. He closes with the remark, 
very frank for an English bourgeois**: 
"When we find the rate of mortality four times as high in some streets as in 
others, and twice as high in whole classes of streets as in other classes, and further 
find that it is all but invariably high in those streets which are in bad condition, and 
* Dr. Cowan, Vital Statistics of Glasgow. —Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892; in the German editions 
of 1845 and 1892 the reference is given in the text— Ed.). 
** Report of Commission of Inquiry into the State of Large Towns and Populous 
Districts. First Report, 1844. Appendix.— Note by Engels. 

=====第430页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 405 
almost invariably low in those whose condition is good, we cannot resist the 
conclusion that multitudes of our fellow-creatures, hundreds of our immediate 
neighbours, are annually destroyed for want of the most evident precautions." 
The Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Working-Class 
contains information which attests the same fact. In Liverpool, in 
1840,  the average longevity of the upper classes, gentry, profession­
al men, etc., was thirty-five years; that of the business men and 
better-placed handicraftsmen, twenty-two years; and that of the 
operatives, day-labourers, and serviceable class in general, but 
fifteen years. The Parliamentary reports contain a mass of similar 
facts. 
The death-rate is kept so high chiefly by the heavy mortality 
among young children in the working-class. The tender frame of a 
child is least able to withstand the unfavourable influences of an 
inferior lot in life; the neglect to which they are often subjected, 
when both parents work or one is dead, avenges itself promptly, 
and no one need wonder that in Manchester, according to the 
report last quoted, more than fifty-seven per cent of the children 
of the working-class perish before the fifth year, while but twenty 
per cent of the children of the higher classes, and not quite, 
thirty-two per cent of the children of all classes in the country die 
under five years of age.* The article of the Artisan, already several 
times referred to, furnishes exacter information on this point, by 
comparing the city death-rate in single diseases of children with 
the country death-rate, thus demonstrating that, in general, 
epidemics in Manchester and Liverpool are three times more fatal 
than in country districts; that affections of the nervous system are 
quintupled, and stomach troubles trebled,a while deaths from 
affections of the lungs in cities are to those in the country as 2'/2 
to 1. Fatal cases of small-pox, measles, scarlet fever, and whooping 
cough, among small children, are four times more frequent; those 
of water on the brain are trebled, and convulsions ten times more 
frequent. To quote another acknowledged authority, I append the 
following table. Out of 10,000 persons, there die—** 
* Factories' Inquiry Commission's Reports, 3rd vol. Report of Dr. Hawkins on 
Lancashire, in which Dr. Roberton is cited  — the "Chief Authority for Statistics in 
Manchester".—  Note  by Engels. 
** Quoted by Dr. Wade from the Report of the Parliamentary Factories' 
Commission of 1832, in his History of the Middle and Working-Classes, London, 1835, 
3rd ed.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1387 (reproduced in the English 
edition of 1892; the German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the reference in the 
text— Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "doubled".— Ed. 

=====第431页=====
406 Frederick Engels 
os Oi O) Oi o> nde 
year m 1C to r~ oo 0> o nde 
year "•s © o o © o o o 
D (N -* (O r^ 
In Ruthlandshire, a 
healthy agricul­
tural district 2,865 891 1,275 1,299 1,189 1,428 938 112 3 
Essex, marshy agri­
cultural district 3,159 1,110 1,526 1,413 963 1,019 630 77 3 
Town of Carlisle, 
1779-1787, before 
introduction of 
mills 4,408 911 1,006 1,201 940 826 533 153 22 
Town of Carlisle, 
after the introduc­
tion of mills 4,738 930 1,261 1,134 677 727 452 80 1 
Preston, factory town 4,947 1,136 1,379 1,114 553 532 298 38 3 
Leeds, factory town...  5,286  927 1,228 1,198 593 512 225 29 2 
Apart from the diverse diseases which are the necessary conse­
quence of the present neglect and oppression of the poorer classes, 
there are other influences which contribute to increase the mortality 
among small children. In many families the wife, like the husband, 
has to work away from home, and the consequence is the total 
neglect of the children, who are either locked up or given out to be 
taken care of. It is, therefore, not to be wondered at if hundreds of 
them perish through all manner of accidents. Nowhere are so 
many children run over, nowhere are so many killed by falling, 
drowning, or burning, as in the great cities and towns of England. 
Deaths from burns and scalds are especially frequent, such a case 
occurring nearly every week during the winter months in Man­
chester, and very frequently in London, though little mention is 
made of them in the papers. I have at hand a copy of the Weekly 
Dispatch of December 15th, 1844, according to which, in the week 
from December 1st to December 7th inclusive, six such cases 
occurred. These unhappy children, perishing in this terrible way, 
are victims of our social disorder, and of the property-holding 
classes interested in maintaining and prolonging this disorder. Yet 
one is left in doubt whether even this terribly torturing death is 
not a blessing for the children in rescuing them from a long life of 

=====第432页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 407 
toil and wretchedness, rich in suffering and poor in enjoyment. So 
far has it gone in England; and the bourgeoisie reads these things 
every day in the newspapers and takes no further trouble in the 
matter. But it cannot complain if, after the official and non-official 
testimony here cited which must be known to it, I broadly accuse it 
of social murder. Let the ruling class see to it that these frightful 
conditions are ameliorated, or let it surrender the administration 
of the common interests to the labouring-class. To the latter 
course it is by no means inclined; for the former task, so long as it 
remains the bourgeoisie crippled by bourgeois prejudice, it has not 
the needed power. For if, at last, after hundreds of thousands of 
victims have perished, it manifests some little anxiety for the 
future, passing a "Metropolitan Buildings Act",142 under which the 
most unscrupulous overcrowding of dwellings is to be, at least in 
some slight degree, restricted; if it points with pride to measures 
which, far from attacking the root of the evil, do not by any means 
meet the demands of the commonest sanitary police, it cannot thus 
vindicate itself from the accusation. The English bourgeoisie has 
but one choice, either to continue its rule under the unanswerable 
charge of murder and in spite of this charge, or to abdicate in 
favour of the labouring-class. Hitherto it has chosen the former 
course. 
Let us turn from the physical to the mental state of the workers. 
Since the bourgeoisie vouchsafes them only so much of life as is 
absolutely necessary, we need not wonder that it bestows upon 
them only so much education as lies in the interest of the 
bourgeoisie; and that, in truth, is not much. The means of 
education in England are restricted out of all proportion to the 
population. The few day schools at the command of the working-
class are available only for the smallest minority, and are bad 
besides. The teachers, worn-out workers, and other unsuitable 
persons who only turn to teaching in order to live, are usually 
without the indispensable elementary knowledge, without the 
moral discipline so needful for the teacher, and relieved of all 
public supervision. Here, too, free competition rules, and, as 
usual, the rich profit by it, and the poor, for whom competition is 
not free, who have not the knowledge needed to enable them to 
form a correct judgment, have the evil consequences to bear. 
Compulsory school attendance does not exist. In the mills it is, as 
we shall see, purely nominal; and when in the session of 1843 the 
Ministry was disposed to make this nominal compulsion effective, 
the manufacturing bourgeoisie opposed the measure with all its 
might, though the working-class was outspokenly in favour of 

=====第433页=====
408 Frederick Engels 
compulsory school attendance. Moreover, a mass of children work 
the whole week through in the mills or at home, and therefore 
cannot attend school. The evening schools, supposed to be 
attended by children who are employed during the day, are almost 
abandoned or attended without benefit. It is asking too much, that 
young workers, who have been using themselves up twelve hours 
in the day, should go to school from eight to ten at night. And 
those who try it usually fall asleep, as is testified by hundreds of 
witnesses in the Children's Employment Commission's Report. 
Sunday schools have been founded, it is true, but they, too, are 
most scantily supplied with teachers, and can be of use to those 
only who have already learnt something in the day schools. The 
interval from one Sunday to the next is too long for an ignorant 
child to remember in the second sitting what it learned in the first, 
a week before. The Children's Employment Commission's Report 
furnishes a hundred proofs, and the Commission itself most 
emphatically expresses the opinion, that neither the week-day nor 
the Sunday schools, in the least degree, meet the needs of the 
nation. This Report gives evidence of ignorance in the working-
class of England, such as could hardly be expected in Spain or 
Italy. It cannot be otherwise; the bourgeoisie has little to hope, 
and much to fear, from the education of the working-class. The 
Ministry, in its whole enormous budget of £55,000,000, has only 
the single trifling item of £40,000 for public education, and, but 
for the fanaticism of the religious sects which does at least as much 
harm as good, the means of education would be yet more scanty. 
As it is, the State Church manages its national schools3 and the 
various sects their sectarian13 schools for the sole purpose of 
keeping the children of the brethren of the faith within the 
congregation, and of winning away a poor childish soul here and 
there from some other sect. The consequence is that religion, and 
precisely the most unprofitable side of religion, polemical discus­
sion, is made the principal subject of instruction, and the memory 
of the children overburdened with incomprehensible dogmas and 
theological distinctions; that sectarian hatred and bigotry are 
awakened as early as possible, and all rational mental and moral 
training shamefully neglected. The working-class has repeatedly 
demanded of Parliament a system of strictly secular public educa­
tion, leaving religion to the ministers of the sects; but, thus far, no 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "national schools" are 
given in English.—Ed. 
The word "sectarian" does not occur in the German editions of 1845 and 
1892.—Ed. 

=====第434页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 409 
Ministry has been induced to grant it. The Minister is the obedient 
servant of the bourgeoisie, and the bourgeoisie is divided into 
countless sects; but each would gladly grant the workers the 
otherwise dangerous education on the sole condition of their 
accepting, as an antidote, the dogmas peculiar to the especial sect 
in question. And as these sects are still quarrelling among 
themselves for supremacy, the workers remain for the present 
without education. It is true that the manufacturers boast of 
having enabled the majority to read, but the quality of the reading 
is appropriate to the source of the instruction, as the Children's 
Employment Commission proves. According to this report, he who 
knows his letters can read enough to satisfy the conscience of the 
manufacturers. And when one reflects upon the confused orthog­
raphy of the English language which makes reading one of the 
arts, learned only under long instruction, this ignorance is readily 
understood. Very few working-people write readily; and writing 
orthographically is beyond the powers even of many "educated" 
persons. The Sunday schools of the State Church, of the Quakers, 
and, I think, of several other sects, do not teach writing, "because 
it is too worldly an employment for Sunday". The quality of the 
instruction offered the workers in other directions may be judged 
from a specimen or two, taken from the Children's Employment 
Commission's Report, which unfortunately does not embrace 
mill-work proper143: 
In Birmingham, says Commissioner Grainger, the children examined by me are, 
as a whole, utterly wanting in all that could be in the remotest degree called a 
useful education. Although in almost all the schools religious instruction alone is 
furnished, the profoundest ignorance even upon that subject prevailed.— In 
Wolverhampton, says Commissioner Home, I found, among others, the following 
example: A girl of eleven years who had attended both day and Sunday school 
"had never learnt of another world, nor of heaven, nor of another life". A boy, 
seventeen years old, "did not know how many two and two made, nor how many 
farthings3  there were in twopence, even when the money was placed in his hand". 
Several boys had never heard of London nor of Willenhall, though the latter 
was but an hour's walk from their homes, and in the closest relations with 
Wolverhampton. Several had never heard the name of the Queen nor other 
names, such as Nelson, Wellington, Bonaparte; but it was noteworthy that those 
who had never heard even of St. Paul, Moses, or Solomon, were very well 
instructed as to the life, deeds, and character of Dick Turpin, and especially of 
Jack Sheppard. A youth of sixteen did not know "how many twice two make", nor 
"how much money four farthings make". A youth of seventeen asserted that "ten 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the word "farthings" is given in 
English, followed in brackets by the explanation "1/4 penny".—Ed. 
' The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the highwayman" after Dick 
Turpin and "the thief and gaol-breaker" after Jack Sheppard.—Ed. 

=====第435页=====
410 Frederick Engels 
farthings make ten halfpence"; a third, seventeen years old, answered several very 
simple questions with the brief statement, that "he was ne jedge o' nothin'."* 
These children, who are crammed with religious doctrines for four or five years 
at a stretch, know as 'little at the end as at the beginning. One child had 
"attended a Sunday school regularly for five years; does not know who Jesus 
Christ was, but has heard the name. Never heard of the twelve apostles. Never 
heard of Samson, nor of Moses, nor Aaron, etc." ** Another "attended a Sunday 
school regularly six years. Knows who Jesus Christ was, he died on the cross to 
shed his blood, to save our Saviour. Never heard of St. Peter or St. Paul." *** A 
third, "attended the Sunday schools of different kinds about seven years; can read, 
only in the thin books, easy words of one syllable; has heard of the apostles, does 
not know if St. Peter was one, nor if St. John was one, unless it was St. John 
Wesley."**** To the question who Christ was, Home received, among others, the 
following answers, "Yes, Adam," "He was an apostle," "He was the Saviour's Lord's 
Son," 3 and from a youth of sixteen: "Jesus Christ was a king of London a long 
time ago." In Sheffield, Commissioner Symons let the children from the Sunday 
school read aloud; they could not tell what they had read, or what sort of people 
the apostles were, of whom they had just been reading. After he had asked them 
all one after the other about the apostles without securing a single correct answer, 
one sly-looking little fellow, with great glee, called out: "Please sir, they were 
the lepers!"***** From the pottery districts and from Lancashire the reports are 
similar. 
This is what the bourgeoisie and the State are doing for the 
education and improvement of the working-class. Fortunately the 
conditions under which this class lives are such as give it a sort of 
practical training, which not only replaces school cramming, but 
renders harmless the confused religious notions connected with it, 
and even places the workers in the vanguard of the national 
movement of England. Necessity is the mother of invention, and 
what is still more important, of thought and action. The English 
working-man who can scarcely read and still less write, neverthe­
less knows very well where his own interest and that of the nation 
lies. He knows, too, what the especial interest of the bourgeoisie is, 
and what he has to expect of that bourgeoisie. If he cannot write 
* Children's Employment Commission's Report. App. Part II. Q. 18, Nos. 216, 
217, 226, 233, etc. Home.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (This and 
other notes to this passage are reproduced in the English edition of 1892; in the 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 all these references are given in the text.—Ed.) 
** Ibid., evidence, pp. 9, 39; 133.—Note  by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
*** Ibid., pp. 9, 36; 146.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
**** Ibid., pp. 34; 158.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (The 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "founder of the Methodists" in brackets.— 
Ed.) 
***** Symons' Rep. App. Part I, pp. E, 22, et seq. —Note by Engels to the American 
edition of Ï887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this answer in English in 
brackets.—Ed. 

=====第436页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 411 
he can speak, and speak in public; if he has no arithmetic, he can, 
nevertheless, reckon with the Political Economists enough to see 
through a Corn-Law-repealing bourgeois, and to get the better of 
him in argument; if celestial matters remain very mixed for him in 
spite of all the effort of the preachers, he sees all the more clearly 
into terrestrial, political, and social questions. We shall have 
occasion to refer again to this point; and pass now to the moral 
characteristics of our workers. 
It is sufficiently clear that the instruction in morals can have no 
better effect than the religious teaching, with which in all English 
schools it is mixed up. The simple principles which, for plain 
human beings, regulate the relations of man to man, brought into 
the direst confusion by our social state, our war of each against all, 
necessarily remain confused and foreign to the working-man when 
mixed with incomprehensible dogmas, and preached in the reli­
gious form of an arbitrary and dogmatic commandment. The 
schools contribute, according to the confession of all authorities, 
and especially of the Children's Employment Commission, almost 
nothing to the morality of the working-class. So short-sighted, so 
stupidly narrow-minded is the English bourgeoisie in its egotism, 
that it does not even take the trouble to impress upon the workers 
the morality of the day, which the bourgeoisie has patched to­
gether in its own interest for its own protection! Even this precau­
tionary measure is too great an effort for the enfeebled and sluggish 
bourgeoisie. A time must come when it will repent its neglect, too 
late. But it has no right to complain that the workers know nothing 
of its system of morals, and do not act in accordance with it. 
Thus are the workers cast out and ignored by the class in 
power, morally as well as physically and mentally. The only 
provision made for them is the law, which fastens upon them 
when they become obnoxious to the bourgeoisie. Like the dullest 
of the brutes, they are treated to but one form of education, the 
whip,  in the shape of force, not convincing but intimidating. 
There is, therefore, no cause for surprise if the workers, treated as 
brutes, actually become such; or if they can maintain their 
consciousness of manhood only by cherishing the most glowing 
hatred, the most unbroken inward rebellion against the 
bourgeoisie in power. They are men so long only as they burn 
with wrath against the reigning class. They become brutes the 
moment they bend in patience under the yoke, and merely strive to 
make life endurable while abandoning the effort to break the yoke. 
This,  then, is all that the bourgeoisie has done for the education 
of the proletariat — and when we take into consideration all the 

=====第437页=====
412 Frederick Engels 
circumstances in which this class lives, we shall not think the worse 
of it for the resentment which it cherishes against the ruling class. 
The moral training which is not given to the worker in school is 
not supplied by the other conditions of his life; that moral 
training, at least, which alone has worth in the eyes of the 
bourgeoisie; his whole position and environment involves the 
strongest temptation to immorality. He is poor, life offers him no 
charm, almost every enjoyment is denied him, the penalties of the 
law have no further terrors for him; why should he restrain his 
desires, why leave to the rich the enjoyment of his birthright,3 why 
not seize a part of it for himself? What inducement has the 
proletarian not to steal? It is all very pretty and very agreeable to 
the ear of the bourgeois to hear the "sacredness of property" 
asserted; but for him who has none, the sacredness of property 
dies out of  itself.  Money is the god of this world; the bourgeois 
takes the proletarian's money from him and so makes a practical 
atheist of him. No wonder, then, if the proletarian retains his 
atheism and no longer respects the sacredness and power of the 
earthly God. And when the poverty of the proletarian is inten­
sified to the point of actual lack of the barest necessaries of life, to 
want and hunger, the temptation to disregard all social order does 
but gain power. This the bourgeoisie for the most part recognises. 
Symons  * observes that poverty exercises the same ruinous influ­
ence upon the mind which drunkenness exercises upon the body; 
and Dr. Alison explains to property-holding readers, with the 
greatest exactness, what the consequences of social oppression 
must be for the working-class.** Want leaves the working-man the 
choice between starving slowly, killing himself speedily, or taking 
what he needs where he finds it  — in plain English, stealing. And 
there is no cause for surprise that most of them prefer stealing to 
starvation and suicide. 
True,  there are, within the working-class, numbers too moral to 
steal even when reduced to the utmost extremity, and these starve 
or commit suicide. For suicide, formerly the enviable privilege of 
the upper classes, has become fashionable among the English 
workers, and numbers of the poor kill themselves to avoid the 
misery from which they see no other means of escape. 
But far more demoralising than his poverty in its influence 
* Arts and Artisans.—Note by Engels. 
** Principles of Population, vol. ii, pp. 196,  197.—  Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the enjoyment of his riches" 
instead of "the enjoyment of his birthright".—Ed. 

=====第438页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 413 
upon the English working-man is the insecurity of his position, the 
necessity of living upon wages from hand to mouth, that in short 
which makes a proletarian of him. The smaller peasants in 
Germany are usually poor, and often suffer want, but they are less 
at the mercy of accident, they have at least something secure. The 
proletarian, who has nothing but his two hands, who consumes 
today what he earned yesterday, who is subject to every possible 
chance, and has not the slightest guarantee for being able to earn 
the barest necessities of life, whom every crisis, every whim of his 
employer may deprive of bread, this proletarian is placed in the 
most revolting, inhuman position conceivable for a human being. 
The slave is assured of a bare livelihood by the self-interest of his 
master, the serf has at least a scrap of land on which to live; each 
has at worst a guarantee for life  itself.  But the proletarian must 
depend upon himself alone, and is yet prevented from so applying 
his abilities as to be able to rely upon them. Everything that the 
proletarian can do to improve his position is but a drop in the 
ocean compared with the floods of varying chances to which he is 
exposed, over which he has not the slightest control. He is the 
passive subject of all possible combinations of circumstances, and 
must count himself fortunate when he has saved his life even for a 
short time; and his character and way of living are naturally 
shaped by these conditions. Either he seeks to keep his head above 
water in this whirlpool, to rescue his manhood, and this he can do 
solely in rebellion * against the class which plunders him so 
mercilessly and then abandons him to his fate, which strives to 
hold him in this position so demoralising to a human being; or he 
gives up the struggle against his fate as hopeless, and strives to 
profit, so far as he can, by the most favourable moment. To save is 
unavailing, for at the utmost he cannot save more than suffices to 
sustain life for a short time, while if he falls out of work, it is for 
no brief period. To accumulate lasting property for himself is 
impossible; and if it were not, he would only cease to be a 
working-man and another would take his place. What better thing 
can he do, then, when he gets high wages, than live well upon 
them? The English bourgeoisie is violently scandalised at the 
extravagant living of the workers when wages are high; yet it is 
not only very natural but very sensible of them to enjoy life when 
they can, instead of laying up treasures which are of no lasting use 
* We shall see later how the rebellion of the working-class against the 
bourgeoisie in England is legalised by the right of coalition.— Note by Engels. (In the 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 this passage reads: "in rebellion against the 
bourgeoisie, against the class", etc.—Ed.) 

=====第439页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
to them, and which in the end moth and rust (i.e., the bourgeoisie) 
get possession of. Yet such a life is demoralising beyond all others. 
What Carlyle says of the cotton spinners is true of all English 
industrial workers*: 
"Their trade, now in plethoric prosperity, anon extenuated into inanition and 
'short time', is of the nature of gambling; they live by it like gamblers, now in 
luxurious superfluity, now in starvation. Black, mutinous discontent devours them; 
simply the miserablest feeling that can inhabit the heart of man. English commerce, 
with its world-wide, convulsive fluctuations, with its immeasurable Proteus Steam 
demon, makes all paths uncertain for them, all life a bewilderment; sobriety, 
steadfastness, peaceable continuance, the first blessings of man are not 
theirs.—  This world is for them no home, but a dingy prison-house, of reckless 
unthrift, rebellion, rancour, indignation against themselves and against all men. Is 
it a green, flowery world, with azure everlasting sky stretched over it, the work and 
government of a God; or a murky, simmering Tophet, of copperas fumes, cotton 
fuzz, gin riot, wrath and toil, created by a Demon, governed by a Demon?" 
And elsewhere**: 
"Injustice, infidelity to truth and fact and Nature's order, being properly the 
one evil under the sun, and the feeling of injustice the one intolerable pain under 
the sun, our grand question as to the condition of these working-men would be: Is 
it just? And, first of all, what belief have they themselves formed about the justice 
of it? The words they promulgate are notable by way of answer; their actions are 
still more notable. Revolt, sullen, revengeful humour of revolt against the upper 
classes, decreasing respect for what their temporal superiors command, decreasing 
faith for what their spiritual superiors teach, is more and more the universal spirit 
of the lower classes. Such spirit may be blamed, may be vindicated, but all men 
must recognise it as extant there, all may know that it is mournful, that unless 
altered it will be fatal." 
Carlyle is perfectly right as to the facts and wrong only in 
censuring the wild rage of the workers against the higher classes. 
This rage, this passion, is rather the proof that the workers feel 
the inhumanity of their position, that they refuse to be degraded 
to the level of brutes, and that they will one day free themselves 
from servitude to the bourgeoisie. This may be seen in the case of 
those who do not share this wrath; they either bow humbly before 
the fate that overtakes them, live a respectful private life as well as 
they can, do not concern themselves as to the course of public 
affairs, help the bourgeoisie to forge the chains of the workers yet 
more securely and stand upon the plane of intellectual nullity that 
prevailed before the industrial period began; or they are tossed 
about by fate, lose their moral hold upon themselves as they have 
already lost their economic hold, live along from day to day, drink 
* Chartism, p. 34, et seq. —Note by Engels. 
** Ibid., p. 40.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the 
English edition of 1892; in the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the reference is 
given in the text— Ed.). 

=====第440页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 415 
and fall into licentiousness; and in both cases they are brutes. The 
last-named class contributes chiefly to the "rapid increase of vice", 
at which the bourgeoisie3 is so horrified after itself setting in 
motion the causes which give rise to it. 
Another source of demoralisation among the workers is their 
being condemned to work. As voluntary, productive activity is the 
highest enjoyment known to us, so is compulsory toil the most 
cruel, degrading punishment. Nothing is more terrible than being 
constrained to do some one thing every day from morning until 
night against one's will. And the more a man the worker feels 
himself,  the more hateful must his work be to him, because he 
feels the constraint, the aimlessness of it for  himself.  Why does he 
work? For love of work? From a natural impulse? Not at all! He 
works for money, for a thing which has nothing whatsoever to do 
with the work  itselfb;  and he works so long, moreover, and in such 
unbroken monotony, that this alone must make his work a torture 
in the first weeks if he has the least human feeling left. The 
division of labour has multiplied the brutalising influences of 
forced work. In most branches the worker's activity is reduced to 
some paltry, purely mechanical manipulation, repeated minute 
after minute, unchanged year after year.* How much human 
feeling, what abilities can a man retain in his thirtieth year, who 
has made needle points or filed toothed wheels twelve hours every 
day from his early childhood, living all the time under the 
conditions forced upon the English proletarian? It is still the same 
thing since the introduction of steam.c The worker's activity is 
made easy, muscular effort is saved, but the work itself becomes 
unmeaning and monotonous to the last degree. It offers no field 
for mental activity, and claims just enough of his attention to keep 
him from thinking of anything else.d And a sentence to such work, 
to work which takes his whole time for  itself,  leaving him scarcely 
time to eat and sleep, none for physical exercise in the open air, 
* Shall I call bourgeois witnesses to bear testimony for me here, too? I select 
one only, whom every one may read, namely, Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations 
(McCulloch's four volume edition), vol. iii, book 5, chap. 1, p. 297.—Note by 
Engels. 
3 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the sentimental bour­
geoisie".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "he works because he has to 
work".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and machinery".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "if he wants to do it 
properly".—Ed. 

=====第441页=====
416 Frederick Engels 
or the enjoyment of Nature, much less for mental activity, how 
can such a sentence help degrading a human being to the level of 
a brute? Once more the worker must choose, must either surren­
der himself to his fate, become a "good" workman, heed "faithful­
ly" the interest of the bourgeoisie, in which case he most certainly 
becomes a brute, or else he must rebel, fight for his manhood to the 
last, and this he can only do in the fight against the bourgeoisie. 
And when all these conditions have engendered vast demoralisa­
tion among the workers, a new influence is added to the old, to 
spread this degradation more widely and carry it to the extremest 
point. This influence is the centralisation of the population. The 
writers of the English bourgeoisie are crying murder at the 
demoralising tendency of the great cities; like perverted 
Jeremiahs, they sing dirges, not over the destruction, but the 
growth of the cities. Sheriff Alison attributes almost everything, 
and Dr. Vaughan, author of The Age of Great Cities, still more to 
this influence. And this is natural, for the propertied class has too 
direct an interest in the other conditions which tend to destroy the 
worker body and soul. If they should admit that poverty, insecuri­
ty, overwork, forced work, are the chief ruinous influences, they 
would have to draw the conclusion, then let us give the poor 
property, guarantee their subsistence, make laws against overwork, 
and this the bourgeoisie dare not formulate. But the great cities 
have grown up so spontaneously, the population has moved into 
them so wholly of its own motion, and the inference that 
manufacture and the middle-class which profits from it alone have 
created the cities is so remote, that it is extremely convenient for 
the ruling class to ascribe all the evil to this apparently unavoid­
able source; whereas the great cities really only secure a more rapid 
and certain development for evils already existing in the germ. 
Alison is humane enough to admit this; he is no thoroughbred 
Liberal manufacturer, but only a half developed Tory bourgeois, 
and he has, therefore, an open eye, now and then, where the 
full-fledged bourgeois is still stone blind. Let us hear him.* 
It is in the great cities that "vice has spread her temptations, and pleasure her 
seductions, and folly her allurements; that guilt is encouraged by the hope of 
impunity, and idleness fostered by the frequency of example. It is to these great 
marts of human corruption that the base and the profligate resort from the 
simplicity of country life; it is here that they find victims whereon to practise their 
iniquity, and gains to reward the dangers that attend them. Virtue is here 
depressed from the obscurity in which it is involved. Guilt is matured from the 
difficulty of its detection; licentiousness is rewarded by the immediate enjoyment 
* Principles of Population, vol. ii, p. 76, et seq., p. 82, p.  135.—  Note by Engels (in 
the German editions of 1845 and 1892 these quotations are abridged— Ed.). 

=====第442页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 417 
which it promises. If any person will walk through St. Giles's, the crowded alleys of 
Dublin, or the poorer quarters of Glasgow by night, he will meet with ample proof 
of these observations; he will no longer wonder at the disorderly habits and 
profligate enjoyments of the lower orders; his astonishment will be, not that there 
is so much, but that there is so little crime in the world. The great cause of human 
corruption in these crowded situations is the contagious nature of bad example and 
the extreme difficulty of avoiding the seductions of vice when they are brought 
into close and daily proximity with the younger part of the people. Whatever we 
may think of the strength of virtue, experience proves that the higher orders 
are indebted for their exemption from atrocious crime or disorderly habits chiefly 
to their fortunate removal from the scene of temptation; and that where they are 
exposed to the seductions which assail their inferiors, they are noways behind them 
in yielding to their influence. It is the peculiar misfortune of the poor in great 
cities that they cannot fly from these irresistible temptations, but that, turn where 
they will, they are met by the alluring forms of vice, or the seductions of guilty 
enjoyment. It is the experienced impossibility of concealing the attractions of vice 
from the younger part of the poor in great cities which exposes them to so many 
causes of demoralisation.3 All this proceeds not from any unwonted or extraordi­
nary depravity in the character of these victims of licentiousness, but from the al­
most irresistible nature of the temptations to which the poor are exposed. The rich, 
who censure their conduct, would in all probability yield as rapidly as they have 
done to the influence of similar causes. There is a certain degree of misery, a certain 
proximity to sin, which virtue is rarely able to withstand, and which the young, 
in particular, are generally unable to resist. The progress of vice in such circum­
stances is almost as certain and often nearly as rapid as that of physical contagion." 
And elsewhere: 
"When the higher orders for their own profit have drawn the labouring-classes 
in great numbers into a small space, the contagion of guilt becomes rapid and 
unavoidable. The lower orders, situated as they are in so far as regards moral or 
religious instruction, are frequently hardly more to be blamed for yielding to the 
temptations which surround them than for falling victims to the typhus fever." 
Enough! The half-bourgeois Alison betrays to us, however 
narrow his manner of expressing  himself,  the evil effect of the 
great cities upon the moral development of the workers. Another, 
a bourgeois pur sang,b  a man after the heart of the Anti-Corn Law 
League, Dr. Andrew Ure,* betrays the other side. He tells us that 
life in great cities facilitates cabals among the workers and confers 
power on the Plebs. If here the workers are not educated (i.e., to 
obedience to the bourgeoisie), they may view matters one-sidedly, 
from the standpoint of a sinister selfishness, and may readily 
permit themselves to be hoodwinked by sly demagogues; nay, they 
* Philosophy of Manufactures, London, 1835, p. 406, et seq. We shall have occasion 
to refer further to this reputable work.— Note by Engels. 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the quotation is interrupted with a 
sentence by Engels "After a long description of morals, the author con­
tinues".—Ed. 
b Pure-blooded.—Ed. 

=====第443页=====
418 Frederick Engels 
might even be capable of viewing their greatest benefactors, the 
frugal and enterprising capitalists, with a jealous and hostile eye. 
Here proper training alone can avail, or national bankruptcy and 
other horrors must follow, since a revolution of the workers could 
hardly fail to occur. And our bourgeois is perfectly justified in his 
fears.  If the centralisation of population stimulates and develops 
the property-holding class, it forces the development of the 
workers yet more rapidly. The workers begin to feel as a class, as a 
whole; they begin to perceive that, though feeble as individuals, 
they form a power united; their separation from the bourgeoisie, 
the development of views peculiar to the workers and correspond­
ing to their position in life, is fostered, the consciousness of 
oppression awakens, and the workers attain social and political 
importance. The great cities are the birthplaces of labour move­
ments; in them the workers first began to reflect upon their own 
condition, and to struggle against it; in them the opposition 
between proletariat and bourgeoisie first made itself manifest; 
from them proceeded the Trades Unions, Chartism, and Social­
ism. The great cities have transformed the disease of the social 
body, which appears in chronic form in the country, into an acute 
one, and so made manifest its real nature and the means of curing 
it. Without the great cities and their forcing influence upon the 
popular intelligence, the working-class would be far less advanced 
than it is. Moreover, they have destroyed the last remnant of the 
patriarchal relation between working-men and employers, a result 
to which manufacture on a large scale has contributed by multiply­
ing the employees dependent upon a single employer. The 
bourgeoisie deplores all this, it is true, and has good reason to do 
so; for, under the old conditions, the bourgeois was comparatively 
secure against a revolt on the part of his hands. He could 
tyrannise over them and plunder them to his heart's content, and 
yet receive obedience, gratitude, and assent from these stupid 
people by bestowing a trifle of patronising friendliness which cost 
him nothing, and perhaps some paltry present, all apparently out 
of pure, self-sacrificing, uncalled-for goodness of heart, but really 
not one-tenth part of his duty. As an individual bourgeois, placed 
under conditions which he had not himself created, he might do 
his duty at least in part; but, as a member of the ruling class, 
which, by the mere fact of its ruling, is responsible for the 
condition of the whole nation,3 he did nothing of what his position 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and undertakes to ensure 
the general interest".—Ed. 

=====第444页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 419 
involved. On the contrary, he plundered the whole nation for his 
own individual advantage. In the patriarchal relation that hypo­
critically concealed the slavery of the worker, the latter must have 
remained an intellectual zero, totally ignorant of his own interest, 
a mere private individual. Only when estranged from his em­
ployer, when convinced that the sole bond between employer and 
employee is the bond of pecuniary profit, when the sentimental 
bond between them, which stood not the slightest test, had wholly 
fallen away, then only did the worker begin to recognise his own 
interests and develop independently; then only did he cease to be 
the slave of the bourgeoisie in his thoughts, feelings, and the 
expression of his will. And to this end manufacture on a grand 
scale and in great cities has most largely contributed. 
Another influence of great moment in forming the character of 
the English workers is the Irish immigration already referred to. 
On the one hand it has, as we have seen, degraded the English 
workers, removed them from civilisation, and aggravated the 
hardship of their lot; but, on the other hand, it has thereby 
deepened the chasm between workers and bourgeoisie, and 
hastened the approaching crisis. For the course of the social 
disease from which England is suffering is the same as the course 
of a physical disease; it develops according to certain laws, has its 
own crises, the last and most violent of which determines the fate 
of the patient. And as the English nation cannot succumb under 
the final crisis, but must go forth from it, born again, rejuvenated, 
we can but rejoice over everything which accelerates the course of 
the disease. And to this the Irish immigration further contributes 
by reason of the passionate, mercurial Irish temperament, which it 
imports into England and into the English working-class. The 
Irish and English are to each other much as the French and the 
Germans; and the mixing of the more facile, excitable, fiery Irish 
temperament with the stable, reasoning, persevering English must, 
in the long run, be productive only of good for both. The rough 
egotism of the English bourgeoisie would have kept its hold upon 
the working-class much more firmly if the Irish nature, generous 
to a fault, and ruled primarily by sentiment, had not intervened, 
and softened the cold, rational English character in part by a 
mixture of the races, and in part by the ordinary contact of life. 
In view of all this, it is not surprising that the working-class has 
gradually become a race wholly apart from the English bourgeoisie. 
The bourgeoisie has more in common with every other nation of the 
earth than with the workers in whose midst it lives. The workers 
speak other dialects, have other thoughts and ideals, other customs 

=====第445页=====
420 Frederick Engels 
and moral principles, a different religion and other politics than 
those of the bourgeoisie. Thus they are two radically dissimilar 
nations, as unlike as difference of race could make them, of whom 
we on the Continent have known but one, the bourgeoisie. Yet it is 
precisely the other, the people, the proletariat, which is by far the 
more important for the future of England.* 
Of the public character of the English working-man, as it finds 
expression in associations and political principles, we shall have 
occasion to speak later; let us here consider the results of the 
influences cited above, as they affect the private character of the 
worker. The workman is far more humane in ordinary life than 
the bourgeois. I have already mentioned the fact that the beggars 
are accustomed to turn almost exclusively to the workers, and that, 
in general, more is done by the workers than by the bourgeoisie 
for the maintenance of the poor. This fact, which any one may 
prove for himself any day, is confirmed, among others, by Dr. 
Parkinson, Canon of Manchester, who says**: 
"The poor give more to each other than the rich give to the poor. I am 
confirmed in this assertion by the testimony of one of our oldest, most learned, and 
most observant physicians Dr. Bardsley, whose humanity is as conspicuous as his 
learning and talent, and who has often publicly declared that the aggregate sum 
given in each year by the poor to each other exceeds that contributed by the rich in 
the same period." 
In other ways, too, the humanity of the workers is constantly 
manifesting itself pleasantly. They have experienced hard times 
themselves, and can therefore feel for those in trouble,3 whence 
they are more approachable, friendlier, and less greedy for 
money, though they need it far more than the property-holding 
class.  For them money is worth only what it will buy, whereas for 
the bourgeois it has an especial inherent value, the value of a god, 
and makes the bourgeois the mean, low money-grubber that he is. 
The working-man who knows nothing of this feeling of reverence 
for money is therefore less grasping than the bourgeois, whose 
whole activity is for the purpose of gain, who sees in the 
accumulations of his money-bags the end and aim of life. Hence 
* (1892) The idea that large-scale industry has split the English into two 
different nations has, as is well known, been carried out about the same time also 
by Disraeli in his novel, Sybil, or the Two Nations.—Note by Engels to the German 
edition of 1892. 
** On the Present Condition of the Labouring Poor in Manchester, etc. By the Rev. 
Rd. Parkinson, Canon of Manchester, 3rd ed., London and Manchester, 1841. 
Pamphlet.— Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "to them every person is a 
human being, while the worker is less than a human being to the bourgeois".—Ed. 

=====第446页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 421 
the workman is much less prejudiced, has a clearer eye for facts as 
they are than the bourgeois, and does not look at everything 
through the spectacles of personal selfishness. His faulty education 
saves him from religious prepossessions, he does not understand 
religious questions, does not trouble himself about them, knows 
nothing of the fanaticism that holds the bourgeoisie bound; and if 
he chances to have any religion, he has it only in name, not even 
in theory. Practically he lives for this world, and strives to make 
himself at home in it. All the writers of the bourgeoisie are 
unanimous on this point, that the workers are not religious, and 
do not attend church. From the general statement are to be 
excepted the Irish, a few elderly people, and the half-bourgeois, 
the overlookers, foremen, and the like. But among the masses 
there prevails almost universally a total indifference to religion, or 
at the utmost, some trace of Deism too undeveloped to amount to 
more than mere words, or a vague dread of the words infidel, 
atheist, etc. The clergy of all sects is in very bad odour with the 
working-men, though the loss of its influence is recent. At present, 
however, the mere cry: "He's a parson!"3 is often enough to drive 
one of the clergy from the platform of a public meeting. And like 
the rest of the conditions under which he lives, his want of re­
ligious and other culture contributes to keep the working-man more 
unconstrained, freer from inherited stable tenets and cut-and-
dried opinions, than the bourgeois who is saturated with the class 
prejudices poured into him from his earliest youth. There is nothing 
to be done with the bourgeois; he is essentially conservative in how­
ever liberal a guise, his interest is bound up with that of the property-
holding class, he is dead to all active movement; he is losing his 
position in the forefront of England's historical development. The 
workers are taking his place, in rightful claim first, then in fact. 
All this, together with the correspondent public action of the 
workers, with which we shall deal later, forms the favourable side 
of the character of this class; the unfavourable one may be quite as 
briefly summed up, and follows quite as naturally out of the given 
causes. Drunkenness, sexual irregularities, brutality, and disregard 
for the rights of property are the chief points with which the 
bourgeois charges them. That they drink heavily is to be expected. 
Sheriff Alison asserts that in Glasgow some thirty thousand 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "infidel" and "He's a parson" in 
English, followed by the German translation.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the existing system" instead of 
"the property-holding class".—Ed. 
15-762 

=====第447页=====
422 Frederick Engels 
working-men get drunk every Saturday night, and the estimate is 
certainly not exaggerated; and that in that city in 1830, one house 
in twelve, and in 1840, one house in ten, was a public-house; that 
in Scotland, in 1823, excise was paid upon 2,300,000 gallons; in 
1837,  upon 6,620,000 gallons; in England, in 1823, upon 
1,976,000  gallons, and in 1837, upon 7,875,000 gallons of spirits.* 
The Beer Act of 1830, which facilitated the opening of beerhouses 
(jerry-shops), whose keepers are licensed to sell beer to be drunk 
on the premises, facilitated the spread of intemperance by bring­
ing a beerhouse, so to say, to everybody's door. In nearly every 
street there are several such beerhouses, and among two or three 
neighbouring houses in the country one is sure to be a jerry-shop. 
Besides these, there are hush-shopsa in multitudes, i.e., secret 
drinking-places which are not licensed, and quite as many secret 
distilleries which produce great quantities of spirits in retired 
spots,  rarely visited by the police, in the great cities. Gaskell 
estimates these secret distilleries in Manchester alone at more than 
a hundred, and their product at 156,000 gallons at the least. In 
Manchester there are, besides, more than a thousand public-
houses selling all sorts of alcoholic drinks,b or quite as many in 
proportion to the number of inhabitants as in Glasgow. In all 
other great towns, the state of things is the same. And when one 
considers, apart from the usual consequences of intemperance, 
that men and women, even children, often mothers with babies in 
their arms, come into contact in these places with the most 
degraded victims of the bourgeois regime, with thieves, swindlers, 
and prostitutes; when one reflects that many a mother gives the 
baby on her arm gin to drink, the demoralising effects of 
frequenting such places cannot be denied. 
On Saturday evenings, especially when wages are paid and work 
stops somewhat earlier than usual, when the whole working-class 
pours from its own poor quarters into the main thoroughfares, 
intemperance may be seen in all its brutality. I have rarely come 
out of Manchester on such an evening without meeting numbers 
of people staggering and seeing others lying in the gutter. On 
Sunday evening the same scene is usually repeated, only less 
* Principles of Population, passim.—Note by Engels. (This note is not given in the 
English and American editions.—Ed.) 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give "a jerry-shop" and "hush-shops" 
in English.—Ed. 
The words "selling all sorts of alcoholic drinks" are not in the German 
editions of 1845 and 1892.—Ed. 

=====第448页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 423 
noisily. And when their money is spent, the drunkards go to the 
nearest pawnshop, of which there are plenty in every city  — over 
sixty in Manchester, and ten or twelve in a single street of Salford, 
Chapel Street—and pawn whatever they possess. Furniture, Sun­
day clothes where such exist, kitchen utensils in masses are fetched 
from the pawnbrokers on Saturday night only to wander back, 
almost without fail, before the next Wednesday, until at last some 
accident makes the final redemption impossible, and one article 
after another falls into the clutches of the usurer, or until he 
refuses to give a single farthing more upon the battered, used up 
pledge. When one has seen the extent of intemperance among the 
workers in England, one readily believes Lord Ashley's statement* 
that this class annually expends something like twenty-five million 
pounds sterling upon intoxicating liquor; and the deterioration in 
external conditions, the frightful shattering of mental and physical 
health, the ruin of all domestic relations which follow may readily 
be imagined. True, the temperance societies have done much, but 
what are a few thousand teetotallers2 among the millions of 
workers? When Father Mathew, the Irish apostle of temperance, 
passes through the English cities, from thirty to sixty thousand 
workers take the pledge*3; but most of them break it again within a 
month. If one counts up the immense numbers who have taken 
the pledge in the last three or four years in Manchester, the total 
is greater than the whole population of the town — and still it is by 
no means evident that intemperance is diminishing. 
Next to intemperance in the enjoyment of intoxicating liquors, 
one of the principal faults of English working-men is sexual 
licence. But this, too, follows with relentless logic, with inevitable 
necessity out of the position of a class left to  itself,  with no means 
of making fitting use of its freedom. The bourgeoisie has left the 
working-class only these two pleasures, while imposing upon it a 
multitude of labours and hardships, and the consequence is that 
the working-men, in order to get something from life, concentrate 
their whole energy upon these two enjoyments, carry them to 
excess, surrender to them in the most unbridled manner. When 
people are placed under conditions which appeal to the brute 
only, what remains to them but to rebel or to succumb to utter 
* Sitting of the Lower House on Feb. 28, 1843.—Note by Engels. (Omitted in the 
American and English editions.—Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this word in English.—Ed. 
h The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this word in English, followed by 
the German translation.—Ed. 
15* 

=====第449页=====
424 Frederick Engels 
brutality? And when, moreover, the bourgeoisie does its full 
share in maintaining prostitution — and how many of the 40,000 
prostitutes who fill the streets of London* every evening live upon 
the virtuous bourgeoisie! How many of them owe it to the 
seduction of a bourgeois, that they must offer their bodies to the 
passers-by in order to live? — surely it has least of all a right to 
reproach the workers with their sexual brutality. 
The failings of the workers in general may be traced to an 
unbridled thirst for pleasure, to want of providence, and of 
flexibility in fitting into the social order, to the general inability to 
sacrifice the pleasure of the moment to a remoter advantage. But 
is that to be wondered at? When a class can purchase few and only 
the most sensual pleasures by its wearying toil, must it not give 
itself over blindly and madly to those pleasures? A class about 
whose education no one troubles  himself,  which is a playball to a 
thousand chances, knows no security in life — what incentives has 
such a class to providence, to "respectability", to sacrifice the 
pleasure of the moment for a remoter enjoyment, most uncertain 
precisely by reason of the perpetually varying, shifting conditions 
under which the proletariat lives? A class which bears all the 
disadvantages of the social order without enjoymg its advantages, 
one to which the social system appears in purely hostile as­
pects—  who can demand that such a class respect this social order? 
Verily that is asking much! But the working-man cannot escape 
the present arrangement of society so long as it exists, and when 
the individual worker resists it, the greatest injury falls upon 
himself. 
Thus the social order makes family life almost impossible for the 
worker. In a comfortless, filthy house, hardly good enough for 
mere nightly shelter, ill-furnished, often neither rain-tight nor 
warm, a foul atmosphere filling rooms overcrowded with human 
beings, no domestic comfort is possible. The husband works the 
whole day through, perhaps the wife also and the elder children, 
all in different places; they meet night and morning only, all 
under perpetual temptation to drink; what family life is possible 
under such conditions? Yet the working-man cannot escape from 
the family, must live in the family, and the consequence is a 
perpetual succession of family troubles, domestic quarrels, most 
demoralising for parents and children alike. Neglect of all domes­
tic duties, neglect of the children, especially, is only too common 
* Sheriff Alison, Principles of Population, vol. ii.—Note by Engels. (Omitted in the 
American and English editions.—Ed.) 

=====第450页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 425 
among the English working-people, and only too vigorously 
fostered by the existing institutions of society. And children 
growing up in this savage way, amidst these demoralising influ­
ences, 3 are expected to turn out goody-goody and moral in the 
end! Verily the requirements are naïve, which the self-satisfied 
bourgeois makes upon the working-man! 
The contempt for the existing social order is most conspicuous 
in its extreme form — that of offences against the law. If the 
influences demoralising to the working-man act more powerfully, 
more concentratedly than usual, he becomes an offender as 
certainly as water abandons the fluid for the vaporous state at 80 
degrees, Reaumur. Under the brutal and brutalising treatment of 
the bourgeoisie, the working-man becomes precisely as much a 
thing without volition as water, and is subject to the laws of 
Nature with precisely the same necessity; at a certain  • point all 
freedom ceases. Hence with the extension of the proletariat, crime 
has increased in England, and the British nation has become the 
most criminal in the world. From the annual criminal tables of the 
Home Secretary, it is evident that the increase of crime in England 
has proceeded with incomprehensible rapidity. The numbers of 
arrests for criminal offences reached in the years: 1805, 4,605, 
1810,  5,146; 1815, 7,818; 1820, 13,710; 1825, 14,437; 1830, 
18,107;  1835,  20,731;  1840, 27,187; 1841, 27,760; 1842, 31,309 in 
England and Wales alone.144 That is to say, they increased 
sevenfold in thirty-seven years. Of these arrests, in 1842, 4,497 
were made in Lancashire alone, or more than 14 per cent of the 
whole; and 4,094 in Middlesex, including London, or more than 
13 per cent. So that two districts which include great cities with 
large proletarian populations, produced one-fourth1' of the total 
amount of crime, though their population is far from forming 
one-fourth of the whole. Moreover, the criminal tables prove 
directly that nearly all crime arises within the proletariat; for, in 
1842,  taking the average, out of 100 criminals, 32.35 could neither 
read nor write; 58.32 read and wrote imperfectly; 6.77 could read 
and write well; 0.22 had enjoyed a higher education, while the 
degree of education of 2.34 could not be ascertained. In Scotland, 
crime has increased yet more rapidly. There were but 89 arrests 
for criminal offences in 1819, and as early as 1837 the number 
had risen to 3,126, and in 1842 to 4,189. In Lanarkshire, where 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "including often enough 
the parents themselves".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "over one-fourth".—Ed. 

=====第451页=====
426 Frederick Engels 
Sheriff Alison himself made out the official report, population has 
doubled once in thirty years, and crime once in five and a  half,  or 
six times more rapidly than the population. The offences, as in all 
civilised countries, are, in the great majority of cases, against prop­
erty, and have, therefore, arisen from want in some form; for what 
a man has, he does not steal. The proportion of offences against 
property to the population, which in the Netherlands is as  1:7,140, 
and in France, as  1:1,804,  was in England, when Gaskell wrote, 
as 1:799.  The proportion of offences against persons to the popu­
lation is, in the Netherlands,  1:28,904;  in France, 1:17,573; in 
England, 1:23,395; that of crimes in general to the population in 
the agricultural districts, as 1:1,043; in the manufacturing districts 
as 1:840.*  In the whole of England today the proportion is 1:660 **; 
though it is scarcely ten years since Gaskell's book appeared! 
These facts are certainly more than sufficient to bring any one, 
even a bourgeois, to pause and reflect upon the consequences of 
such a state of things. If demoralisation and crime multiply twenty 
years longer in this proportion (and if English manufacture in 
these twenty years should be less prosperous than heretofore, the 
progressive multiplication of crime can only continue the more 
rapidly), what will the result be? Society is already in a state of 
visible dissolution; it is impossible to pick up a newspaper without 
seeing the most striking evidence of the giving way of all social 
ties. I look at random into a heap of English journals lying before 
me; there is the Manchester Guardian for October 30, 1844, which 
reports for three days. It no longer takes the trouble to give exact 
details as to Manchester, and merely relates the most interesting 
cases:  that the workers in a mill have struck for higher wages 
without giving notice, and been condemned by a Justice of the 
Peace to resume work; that in Salford a couple of boys had been 
caught stealing, and a bankrupt tradesman tried to cheat his 
creditors. From the neighbouring towns the reports are more 
detailed: in Ashton, two thefts, one burglary, one suicide; in Bury, 
one theft; in Bolton, two thefts, one revenue fraud; in Leigh, one 
theft; in Oldham, one strike for wages, one theft, one fight 
between Irish women, one non-Union hatter assaulted by Union 
men, one mother beaten by her son, 3 one attack upon the police, 
* The Manufacturing Population of England, chap. 10.— Note by Engels. 
** The total of population, about fifteen millions, divided by the number of 
convicted criminals (22,733).—Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in Rochdale a number of 
fights".—Ed. 

=====第452页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 427 
one robbery of a church; in Stockport, discontent of working-men 
with wages, one theft, one fraud, one fight, one wife beaten by her 
husband; in Warrington, one theft, one fight; in Wigan, one theft, 
and one robbery of a church. The reports of the London papers 
are much worse; frauds, thefts, assaults, family quarrels crowd one 
another. A Times of September 12, 1844, falls into my hand, 
which gives a report of a single day, including a theft, an attack 
upon the police, a sentence upon a father requiring him to 
support his illegitimate son, the abandonment of a child by its 
parents, and the poisoning of a man by his wife. Similar reports 
are to be found in all the English papers. In this country, social 
war is under full headway, every one stands for  himself,  and fights 
for himself against all comers, and whether or not he shall injure 
all the others who are his declared foes, depends upon a cynical 
calculation as to what is most advantageous for  himself.  It no 
longer occurs to any one to come to a peaceful understanding with 
his fellow-man; all differences are settled by threats violence, or in 
a law-court. In short, every one sees in his neighbour an enemy to 
be got out of the way, or, at best, a tool to be used for his own 
advantage. And this war grows from year to year, as the criminal 
tables show, more violent, passionate, irreconcilable. The enemies 
are dividing gradually into two great camps3—the bourgeoisie on 
the one hand, the workers on the other. This war of each against 
all, of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat, need cause us no 
surprise, for it is only the logical sequel of the principle involved 
in free competition. But it may very well surprise us that the 
bourgeoisie remains so quiet and composed in the face of the 
rapidly gathering storm-clouds, that it can read all these things 
daily in the papers without, we will not say indignation at such a 
social condition, but fear of its consequences, of a universal 
outburst of that which manifests itself symptomatically from day to 
day in the form of crime. But then it is the bourgeoisie, and from 
its standpoint cannot even see the facts, much less perceive their 
consequences. One thing only is astounding, that class prejudice 
and preconceived opinions can hold a whole class of human beings 
in such perfect, I might almost say, such mad blindness. Mean­
while, the development of the nation goes its way whether the 
bourgeoisie has eyes for it or not, and will surprise the property-
holding class one day with things not dreamed of in its 
philosophy. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "two great camps fighting each 
other".—Ed. 

=====第453页=====
SINGLE BRANCHES OF INDUSTRY 
FACTORY-HANDS a 
In dealing now with the more important branches of the English 
manufacturing proletariat, we shall begin, according to the princi­
ple already laid down,b with the factory-workers, i.e., those who 
are comprised under the Factory Act. This law regulates the 
length of the working-day in mills in which wool, silk, cotton, and 
flax are spun or woven by means of water or steam-power, and 
embraces, therefore, the more important branches of English 
manufacture. The class employed by them is the most intelligent 
and energetic of all the English workers, and, therefore, the 
most restless and most hated by the bourgeoisie. It stands as a 
whole, and the cotton-workers pre-eminently stand, at the head 
of the labour movement, as their masters the manufacturers, 
especially those of Lancashire, take the lead of the bourgeois 
agitation. 
We have already seen in the introduction how the population 
employed in working up the textile materials were first torn from 
their former way of life.0 It is, therefore, not surprising that the 
progress of mechanical invention in later years also affected 
precisely these workers most deeply and permanently. The history 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "factory-hands in the narrower 
sense".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the reference to the page on 
which the chapter "The Industrial Proletariat" begins (see p. 324 of this volume). 
Concerning the Factory Laws see pp. 442, 459, 461, 464 of this volume.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "through the new 
machinery".—Ed. 

=====第454页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 429 
of cotton manufacture as related by Ure,* Baines,** and others is 
the story of improvements in every direction, most of which have 
become domesticated in the other branches of industry as well. 
Hand-work is superseded by machine-work almost universally, 
nearly all manipulations are conducted by the aid of steam or 
water, and every year is bringing further improvements. 
In a well-ordered state of society, such improvements could only 
be a source of rejoicing; in a war of all against all, individuals seize 
the benefit for themselves, and so deprive the majority of the 
means of subsistence. Every improvement in machinery throws 
workers out of employment, and the greater the advance, the 
more numerous the unemployed; each great improvement pro­
duces,  therefore, upon a number of workers the effect of a 
commercial crisis, creates want, wretchedness, and crime. Take a 
few examples. The very first invention, the jenny, worked by one 
man, produced at least sixfold what the spinning-wheel had 
yielded in the same time; thus every new jenny threw five spinners 
out of employment. The throstle, which, in turn, produced much 
more than the jenny, and, like it, was worked by one man, threw 
still more people out of employment. The mule, which required 
yet fewer hands in proportion to the product, had the same effect, 
and every improvement in the mule, every multiplication of its 
spindles, diminished still further the number of workers em­
ployed. But this increase of the number of spindles in the mule is 
so great that whole armies of workers have been thrown out of 
employment by it. For, whereas one spinner, with a couple of 
children for piecers, formerly set six hundred spindles in motion, 
he could now manage fourteen hundred to two thousand spindles 
upon two. mules, so that two adult spinners and a part of the 
piecers whom they employed were thrown out. And since  self-
acting mules have been introduced into a very large number of 
spinning-mills, the spinners' work is wholly performed by the 
machine. There lies before me a book from the pen of James 
Leach,*** one of the recognised leaders of the Chartists in 
Manchester. The author has worked for years in various branches 
of industry, in mills and coal-mines, and is known to me 
* The Cotton Manufacture of Great Britain, by Dr. A. Ure, 1836.—Note by 
Engels. 
** History of the Cotton Manufacture of Great Britain by E. Baines, Esq.—Note by 
Engels. 
*** Stubborn Facts from the Factories by a Manchester Operative. Published and 
dedicated to the working-classes, by Wm. Rashleigh, M. P., London, Ollivier, 1844, 
p. 28, et seq. —Note by Engels. 

=====第455页=====
430 Frederick Engels 
personally as an honest, trustworthy, and capable man. In conse­
quence of his political position, he had at command extensive 
detailed information as to the different factories, collected by the 
workers themselves, and he publishes tables from which it is clear 
that in 1841, in 35 factories, 1,083 fewer mule spinners were 
employed than in 1829, though the number of spindles in these 
35 factories had increased by 99,429. He cites five factories in 
which no spinners whatever are employed, self-actors only being 
used. While the number of spindles increased by 10 per cent, the 
number of spinners diminished more than 60 per cent. And Leach 
adds that since 1841, so many improvements have been intro­
duced by double-decking3 and other means, that in some of the 
factories named, half the operatives have been discharged. In one 
factory alone, where eighty spinners were employed a short time 
ago, there are now but twenty left; the others having been 
discharged or set at children's work for children's wages. Of 
Stockport Leach tells a similar story, that in 1835, 800 spinners 
were employed, and in 1843 but 140, though the manufacture of 
Stockport has greatly increased during the last eight or nine years. 
Similar improvements have now been made in carding-frames, by 
which one-half the operatives have been thrown out of employ­
ment. In one factory improved frames have been set up, which 
have thrown four hands out of eight out of work, besides which 
the employer reduced the wages of the four retained from eight 
shillings to seven. The same process has gone on in the weaving 
industry; the power-loom has taken possession of one branch of 
hand-weaving after another, and since it produces much more 
than the hand-loom, while one weaver can work two looms, it has 
superseded a multitude of working-people. And in all sorts of 
manufacture, in flax and wool-spinning, in silk-twisting, the case is 
the same. The power-loom, too, is beginning to appropriate one 
branch after another of wool and linen-weaving; in Rochdale 
alone, there are more power than hand-looms in flannel and other 
wool-weaving branches. The bourgeoisie usually replies to this, 
that improvements in machinery, by decreasing the cost of 
production, supply finished goods'at lower prices, and that these 
reduced prices cause such an increase in consumption that the 
unemployed operatives soon find full employment in newly 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the English terms "double-deck­
ing", "spinners", "self-actors" and "doffers" in English, sometimes in brackets, after 
their German equivalents.—Ed. 

=====第456页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 431 
founded factories.* The bourgeoisie is so far correct that under 
certain conditions favourable for the general development of 
manufacture, every reduction in price of goods in which the raw 
material is cheap, greatly increases consumption, and gives rise to 
the building of new factories; but every further word of the 
assertion is a lie. The bourgeoisie ignores the fact that it takes 
years for these results of the decrease in price to follow and for 
new factories to be built; it is silent upon the point that every 
improvement in machinery throws the real work, the expenditure 
of force, more and more upon the machine, and so transforms the 
work of full-grown men into mere supervision, which a feeble 
woman or even a child can do quite as well, and does for half or 
two-thirds wages; that, therefore, grown men are constantly more 
and more supplanted and not re-employed by the increase in 
manufacture; it conceals the fact that whole branches of industry 
fall away, or are so changed that they must be learned afresh; and 
it takes good care not to confess what it usually harps upon, 
whenever the question of forbidding the work of children is 
broached, that factory-work must be learned in earliest youth3 in 
order to be learned properly. It does not mention the fact that the 
process of improvement goes steadily on, and that as soon as the 
operative has succeeded in making himself at home in a new 
branch, if he actually does succeed in so doing, this, too, is taken 
from him, and with it the last remnant of security which remained 
to him for winning his bread. But the bourgeoisie gets the benefit 
of the improvements in machinery; it has a capital opportunity for 
piling up money during the first years while many old machines are 
still in use, and the improvement not yet universally introduced; 
and it would be too much to ask that it should have an open eye 
for the disadvantages inseparable from these improvements. 
The fact that improved machinery reduces wages has also been 
as violently disputed by the bourgeoisie, as it is constantly 
reiterated by the working-men. The bourgeoisie insists that al­
though the price of piece-work has been reduced, yet the total of 
wages for the week's work has rather risen than fallen, and the 
condition of the operatives rather improved than deteriorated. It 
is hard to get to the bottom of the matter, for the operatives 
* Compare Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report.—Note by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892; the German 
editions of 1845 and 1892 give the reference in the text below— Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "indeed before the age of 
ten" and a reference to the Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report.—Ed. 

=====第457页=====
432 Frederick Engels 
usually dwell upon the price of piece-work. But it is certain 
that the weekly wage, also, has, in many branches of work, been 
reduced by the improvement of machinery. The so-called fine 
spinners (who spin fine mule yarn), for instance, do receive high 
wages, .thirty to forty shillings a week, because they have a 
powerful association for keeping wages up, and their craft re­
quires long training; but the coarse spinners who have to compete 
against self-actors (which are not as yet adapted for fine spinning), 
and whose association was broken down by the introduction of 
these machines, receive very low wages. A mule spinner told me 
that he does not earn more than fourteen shillings a week, and his 
statement agrees with that of Leach, that in various factories the 
coarse spinners earn less than sixteen shillings and sixpence a 
week, and that a spinner, who years ago3 earned thirty shillings, 
can now hardly scrape up twelve and a  half,  and had not earned 
more on an average in the past year. The wages of women and 
children may perhaps have fallen less, but only because they were 
not high from the beginning. I know several women, widows with 
children, who have trouble enough to earn eight to nine shillings a 
week; and that they and their families cannot live decently upon 
that sum, every one must admit who knows the price of the barest 
necessaries of life in England. That wages in general have been 
reduced by the improvement of machinery is the unanimous 
testimony of the operatives. The bourgeois assertion that the 
condition of the working-class has been improved by machinery is 
most vigorously proclaimed a falsehood in every meeting of 
Working-men in the factory districts. And even if it were true that 
the relative wage, the price of piece-work only, has fallen, while 
the absolute wage, the sum to be earned in the week, remained 
unchanged, what would follow? That the operatives have had 
quietly to look on while the manufacturers filled their purses from 
every improvement without giving the hands the smallest share in 
the gain. The bourgeois forgets, in fighting the working-man, the 
most ordinary principles of his own Political Economy. He who at 
other times swears by Malthus, cries out in his anxiety before the 
workers: "Where could the millions by which the population of 
England has increased find work, without the improvements in 
machinery?"* As though the bourgeois did not know well enough 
* This is the question posed by J. C. Symons, in Arts and Artisans.—Note by 
Engels. (In the German editions of 1845 and 1892, this question is followed by: 
"Nonsense!"—Ed.) 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "who three years  ago".—Ed. 

=====第458页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 433 
that without machinery and the expansion of industry which it 
produced, these "millions" would never have been brought into 
the world and grown up! The service which machinery has 
rendered the workers is simply this: that it has brought home to 
their minds the necessity of a social reform by means of which 
machinery shall no longer work against but for them. Let the wise 
bourgeois ask the people who sweep the streets in Manchester and 
elsewhere (though even this is past now, since machines for the 
purpose have been invented and introduced), or sell salt, matches, 
oranges, and shoe-strings on the streets, or even beg, what they 
were formerly, and he will see how many will answer: Mill-hands 
thrown out of work by machinery. The consequences of improve­
ment in machinery under our present social conditions are, for the 
working-man, solely injurious, and often in the highest degree 
oppressive. Every new advance brings with it loss of employment, 
want, and suffering, and in a country like England where, without 
that, there is usually a "surplus population", to be discharged 
from work is the worst that can befall the operative. And what a 
dispiriting, unnerving influence this uncertainty of his position in 
life, consequent upon the unceasing progress of machinery,3 must 
exercise upon the worker, whose lot is precarious enough without 
it! To escape despair, there are but two ways open to him; either 
inward and outward revolt against the bourgeoisie or drunkenness 
and general demoralisation. And the English operatives are 
accustomed to take refuge in both. The history of the English 
proletariat relates hundreds of uprisings against machinery and 
the bourgeoisie; we have already spoken of the moral dissolution 
which, in  itself,  is only another form of despair. 
The worst situation is that of those workers who have to 
compete against a machine that is making its way. The price of the 
goods which they produce adapts itself to the price of the kindred 
product of the machine, and as the latter works more cheaply, its 
human competitor has but the lowest wages. The same thing 
happens to every operative employed upon an old machine in 
competition with later improvements. And who else is there to 
bear the hardship? The manufacturer will not throw out his old 
apparatus, nor will he sustain the loss upon it; out of the dead 
mechanism he can make nothing, so he fastens upon the living 
worker, the universal scapegoat of society. Of all the workers in 
competition with machinery, the most ill-used are the hand-loom 
cotton weavers. They receive the most trifling wages, and, with full 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and the unemployment 
resulting from  it".—Ed. 

=====第459页=====
434 Frederick Engels 
work, are not in a position to earn more than ten shillings a week. 
One class of woven goods after another is annexed by the 
power-loom, and hand-weaving is the last refuge of workers 
thrown out of employment in other branches, so that the trade is 
always overcrowded. Hence it comes that, in average seasons, the 
hand-weaver counts himself fortunate if he can earn six or seven 
shillings a week, while to reach this sum he must sit at his loom 
fourteen to eighteen hours a day. Most woven goods require 
moreover a damp weaving-room, to keep the weft from snapping, 
and in part for this reason, in part because of their poverty, which 
prevents them from paying for better dwellings, the work-rooms 
of these weavers are usually without wooden or paved floors. I 
have been in many dwellings of such weavers, in remote, vile 
courts and alleys, usually in cellars. Often half-a-dozen of these 
hand-loom weavers, several of them married, live together in a 
cottage with one or two work-rooms, and one large sleeping-room. 
Their food consists almost exclusively of potatoes, with perhaps 
oatmeal porridge, rarely milk, and scarcely ever meat. Great 
numbers of them are Irish or of Irish descent. And these poor 
hand-loom weavers, first to suffer from every crisis, and last to be 
relieved from it, must serve the bourgeoisie as a handle in meeting 
attacks upon the factory system. See, cries the bourgeois, trium­
phantly, see how these poor creatures must famish, while the mill 
operatives are thriving, and then judge the factory system!* As 
though it were not precise y the factory system and the machinery 
belonging to it which had so shamefully crushed the hand-loom 
weavers, and as though the bourgeoisie did not know this quite as 
well as ourselves! But the bourgeoisie has interests at stake, and so 
a falsehood or two and a bit of hypocrisy won't matter much. 
Let us examine somewhat more closely the fact that machinery 
more and more supersedes the work of men. The human labour, 
involved in both spinning and weaving, consists chiefly in piecing 
broken threads, as the machine does all the rest. This work 
requires no muscular strength, but only flexibility of finger. Men 
are, therefore, not only not needed for it, but actually, by reason 
of the greater muscular development of the hand, less fit for it 
than women and children, and are, therefore, naturally almost 
superseded by them. Hence, the more the use of the arms, the 
expenditure of strength, can be transferred* to steam or water-
* See Dr. Ure in The Philosophy of Manufactures.—Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "through the introduction 
of machinery".—Ed. 

=====第460页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 435 
power, the fewer men need be employed; and as women and 
children work more cheaply, and in these branches better than 
men, they take their places. In the spinning-mills women and girls 
are to be found in almost exclusive possession of the throstles; 
among the mules one man, an adult spinner (with self-actors, he, 
too, becomes superfluous), and several piecers for tying the 
threads, usually children or women, sometimes young men of 
from eighteen to twenty years, here and there an old spinner* 
thrown out of other employment. At the power-looms women, 
from fifteen to twenty years, are chiefly employed, and a few men; 
these, however, rarely remain at this trade after their twenty-first 
year. Among the preparatory machinery, too, women alone are to 
be found, with here and there a man to clean and sharpen the 
carding-f rames. Besides all these, the factories employ numbers of 
children—doffers—for mounting and taking down bobbins, and a 
few men as overlookers, a mechanic and an engineer for the steam-
engines, carpenters, porters, etc.; but the actual work of the mills 
is done by women and children. This the manufacturers deny. 
They published last year elaborate tables to prove that machin­
ery does not supersede adult male operatives. According to these 
tables,  rather more than half of all the factory-workers employed, 
viz., 52 per cent, were females and 48 per cent males, and of these 
operatives more than half were over eighteen years old. 145 So far, 
so good. But the manufacturers are very careful not to tell us, how 
many of the adults were men and how many women. And this is 
just the point. Besides this, they have evidently counted the 
mechanics, engineers, carpenters, all the men employed in any 
way in the factories, perhaps even the clerks, and still they have 
not the courage to tell the whole truth. These publications teem 
generally with falsehoods, perversions, crooked statements, with 
calculations of averages, that prove a great deal for the uninitiated 
reader and nothing for the initiated, and with suppressions of 
facts bearing on the most important points; and they prove only 
the selfish blindness and want of uprightness of the manufacturers 
concerned. Let us take some of the statements of a speech with 
which Lord Ashley introduced the Ten Hours' Bill, March 15th, 
1844,  into the House of Commons. Here he gives some data as to 
* Report of Factory Inspector, L. Horner. October, 1843: "There is at present 
a very anomalous state of things in regard to wages in some departments of cot­
ton mills in Lancashire; for there are hundreds of young men, between 20 and 
30 years of age, employed as piecers and otherwise, who are receiving not 
more than eight or nine shillings a week; while under the same  roof,  children 
of 13 years of age are getting five shillings, and young women between 16 and 
20 are getting from ten to twelve shillings a week."—Note by Engeh. 

=====第461页=====
436 Frederick Engels 
the relations of sex and age of the operatives, not yet refuted by 
the manufacturers, whose statements, as quoted above, cover 
moreover only a part of the manufacturing industry of England. 
Of 419,590 factory operatives of the British Empire in 1839, 
192,887, or nearly  half,  were under eighteen years of age, and 
242,296 of the female sex, of whom 112,192 were less than 
eighteen years old. There remain, therefore, 80,695 male opera­
tives under eighteen years, and 96,599 adult male operatives, or 
not one full quarter* of the whole number. In the cotton factories, 
56V4 per cent; in the woollen mills, 69V2 per cent; in the silk mills, 
7OV2 per cent; in the flax-spinning mills, 7OV2 per cent of all 
operatives are of the female sex. These numbers suffice to prove 
the crowding out of adult males. But you have only to go into the 
nearest mill to see the fact confirmed. Hence follows of necessity 
that inversion of the existing social order which, being forced 
upon them, has the most ruinous consequences for the workers. 
The employment of women at once breaks up the family; for 
when the wife spends twelve or thirteen hours every day in the 
mill, and the husband works the same length of time there or 
elsewhere, what becomes of the children? They grow up like wild 
weeds; they are put out to nurse for a shilling or eighteenpence a 
week, and how they are treated may be imagined. Hence the 
accidents to which little children fall victims0 multiply in the 
factory districts to a terrible extent. The lists of the Coroner of 
Manchester* showed for nine months: 69 deaths from burning, 56 
from drowning, 23 from falling, 67 from other causes, or a total 
of 215 deaths from accidents,** while in non-manufacturing 
Liverpool during twelve months there were but 146 fatal acci­
dents.  The mining accidents are excluded in both cases; and since 
the Coroner of Manchester has no authority in Salford, the 
population of both places mentioned in the comparison is about 
the same. The Manchester Guardian reports one or more deaths by 
* Report of Factories' Inquiry Commission. Testimony of Dr. Hawkins, p. 3.— 
Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 
1892;  the German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this reference in the text— 
Ed.). 
** In 1842, among the accidents brought to the Infirmary in Manchester, one 
hundred and eighty-nine were from burning. How many were fatal is not stated. 
Note by Engels. (The last sentence is omitted in the authorised English edi­
tion.—Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "or 23 per cent, i.e., not 
one full quarter".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "due to lack of 
supervision".—Ed. 

=====第462页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 437 
burning in almost every number. That the general mortality 
among young children must be increased by the employment of 
the mothers is self-evident, and is placed beyond all doubt by 
notorious facts. Women often return to the mill three or four days 
after confinement, leaving the baby, of course; in the dinner-hour 
they must hurry home to feed the child and eat something, and 
what sort of suckling that can be is also evident. Lord Ashley 
repeats the testimony of several workwomen: 
"M. H., twenty years old, has two children, the youngest a baby that is tended 
by the other, a little older. The mother goes to the mill shortly after five o'clock in 
the morning, and comes home at eight at night; all day the milk pours from her 
breasts, so that her clothing drips with it." "H. W. has three children, goes away 
Monday morning at five o'clock, and comes back Saturday evening; has so much to 
do for the children then that she cannot get to bed before three o'clock in the 
morning; often wet through to the skin, and obliged to work in that state." She 
said: "My breasts have given me the most frightful pain, and I have been dripping 
wet with milk." 
The use of narcotics to keep the children still is fostered by this 
infamous system, and has reached a great extent in the factory 
districts. Dr. Johns, Registrar in Chief for Manchester, is of 
opinion that this custom is the chief source of the many deaths 
from convulsions. The employment of the wife dissolves the family 
utterly and of necessity, and this dissolution, in our present 
society, which is based upon the family, brings the most demoralis­
ing consequences for parents as well as children. A mother who 
has no time to trouble herself about her child, to perform the 
most ordinary loving services for it during its first year, who 
scarcely indeed sees it, can be no real mother to the child, must 
inevitably grow indifferent to it, treat it unlovingly like a stranger. 
The children who grow up under such conditions are utterly 
ruined for later family life, can never feel at home in the family 
which they themselves found, because they have always been 
accustomed to isolation, and they contribute therefore to the 
already general undermining of the family in the working-class. A 
similar dissolution of the family is brought about by the employ­
ment of the children. When they get on far enough to earn more 
than they cost their parents from week to week, they begin to pay 
the parents a fixed sum for board and lodging, and keep the rest 
for themselves. This often happens from the fourteenth or 
fifteenth year.* In a word, the children emancipate themselves, 
* Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report, Power's Report on Leeds, passim; 
Tufnell Report on Manchester, p. 17, etc.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 
1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892; the German editions of 1845 and 
1892 give the reference in the text— Ed.). 

=====第463页=====
438 Frederick Engels' 
and regard the paternal dwelling as a lodging-house, which they 
often exchange for another, as suits them. 
In many cases the family is not wholly dissolved by the 
employment of the wife, but turned upside down. The wife 
supports the family, the husband sits at home, tends the children, 
sweeps the room and cooks. This case happens very frequently; in 
Manchester alone, many hundred such men could be cited, 
condemned to domestic occupations. It is easy to imagine the 
wrath aroused among the working-men by this reversal of all 
relations within the family," while the other social conditions 
remain unchanged. There lies before me a letter from an English 
working-man, Robert Pounder, Baron's Buildings, Woodhouse, 
Moorside, in Leeds (the bourgeoisie may hunt him up there; I give 
the exact address for the purpose), written by him to Oastler.* 
He relates how another working-man, being on tramp, came to 
St. Helens, in Lancashire, and there looked up an old friend. He 
found him in a miserable, damp cellar, scarcely furnished. 
"And when my poor friend went in, there sat poor Jack near the fire, and what 
did he, think you? Why he sat and mended his wife's stockings with the bodkin; and 
as soon as he saw his old friend at the door-post, he tried to hide them. But Joe, that is 
my friend's name, had seen it, and said: 'Jack, what the devil art thou doing? Where is 
the missus? Why, is that thy work?' and poor Jack was ashamed, and said: 'No, I know 
this is not my work, but my poor missus is i' th' factory; she has to leave at half-past 
five and works till eight at night, and then she is so knocked up that she cannot do 
aught when she gets home, so I have to do everything for her what I can, for I 
have no work, nor had any for more nor three years, and I shall never have any 
more work while I live;' and then he wept a big tear. Jack again said: 'There is 
work enough for women folks and childer hereabouts, but none for men: thou 
mayest sooner find a hundred pound on the road than work for men—but I 
should never have believed that either thou or any one else would have seen me 
mending my wife's stockings, for it is bad work. But she can hardly stand on her 
feet; I am afraid she will be laid up, and then I don't know what is to become of 
us, for it's a good bit that she has been the man in the house and I the woman; it is 
bad work, Joe;' and he cried bitterly, and said, 'It has not been always so.' 'No,' said 
Joe; *but when thou hadn't no work, how hast thou not shifted?' 'I'll tell thee, Joe, 
as well as I can, but it was bad enough; thou knowest when I got married I had 
work plenty, and thou knows I was not lazy.' 'No, that thou wert not.' 'And we had 
* This letter is re-translated from the German, no attempt being made to 
reproduce either the spelling or the original Yorkshire dialect.— Note by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887 and the English edition of 1892. (After "written bv him to 
Oastler" the German editions of 1845 and 1892 have: "and the naivety of which I 
can only partly render. The spelling can, if need be, but the Yorkshire dialect in no 
way, be imitated in German." The contents of the beginning of the letter are given 
in greater detail in the German version.— Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "the just wrath aroused 
among the working-men by this virtual castration, and the reversal of all relations 
within the family".— Ed. 

=====第464页=====
The Condition of the Working-CIass in England 439 
a good furnished house, and Mary need not go to work. I could work for the two 
of us; but now the world is upside down. Mary has to work and I have to stop at 
home, mind the childer, sweep and wash, bake and mend; and, when the poor 
woman comes home at night, she is knocked up. Thou knows, Joe, it's hard for one 
that was used different.' 'Yes, boy, it is hard.' And then Jack began to cry again, 
and he wished he had never married, and that he had never been born; but he had 
never thought, when he wed Mary, that it would come to this. 'I have often cried 
over it,' said Jack. Now when Joe heard this, he told me that he had cursed and 
damned the factories, and the masters, and the Government, with all the curses 
that he had learned while he was in the factory from a child." 
Can any one imagine a more insane state of things than that 
described in this letter? And yet this condition, which unsexes the 
man and takes from the woman all womanliness without being 
able to bestow upon the man true womanliness, or the woman true 
manliness — this condition which degrades, in the most shameful 
way, both sexes, and, through them, Humanity, is the last result of 
our much-praised civilisation, the final achievement of all the 
efforts and struggles of hundreds of generations to improve their 
own situation and that of their posterity. We must either despair 
of mankind, and its aims and efforts, when we see all our labour 
and toil result in such a mockery, or we must admit that human 
society has hitherto sought salvation in a false direction; we must 
admit that so total a reversal of the position of the sexes can have 
come to pass only because the sexes have been placed in a false 
position from the beginning. If the reign of the wife over the 
husband, as inevitably brought about by the factory system, is 
inhuman, the pristine rule of the husband over the wife must have 
been inhuman too. If the wife can now base her supremacy" upon 
the fact that she supplies the greater part, nay, the whole of the 
common possession, the necessary inference is that this community 
of possession is no true and rational one, since one member of the 
family boasts offensively of contributing the greater share. If the 
family of our present society is being thus dissolved, this dissolu­
tion merely shows that, at bottom, the binding tie of this family 
was not family affection, but private interest lurking under the 
cloak of a pretended community of possessions.* The same 
* How numerous married women are in the factories is seen from information 
furnished by a manufacturer. In 412 factories in Lancashire, 10,721 of them 
were employed; of the husbands of these women, but 5,314 were also employed in 
the factories, 3,927 were otherwise employed, 821 were unemployed, and informa­
tion was wanting as to 659; or two, if not three men for each factory, are 
supported by the work of their wives.— Note by Engels. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "as the husband did 
formerly".—Ed. 

=====第465页=====
440 Frederick Engels 
relation exists on the part of those children who support unem­
ployed parents when they do not directly pay board as already 
referred to. Dr. Hawkins testified in the Factories' Inquiry Com­
mission's Report that this relation is common enough, and in 
Manchester it is notorious. In this case the children are the 
masters in the house, as the wife was in the former case, and Lord 
Ashley gives an example of this in his speech*: A man berated his 
two daughters for going to the public-house, and they answered 
that they were tired of being ordered about, saying, "Damn you, 
we have to keep you."3 Determined to keep the proceeds of their 
work for themselves, they left the family dwelling, and abandoned 
their parents to their fate. 
The unmarried women, who have grown up in mills, are no 
better off than the married ones. It is self-evident that a girl who 
has worked in a mill from her ninth year is in no position to 
understand domestic work, whence it follows that female opera­
tives prove wholly inexperienced and unfit as housekeepers. They 
cannot knit or sew, cook or wash, are unacquainted with the most 
ordinary duties of a housekeeper, and when they have young 
children to take care of, have not the vaguest idea how to set 
about it. The Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report gives dozens 
of examples of this, and Dr. Hawkins, Commissioner for Lanca­
shire, expresses his opinion as follows**: 
A girl marries early and recklessly; "she has had no time, no means, no 
opportunities of learning the common duties of domestic life; and even if she 
had acquired the knowledge she has still no time to practise them.... There is the 
young mother absent from her child above twelve hours daily. Who has the charge 
of the infant in her absence? Usually some little girl or aged woman, who is hired 
for a trifle and whose services are equivalent  to* the reward. Too often the dwelling 
of the factory family is no home; it sometimes is a cellar, which includes no 
cooking, no washing, no making, no mending, no decencies of life, no invitations to 
the fireside. I cannot help on these and on other grounds, especially for the better 
preservation of infant life, expressing my hope that a period may arrive when 
married women shall be rarely employed in a factory.*** 
* House of Commons, March 15th, 1844.—Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. (This reference, like the others in this chapter, are reproduced in 
the English edition of 1892; the German editions of 1845 and 1892 give them in 
the text.—Ed.) 
** Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report, p. 4.—Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
*** For further examples and information compare Factories' Inquiry Commis­
sion's Report. Cowell Evidence, pp. 37, 38, 39, 72, 77, 82; Tufnell Evidence, pp. 9, 
15, 45, 54, etc.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the words in quotes in 
English.— Ed. 

=====第466页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 441 
But that is the least of the evil. The moral consequences of the 
employment of women in factories are even worse. The collecting 
of persons of both sexes and all ages in a single work-room, the 
inevitable contact, the crowding into a small space of people, to 
whom neither mental nor moral education has been given, is not 
calculated for the favourable development of the female character. 
The manufacturer, if he pays any attention to the matter, can 
interfere only when something scandalous actually happens; the 
permanent, less conspicuous influence of persons of dissolute 
character upon the more moral, and especially upon the younger 
ones,  he cannot ascertain, and consequently cannot prevent. But 
precisely this influence is the injurious. The language used in the 
mills is characterised by many witnesses in the report of 1833, as 
"indecent", "bad", "filthy", etc.* It is the same process upon a 
small scale which we have already witnessed upon a large one in 
the great cities. The centralisation of population has the same 
influence upon the same persons, whether it affects them in a 
great city or a small factory. The smaller the mill the closer the 
packing, and the more unavoidable the contact; and the conse­
quences are not wanting. A witness in Leicester said that he would 
rather let his daughter beg than go into a factory; that they are 
perfect gates of hell; that most of the prostitutes of the town had 
their employment in the mills to thank for their present situa­
tion.** Another, in Manchester, "did not hesitate to assert that 
three-fourths of the young factory employees, from fourteen to 
twenty years of age, were unchaste".*** Commissioner Cowell 
expresses it as his opinion, that the morality of the factory 
operatives is somewhat below the average of that of the working-
class in general.**** And Dr. Hawkins***** says: 
"An estimate of sexual morality is scarcely possible to be reduced into figures; 
but if I may trust my own observations, and the general opinion of those with 
whom I have conversed, and the spirit of our evidence, then a most discouraging view 
of the influence of the factory life upon the morality of female youth obtrudes  itself." 
It is, besides, a matter of course that factory servitude, like any 
other, and to an even higher degree, confers the jus primae noctis 
upon the master. In this respect also the employer is sovereign 
* Cowell Evidence, pp. 35, 37, and elsewhere.— Note by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887. 
** Power Evidence, p. 8.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
*** Cowell Evidence, p. 57.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
**** Cowell Evidence, p. 82.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
***** Factories Inquiry Commission s Report, p. 4, Hawkins.—Note by Engels to 
the American edition of 1887. 

=====第467页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
over the persons and charms of his employees. The threat of 
discharge suffices to overcome all resistance in nine cases out of 
ten, if not in ninety-nine out of a hundred, in girls who, in any 
case,  have no strong inducements to chastity. If the master is mean 
enough, and the official report mentions several such cases, his 
mill is also his harem; and the fact that not all manufacturers use 
their power, does not in the least change the position of the girls. 
In the beginning of manufacturing industry, when most of the 
employers were upstarts without education or consideration for 
the hypocrisy of society, they let nothing interfere with the 
exercise of their vested rights. 
To form a correct judgment of the influence of factory-work 
upon the health of the female sex, it is necessary first to consider 
the work of children, and then the nature of the work  itself.  From 
the beginning of manufacturing industry, children have been 
employed in mills, at first almost exclusively by reason of the 
smallness of the machines, which were later enlarged. Even 
children from the workhouses were employed in multitudes, being 
rented out for a number of years to the manufacturers as 
apprentices. They were lodged, fed, and clothed in common, and 
were, of course, completely the slaves of their masters, by whom 
they were treated with the utmost recklessness and barbarity. As 
early as 1796, the public objection to this revolting system found 
such vigorous expression through Dr. Percival and Sir Robert Peel 
(father of the Cabinet Minister, and himself a cotton manufac­
turer),  that in 1802 Parliament passed an Apprentices' Bill,3 by 
which the most crying evils were removed.149 Gradually the 
increasing competition of free workpeople crowded out the whole 
apprentice system; factories were built in cities, machinery was 
constructed on a larger scale, and work-rooms were made more 
airy and wholesome; gradually, too, more work was found for 
adults and young persons. The number of children in the mills di­
minished somewhat, and the age at which they began to work rose 
a little; few children under eight or nine years were now employed. 
Later, as we shall see, the power of the state intervened several 
times to protect them from the money-greed of the bourgeoisie. 
The great mortality among children of the working-class, and 
especially among those of the factory operatives, is proof enough 
of the unwholesome conditions under which they pass their first 
years.  These influences are at work, of course, among the children 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the title of the Bill in 
English.— Ed. 

=====第468页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 443 
who survive, but not quite so powerfully as upon those who 
succumb. The result in the most favourable case is a tendency to 
disease, or some check in development, and consequent less than 
normal vigour of the constitution. A nine years old child of a 
factory operative that has grown up in want, privation, and 
changing conditions, in cold and damp, with insufficient clothing 
and unwholesome dwellings, is far from having the working force 
of a child brought up under healthier conditions. At nine years of 
age it is sent into the mill to work 6l/2 hours (formerly 8, earlier 
still, 12 to 14, even 16 hours) daily, until the thirteenth year; then 
twelve hours until the eighteenth year. The old enfeebling 
influences continue, while the work is added to them. It is not to 
be denied that a child of nine years, even an operative's child, can 
hold out through 6V2 hours' daily work, without any one being 
able to trace visible bad results in its development directly to this 
cause; but in no case can its presence in the damp, heavy air of 
the factory, often at once warm and wet, contribute to good 
health; and, in any case, it is unpardonable to sacrifice to the 
greed of an unfeeling bourgeoisie the time of children which 
should be devoted solely to their physical and mental develop­
ment, withdraw them from school and the fresh air, in order to 
wear them for the benefit of the manufacturers. The bourgeoisie 
says:  If we do not employ the children in the mills, they only 
remain under conditions unfavourable to their development; and 
this is true on the whole. But what does this mean if it is not a 
confession that the bourgeoisie first places the children of the 
working-class under unfavourable conditions, and then exploits 
these bad conditions for its own benefit, appeals to that which is as 
much its own fault as the factory system, excuses the sin of today 
with the sin of yesterday? And if the Factory Act did not in some 
measure fetter their hands, how this "humane", this "benevolent" 
bourgeoisie, which has built its factories solely for the good of the 
working-class, would take care of the interests of these workers! 
Let us hear how they acted before the factory inspector was at 
their heels. Their own admitted testimony shall convict them in 
the Report of the Factories' Inquiry Commission of 1833. 
The report of the Central Commission relates that the manufac­
turers began to employ children rarely of five years, often of six, 
very often of seven, usually of eight to nine years; that the 
working-day often lasted fourteen to sixteen hours, exclusive of 
meals and intervals; that the manufacturers permitted overlookers 
to flog and maltreat children, and often took an active part in so 
doing themselves. One case is related of a Scotch manufacturer, 

=====第469页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
who rode after a sixteen years old runaway, forced him to return, 
running after3 the employer as fast as the master's horse trotted, 
and beat him the whole way with a long whip.* In the large towns 
where the operatives resisted more vigorously, such things natural­
ly happened less often. But even this long working-day failed to 
satisfy the greed of the capitalists. Their aim was to make the 
capital invested in the building and machinery produce the highest 
return, by every available means, to make it work as actively as 
possible. Hence the manufacturers introduced the shameful sys­
tem of night-work. Some of them employed two sets of operatives, 
each numerous enough to fill the whole mill, and let one set work 
the twelve hours of the day, and the other the twelve hours of the 
night. It is needless to picture the effect upon the frames of young 
children, and even upon the health of young persons and adults, 
produced by permanent loss of sleep at night, which cannot be 
made good by any amount of sleep during the day. Irritation of 
the whole nervous system, with general lassitude and enfeeblement 
of the entire frame, were the inevitable results, with the fostering 
of temptation to drunkenness and unbridled sexual indulgence. 
One manufacturer testifies** that during the two years in which 
night-work was carried on in his factory, the number of illegiti­
mate children born was doubled, and such general demoralisation 
prevailed that he was obliged to give up night-work. Other manu­
facturers were yet more barbarous, requiring many hands to work 
thirty to forty hours at a stretch, several times a week, letting them 
get a couple of hours sleep only, because the night-shift was not 
complete, but calculated to replace a part of the operatives only. 
The reports of the Commission touching this barbarism surpass 
everything that is known to me in this line. Such infamies, as are 
here related, are nowhere else to be found — yet we shall see that 
the bourgeoisie constantly appeals to the testimony of the Commis­
sion as being in its own favour. The consequences of these 
cruelties became evident quickly enough. The Commissioners 
mention a crowd of cripples who appeared before them, who 
clearly owed their distortion to the long working-hours. This 
distortion usually consists of a curving of the spinal column and 
* Stuart Evidence, p. 35.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
'* Tufnell Evidence, p. 91.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "in front of" instead of 
"after".—Ed. 

=====第470页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 445 
legs,  and is described as follows by Francis Sharp, M.R.C.S., of 
Leeds*: 
"Before I came to Leeds, I had never seen the peculiar twisting of the ends 
of the lower part of the thigh bone. At first I considered it might be rickets, but 
from the numbers which presented themselves, particularly at an age beyond the 
time when rickets attack children (between 8 and 14), and finding that they had 
commenced since they began work at the factory I soon began to change my 
opinion. I now may have seen of such cases nearly 100, and I can most decidedly 
state they were the result of too much labour. So far as I know they all belong to 
factories, and have attributed their disease to this cause themselves." "Of 
distortions of the spine, which were evidently owing to the long standing at their 
labour, perhaps the number of cases might not be less than 300." 
Precisely similar is the testimony of Dr. Hey, for eighteen years 
physician in the hospital in Leeds**: 
"Diseases of the spine amongst people employed in factories presented them­
selves very frequently. Some were the result of pure labour; others were the 
result of labour on a constitution perhaps congenitally weak, or rendered feeble by 
bad food. The deformities of the limbs appear to be more frequent than the 
spinal diseases... the bending in of the knees, relaxation of the ligaments of the 
ankles was very frequent, and the bending of the large bones. The heads of the 
large bones have especially been increased and twisted to a considerable extent; 
and these cases I have found to have come from those mills and factories where 
long hours have been said to be common." 
Surgeons Beaumont and Sharp, of Bradford, bear the same 
testimony. The reports of Drinkwater, Power, and Dr. Loudon 
contain a multitude of examples of such distortions, and those of 
Tufnell and Sir David Barry, which are less directed to this point, 
give single examples.*** The Commissioners for Lancashire, Cowell, 
Tufnell, and Hawkins, have almost wholly neglected this aspect of 
the physiological results of the factory system, though this district 
rivals Yorkshire in the number of cripples. I have seldom 
traversed Manchester without meeting three or four of them, 
suffering from precisely the same distortions of the spinal columns 
and legs as that described, and I have often been able to observe 
them closely. I know one personally who corresponds exactly with 
* Dr. Loudon Evidence, pp. 12, 13.—Note by Engeb to the American edition of 
1887. 
** Dr. Loudon Evidence, p. 16.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
*** Drinkwater Evidence, pp. 72, 80, 146, 148, 150 (two brothers); 69 (two 
brothers); 155, and many others. 
Power Evidence, pp. 63, 66, 67 (two cases); 68 (three cases); 69 (two cases); in 
Leeds, pp. 29, 31, 40, 43, 53, et seq. 
Loudon Evidence, pp. 4, 7 (four cases); 8 (several cases), etc. 
Sir D. Barry Evidence, pp. 6, 8, 13, 21, 22, 44, 55 (three cases), etc. 
Tufnell Evidence, pp. 5, 6, 16,  etc.—  Note by Engels to the American edition of 
1887. 

=====第471页=====
446 Frederick Engels 
the foregoing description of Dr. Hey, and who got into this 
condition in Mr. Douglas' factory in Pendleton, an establishment 
which enjoys an unenviable notoriety among the operatives by 
reason of the former long working periods continued night after 
night. It is evident, at a glance, whence the distortions of these 
cripples come; they all look exactly alike. The knees are bent 
inward and backwards,3 the ankles deformed and thick, and the 
spinal column often bent forwards or to one side. But the crown 
belongs to the philanthropic manufacturers of the Macclesfield silk 
district. They employed the youngest children of all, even from 
five to six years of age. In the supplementary testimony of 
Commissioner Tufnell, I find the statement of a certain, factory 
manager Wright, both of whose sisters were most shamefully 
crippled, and who had once counted the cripples in several streets, 
some of them the cleanest *and neatest streets of Macclesfield. He 
found in Townley Street ten, George Street five, Charlotte Street 
four, Watercots fifteen, Bank Top three, Lord Street seven, Mill 
Lane twelve, Great George Street two, in the workhouse two, Park 
Green one, Peckford Street two, whose families all unanimously 
declared that the cripples had become such in consequence of 
overwork in the silk-twisting mills. One boy is mentioned so 
crippled as not to be able to go upstairs, and girls deformed in 
back and hips. 
Other deformities also have proceeded from this overwork, 
especially flattening of the foot, which Sir D. Barry* frequently 
observed, as did the physicians and surgeons in Leeds.** In cases, 
in which a stronger constitution, better food, and other more 
favourable circumstances enabled the young operative to resist this 
effect of a barbarous exploitation, we find, at least, pain in the 
back, hips, and legs, swollen joints, varicose veins, and large, 
persistent ulcers in the thighs and calves. These affections are 
almost universal among the operatives. The reports of Stuart, 
Mackintosh, and Sir D. Barry contain hundreds of examples; 
indeed, they know almost no operative who did not suffer from 
some of these affections; and in the remaining reports, the 
occurrence of the same phenomena is attested by many physicians. 
* Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report, 1833, Sir D. Barry Evidence, p. 21 
(two cases).—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
** Factories' Inquiry Commission's Report, 1833, Loudon Evidence, pp. 13, 16, 
etc.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "the feet bent in­
wards".—Ed. 

=====第472页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 447 
The reports covering Scotland place it beyond all doubt, that a 
working-day of thirteen hours, even for men and women from 
eighteen to twenty-two years of age, produces at least these 
consequences, both in the flax-spinning mills of Dundee and 
Dunfermline, and in the cotton mills of Glasgow and Lanark. 
All these affections are easily explained by the nature of 
factory-work, which is, as the manufacturers say, very "light", and 
precisely by reason of its lightness, more enervating than any 
other. The operatives have little to do, but must stand the whole 
time. 3 Any one who sits down, say upon a window-ledge or a 
basket, is fined, and this perpetual upright position, this constant 
mechanical pressure of the upper portions of the body upon 
spinal column, hips, and legs, inevitably produces the results 
mentioned. This standing is not required by the work  itself,  and at 
Nottingham chairs have been introduced,0 with the result that 
these affections disappeared, and the operatives ceased to object to 
the length of the working-day. But in a factory where the 
operative works solely for the bourgeois, and has small interest in 
doing his work well, he would probably use the seats more than 
would be agreeable and profitable to the manufacturer; and in 
order that somewhat less raw material may be spoiled for the 
bourgeois, the operative must sacrifice health and strength.* This 
long protracted upright position, with the bad atmosphere prev­
alent in the mills, entails, besides the deformities mentioned, a 
marked relaxation of all vital energies, and, in consequence, all 
sorts of other affections general rather than local. The atmosphere 
of the factories is, as a rule, at once damp and warm, usually 
warmer than is necessary, and, when the ventilation is not very 
good, impure, heavy, deficient in oxygen, filled with dust and the 
smell of the machine oil, which almost everywhere smears the 
floor, sinks into it, and becomes rancid. The operatives are lightly 
clad by reason of the warmth, and would readily take cold in case 
of irregularity of the temperature; a draught is distasteful to them, 
the general enervation which gradually takes possession of all the 
physical functions diminishes the animal warmth: this must be 
replaced from without, and nothing is therefore more agreeable to 
* In the spinning-room of a mill at Leeds, too, chairs had been introduced. 
Drinkwater Evidence, p. 85.— Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and cannot sit 
down".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in the carding-rooms at 
least".—Ed. 

=====第473页=====
448 Frederick Engels 
the operative than to have all the doors and windows closed, and 
to stay in his warm factory air. Then comes the sudden change of 
temperature on going out into the cold and wet or frosty 
atmosphere, without the means of protection from the rain, or of 
changing wet clothing for dry, a circumstance which perpetually 
produces colds. And when one reflects that, with all this, not one 
single muscle of the body is really exercised, really called into 
activity, except perhaps those of the legs; that nothing whatsoever 
counteracts the enervating, relaxing tendency of all these condi­
tions;  that every influence is wanting which might give the muscles 
strength, the fibres elasticity and consistency; that from youth up, 
the operative is deprived of all fresh-air recreation, it is impossible 
to wonder at the almost unanimous testimony of the physicians in 
the Factories' Report, that they find a great lack of ability to resist 
disease, a general depression in vital activity, a constant relaxation 
of the mental and physical powers. Let us hear Sir D. Barry first*: 
The unfavourable influences of mill-work upon the hands are the following: "(1) 
The indispensable necessity of forcing both their mental and bodily exertions to 
keep exact pace with the motions of machinery propelled by an unvarying, 
unceasing power. (2) The continuance of an erect posture for periods unnaturally 
prolonged and too quickly repeated. (3) The privation of sleep" (in consequence of 
too long working-hours, pain in the legs, and general physical derangement). 
"To these causes are often added low, crowded, dusty, or damp rooms; impure 
air, heated atmospheres, constant perspiration. Hence it is that male children 
particularly, after they have worked some time in mills lose—with very few excep­
tions indeed—the rosy chubbiness of boyhood, and become paler and thinner than 
boys not so employed generally are. Even the draw-boy who stands with his bare 
feet on the earthen floor of his master's shop preserves his appearance much 
better than the mill-boys," because he occasionally goes into the fresh air for a time. 
"But the mill-worker never has a moment's respite except at meals, and never 
gets into the open air except when he is going to look for them. All the adult male 
spinners are pale and thin; they are subject to capricious appetite and dyspepsia; 
all the spinners have been brought up in the mills from their very childhood, it is 
fair to conclude that their mode of life is not favourable to the development of 
the manly forms, seeing that few, or none of them are tall athletic men. Females are 
much less deteriorated in their appearance by mill-work than males." (Very naturally. 
But we shall see that they have their own diseases.) 
So, too, Power**: 
"I can have no hesitation in stating my belief that a large mass of deformity has 
been produced at Bradford by the factory system.... The effect of long and 
continuous work upon the frame and limbs is not indicated by actual deformity 
alone; a more common indication of it is found in a stunted growth, relaxed 
muscles, and slender conformation." 
* General report by Sir D. Barry.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 
1887. 
** Power Report, p. 74.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 

=====第474页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 449 
So, too, F. Sharp, in Leeds, the surgeon* already quoted: 
When I moved from Scarborough to Leeds, "the general appearance of the 
children in Leeds immediately struck me as much more pallid, and also the 
firmness of the fibre as much inferior as what I had seen in Scarborough and the 
adjacent country. Observed also many to be more diminutive for their age.... 
Innumerable cases of scrofula, affections of the lungs, mesenteric diseases, and 
dyspepsia, have also occurred, which I have no doubt, as a professional man, were 
owing to the same cause", the mill-work. "The nervous energy of the body I 
consider to be weakened by the very long hours, and a foundation laid for many 
diseases. Were it not for the individuals who join the mills from the country, the 
factory people would soon be deteriorated." 
So, too, Beaumont, surgeon in Bradford: 
"I also consider the system of working in the factories in and around here 
induces for the most part a peculiar laxity of the whole system, rendering the 
children highly susceptible of either prevailing epidemics or casual medical 
disorders.... I certainly consider the want of wholesome regulations in the most of 
the factories, whether as to ventilation or cleanliness, to be productive in a great 
measure of that peculiar tendency or susceptibility of morbid affections of which 
my own practice affords ample experience." 
Similar testimony is borne by Dr. Hey: 
(1) "I have had an opportunity of observing the effect of the factory system in 
the health of children under the most advantageous circumstances" (in Wood's 
mill, in Bradford, the best arranged of the district, in which he was factory 
surgeon). (2) "This effect is decidedly, and, to a great extent, injurious, even under 
those favourable circumstances. (3) During the year 1832, three-fifths of all the 
children employed in Wood's mill had medical assistance from me; (4) The most 
injurious effect is not in the prevalency of deformed bodies, but debilitated and 
diseased constitutions." (5) All this is greatly improved since the working-hours 
of children have been reduced at Wood's to ten. 
The Commissioner, Dr. Loudon  himself,  who sites these wit­
nesses, says: 
"I think it has been clearly proved that children have been worked a most 
unreasonable and cruel length of time daily, and that even adults have been 
expected to do a certain quantity of labour which scarcely any human being is able 
to endure. The result of this has been, that many have met with a premature 
death; many have been affected constitutionally for life; and the idea of a posterity 
being injured from the shattered frames of the survivors is, physiologically 
speaking, but too well founded." 
And, finally, Dr. Hawkins, in speaking of Manchester: 
"I believe that most travellers are struck by the lowness of stature, the leanness, 
and the paleness which present themselves so commonly to the eye at Manchester, 
* The surgeons in England are scientifically educated as well as the physi­
cians,  and have, in general, medical as well as surgical practice. They are, in 
general, for various reasons, preferred to the physicians.—Note by Engels. (In the 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "surgeons" and "physicians" are 
given in English in brackets.—Erf.) 

=====第475页=====
450 Frederick Engels 
and above all, among the factory classes. I have never been in any town in Great 
Britain nor in Europe in which degeneracy of form and colour from the national 
standard has been so obvious. The married women fall remarkably short of the 
usual characteristics of the English wife.... I cannot help remarking, that the boys 
and girls whom I examined from the Manchester factories very generally exhibited 
a depressed look, and a pallid complexion; none of the alacrity, activity, and 
hilarity of early life shone on their countenances and gestures. A large number of 
both, in reply to my questions, declared that they had no wish to play about on the 
Saturday afternoon and on the Sunday, but that they preferred remaining quiet." 
I add, at once, another passage of Hawkins' report, which only 
half belongs here, but may be quoted here as well as anywhere 
else: 
"Intemperance, debauchery and improvidence are the chief blemishes on the 
character of the factory workpeople, and those evils may easily be traced to habits 
formed under the present system, and springing from it almost inevitably. On all 
sides it is admitted that indigestion, hypochondriasis and languor affect this class of 
the population very widely. After twelve hours of monotonous labour, it is but too 
natural to seek for stimulants of one kind or another; but when we superadd the 
morbid states above alluded to, the transition to spirits is rapid and perpetual." 
For all this testimony of the physicians and commissioners, the 
report itself offers hundreds of cases of  proof.  That the growth of 
young operatives is stunted, by their work, hundreds of statements 
testify; among others, Cowell gives the weight of 46 youths of 17 
years of age, from one Sunday school, of whom 26 employed in 
mills,  averaged 104.5 pounds, and 20 not employed in mills,3 
117.7 pounds. One of the largest manufacturers of Manchester, 
leader of the opposition against the working-men, I think Robert 
Hyde Greg  himself,  said, on one occasion, that if things went on as 
at present, the operatives of Lancashire would soon be a race of 
pigmies.* A recruiting officer** testified that operatives are little 
adapted for military service, looked thin and nervous, and were 
frequently rejected by the surgeons as unfit. In Manchester he 
could hardly get men of five feet eight inches; they were usually 
only five feet six to seven, whereas in the agricultural districts, 
most of the recruits were five feet eight.b 
The men wear out very early in consequence of the conditions 
* This statement is not taken from the report.150 —Note by Engels. 
** Tufnell, p. 59.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "but belonging to the 
working-class".— Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets: "the difference 
between English and Prussian measures is about 2 inches for 5 feet, the English 
measure being shorter." — Ed. 

=====第476页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 451 
under which they live and work. Most of them are unfit for work 
at forty years, a few hold out to forty-five, almost none to fifty 
years of age. This is caused not only by the general enfeeblement 
of the frame, but also very often by a failure of the sight, which is 
a result of mule-spinning, in which the operative is obliged to fix 
his gaze upon a long row of fine, parallel threads, and so greatly 
to. strain the sight. 
Of 1,600 operatives employed in several factories in Harpur and . 
Lanark, but 10 were over 45 years of age; of 22,094 operatives in 
diverse factories in Stockport and Manchester, but 143 were over 
45 years old. Of these 143, 16 were retained as a special favour, 
and one was doing the work of a child. A list of 131 spinners 
contained but seven over 45 years, and yet the whole 131 were 
rejected by the manufacturers, to whom they applied for work, as 
"too old",a and were without means of support by reason of old 
age! Mr. Ashworth, a large manufacturer, admits in a letter to 
Lord Ashley, that, towards the fortieth year, the spinners can no 
longer prepare the required quantity of yarn, and are therefore 
"sometimes" discharged; he calls operatives forty years of age "old 
people"!* Commissioner Mackintosh expresses himself in the same 
way in the report of 1833: 
"Although prepared by seeing childhood occupied in such a manner, it is very 
difficult to believe the ages of the men advanced in years as given by themselves, so 
complete is their premature old age." 
Surgeon Smellie of Glasgow, who treated operatives chiefly, says 
that forty years is old age for them.** And similar evidence may 
be found elsewhere.*** In Manchester, this premature old age 
among the operatives is so universal that almost every man of 
forty would be taken for ten to fifteen years older, while the 
prosperous classes, men as well as women, preserve their appear­
ance exceedingly well if they do not drink too heavily. 
* All taken from Lord Ashley's speech (sitting of Lower House, March 15, 
1844).—  Note by Engels (omitted in the American and English editions— Ed.). 
** Stuart Evidence, p. 101.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (In 
the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "old age" are given in English in 
brackets.— Ed.) 
*** Tufnell Evidence, pp. 3, 6, 15; Hawkins Report, p. 4; Evidence, p. 11, etc., 
etc.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
a In the German editions ot 1845 and 1892 the sentence follows: "Of fifty 
worked-out spinners in Bolton only two were over 50 and the rest did not yet 
average 40 —and all were" etc.— Ed. 

=====第477页=====
452 Frederick Engels 
The influence of factory-work upon the female physique also is 
marked and peculiar. The deformities entailed by long hours of 
work are much more serious among women. Protracted work 
frequently causes deformities of the pelvis, partly in the shape of 
abnormal position and development of the hip bones, partly of 
malformation of the lower portion of the spinal column. 
"Although," says Dr. Loudon in his report, "no cases presented themselves of 
deformed pelvis, and some others of the diseases which have been described, yet 
their ailments are such as every medical man must expect to be the probable 
consequences" of such working-hours for young people, "and they are recorded by 
men of the highest professional and moral character". 
That factory operatives undergo more difficult confinement 
than other women is testified to by several midwives and ac­
coucheurs, and also that they are more liable to miscarriage.* 
Moreover, they suffer from the general enfeeblement common to 
all operatives, and, when pregnant, continue to work in the factory 
up to the hour of delivery, because otherwise they lose their wages 
and are made to fear that they may be replaced if they stop away 
too soon. It frequently happens that women are at work one 
evening and delivered the next morning, and the case is none too 
rare of their being delivered in the factory among the machinery. 
And if the gentlemen of the bourgeoisie find nothing particularly 
shocking in this, their wives will perhaps admit that it is a piece of 
cruelty, an infamous act of barbarism, indirectly to force a 
pregnant woman to work twelve or thirteen hours daily (formerly 
still longer), up to the day of her delivery, in a standing position, 
with frequent stoopings. But this is not all. If these women are not 
obliged to resume work within two weeks, they are thankful, and 
count themselves fortunate. Many come back to the factory after 
eight, and even after three to four days, to resume full work. I 
once heard a manufacturer ask an overlooker: "Is so and so not 
back yet?" "No." "How long since she was confined?" "A week." 
"She might surely have been back long ago. That one over there 
only stays three days." Naturally, fear of being discharged, dread 
of starvation drives her to the factory in spite of her weakness, in 
defiance of her pain. The interest of the manufacturer will not 
brook that his employees stay at home by reason of illness; they 
must not be ill, they must not venture to lie still through a long 
confinement, or he must stop his machinery or trouble his 
supreme head with a temporary change of arrangements; and 
* Hawkins Evidence, pp. 11, 13.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 
1887. 

=====第478页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 453 
rather than dp this, he discharges his people when they begin to 
be ill. Listen*: 
A girl feels very ill, can scarcely do her work. "Why don't you ask for leave to 
stay away?" "Well, sir, the master is queer at letting us off; if we are off a quarter 
of a day we stand a chance of being turned away." 
Or Sir D. Barry**: 
Thomas McDurt, workman, has slight fever. "Cannot venture to be off work 
more than four days, for fear of losing his work." 
And so it goes on in almost all the factories. The employment of 
young girls produces all sorts of irregularities during the period of 
development. In some, especially those who are better fed, the 
heat of the factories hastens this process, so that in single cases, 
girls of thirteen and fourteen3 are wholly mature. Roberton, whom 
I have already cited (mentioned in the Factories' Inquiry Commis­
sion's Report as the "eminent" gynaecologist of Manchester), 
relates in the North of England Medical and Surgical Journal, that he 
had seen a girl of eleven years who was not only a wholly 
developed woman, but pregnant, and that it was by no means rare 
in Manchester for women to be confined at fifteen years of age).151 
In such cases, the influence of the warmth of the factories is the 
same as that of a tropical climate, and, as in such climates, the 
abnormally early development revenges itself by correspondingly 
premature age and debility. On the other hand, retarded develop­
ment of the female constitution occurs, the breasts mature late or 
not at all.*** Menstruation first appears in the seventeenth or 
eighteenth, sometimes in the twentieth year, and is often wholly 
wanting.**** Irregular menstruation, coupled with great pain and 
numerous affections, especially with anaemia, is very frequent, as 
the medical reports unanimously state. 
Children of such mothers, particularly of those who are obliged 
to work during pregnancy, cannot be vigorous. They are, on the 
contrary, described in the report, especially in Manchester, as very 
feeble; and Barry alone asserts that they are healthy, but says 
further, that in Scotland, where his inspection lay, almost no 
married women worked in factories. Moreover, most of the 
factories there are in the country (with the exception of Glasgow), 
* Cowell Evidence, p. 77.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
** Sir D. Barry Evidence, p. 44.— Note  by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
*** Cowell, p. 35.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
**** j-) r Hawkins Evidence, p. 11; Dr. Loudon, p. 14, etc.; Sir D. Barry, p. 5, 
etc.—JVote by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "of twelve to four­
teen".—Ed. 
16-762 

=====第479页=====
454 Frederick Engels 
a circumstance which contributes greatly to the invigoration of the 
children. The operatives' children in the neighbourhood of Man­
chester are nearly all thriving and rosy, while those within the city 
look pale and scrofulous; but with the ninth year the colour 
vanishes suddenly, because all are then sent into the factories, 
when it soon becomes impossible to distinguish the country from 
the city children. 
But besides all this, there are some branches of factory-work 
which have an especially injurious effect. In many rooms of the 
cotton and flax-spinning mills, the air is filled with fibrous dust, 
which produces chest affections, especially among workers in the 
carding and combing-rooms. Some constitutions can bear it, some 
cannot; but the operative has no choice. He must take the room in 
which he finds work, whether his chest is sound or not. The most 
common effects of this breathing of dust are blood-spitting, hard, 
noisy breathing, pains in the chest, coughs, sleeplessness — in 
short, all the symptoms of asthma ending in the worst cases in 
consumption.* Especially unwholesome is the wet spinning of 
linen-yarn which is carried on by young girls and boys. The water 
spirts over them from the spindle, so that the front of their 
clothing is constantly wet through to the skin; and there is always 
water standing on the floor. This is the case to a less degree in the 
doubling-rooms of the cotton mills, and the result is a constant 
succession of colds and affections of the chest. A hoarse, rough 
voice is common to all operatives, but especially to wet spinners 
and doublers. Stuart, Mackintosh, and Sir D. Barry express 
themselves in the most vigorous terms as to the unwholesomeness 
of this work, and the small consideration shown by most of the 
manufacturers for the health of the girls who do it. Another effect 
of flax-spinning is a peculiar deformity of the shoulder, especially 
a projection of the right shoulder-blade, consequent upon the 
nature of the work. This sort of spinning and the throstle-
spinning of cotton frequently produce diseases of the knee-pan, 
which is used to check the spindle during the joining of broken 
threads. The frequent stooping and the bending to the low 
machines common to both these branches of work have, in 
general, a stunting effect upon the growth of the operative. In the 
throstle-room of the cotton mill at Manchester, in which I was 
employed, I do not remember to have seen one single tall, 
* Compare Stuart, pp. 13, 70, 101; Mackintosh, p. 24, etc.; Power Report on 
Nottingham, on Leeds; Cowell, p. 33, etc.; Barry, p. 12 (five cases in one factory), 
pp. 17, 44, 52, 60, etc.; Loudon, p.  13.—  Note by Engeb to the American edition of 
1887. 

=====第480页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 455 
well-built girl; they were all short, dumpy, and badly-formed, 
decidedly ugly in the whole development of the figure. But apart 
from all these diseases and malformations, the limbs of the 
operatives suffer in still another way. The work between the 
machinery gives rise to multitudes of accidents of more or less 
serious nature, which have for the operative the secondary effect 
of unfitting him for his work more or less completely. The most 
common accident is the squeezing off of a single joint of a finger, 
somewhat less common the loss of the whole finger, half or a 
whole hand, an arm, etc., in the machinery. Lockjaw very often 
follows, even upon the lesser among these injuries, and brings 
death with it. Besides the deformed persons, a great number of 
maimed ones may be seen going about in Manchester; this one has 
lost an arm or a part of one, that one a foot, the third half a leg; it 
is like living in the midst of an army just returned from a 
campaign. But the most dangerous portion of the machinery is the 
strapping which conveys motive power from the shaft to the 
separate machines, especially if it contains buckles, which, how­
ever, are rarely used now. Whoever is seized by the strap is carried 
up with lightning speed, thrown against the ceiling above and 
floor below with such force that there is rarely a whole bone left in 
the body, and death follows instantly. Between June 12th and 
August 3rd, 1844, the Manchester Guardian reported the following 
serious accidents (the trifling ones it does not notice): June 12th, a 
boy died in Manchester of lockjaw, caused by his hand being 
crushed between wheels. June 15th, a youth in Saddleworth seized 
by a wheel and carried away with it; died, utterly mangled. June 
29th, a young man at Green Acres Moor, near Manchester, at 
work in a machine shop, fell under the grindstone, which broke 
two of his ribs and lacerated him terribly. July 24th, a girl in 
Oldham died, carried around fifty times by a strap; no bone 
unbroken. July 27th, a girl in Manchester seized by the blower 
(the first machine that receives the raw cotton), and died of 
injuries received. August 3rd, a bobbins turner died in Duken-
field, caught in a strap, every rib broken. In the year 1842, the 
Manchester Infirmary treated 962 cases of wounds and mutilations 
caused by machinery, while the number of all other accidents 
within the district of the hospital was 2,426, so that for five 
accidents from all other causes, two were caused by machinery. 
The accidents which happened in Salford are not included here, 
nor those treated by surgeons in private practice. In such cases, 
whether or not the accident unfits the victim for further work, the 
employer, at best, pays the doctor, or, in very exceptional cases, he 
16* 

=====第481页=====
456 Frederick Engels 
may pay wages during treatment; what becomes of the operative 
afterwards, in case he cannot work, is no concern of the employer. 
The Factory Report says on this subject, that employers must be 
made responsible for all cases, since children cannot take care, and 
adults will take care in their own interest. But the gentlemen who 
write the report are bourgeois, and so they must contradict 
themselves and bring up later all sorts of bosh on the subject of 
the culpable temerity of the operatives.3 
The state of the case is this: If children cannot take care, the 
employment of children must be forbidden. If adults are reckless, 
they must be mere overgrown children on a plane of intelligence 
which does not enable them to appreciate the danger in its full 
scope; and who is to blame for this but the bourgeoisie which 
keeps them in a condition in which their intelligence cannot 
develop? Or the machinery is ill-arranged, and must be sur­
rounded with fencing, to supply which falls to the share of the 
bourgeoisie. Or the operative is under inducements which out­
weigh the threatened danger; he must work rapidly to earn his 
wages, has no time to take care, and for this, too, the bourgeoisie 
is to blame. Many accidents happen, for instance, while the 
operatives are cleaning machinery in motion. Why? Because the 
bourgeois would otherwise oblige the worker to clean the machine­
ry during the free hours while it is not going, and the worker 
naturally is not disposed to sacrifice any part of his free time. 
Every free hour is so precious to the worker that he often risks his 
life twice a week rather than sacrifice one of them to the 
bourgeois. Let the employer take from working-hours the time 
required for cleaning the machinery, and it will never again occur 
to an operative to clean machinery in motion. In short, from 
whatever point of view, the blame falls ultimately on the manufac­
turer, and of him should be required, at the very least, life-long 
support of the incapacitated operative, and support of the victim's 
family in case death follows the accident. In the earliest period of 
manufacture, the accidents were much more numerous in propor­
tion than now, for the machinery was inferior, smaller, more 
crowded, and almost never fenced. But the number is still large 
enough, as the foregoing cases prove, to arouse the grave question 
as to a state of things which permits so many deformities and 
mutilations for the benefit of a single class, and plunges so many 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "But it makes no 
difference", and give the words "culpable temerity" in English in brackets.—Ed. 

=====第482页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 457 
industrious working-people into want and starvation by reason of 
injuries undergone in the service and through the fault of the 
bourgeoisie. 
A pretty list of diseases engendered purely by the hateful 
money-greed of the manufacturers! Women made unfit for 
child-bearing, children deformed, men enfeebled, limbs crushed, 
whole generations wrecked, afflicted with disease and infirmity, 
purely to fill the purses of the bourgeoisie. And when one reads 
of the barbarism of single cases, how children are seized naked in 
bed by the overlookers, and driven with blows and kicks to the 
factory, their clothing over their arms,* how their sleepiness is 
driven off with blows, how they fall asleep over their work 
nevertheless, how one poor child sprang up, still asleep, at the call 
of the overlooker, and mechanically went through the operations 
of its work after its machine was stopped; when one reads how 
children, too tired to go home, hide away in the wool in the 
drying-room to sleep there, and could only be driven out of the 
factory with straps; how many hundreds came home so tired every 
night, that they could eat no supper for sleepiness and want of 
appetite, that their parents found them kneeling by the bedside, 
where they had fallen asleep during their prayers; when one reads 
all this and a hundred other villainies and infamies in this one 
report, all testified to on oath, confirmed by several witnesses, 
deposed by men whom the commissioners themselves declare 
trustworthy; when one reflects that this is a Liberal report, a 
bourgeois report, made for the purpose of reversing the previous 
Tory report, and rehabilitating the pureness of heart of the 
manufacturers, that the commissioners themselves are on the side 
of the bourgeoisie, and report all these things against their own 
will, how can one be otherwise than filled with wrath and 
resentment against a class which boasts of philanthropy and 
self-sacrifice, while its one object is to fill its purse à tout prix? 
Meanwhile, let us listen to the bourgeoisie speaking through the 
mouth of its chosen apostle, 3 Dr. Ure, who relates in his Philosophy 
of Manufactures  ** that the workers have been told that their wages 
bore no proportion to their sacrifices, the good understanding 
between masters and men being thus disturbed. Instead of this, 
* Stuart, p. 39.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
** Philosophy of Manufactures, by Dr. Andrew Ure, p. 277, et seq. —Note by 
Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "lackey" instead of 
"apostle".— Ed. 

=====第483页=====
458 Frederick Engels 
the working-men should have striven to recommend themselves by 
attention and industry, and should have rejoiced in the prosperity 
of their masters. They would then become overseers, superinten­
dents,  and finally partners, and would thus—(Oh! Wisdom, thou 
speakest as the dove!)—"have increased at the same time the 
demand for their companions' labour in the market!" 
"Had it not been for the violent collisions and interruptions resulting from 
erroneous views among the operatives, the factory system would have been 
developed still more rapidly and beneficially."* 
Hereupon follows a long Jeremiad upon the spirit of resistance 
of the operatives, and on the occasion of a strike of the best-paid 
workers, the fine spinners, the following naive observation** 
"In fact, it was their high wages which enabled them to maintain a stipendiary 
committee in affluence, and to pamper themselves into nervous ailments, by a diet 
too rich and exciting for their indoor employments." 
Let us hear how the bourgeois describes the work of children***: 
"I have visited many factories, both in Manchester and in the surrounding 
districts, during a period of several months, entering the spinning-rooms unexpect­
edly, and often alone, at different times of the day, and I never saw a single 
instance of corporal chastisement inflicted on a child; nor, indeed, did I ever see 
children in ill-humour. They seemed to be always cheerful and alert; taking 
pleasure in the light play of their muscles, enjoying the mobility natural to their 
age. The scene of industry, so far from exciting sad emotions, in my mind, was 
always exhilarating. It was delightful to observe the nimbleness with which they 
pieced broken ends, as the mule carriage began to recede from the fixed roller 
beam, and to see them at leisure, after a few seconds' exercise of their tiny fingers, 
to amuse themselves in any attitude they chose, till the stretch and winding on were 
once more completed. The work of these lively elves seemed to resemble a sport, in 
which habit gave them a pleasing dexterity. Conscious of their skill, they were 
delighted to show it off to any stranger. As to exhaustion by the day's work, they 
evinced no trace of it on emerging from the mill in the evening; for they 
immediately began to skip about any neighbouring play-ground, and to commence 
their little games with the same alacrity as boys issuing from a school." 
Naturally! As though the immediate movement of every muscle 
were not an urgent necessity for frames grown at once stiff and 
relaxed! But Ure should have waited to see whether this momen­
tary excitement had not subsided after a couple of minutes. And 
* Ibid., p. 277.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
** Ibid., p. 298.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
*** Ibid., p. 301.—  Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (The German 
editions of 1845 and 1892 give this quotation abridged, with the words "cheerful", 
"taking pleasure", "delightful" and "lively" in brackets in English after their 
German equivalents.—Ed.) 

=====第484页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 459 
besides, Ure could see this whole performance only in the 
afternoon after five or six hours' work, but not in the evening! As 
to the health of the operatives, the bourgeois has the boundless 
impudence to cite the report of 1833 just quoted in a thousand 
places, as testimony for the excellent health of these people; to try 
to prove by detached and garbled quotations that no trace of 
scrofula can be found among them, and, what is quite true, that 
the factory system frees them from all acute diseases (that they 
have every variety of chronic affection instead he naturally 
conceals). To explain the impudence with which our friend Ure 
palms off the grossest falsehoods upon the English public, it must 
be known that the report consists of three large folio volumes, 
which it never occurs to a well-fed English bourgeois to study 
through. Let us hear further how he expresses himself as to the 
Factory Act of 1833, passed by the Liberal bourgeoisie, and 
imposing only the most meagre limitations upon the manufactur­
ers, as we shall see. This law, especially its compulsory education 
clause, he calls an absurd and despotic measure directed against 
the manufacturers, through which all children under twelve years 
of age have been thrown out of employment; and with what 
results? The children thus discharged from their light and useful 
occupation receive no education whatsoever; cast out from the 
warm spinning-room into a cold world, they subsist only by 
begging and stealing, a life in sad contrast with their steadily 
improving condition in the factory and in Sunday school. Under 
the mask of philanthropy, this law intensifies the sufferings of the 
poor, and will greatly restrict the conscientious manufacturer in 
his useful work, if, indeed, it does not wholly stop him.* 
The ruinous influence of the factory system began at an early 
day to attract general attention. We have already alluded to the 
Apprentices' Act of 1802. Later, towards 1817, Robert Owen, then 
a manufacturer in New Lanark, in Scotland, afterwards founder 
of English Socialism, began to call the attention of the Govern­
ment, by memorials and petitions, to the necessity of legislative 
guarantees for the health of the operatives, and especially of 
children. The late Sir Robert Peel and other philanthropists united 
with him, and gradually secured the Factory Acts of 1819, 1825, 
and 1831, of which the first two were never enforced,152 and the 
last only here and there. This law of 1831, based upon the motion 
of Sir J. C. Hobhouse, provided that in cotton mills no one under 
* Dr. Andrew Ure, Philosophy of Manufactures, pp. 405, 406, et seq. — Note by 
Engels to the American edition of 1887. 

=====第485页=====
460 Frederick' Engels 
twenty-one should be employed between half-past seven at night 
and half-past five in the morning; and that in all factories young 
persons under eighteen should work no longer than twelve hours 
daily, and nine hours on Saturday. But since operatives could not 
testify against their masters without being discharged, this law 
helped matters very little. In the great cities, where the operatives 
were more restive, the larger manufacturers came to an agreement 
among themselves to obey the law; but even there, there were 
many who, like the employers in the country, did not trouble 
themselves about it. Meanwhile, the demand for a ten hours' law 
had become lively among the operatives; that is, for a law which 
should forbid all operatives under eighteen years of age to work 
longer than ten hours daily; the Trades Unions, by their agitation, 
made this demand general throughout the manufacturing popula­
tion; the philanthropic section of the Tory party, then led by 
Michael Sadler, seized upon the plan, and brought it before 
Parliament. Sadler obtained a parliamentary committee for the 
investigation of the factory system, and this committee reported in 
1832.153  Its report was emphatically partisan, composed by strong 
enemies of the factory system, for party ends. Sadler permitted 
himself to be betrayed by his noble enthusiasm into the most 
distorted and erroneous statements, drew from his witnesses by 
the very form of his questions, answers which contained the truth, 
but truth in a perverted form. The manufacturers themselves, 
incensed at a report which represented them as monsters, now 
demanded an official investigation; they knew that an exact report 
must, in this case, be advantageous to them; they knew that Whigs, 
genuine bourgeois, were at the helm, with whom they were upon 
good terms, whose principles were opposed to any restriction 
upon manufacture. They obtained a commission, in due order, 
composed of Liberal bourgeois, whose report I have so often cited. 
This comes somewhat nearer the truth than Sadler's, but its 
deviations therefrom are in the opposite direction. On every page 
it betrays sympathy with the manufacturers, distrust of the Sadler 
report, repugnance to the working-men agitating independently 
and the supporters of the Ten Hours' Bill. It nowhere recognises 
the right of the working-man to a life worthy of a human being, to 
independent activity, and opinions of his own. It reproaches the 
operatives that in sustaining the Ten Hours' Bill they thought, not 
of the children only, but of themselves as well; it calls the 
working-men engaged in the agitation demagogues, ill-intentioned, 
malicious, etc., is written, in short, on the side of the bourgeoisie; 
and still it cannot whitewash the manufacturers, and still it leaves 

=====第486页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 461 
such a mass of infamies upon the shoulders of the employers, that 
even after this report, the agitation for the Ten Hours' Bill, the 
hatred against the manufacturers, and the committee's severest 
epithets applied to them are all fully justified. But there was the 
one difference, that whereas the Sadler report accuses the man­
ufacturers of open, undisguised brutality, it now became evident 
that this brutality was chiefly carried on under the mask of 
civilisation and humanity. Yet Dr. Hawkins, the medical commis­
sioner for Lancashire, expresses himself decidedly in favour of 
the Ten Hours' Bill in the opening lines of his report, and 
Commissioner Mackintosh explains that his own report does not 
contain the whole truth, because it is very difficult to induce the 
operatives to testify against their employers, and because the 
manufacturers, besides being forced into greater concessions 
towards their operatives by the excitement among the latter, are 
often prepared for the inspection of the factories, have them 
swept, the speed of the machinery reduced, etc. In Lancashire 
especially they resorted to the device of bringing the overlookers 
of work-rooms before the commissioners, and letting them testify 
as working-men to the humanity of the employers, the wholesome 
effects of the work, and the indifference, if not the hostility of the 
operatives, towards the Ten Hours' Bill. But these are not genuine 
working-men; they are deserters from their class, who have 
entered the service of the bourgeoisie for better pay, and fight in 
the interests of the capitalists against the workers. Their interest is 
that of the capitalists, and they are, therefore, almost more hated 
by the workers than the manufacturers themselves. 
And yet this report suffices wholly to exhibit the most shameful 
recklessness of the manufacturing bourgeoisie towards its em­
ployees, the whole infamy of the industrial exploiting system in its 
full inhumanity. Nothing is more revolting than to compare the 
long register of diseases and deformities engendered by overwork, 
in this report, with the cold, calculating political economy of the 
manufacturers, by which they try to prove that they, and with 
them all England, must go to ruin, if they should be forbidden to 
cripple so and so many children every year. The language of Dr. 
Ure alone, which I have quoted, would be yet more revolting if it 
were not so preposterous. 
The result of this report was the Factory Act of 1833, which 
forbade the employment of children under nine years of age 
(except in silk mills), limited the working-hours of children 
between 9-13 years to 48 per week, or 9 hours in any one day at 
the utmost; that of young persons from 14-18 years of age to 69 

=====第487页=====
462 Frederick Engels 
per week, or 12 on any one day as the maximum, provided for an 
hour and a half as the minimum interval for meals, and repeated 
the total prohibition of night-work for persons under eighteen 
years of age. Compulsory school attendance two hours daily was 
prescribed for all children under fourteen years, and the manufac­
turer declared punishable in case of employing children without a 
certificate of age from the factory surgeon, and a certificate of 
school attendance from the teacher. As recompense, the employer 
was permitted to withdraw one penny from the child's weekly 
earnings to pay the teacher. Further, surgeons and inspectors were 
appointed to visit the factories at all times, take testimony of 
operatives on oath, and enforce the law by prosecution before a 
Justice of the Peace. This is the law against which Dr. Ure inveighs 
in such unmeasured terms! 
The consequence of this law, and especially of the appointment 
of inspectors, was the reduction of working-hours to an average of 
twelve to thirteen, and the superseding of children as far as 
possible. Hereupon some of the most crying evils disappeared 
almost wholly. Deformities arose now only in cases of weak 
constitution, and the effects of overwork became much less 
conspicuous. Nevertheless, enough testimony remains to be found 
in the Factory Report, that the lesser evils, swelling of the ankles, 
weakness and pain in the legs, hips, and back, varicose veins, 
ulcers on the lower extremities, general weakness, especially of the 
pelvic region, nausea, want of appetite alternating with unnatural 
hunger, indigestion, hypochondria, affections of the chest in 
consequence of the dust and foul atmosphere of the factories, etc., 
etc., all occur among employees subject to the provisions of Sir J. 
C. Hobhouse's Law (of 1831), which prescribes twelve to thirteen 
hours as the maximum. The reports from Glasgow and Manches­
ter are especially worthy of attention in this respect. These evils 
remained too, after the law of 1833, and continue to undermine 
the health of the working-class to this day. Care has been taken to 
give the brutal profit-greed of the bourgeoisie a hypocritical, 
civilised form, to restrain the manufacturers through the arm of 
the law from too conspicuous villainies, and thus to give them a 
pretext for self-complacently parading their sham philanthropy. 
That is all. If a new commission were appointed today, it would 
find things pretty much as before. As to the extemporised 
compulsory attendance at school, it remained wholly a dead letter, 
since the Government failed to provide good schools. The man­
ufacturers employed as teachers worn-out operatives, to whom 
they sent the children two hours daily, thus complying with the 

=====第488页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 463 
letter of the law; but the children learned nothing. And even the 
reports of the factory inspectors, which are limited to the scope of 
the inspector's duties, i.e., the enforcement of the Factory Act, 
give data enough to justify the conclusion that the old evils 
inevitably remain. Inspectors Horner and Saunders,154 in their 
reports for October and December, 1843, state that, in a number 
of branches in which the employment of children can be dis­
pensed with or superseded by that of adults,3 the working-day is 
still fourteen to sixteen hours, or even longer. Among the 
operatives in these branches they found numbers of young people 
who had just outgrown the provisions of the law. Many employers 
disregard the law, shorten the meal times, work children longer 
than is permitted, and risk prosecution, knowing that the possible 
fines are trifling in comparison with the certain profits derivable 
from the offence. Just at present especially, while business is 
exceptionally brisk, they are under great temptation in this 
respect. 
Meanwhile the agitation for the Ten Hours' Bill by no means 
died out among the operatives; in 1839 it was under full headway 
once more, and Sadler's place, he having died, was filled in the 
House of Commons by Lord Ashley* andb Richard Oastler, both 
Tories. Oastler especially, who carried on a constant agitation in 
the factory districts, and had been active in the same way during 
Sadler's life, was the particular favourite of the working-men. 
They called him their "good old king", "the king of the factory 
children", and there is not a child in the factory districts that does 
not know and revere him, that does not join the procession which 
moves to welcome him when he enters a town. Oastler vigorously 
opposed the New Poor Law also, and was therefore imprisoned 
for debt by a Mr. Thornhill,c on whose estate he was employed as 
agent, and to whom he owed money. The Whigs offered repeated­
ly to pay his debt and confer other favours upon him if he would 
* Afterwards Earl of Shaftesbury, died 1885.— Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892 but omitted in the 
German edition of 1892 — Ed.). 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "who were otherwise 
unemployed".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and, outside the House, by 
Richard Oastler".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "Mr. Thornhill, a Whig". 
Concerning the New Poor Law, see below, pp. 571-73.— Ed. 

=====第489页=====
464 Frederick Engels 
only give up his agitation against the Poor Law. But in vain; he 
remained in prison, whence he published his Fleet Papers against 
the factory system and the Poor Law. 
The Tory Government of 1841 turned its attention once more 
to the Factory Acts. The Home Secretary, Sir James Graham, 
proposed, in 1843, a bill restricting the working-hours of children 
to six and  one-half,  and making the enactments for compulsory 
school attendance more effective, the principal point in this 
connection being a provision for better schools. This bill was, 
however, wrecked by the jealousy of the dissenters155; for, al­
though compulsory religious instruction was not extended to the 
children of dissenters, the schools provided for were to be placed 
under the general supervision of the Established Church, and the 
Bible made the general reading-book, religion being thus made 
the foundation of all instruction, whence the dissenters felt 
themselves threatened. The manufacturers and the Liberals gener­
ally united with them, the working-men were divided by the 
Church question, and therefore inactive. The opponents of the 
bill, though outweighed in the great manufacturing towns, such as 
Salford and Stockport, and able in others, such as Manchester, to 
attack certain of its points only, for fear of the working-men, 
collected nevertheless nearly two million signatures for a petition 
against it, and Graham allowed himself to be so far intimidated as 
to withdraw the whole bill. The next year he omitted the school 
clauses, and proposed that, instead of the previous provisions, 
children between eight and thirteen years should be restricted to 
six and one-half hours, and so employed as to have either the 
whole morning or the whole afternoon free; that young people 
between thirteen and eighteen years, and all females, should be 
limited to twelve hours; and that the hitherto frequent evasions of 
the law should be prevented. Hardly had he proposed this bill, 
when the ten hours' agitation was begun again more vigorously 
than ever. Oastler had just then regained his liberty; a number of 
his friends and a collection among the workers had paid his debt, 
and he threw himself into the movement with all his might. The 
defenders of the Ten Hours' Bill in the House of Commons had 
increased in numbers, the masses of petitions supporting it which 
poured in from all sides brought them allies, and on March 19th, 
1844,  Lord Ashley carried, with a majority of 179 to 170, a 
resolution that the word "Night" in the Factory Act should 
express the time from six at night to six in the morning, whereby 
the prohibition of night-work came to mean the limitation of 
working-hours to twelve, including free hours, or ten hours of 

=====第490页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 465 
actual work a day. But the Ministry did not agree to this. Sir 
James Graham began to threaten resignation from the Cabinet, 
and at the next vote on the bill the House rejected by a small 
majority both ten and twelve hours. Graham and Peel now 
announced that they should introduce a new bill, and that if this 
failed to pass they should resign. The new bill was exactly the old 
Twelve Hours' Bill with some changes of form, and the same 
House of Commons which had rejected the principal points of this 
bill in March, now3 swallowed it whole. The reason of this was that 
most of the supporters of the Ten Hours' Bill were Tories who let 
fall the bill rather than the Ministry; but be the motives what they 
may, the House of Commons by its votes upon this subject, each 
vote reversing the last, has brought itself into the greatest 
contempt among all the workers, and proved most brilliantly the 
Chartists' assertion of the necessity of its reform. Three members, 
who had formerly voted against the Ministry, afterwards voted for 
it and rescued it. In all the divisions, the bulk of the opposition 
voted for and the bulk of its own party against the Ministry.* The 
foregoing propositions of Graham touching the employment of 
children six and one-half and of all other operatives twelve hoursb 
are now legislative provisions, and by them and by the limitation 
of overwork for making up time lost through breakdown of 
machinery or insufficient water-power by reason of frost or 
drought,c a working-day of more than twelve hours has been 
made well-nigh impossible. There remains, however, no doubt 
that, in a very short time, the Ten Hours' Bill will really be 
adopted.157 The manufacturers are naturally all against it; there 
are perhaps not ten who are for it; they have used every 
honourable and dishonourabje means against this dreaded meas­
ure, but with no other result than that of drawing down upon 
them the ever-deepening hatred of the working-men. The bill will 
pass.  What the working-men will do they can do, and that they will 
have this bill they proved last spring. The economic arguments of 
the manufacturers that a Ten Hours' Bill would increase the cost 
* It is notorious that the House of Commons made itself ridiculous a second 
time in the same session in the same way on the Sugar Question, when it first 
voted against the Ministry and then for it, after an application of the ministerial 
whip.—  Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in May".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "concerning a 6 /2-and 12-hour 
working-day respectively for the two categories of workers".— Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and other less important 
limitations".—Ed. 

=====第491页=====
466 Frederick Engels 
of production and incapacitate the English producers for competi­
tion in foreign markets, and that wages must fall, are all half true; 
but they prove nothing except this, that the industrial greatness of 
England can be maintained only through the barbarous treatment 
of the operatives, the destruction of their health, the social, 
physical, and mental decay of whole generations. Naturally, if the 
Ten Hours' Bill were a final measure, it must ruin England; but 
since it must inevitably bring with it other measures which must 
draw England into a path wholly different from that hitherto 
followed, it can only prove an advance. 
Let us turn to another side of the factory system which cannot 
be remedied by legislative provisions so easily as the diseases now 
engendered by it. We have already alluded in a general way to the 
nature of the employment, and enough in detail to be able to 
draw certain inferences from the facts given. The supervision of 
machinery, the joining of broken threads, is no activity which 
claims the operative's thinking powers, yet it is of a sort which 
prevents him from occupying his mind with other things. We have 
seen, too, that this work affords the muscles no opportunity for 
physical activity. Thus it is, properly speaking, not work, but 
tedium, the most deadening, wearing process conceivable. The 
operative is condemned to let his physical and mental powers 
decay in this utter monotony, it is his mission to be bored every 
day and all day long from his eighth year. Moreover, he must not 
take a moment's rest; the engine moves unceasingly; the wheels, 
the straps, the spindles hum and rattle in his ears without a pause, 
and if he tries to snatch one instant, there is the overlooker at his 
back with the book of fines. This condemnation to be buried alive 
in the mill, to give constant attention to the tireless machine is felt 
as the keenest torture by the operatives, and its action upon mind 
and body is in the long run stunting in the highest degree. There 
is no better means of inducing stupefaction than a period of 
factory-work, and if the operatives have, nevertheless, not only 
rescued their intelligence, but cultivated and sharpened it more 
than other working-men, they have found this possible only in 
rebellion against their fate and against the bourgeoisie, the sole 
subject on which under all circumstances they can think and feel 
while at work. Or, if this indignation against the bourgeoisie does 
not become the supreme passion of the working-man, the inevita­
ble consequence is drunkenness and all that is generally called 
demoralisation. The physical enervation and the sickness, universal 
in consequence of the factory system, were enough to induce 
Commissioner Hawkins to attribute this demoralisation thereto as 

=====第492页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 467 
inevitable; how much more when mental lassitude is added to 
them, and when the influences already mentioned which tempt 
every working-man to demoralisation, make themselves felt here 
too! There is no cause for surprise, therefore, that in the 
manufacturing towns especially, drunkenness and sexual excesses 
have reached the pitch which I have already described.* 
Further, the slavery in which the bourgeoisie holds the pro­
letariat chained, is nowhere more conspicuous than in the factory 
system. Here ends all freedom in law and in fact. The operative 
must be in the mill at half-past five in the morning; if he comes a 
couple of minutes too late, he is fined; if he comes ten minutes too 
late, he is not let in until breakfast is over, and a quarter of the 
day's wages is withheld, though he loses only two and one-half 
hours'  work out of twelve. He must eat, drink, and sleep at 
command. For satisfying the most imperative needs, he is vouch­
safed the least possible time absolutely required by them. Whether 
his dwelling is a half-hour or a whole one removed from the factory 
does not concern his employer. The despotic bell calls him from 
his bed, his breakfast, his dinner. 
What a time he has of it, too, inside the factory! Here the 
employer is absolute law-giver; he makes regulations at will, 
changes and adds to his codex at pleasure, and even, if he inserts 
the craziest  stuff,  the courts say to the working-man: 
"You were your own master, no one forced you to agree to such a contract if 
you did not wish to; but now, when you have freely entered into it, you must be 
bound by it." 
And so the working-man only gets into the bargain the mockery 
of the Justice of the Peace who is a bourgeois  himself,  and of the 
law which is made by the bourgeoisie. Such decisions have been 
* Let us hear another competent judge: "When this example [i.e., of the Irish] 
is considered in connexion with the unremitted labour of the whole population 
engaged in the various branches of the cotton manufacture, our wonder will be less 
excited by their fatal demoralisation. Prolonged and exhausting labour, continued 
from day to day, and from year to year, is not calculated to develop the intellectual 
or moral faculties of man. The dull routine of a ceaseless drudgery, in which the 
same mechanical process is incessantly repeated, resembles the torment of 
Sisyphus — the toil, like the rock, recoils perpetually on the wearied operative. The 
mind gathers neither stores nor strength from the constant extension and 
retraction of the same muscles. The intellect slumbers in supine inertness; but the 
grosser parts of our nature attain a rank development. To condemn man to such 
severity of toil is, in some measure, to cultivate in him the habits of an animal. He 
becomes reckless. He disregards the distinguishing appetites and habits of his 
species. He neglects the comforts and delicacies of life. He lives in squalid 
wretchedness, on meagre food, and expends his superfluous gains in de­
bauchery."— Dr. J. Kay.— Note by Engels. 

=====第493页=====
468 Frederick Engels 
given often enough. In October, 1844, the operatives of Kennedy's 
mill, in Manchester, struck. Kennedy prosecuted them on the 
strength of a regulation placarded in the mill, that at no time 
more than two operatives in one room may quit work at once. 
And the court decided in his favour, giving the working-men the 
explanation cited above.* And such rules as these usually are! For 
instance: 1. The doors are closed ten minutes after work begins, 
and thereafter no one is admitted until the breakfast hour; 
whoever is absent during this time forfeits 3d. per loom. 2. Every 
power-loom weaver detected absenting himself at another time, 
while the machinery is in motion, forfeits for each hour and each 
loom, 3d. Every person who leaves the room during working-
hours,  without obtaining permission from the overlooker, forfeits 
3d. 3. Weavers who fail to supply themselves with scissors forfeit, 
per day, Id. 4. All broken shuttles, brushes, oil-cans, wheels, 
window-panes, etc., must be paid for by the weaver. 5. No weaver 
to stop work without giving a week's notice. The manufacturer 
may dismiss any employee without notice for bad work or 
improper behaviour. 6. Every operative detected speaking to 
another, singing or whistling, will be fined 6d.; for leaving his 
place during working-hours, 6d. Another copy of factory regula­
tions lies before me, according to which every operative who 
comes three minutes too late, forfeits the wages for a quarter of 
an hour, and every one who comes twenty minutes too late, for a 
quarter of a day. Every one who remains absent until breakfast 
forfeits a shilling on Monday, and sixpence every other day of the 
week, etc., etc. This last is the regulation of the Phoenix Works in 
Jersey Street, Manchester.** It may be said that such rules are 
necessary in a great, complicated factory, in order to insure the 
harmonious working of the different parts; it may be asserted that 
such a severe discipline is as necessary here as in an army. This 
may be so, but what sort of a social order is it which cannot be 
maintained without such shameful tyranny? Either the end sanc­
tifies the means, or the inference of the badness of the end from 
the badness of the means is justified. Every one who has served as 
a soldier knows what it is to be subjected even for a short time to 
military discipline. But these operatives are condemned from their 
ninth year to their death to live under the sword, physically and 
mentally. They are worse slaves than the Negroes in America, for 
* Manchester Guardian, October 30th.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 
1887. 
** Stubborn Facts, p. 9 et seq.— Note by Engels. 

=====第494页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 469 
they are more sharply watched, and yet it is demanded of them 
that they shall live like human beings, shall think and feel like 
men! Verily, this they can do only under glowing hatred towards 
their oppressors, and towards that order of things which places 
them in such a position, which degrades them to machines. But it 
is far more shameful yet, that according to the universal testimony 
of the operatives, numbers of manufacturers collect the fines 
imposed upon the operatives with the most heartless severity, and 
for the purpose of piling up extra profits out of the farthings thus 
extorted from the impoverished proletarians. Leach asserts, too, 
that the operatives often find the factory clock moved forward a 
quarter of an hour and the doors shut, while the clerk moves 
about with the fines-book inside, noting the many names of the 
absentees. Leach claims to have counted ninety-five operatives thus 
shut out, standing before a factory, whose clock was a quarter of 
an hour slower than the town clocks at night, and a quarter of an 
hour faster in the morning. The Factory Report relates similar 
facts.  In one factory the clock was set back during working-hours, 
so that the operatives worked overtime without extra pay; in 
another, a whole quarter of an hour overtime was worked; in a 
third, there were two clocks, an ordinary one and a machine clock, 
which registered the revolutions of the main shaft; if the machin­
ery went slowly, working-hours were measured by the machine 
clock until the number of revolutions due in twelve hours was 
reached; if work went well, so that the number was reached before 
the usual working-hours were ended, the operatives were forced 
to toil on to the end of the twelfth hour. The witness adds that he 
had known girls who had good work, and who had worked 
overtime, who, nevertheless, betook themselves to a life of pros­
titution rather than submit to this tyranny.* To return to the fines, 
Leach relates having repeatedly seen women in the last period of 
pregnancy fined 6d. for the offence of sitting down a moment to 
rest. Fines for bad work are wholly arbitrary; the goods are 
examined in the wareroom, and the supervisor charges the fines 
upon a list without even summoning the operative, who only 
learns that he has been fined when the overlooker pays his wages, 
and the goods have perhaps been sold, or certainly been placed 
beyond his reach. Leach has in his possession such a fines list, ten 
feet long, and amounting to £35 17s. lOd. He relates that in the 
factory where this list was made, a new supervisor was dismissed 
for fining too little, and so bringing in five pounds too little 
* Drinkwater Evidence, p. 80.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 

=====第495页=====
470 Frederick Engels 
weekly.* And I repeat that I know Leach to be a thoroughly 
trustworthy man incapable of a falsehood. 
But the operative is his employer's slave in still other respects. If 
his wife or daughter finds favour in the eyes of the master, a 
command, a hint suffices, and she must place herself at his 
disposal. When the employer wishes to supply with signatures a 
petition in favour of bourgeois interests, he need only send it to 
his mill. If he wishes to decide a Parliamentary election, he sends 
his enfranchised operatives in rank and file to the polls, and they 
vote for the bourgeois candidate whether they will or no. If he 
desires a majority in a public meeting, he dismisses them half-an-
hour earlier than usual, and secures them places close to the 
platform, where he can watch them to his satisfaction. 
Two further arrangements contribute especially to force the 
operative under the dominion of the manufacturer; the Truck 
system and the Cottage system.3 The truck system, the payment of 
the operatives in goods, was formerly universal in England. The 
manufacturer opens a shop, "for the convenience of the opera­
tives,  and to protect them from the high prices of the petty 
dealers". Here goods of all sorts are sold to them on creditb; and 
to keep the operatives from going to the shops where they could 
get their goods more cheaply — the "Tommy shops" usually 
charging twenty-five to thirty per cent more than others—wages are 
paid in requisitions on the shop instead of money. The general in­
dignation against this infamous system led to the passage of the 
Truck Act in 1831, by which, for most employees, payment in truck 
orders was declared void and illegal, and was made punishable by 
fine;  but, like most other English laws, this has been enforced only 
here and there. In the towns it is carried out comparatively 
efficiently; but in the country, the truck system, disguised or 
undisguised, flourishes. In the town of Leicester, too, it is very 
common. There lie before me nearly a dozen convictions for this 
offence, dating from the period between November, 1843, and 
June,  1844, and reported, in part, in the Manchester Guardian and, 
in part, in the Northern Star. The system is, of course, less openly 
* Stubborn Facts, pp. 13-17.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (The 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 have after "five pounds" the German equivalent 
"34 talers" in brackets.— Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the terms "Truck system", 
"Cottage system", "Tommy-shops" and "Truck Act" in English.— Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "on his account" instead of "on 
credit".— Ed. 

=====第496页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 471 
carried on at present; wages are usually paid in cash, but the 
employer still has means enough at command to force him to 
purchase his wares in the truck shop and nowhere else. Hence it is 
difficult to combat the truck system, because it can now be carried 
on under cover of the law,3 provided only that the operative 
receives his wages in money. The Northern Star of April 27th, 
1844,  publishes a letter from an operative of Holmfirth, near 
Huddersfield, in Yorkshire, which refers to a manufacturer of the 
name of Bowers, as follows: 
"It is almost strainge to see that the accursed truck sistim should exist to the 
enormoust extent that it dose in Holmfirth, and no one to be found to have the 
moral courage to attempt to put a stop to it. Thaire are a greate many honest 
handloome weavers that is suffering by that accurssed sistim. This is one specimen. 
Out of the many of that precious freetraid crew,* thaire is one manufacturer that 
as the curse of the whole neighbourhood upon im, for is baseness towards is 
weavers. When they finnish a warp, which comes to £1 14s, or £1 16s, he gives 
them £1, and the rest in goods, wearing apparel, at 40 or 50 per sent dearer then 
at the regular shopkeeppers, and many a time the goods are rotton. But as the 
Free-Trade Mercury** says by the factory labour, 'they are not bound to take it; its 
quite optional'. O, yes; but thay must eather take it or starve. If thay whant any 
more than the £1 os od, thay must wait of a warp a week or a fortnight; but if thay 
take the £1, os od and the goods, thaire is always a warp for them. This is free 
traidism. Lord Brougham says 'we should lay something by in our young days, that 
we may be independent in our old age of parochial  relief.  Must we lay by these 
rotton goods? If this did not come from a lord, thay would think is brains wear as 
rotton as the goods wee got for our labour. When the unstampt newspapers wear 
in circulation thaire wear no lack of informers in Holmfirth. Thaire wear the 
Blyths, the Estwoods, &,: but wear are they now? O, but this is quite different. Our 
truckster is one of the free trading pious crew. He goes to the church twise every 
Sunday, and repeats after the parson very fervently: 'we have left undone those 
things wich we hought to have done; we have done those things wich we hought 
not to have done; and thaire is no help in us; but spare us, good Lord." "Yes, spare 
us wile morning, and we will pay our weavers wages in rotton goods again." 
The Cottage system looks much more innocent and arose in a 
much more harmless way, though it has the same enslaving 
influence upon the employee. In the neighbourhood of the mills 
in the country, there is often a lack of dwelling accommodation 
* Supporters of the Anti-Corn I^aw League.— Note by Engels (omitted in the 
authorised English edition — Ed.). 
** Leeds Mercury, a radical bourgeois newspaper.— Note by Engels (omitted in the 
authorised English edition — Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have, instead of the foregoing 
sentence: "Hence it is rarely possible to get at the manufacturers who practise the 
Truck system, since they can now pursue their infamous practices under cover of 
the law." — Ed. 
b In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the author explains that these 
words are taken from the Anglican litany.—Ed. 

=====第497页=====
472 Frederick Engels 
for the operatives. The manufacturer is frequently obliged to 
build such dwellings and does so gladly, as they yield great 
advantages, besides the interest upon the capital invested.3 If any 
owner of working-men's dwellings averages about six per cent on 
his invested capital, it is safe to calculate that the manufacturer's 
cottages yield twice this rate; for so long as his factory does not 
stand perfectly idle he is sure of occupants, and of occupants who 
pay punctually. He is therefore spared the two chief disadvantages 
under which other house-owners labour; his cottages never stand 
empty, and he runs no risk. But the rent of the cottages is as high 
as though these disadvantages were in full force, and by obtaining 
the same rent as the ordinary house-owner, the manufacturer, at 
cost of the operatives, makes a brilliant investment at twelve to 
fourteen per cent. For it is clearly unjust that he should make 
twice as much profit as other competing house-owners, who at the 
same time are excluded from competing with him. But it implies a 
double wrong, when he draws his fixed profit from the pockets of 
the non-possessing class, which must consider the expenditure of 
every penny. He is used to that, however, he whose whole wealth 
is gained at the cost of his employees. But this injustice becomes 
an infamy when the manufacturer, as often happens, forces his 
operatives, who must occupy his houses on pain of dismissal, to 
pay a higher rent than the ordinary one, or even to pay rent for 
nouses in which they do not live! The Halifax Guardian, quoted by 
the Liberal Sun,* asserts that hundreds of operatives in Ashton-
under-Lyne, Oldham, and Rochdale, etc., are forced by their 
employers to pay house-rent whether they occupy the house or 
not.158 The cottage system is universal in the country districts; it 
has created whole villages, and the manufacturer usually has little 
or no competition against his houses, so that he can fix his price 
regardless of any market rate, indeed at his pleasure. And what 
power does the cottage system give the employer over his 
operatives in disagreements between master and men? If the latter 
strike, he need only give them notice to quit his premises, and the 
notice need only be a week; after that time the operative is not 
only without bread but without a shelter, a vagabond at the mercy 
of the law which sends him, without fail, to the treadmill.0 
* Sun, a London daily; end of November, 1843.—Note by Engels. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the end of the sentence reads as 
follows: "since they bring him a good profit upon the capital he has invested".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "to the treadmill "for a 
month".— Ed. 

=====第498页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 473 
Such is the factory system sketched as fully as my space permits, 
and with as little partisan spirit as the heroic deeds of the 
bourgeoisie against the defenceless workers permit—deeds to­
wards which it is impossible to remain indifferent, towards which 
indifference were a crime. Let us compare the condition of the 
free Englishman of 1845 with the Saxon serf under the lash of the 
Norman barons of 1145. The serf was glebae adscriptus, bound to 
the soil, so is the free working-man through the cottage system. 
The serf owed his master the jus primae noctis, the right of the first 
night—the free working-man must, on demand, surrender to his 
master not only that, but the right of every night. The serf could 
acquire no property; everything that he gained, his master could 
take from him; the free working-man has no property, can gain 
none by reason of the pressure of competition, and what even the 
Norman baron did not do, the modern manufacturer does. 
Through the truck system, he assumes every day the administra­
tion in detail of the things which the worker requires for his 
immediate necessities. The relation of the lord of the soil to the 
serf was regulated by the prevailing customs and by laws which 
were obeyed, because they corresponded to them. 3 The free 
working-man's relation to his master is regulated by laws which are 
not obeyed, because they correspond neither with the interests of 
the employer nor with the prevailing customs. The lord of the soil 
could not separate the serf from the land, nor sell him apart from 
it, and since almost all the land was fief and there was no capital, 
practically could not sell him at all. The modern bourgeois forces 
the working-man to sell  himself.  The serf was the slave of the 
piece of land on which he was born, the working-man is the slave 
of his own necessaries of life and of the money with which he has 
to buy them — both are slaves of a thing. The serf had a guarantee 
for the means of subsistence in the feudal order of society in 
which every member had his own place. The free working-man 
has no guarantee whatsoever, because he has a place in society 
only when the bourgeoisie can make use of him; in all other cases 
he is ignored, treated as non-existent. The serf sacrificed himself 
for his master in war, the factory operative in peace. The lord of 
the serf was a barbarian who regarded his villain as a head of 
cattle; the employer of operatives is civilised and regards his 
"hand" as a machine. In short, the position of the two is not far 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this sentence reads as follows: "The 
relation of the serf to the lord of the soil was regulated by laws, which were obeyed 
because they corresponded to the customs, and by the customs themselves." — Ed. 

=====第499页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
from equal, and if either is at a disadvantage, it is the free 
working-man. Slaves they both are, with the single difference that 
the slavery of the one is undissembled, open, honest; that of the 
other cunning, sly, disguised, deceitfully concealed from himself 
and every one else, a hypocritical servitude worse than the old. 
The philanthropic Tories were right when they gave the opera­
tives the name white slaves. But the hypocritical disguised slavery 
recognises the right to freedom, at least in outward form; bows 
before a freedom-loving public opinion, and herein lies the 
historic progress as compared with the old servitude, that the 
principle of freedom is affirmed, and the oppressed will one day 
see to it that this principle is carried out.b 
At the close a few stanzas of a poem which voices the sentiments 
of the workers themselves about the factory system. Written by 
Edward P. Mead of Birmingham, it is a correct expression of the 
views prevailing among them.159 
There is a King, and a ruthless King; 
Not a King of the poet's dream; 
But a tyrant fell, white slaves know well, 
And that ruthless King is Steam. 
He hath an arm, an iron arm, 
And tho' he hath but one, 
In that mighty arm there is a charm, 
That millions hath undone. 
Like the ancient Moloch grim, his sire 
In Himmon's vale that stood, 
His bowels are of living fire, 
And children are his food. 
His priesthood are a hungry band, 
Blood-thirsty, proud, and bold; 
'Tis they direct his giant hand, 
In turning blood to gold. 
For filthy gain in their servile chain 
All nature's rights they bind; 
They mock at lovely woman's pain, 
And to manly tears are biind. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "theological" instead of 
"hypocritical". Lower "white slaves" is given in English, followed by the German 
equivalent.— Ed. 
The following paragraph and the poem were omitted from the 1887 
American and 1892 English editions, which, however, included the Author's note 
to this passage.— Ed. 

=====第500页=====
227 
(Sin Äönig lebt, fin jorniger gflrft, 
92ic^t be* ©idjter* geträumte* ÄönigSbilb, 
(Sin Styrann, ben bcr tueifje ©ffatte fennt, 
Unb bec 2>ampf ift bec Äönig h>i(b. 
(Sc Cat einen Krm, einen eifcrnen Strm, 
Unb obgleid) ec nur (Sinen trägt; 
3n bent Arme fdjafft eine Qaubcxtttft, 
2)ie SDKfltonen fdjlägt. 
ffiie ber SWolodj grimm, fein Äljn, ber einft 
3m Ib>Ie $immon faß, 
3ft §euer*g(utb, fein <Singch)eib', 
Unb Äinber ftnb fein  grafj. 
Seine ißriefterfdjaar, bec SWenfdjljett bac, 
Sott »lutburft, ©totj unb SButl}, 
®ie fenfen — o ©djanbM — feine SRiefenljanb 
Unb jaubecn (Bolb au* Slut. 
(Sie tceten in Staub ba* SWenfdjenredjt 
gür ba« fdjnöbe ®olb, ib>en ®ott, 
2)e* SBeibe* ©djmerj ift iljnen ©djerj, 
Se* SRanne* îï»ran' ir>r (Spott. 
SRufU *f* tarent Db> ba* @d§rei'n 
£e* Armen im £obe*Fampf; 
©felette »on §ungfraun unb Änaben füfl'n 
2)ie gotten be* Äönig 2>ampf. 
Sie #ött'n auf Srb'! fie becbreiten ïob, 
•Seit bec Dampf ljerrfdjt, ring* im Stria), 
Senn be* SRenfdjen jeib unb Seele toirb 
©etnorbet brin jugletd). 
3>rum nieber ben 2>ampf, ben SWolodi wilb, 
Krbeitenbe Xaufenbe, afl', 
Stnb't üjm bie $anb, ober unfer Janb 
»ringt ec über «Radjt }U Call! 
Unb feine Sögte grimm, bie 3RiD«£orb*  ftolj, 
©olbftrofcenb unb btuttgroti}, 
©tttrjen mufj fie be* Sode* 3om, 
SBie ba* ©djeufal, iljren ®ott! *) 
*) 3d} b»be »eber Qtxt nodj {Raum, mid) toeitlSufig auf bte (Entgegnungen ber 
15* 
A page from 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England (1845), 
with Edward Mead's poem "The Steam King" 
translated by Engels 

=====第501页=====

=====第502页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 477 
The sighs and groans of Labour's sons 
Are music in their ear, 
And the skeleton shades, of lads and maids, 
In the Steam King's hell appear. 
Those hells upon earth, since the Steam King's birth, 
Have scatter'd around despair; 
For the human mind for Heav'n design'd, 
With the body, is murdered there. 
Then down with the King, the Moloch King, 
Ye working millions all; 
O chain his hand, or our native land 
Is destin'd by him to fall. 
And his Satraps abhor'd, each proud Mill Lord, 
Now gorg'd with gold and blood, 
Must be put down by the nation's frown, 
As well as their monster God.* 
* I have neither time nor space to deal in detail with the replies of the 
manufacturers to the charges made against them for twelve years past. These men 
will not learn because their supposed interest blinds them. As, moreover, many of 
their objections have been met in the foregoing, the following is all that it is 
necessary for me to add: 
You come to Manchester, you wish to make yourself acquainted with the state 
of affairs in England. You naturally have good introductions to respectable people. 
You drop a remark or two as to the condition of the workers. You are made 
acquainted with a couple of the first Liberal manufacturers, Robert Hyde Greg, 
perhaps, Edmund Ashworth, Thomas Ashton, or others. They are told of your 
wishes. The manufacturer understands you, knows what he has to do. He 
accompanies you to his factory in the country; Mr. Greg to Quarrybank in 
Cheshire, Mr. Ashworth to Turton near Bolton, Mr. Ashton to Hyde. He leads you 
through a superb, admirably arranged building, perhaps supplied with ventilators, 
he calls your attention to the lofty, airy rooms, the fine machinery, here and there a 
healthy-looking operative. He gives you an excellent lunch, and proposes to you to 
visit the operatives' homes; he conducts you to the cottages, which look new, clean 
and neat, and goes with you into this one and that one, naturally only to 
overlookers, mechanics, etc., so that you may see "families who live wholly from the 
factory". Among other families you might find that only wife and children work, 
and the husband darns stockings. The presence of the employer keeps you from 
asking indiscreet questions; you find every one well-paid, comfortable, comparative­
ly healthy by reason of the country air; you begin to be converted from your 
exaggerated ideas of misery and starvation. But, that the cottage system makes 
slaves of the operatives, that there may be a truck shop in the neighbourhood, that 
the people hate the manufacturer, this they do not point out to you, because he is 
present. He has built a school, church, reading-room, etc. That he uses the school 
to train children to subordination, that he tolerates in the reading-room such prints 
only as represent the interests of the bourgeoisie, that he dismisses his employees if 
they read Chartist or Socialist papers or books, this is all concealed from you. You 
see an easy, patriarchal relation, you see the life of the overlookers, you see what 
the bourgeoisie promises the workers if they become its slaves, mentally and morally. 
This "country manufacture" has always been what the employers like to show, 
because in it the disadvantages of the factory system, especially from the point of 

=====第503页=====
478 Frederick Engels 
view of health, are, in part, done away with by the free air and surroundings, and 
because the patriarchal servitude of the workers can here be longest maintained. 
Dr. Ure sings a dithyramb upon the theme. But woe to the operatives to whom it 
occurs to think for themselves and become Chartists! For them the paternal 
affection of the manufacturer comes to a sudden end. Further, if you should wish 
to be accompanied through the working-people's quarters of Manchester, if you 
should desire to see the development of the factory system in a factory town, you 
may wait long before these rich bourgeoisie will help you! These gentlemen do not 
know in what condition their employees are nor what they want, and they dare not 
know things which would make them uneasy or even oblige them to act in 
opposition to their own interests. But, fortunately, that is of no consequence: what 
the working-men have to carry out, they carry out for themselves.— Note by Engels. 

=====第504页=====
THE REMAINING BRANCHES 
OF INDUSTRY 
We were compelled to deal with the factory system somewhat at 
length, as it is an entirely novel creation of the industrial period; 
we shall be able to treat the other workers the more briefly, 
because what has been said either of the industrial proletariat in 
general, or of the factory system in particular, will wholly, or in 
part, apply to them. We shall, therefore, merely have to record how 
far the factory system has succeeded in forcing its way into each 
branch of industry, and what other peculiarities these may reveal. 
The four branches comprised under the Factory Act are 
engaged in the production of clothing stuffs. We shall do best if 
we deal next with those workers who receive their materials from 
these factories; and, first of all, with the stocking weavers of 
Nottingham, Derby, and Leicester. Touching these workers, the 
Children's Employment Commission reports that the long work­
ing-hours, imposed by low wages, with a sedentary life and the 
strain upon the eyes involved in the nature of the employment, 
usually enfeeble the whole frame, and especially the eyes. Work at 
night is impossible without a very powerful light produced by 
concentrating the rays of the lamp, making them pass through 
glass globes, which is most injurious to the sight. At forty years of 
age, nearly all wear spectacles. The children employed at spooling 
and hemming usually suffer grave injuries to the health and 
constitution. They work from the sixth, seventh, or eighth year ten 
to twelve hours daily in small, close rooms. It is not uncommon for 
them to faint at their work, to become too feeble for the most 
ordinary household occupation, and so near-sighted as to be 
obliged to wear glasses during childhood. Many were found by the 
commissioners to exhibit all the symptoms of a scrofulous constitu-

=====第505页=====
480 Frederick Engels 
tion, and the manufacturers usually refuse to employ girls who 
have worked in this way as being too weak. The condition of these 
children is characterised as "a disgrace to a Christian country", 
and the wish expressed for legislative interference.* The Factory 
Report adds that the stocking weavers are the worst paid workers 
in Leicester, earning six, or with great effort, seven shillings a 
week, for sixteen to eighteen hours' daily work. Formerly they 
earned twenty to twenty-one shillings, but the introduction of 
enlarged frames has ruined their business; the great majority still 
work with old, small, single frames, and compete with difficulty 
with the progress of machinery. Here, too, every progress is a 
disadvantage for the workers. Nevertheless, Commissioner Power 
speaks of the pride of the stocking weavers that they are free, and 
have no factory bell to measure out the time for their eating, 
sleeping, and working. Their position today is no better than in 
1833,  when the Factory Commission made the foregoing state­
ments; the competition of the Saxon stocking weavers, who have 
scarcely anything to eat, takes care of that. This competition is too 
strong for the English in nearly all foreign markets, and for the 
lower qualities of goods even in the English market. It must be a 
source of rejoicing for the patriotic German stocking weaver that 
his starvation wages force his English brother to starve too! And, 
verily, will he not starve on, proud and happy, for the greater 
glory of German industry, since the honour of the Fatherland 
demands that his table should be bare, his dish half-empty? Ah! it 
is a noble thing this competition, this "race of the nations". In the 
Morning Chronicle, another Liberal sheet, the organ of the 
bourgeoisie par excellence, there were published3 some letters 
from a stocking weaver in Hinckley, describing the condition of 
his fellow-workers. Among other things, he reports 50 families, 
321 persons, who were supported by 109 frames; each frame 
yielded on an average 572 shillings; each family earned an average 
of lis. 4d. weekly. Out of this there was required for house rent, 
frame rent, fuel, light, soap, and needles, together 5s. 10d., so that 
there remained for food, per head daily, lV2d.,b and for clothing 
nothing. 
* Grainger Report. Appendix, Part I, p. F 15, sect. 132-142.—Note  by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892; the German 
editions of 1845 and 1892 give this and similar references in the text— Ed.). 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in December  1843".—  Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in German "15 Prussian 
pfennigs".—Ed. 

=====第506页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 481 
"Eye hath not seen," says the stocking weaver, "ear hath not heard, the heart 
cannot conceive the half of the suffering endured by this poverty-stricken 
people." 160 
Beds were wanting either wholly or in part, the children ran 
about ragged and barefoot; the men said, with tears in their eyes: 
"We never tasted meat this many a day"—"We have almost 
forgotten its taste"; and, finally, some of them worked on Sunday, 
though public opinion pardons anything else more readily than 
this, and the rattling noise of the frame is audible throughout the 
neighbourhood. 
"Look at my children," said one of them, "and ask no more. It is because my 
poverty compels me; I cannot and will not hear my children cry for bread without 
taking the only means honestly to get it. Last Monday morning I rose at two o'clock 
and worked till near midnight. I rose at six o'clock each succeeding morning and 
worked until between eleven and twelve each night. I cannot do it longer. I shall go 
to an untimely grave if I do; I will therefore end my labours at ten o'clock each 
night and make up the time lost by labouring on the Sunday." 
Neither in Leicester, Nottingham, nor Derby have wages risen 
since 1833; and the worst of it is that in Leicester the truck system 
prevails to a great extent, as I have mentioned. It is, therefore, not 
to be wondered at that the weavers of this region take a very 
active part in all working-men's movements, the more active and 
effective because the frames are worked chiefly by men. 
In this stocking weavers' district the lace industry also has its 
headquarters. In the three counties mentioned there are in all 
2,760 lace frames in use, while in all the rest of England there are 
but 787. The manufacture of lace is greatly complicated by a rigid 
division of labour, and embraces a multitude of branches. The 
yarn is first spooled by girls fourteen years of age and upwards, 
winders3; then the spools are set up on the frames by boys, eight 
years old and upwards, threaders, who pass the thread through 
fine openings, of which each machine has an average of  1,800, 
and bring it towards its destination; then the weaver weaves the 
lace which comes out of the machine like a broad piece of cloth 
and is taken apart by very little children who draw out the 
connecting threads. This is called running or drawing lace, and 
the children themselves lace-runners. The lace is then made ready 
for sale. The winders, like the threaders, have no specified 
working-time, being called upon whenever the spools on a frame 
are empty, and are liable, since the weavers work at night, to be 
required at any time in the factory or work-room. This irregulari-
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give brackets the English names of 
this and the other occupations mentioned here.— Ed. 

=====第507页=====
482 Frederick Engels 
ty, the frequent night-work, the disorderly way of living conse­
quent upon it, engender a multitude of physical and moral ills, 
especially early and unbridled sexual licence, upon which point all 
witnesses are unanimous. The work is very bad for the eyes, and 
although a permanent injury in the case of the threaders is not 
universally observable, inflammations of the eye, pain, tears, and 
momentary uncertainty of vision during the act of threading are 
engendered. For the winders, however, it is certain that their work 
seriously affects the eye, and produces, besides the frequent 
inflammations of the cornea, many cases of amaurosis and 
cataract. The work of the weavers themselves is very difficult, as 
the frames have constantly been made wider, until those now in 
use are almost all worked by three men in turn, each3 working 
eight hours, and the frame being kept in use the whole twenty-
four. Hence it is that the winders and threaders are so often called 
upon during the night, and must work to prevent the frame from 
standing idle. The filling in of 1,800 openings with thread 
occupies three children at least two hours. Many frames are 
moved by steam-power, and the work of men thus superseded; 
and, as the Children's Employment Commission's Report mentions 
only lace factories to which the children are summoned, it seems 
to follow either that the work of the weavers has been removed to 
great factory rooms of late, or that steam-weaving has become 
pretty general; a forward movement of the factory system in 
either case. Most unwholesome of all is the work of the runners, 
who are usually children of seven, and even of five and four, years 
old. Commissioner Grainger actually found one child of two years 
old employed at this work. Following a thread which is to be 
withdrawn by a needle from an intricate texture, is very bad for 
the eyes, especially when, as is usually the case, the work is 
continued fourteen to sixteen hours. In the least unfavourable 
case,  aggravated near-sightedness follows; in the worst case, which 
is frequent enough, incurable blindness from amaurosis. But, 
apart from that, the children, in consequence of sitting perpetually 
bent up, become feeble, narrow-chested, and scrofulous from bad 
digestion. Disordered functions of the uterus are almost universal 
among the girls, and curvature of the spine also, so that "all the 
runners may be recognised from their gait". The same conse­
quences for the eyes and the whole constitution are produced by the 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "each of whom is relieved 
after four hours, so that all together they work twenty-four, each eight hours a 
day".— Ed. 

=====第508页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 483 
embroidery of lace. Medical witnesses are unanimously of the 
opinion that the health of all children employed in the production 
of lace suffers seriously, that they are pale, weak, delicate, 
undersized, and much less able than other children to resist 
disease. The affections from which they usually suffer are general 
debility, frequent fainting, pains in the head, sides, back, and hips, 
palpitation of the heart, nausea, vomiting and want of appetite, 
curvature of the spine, scrofula, and consumption. The health of 
the female lace-makers especially, is constantly and deeply under­
mined; complaints are universal of anaemia, difficult child-birth, 
and miscarriage.* The same subordinate official of the Children's 
Employment Commission reports further that the children are very 
often ill-clothed and ragged, and receive insufficient food, usually 
only bread and tea, often no meat for months together. As to their 
moral condition, he reports:** 
"In the town of Nottingham all parties, police, clergy, manufacturers, work­
people, and parents of the children agree that the present system of labour is a most 
fertile source of immorality. The threaders, who are usually boys, and the winders, 
who are generally girls, are called out of their parents' houses at all hours of the 
night, and as it is quite uncertain how long they may be required, a ready and unans­
werable excuse for staying out is furnished and they have every facility for forming 
improper connections. This must have contributed, in no slight degree, to the 
immorality which, according to the opinion universally expressed, prevails to a 
most awful extent in Nottingham. In addition to the immediate evils to the children 
themselves, the domestic peace and comfort of the families to which they are members 
are sacrificed to this most unnatural state of things." 
Another branch of lace-making, bobbin-lacework, is carried on 
in the agricultural shires of Northampton, Oxford, and Bedford,3 
chiefly by children and young persons, who complain universally 
of bad food, and rarely taste meat. The employment itself is most 
unwholesome. The children work in small, ill-ventilated, damp 
rooms, sitting always bent over the lace cushion. To support the 
body in this wearying position, the girls wear stays with a wooden 
busk, which, at the tender age of most of them, when the bones 
are still very soft, wholly displace the ribs, and make narrow chests 
universal. They usually die of consumption after suffering the 
severest forms of digestive disorders, brought on by sedentary 
work in a bad atmosphere. They are almost wholly without edu­
cation, least of all do they receive moral training. They love finery, 
* Grainger's whole Report.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
** Grainger Children's Employment Commission's Report.— Note by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and Buckingham".— Ed. 

=====第509页=====
484 Frederick Engels 
and in consequence of these two influences their moral condition 
is most deplorable, and prostitution almost epidemic among them.* 
This is the price at which society purchases for the fine ladies of 
the bourgeoisie the pleasure of wearing lace; a reasonable price 
truly! Only a few thousand blind working-men, some consumptive 
labourers' daughters, a sickly generation of the vile multitude 
bequeathing its debility to its equally "vile" children and children's 
children. But what does that come to? Nothing, nothing what­
soever! Our English bourgeoisie will lay the report of the Govern­
ment Commission aside indifferently, and wives and daughters will 
deck themselves with lace as before. It is a beautiful thing, the 
composure of an English bourgeois. 
A great number of operatives are employed in the cotton-
printing establishments of Lancashire, Derbyshire, and the West of 
Scotland. In no branch of English industry has mechanical 
ingenuity produced such brilliant results as here, but in no other 
has it so crushed the workers. The application of engraved 
cylinders driven by steam-power, and the discovery of a method of 
printing four to six colours at once with such cylinders, has as 
completely superseded hand-work as did the application of 
machinery to the spinning and weaving of cotton, and these new 
arrangements in the printing-works have superseded the hand­
workers much more than was the case in the production of the 
fabrics. One man, with the assistance of one child, now does with a 
machine the work done formerly by 200 block printers; a single 
machine yields 28 yards3 of printed cloth per minute. The calico 
printers are in a very bad way in consequence; the shires of 
Lancaster, Derby, and Chester produced (according to a petition 
of the printers to the House of Commons), in the year 1842, 
11,000,000 pieces of printed cotton goods: of these, 100,000 were 
printed by hand exclusively, 900,000 in part with machinery and 
in part by hand, and 10,000,000 by machinery alone, with four to 
six colours.*3 As the machinery is chiefly new and undergoes 
constant improvement, the number of hand-printers is far too 
great for the available quantity of work, and many of them are 
therefore starving; the petition puts the number at one-quarter of 
the whole, while the rest are employed but one or two, in the best 
* Burns, Children's Employment Commission's Report.— Note by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets "80 feet".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "from one to six colours".— 
Ed. 

=====第510页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 485 
case three days in the week, and are ill-paid. Leach* asserts of one 
print-works (Deeply Dale, near Bury, in Lancashire), that the 
hand-printers did not earn on an average more than five shillings, 
though he knows that the machine-printers were pretty well paid. 
The print-works are thus wholly affiliated with the factory system, 
but without being subject to the legislative restrictions placed upon 
it. They produce an article subject to fashion, and have therefore 
no regular work. If they have small orders, they work half-time; if 
they make a hit with a pattern, and business is brisk, they work 
twelve hours, perhaps all night.3 In the neighbourhood of my 
home, near Manchester, there was a print-works that was often 
lighted when I returned late at night; and I have heard that the 
children were obliged at times to work so long there, that they 
would try to catch a moment's rest and sleep on the stone steps 
and in the corners of the lobby. I have no legal proof of the truth 
of the statement, or I should name the firm. The Report of the 
Children's Employment Commission is very cursory upon this sub­
ject, stating merely that in England, at least, the children are mostly 
pretty well clothed and fed (relatively, according to the wages of 
the parents), that they receive no education whatsoever, and are 
morally on a low plane. It is only necessary to remember that these 
children are subject to the factory system, and then, referring the 
reader to what has already been said of that, we can pass on. 
Of the remaining workers employed in the manufacture of 
clothing stuffs little remains to be said; the bleachers' work is very 
unwholesome, obliging them to breathe chlorine, a gas injurious to 
the lungs. The work of the dyers is in many cases very healthful,0 
since it requires the exertion of the whole body; how these 
workers are paid is little known, and this is ground enough for the 
inference that they do not receive less than the average wages, 
otherwise they would make complaint. The fustian cutters, who, in 
consequence of the large consumption of cotton velvet, are 
comparatively numerous, being estimated at from 3,000 to 4,000, 
have suffered very severely, indirectly, from the influence of the 
factory system. The goods formerly woven with hand-looms, were 
not perfectly uniform, and required a practised hand in cutting 
* Leach, Stubborn Facts from the Factories, p. 47.— Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "they work till ten or twelve, even 
the whole night".— Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this sentence reads: "The work 
of the dyers is healthier, in many cases very healthful", etc.— Ed. 
17-761.' 

=====第511页=====
486 Frederick Engeis 
the single rows of threads. Since power-looms have been used, the 
rows run regularly; each thread of the weft is exactly parallel with 
the preceding one, and cutting is no longer an art. The workers 
thrown out of employment by the introduction of machinery turn 
to fustian cutting, and force down wages by their competition; the 
manufacturers discovered that they could employ women and 
children, and the wages sank to the rate paid them, while 
hundreds of men were thrown out of employment. The manufac­
turers found that they could get the work done in the factory itself 
more cheaply than in the cutters' work-room, for which they 
indirectly paid the rent. Since this discovery, the low upper-storey 
cutters' rooms stand empty in many a cottage, or are let for 
dwellings, while the cutter has lost his freedom of choice of his 
working-hours, and is brought under the dominion of the factory 
bell. A cutter of perhaps forty-five years of age told me that he 
could remember a time when he had received 8d. a yard for work, 
for which he now received Id.; true, he can cut the more regular 
texture more quickly than the old, but he can by no means do 
twice as much in an hour as formerly, so that his wages have sunk 
to less than a quarter of what they were. Leach* gives a list of 
wages paid in 1827 and in 1843 for various goods, from which it 
appears that articles paid in 1827 at the rate of 4d., 2V4d., 2 3Atd., 
and Id. per yard, were paid in 1843 at the rate of lV2 d., Id., 3/4d., 
and s/8d. per yard, cutters' wages. The average weekly wage, 
according to Leach, was as follows: 1827, £1 6s. 6d.; £1 2s. 6d.; 
£1; £1 6s. 6d.; and for the same goods in 1843, 10s.; 7s.; 6s. 8d.; 
10s.;  while there are hundreds of workers who cannot find 
employment even at these last-named rates. Of the hand-weavers 
of the cotton industry we have already spoken; the other woven 
fabrics are almost exclusively produced on hand-looms. Here most 
of the workers have suffered as the weavers3 have done from the 
crowding in of competitors displaced by machinery, and are, 
moreover, subject like the factory operatives to a severe fine 
system for bad work. Take, for instance, the silk weavers. Mr. 
Brocklehurst, one of the largest silk manufacturers in all England 
laid before a committee of Members of Parliament lists taken from 
his books, from which it appears that for goods for which he paid 
wages in 1821 at the rate of 30s., 14s.; 372s.,  3/4s.,  IVIOS-, 10s.; he 
paid in 1831 but 9s., 7V2S., 2V4s., V3s., V2S., 674s., while in this case 
* Leach, Stubborn Facts from the Factories, p. 35.— Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
3 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "fustian cutters".—Ed. 

=====第512页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 487 
no improvement in the machinery has taken place. But what Mr. 
Brocklehurst does may very well be taken as a standard for all. 
From the same lists it appears that the average weekly wage of his 
weavers, after all deductions, was, in 1821, 1672s-> and, in 1831, 
but 6s. Since that time wages have fallen still further. Goods which 
brought in 4d.a weavers' wages in 1831, bring in but  2ll2d.  in 1843 
(single sarsnetsb), and a great number of weavers in the country 
can get work only when they undertake these goods at lV2d.-2d. 
Moreover, they are subject to arbitrary deductions from their 
wages. Every weaver who receives materials is given a card, on 
which is usually to be read that the work is to be returned at a 
specified hour of the day; that a weaver who cannot work by 
reason of illness must make the fact known at the office within 
three days, or sickness will not be regarded as an excuse; that it 
will not be regarded as a sufficient excuse if the weaver claims to 
have been obliged to wait for yarn; that for certain faults in the 
work (if, for example, more weft-threads are found within a given 
space than are prescribed), not less than half the wages will be 
deducted; and that if the goods should not be ready at the time 
specified, one penny will be deducted for every yard returned. 
The deductions in accordance with these cards are so considerable 
that, for instance, a man who comes twice a week to Leigh, in 
Lancashire, to gather up woven goods, brings his employer at least 
£15c  fines every time. He asserts this  himself,  and he is regarded 
as one of the most lenient. Such things were formerly settled by 
arbitration; but as the workers were usually dismissed if they 
insisted upon that, the custom has been almost wholly abandoned, 
and the manufacturer acts arbitrarily as prosecutor, witness, judge, 
law-giver, and executive in one person. And if the workman goes 
to a Justice of the Peace, the answer is: "When you accepted your 
card you entered upon a contract, and you must abide by it." The 
case is the same as that of the factory operatives. Besides, the 
employer obliges the workman to sign a document in which he 
declares that he agrees to the deductions made. And if a workman 
rebels, all the manufacturers in the town know at once that he is a 
man who, as Leach says,* 
* Leach, Stubborn  Facts  from the  Factories,  pp. 37-40.—Note  by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give " /$ s. or 4 d.".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this term in English.— Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give in brackets the German 
equivalent "100 Prussian talers". —Ed. 
17 

=====第513页=====
488 Frederick Engels 
"is an enemy to all ticket-made law and social order and has the impudence to dis­
pute the wisdom of those whom he ought to know are his superiors in society." 
Naturally, the workers are perfectly free; the manufacturer does 
not force them to take his materials and his cards, but he says to 
them what Leach translates into plain English with the words: 
"If you don't like to be frizzled in my frying-pan, you can take a walk into the 
fire."3 
The silk weavers of London, and especially of Spitalfields, have 
lived in periodic distress for a long time, and that they still have 
no cause to be satisfied with their lot is proved by their taking a 
most active part in English labour movements in general, and in 
London ones in particular. The distress prevailing among them 
gave rise to the fever which broke out in East London, and called 
forth the Commission for Investigating the Sanitary Condition of 
the Labouring Class. But the last report of the London Fever 
Hospital shows that this disease is still raging. 
After the textile fabrics, by far the most important products of 
English industry are the metal-wares. This trade has its headquar­
ters at Birmingham, where the finer metal goods of all sorts are 
produced, at Sheffield for cutlery, and in Staffordshire, especially 
at Wolverhampton, where the coarser articles, locks, nails, etc., are 
manufactured. In describing the position of the workers employed 
in these trades, let us begin with Birmingham. The disposition of 
the work has retained in Birmingham, as in most places where 
metals are wrought, something of the old handicraft character; the 
small employers are still to be found, who work with their 
apprentices in the shop at home, or when they need steam-power, 
in great factory buildings which are divided into little shops, each 
rented to a small employer, and supplied with a shaft moved by 
the engine, and furnishing motive power for the machinery. Léon 
Faucher, author of a series of articles b in the Revue des deux Mondes, 
which at least betray study, and are better than what has hitherto 
been written upon the subject by Englishmen or Germans, 161 
characterises this relation in contrast with the manufacture of 
Lancashire as Démocratie industrielle, and observes that it pro­
duces no very favourable results for master or men. This observa­
tion is perfectly correct, for the many small employers cannot well 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give this sentence in German and the 
original English in brackets.— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "concerning working-class 
conditions in England".—Ed. 

=====第514页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 489 
subsist on the profit divided amongst them, determined by 
competition, a profit under other circumstances absorbed by a 
single manufacturer. The centralising tendency of capital holds 
them down. For one who grows rich ten are ruined, and a 
hundred placed at greater disadvantage than ever, by the pressure 
of the one upstart who can afford to sell more cheaply than they. 
And in the cases where they have to compete from the beginning 
against great capitalists, it is self-evident that they can only toil 
along with the greatest difficulty. The apprentices are, as we shall 
see, quite as badly off under the small employers as under the 
manufacturers, with the single difference that they, in turn, may 
become small employers, and so attain a certain independ­
ence—  that is to say, they are at best less directly exploited by the 
bourgeoisie than under the factory system. Thus these small 
employers are neither genuine proletarians, since they live in part 
upon the work of their apprentices,3  nor genuine bourgeois, since 
their principal means of support is their own work. This peculiar 
midway position of the Birmingham iron-workers is to blame for 
their having so rarely joined wholly and unreservedly in the 
English labour movements. Birmingham is a politically radical, but 
not a Chartist, town. There are, however, numerous larger 
factories belonging to capitalists; and in these the factory system 
rèigns supreme. The division of labour, which is here carried out 
to the last detail (in the needle industry, for example), and the use 
of steam-power, admit of the employment of a great multitude of 
women and children, and we find here* precisely the same 
features reappearing which the Factories' Report presented,— the 
work of women up to the hour of confinement, incapacity as 
housekeepers, neglect of home and children, indifference, actual 
dislike to family life, and demoralisation; further, the crowding 
out of men from employment, the constant improvement of 
machinery, early emancipation of children, husbands supported by 
their wives and children, etc., etc. The children are described as 
half-starved and ragged, the half of them are said not to know 
what it is to have enough to eat, many of them get nothing to eat 
before the midday meal, or even live the whole day upon a pen-
* Children's Employment Commission's Report.— Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here: "and sell not the labour 
itself,  but the ready product." Mention of the sale of labour was perhaps omitted in 
the American edition of 1887 and the English edition of 1892 in connection with 
the later opinion of Marxist political economy that the worker sells his labour-
power, and not his labour, to the capitalist.— Ed. 

=====第515页=====
490 Frederick Engels 
nyworth8 of bread for a noonday meal—there were actually cases 
in which children received no food from eight in the morning 
until seven at night. Their clothing is very often scarcely sufficient 
to cover their nakedness, many are barefoot even in winter. Hence 
they are all small and weak for their age, and rarely develop with 
any degree of vigour. And when we reflect that with these  insuf­
ficient means of reproducing the physical forces, hard and protract­
ed work in close rooms is required of them, we cannot wonder that 
there are few adults in Birmingham fit for military service. 
The working-men, says a recruiting surgeon, "are shorter, more puny, and 
altogether inferior in their physical powers. Many of the men presented for 
examinations, are distorted in the spine and chest." 
According to the assertion of a recruiting sergeant, the people 
of Birmingham are smaller than those anywhere else, being 
usually 5 feet 4 to 5 inches tall; out of 613 recruits, but 238 were 
found fit for service. As to education, a series of depositions and 
specimens taken from the metal districts have already been given,b 
to which the reader is referred. It appears further, from the 
Children's Employment Commission's Report, that in Birmingham 
more than half the children, between five and fifteen years attend 
no school whatsoever, that those who do are constantly changing, 
so that it is impossible to give them any training of an enduring 
kind, and that they are all withdrawn from school very early and 
set to work. The report makes it clear what sort of teachers are 
employed. One teacher, in answer to the question whether she 
gave moral instruction, said, No, for threepence a week school fees 
that was too much to require, but that she took a great deal of 
trouble to instil good principles into the children.0 (And she made 
a decided slip in her English in saying it.) In the schools the 
commissioner found constant noise and disorder. The moral state 
of the children is in the highest degree deplorable. Half of all the 
criminals are children under fifteen, and in a single year ninety 
ten-years'-old offenders, among them forty-four serious criminal 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets "10 Prussian 
pfennigs".—Ed. 
The American edition of 1887 and the English edition of 1892 give reference 
to the respective pages. (See pp. 408-10 of this volume.)  — Ed. 
c In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this passage reads as follows: "One 
teacher, in answer to the question whether she gave moral instruction, said, No, for 
threepence a week school fees that was too much to require; several others did not 
even understand this question and still others did not consider this part of their 
duty. One of the teachers said that she gave no moral instruction but that she took 
a great deal of trouble to instil good principles into the children." — Ed. 

=====第516页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 491 
cases,  were sentenced. Unbridled sexual intercourse seems, accord­
ing to the opinion of the commissioner, almost universal, and that 
at a very early age.* 
In the iron district of Staffordshire the state of things is still 
worse. For the coarse wares made here neither much division of 
labour (with certain exceptions) nor steam-power or machinery can 
be applied. In Wolverhampton, Willenhall, Bilston, Sedgeley, 
Wednesfield, Darlaston, Dudley, Walsall, Wednesbury, etc., there 
are, therefore, fewer factories. But chiefly single forges, where the 
small masters work alone, or with one or more apprentices, who 
serve them until reaching the twenty-first year. The small employers 
are in about the same situation as those of Birmingham; but the 
apprentices, as a rule, are much worse off. They get almost 
exclusively meat from diseased animals or such as have died a 
natural death, or tainted meat, or fish to eat, with veal from calves 
killed too young, and pork from swine smothered during trans­
portation, and such food is furnished not by small employers 
only, but by large manufacturers, who employ from thirty to forty 
apprentices. The custom seems to be universal in Wolverhampton, 
and its natural consequence is frequent bowel complaints and 
other diseases. Moreover, the children usually do not get enough 
to eat, and have rarely other clothing than their working rags, for 
which reason, if for no other, they cannot go to Sunday school. 
The dwellings are bad and filthy, often so much so that they give 
rise to disease; and in spite of the not materially unhealthy work, 
the children are puny,a weak, and, in many cases, severely 
crippled. In Willenhall, for instance, there are countless persons 
who have, from perpetually filing at the lathe, crooked backs and 
one leg crooked, "hind-leg" as they call it, so that the two legs 
have the form of a K; while it is said that more than one-third of 
the working-men there are ruptured. Here, as well as in Wol­
verhampton, numberless cases were found of retarded puberty 
among girls (for girls, too, work at the forges), as well as among 
boys,  extending even to the nineteenth year. In Sedgeley and its 
surrounding district, where nails form almost the sole product, the 
nailers live and work in the most wretched stable-like huts, which 
for filth can scarcely be equalled. Girls and boys work from the 
tenth or twelfth year, and are accounted fully skilled only when 
they make a thousand nails a day. For twelve hundred nails the 
* Grainger Report and Evidence.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have, instead of "puny", "small, badly 
built". Below, "hind-leg" is given in English.— Ed. 

=====第517页=====
492 Frederick Engels 
pay is  5 3/4d.a  Every nail receives twelve blows, and since the 
hammer weighs IV4 pounds, the nailer must lift 18,000 pounds to 
earn this miserable pay. With this hard work and insufficient food, 
the children inevitably develop ill-formed, undersized frames, and 
the commissioners' depositions confirm this. As to the state of 
education in this district, data have already been furnished in the 
foregoing chapters. It is upon an incredibly low plane; half the 
children do not even go to Sunday school, and the other half go 
irregularly; very few, in comparison with the other districts, can 
read, and in the matter of writing the case is much worse. 
Naturally, for between the seventh and tenth years, just when they 
are beginning to get some good out of going to school, they are 
set to work, and the Sunday school teachers, smiths or miners, 
frequently cannot read, and write their names with difficulty. The 
prevailing morals correspond with these means of education. In 
Willenhall, Commissioner Home asserts, and supplies ample 
proofs of his assertion, that there exists absolutely no moral sense 
among the workers. In general, he found that the children neither 
recognised duties to their parents nor felt any affection for them. 
They were so little capable of thinking of what they said, so stolid, so 
hopelessly stupid, that they often asserted that they were well treat­
ed, were coming on famously, when they were forced to work twelve 
to fourteen hours, were clad in rags, did not get enough to eat, and 
were beaten so that they felt it several days afterwards. They knew 
nothing of a different kind of life than that in which they toil from 
morning until they are allowed to stop at night, and did not even un­
derstand the question never heard before, whether they were tired.* 
In Sheffield wages are better, and the external state of the 
workers also. On the other hand, certain branches of work are to 
be noticed here, because of their extraordinarily injurious influ­
ence upon health. Certain operations require the constant pres­
sure of tools against the chest, and engender consumption in 
many cases; others, file-cutting among them, retard the general 
development of the body and produce digestive disorders; bone-
cutting for knife handles brings with it headache, biliousness, and 
among girls, of whom many are employed, anaemia. By far the 
most unwholesome work is the grinding of knife-blades and forks, 
which, especially when done with a dry stone, entails certain early 
death. The unwholesomeness of this work lies in part in the bent 
* Home Report and Evidence.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here the explanation "or not 
quite 5 silver groschen".— Ed. 

=====第518页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 493 
posture, in which chest and stomach are cramped; but especially in 
the quantity of sharp-edged metal dust particles freed in the 
cutting, which fill the atmosphere, and are necessarily inhaled. 
The dry grinders' average life is hardly thirty-five years, the wet 
grinders' rarely exceeds forty-five. Dr. Knight, in Sheffield, says*: 
I can convey some idea of the injuriousness of this occupation only by asserting 
that "the greatest drinkers among the grinders are sometimes the longest lived, 
owing to their more frequent absence from their work". Altogether the grinders in 
Sheffield "amount to about two thousand five hundred, of this number about one 
hundred and fifty, viz. eighty men and seventy boys, are fork grinders—these die 
from twenty-eight to thirty-two years of age. The razor grinders, grind both wet, 
and dry, and they die from forty to forty-five years of age. The table-knife grinders 
work on wet stones, and they ljve to betwixt forty and fifty years of age." 
The same physician gives the following description of the course 
of the disease called grinders' asthma: 
"Those who are to be brought up grinders, usually begin to work when they are 
about fourteen years old. Grinders, who have good constitutions seldom experience 
much inconvenience from their trade until they arrive at about twenty years of age: 
about that time the symptoms of their peculiar complaint begin to steal upon them, 
their breathing becomes more than usually embarrassed on slight exertions, 
particularly on going upstairs or ascending a hill; their shoulders are elevated in 
order to relieve their constant and increasing dyspnoea; they stoop forward, and 
appear to breathe the most comfortably in that posture in which they are 
accustomed to sit at their work. Their complexions assume a muddy, dirty 
appearance; their countenance indicates anxiety; they complain of a sense of 
tightness across the chest; their voice is rough, and hoarse; their cough loud, and 
as if the air were drawn through wooden tubes; they occasionally expectorate 
considerable quantities of dust, sometimes mixed up with mucus, at other times in 
globular or cylindrical masses enveloped in a thin film of mucus. Haemoptysis, 
inability to lie down, night sweats, colignative diarrhoea, extreme emaciation, 
together with all the usual symptoms of pulmonary consumption at length carry 
them off; but not until they have lingered through months, and even years of 
suffering, incapable of working so as to support either themselves or their 
families." I must add that "all the attempts which have hitherto been made, to 
prevent or to cure the grinders' asthma, have utterly failed." 
All this Knight wrote ten years ago162; since then the number of 
grinders and the violence of the disease have increased, though 
attempts have been made to prevent it by covered grindstones and 
carrying off the dust by artificial draught. These methods have 
been at least partially successful, but the grinders do not desire 
their adoption, and have even destroyed the contrivance here and 
there, in the belief that more workers may be attracted to the 
business and wages thus reduced; they are for a short life and a 
merry one. Dr. Knight has often told grinders who came to him 
with the first symptoms of asthma that a return to grinding means 
* Dr. Knight, Sheffield.— Note by Engeb to the American edition of 1887. 

=====第519页=====
494 Frederick Engels 
certain death, but with no avail. He who is once a grinder falls 
into despair, as though he had sold himself to the devil. Education 
in Sheffield is upon a very low plane; a clergyman, who had 
occupied himself largely with the statistics of education, was of the 
opinion that of 16,500 children of the working-class who are in a 
position to attend school, scarcely 6,500 can read. This comes of 
the fact that the children are taken from school in the seventh, 
and, at the very latest, in the twelfth year, and that the teachers 
are good for nothing; one was a convicted thief who found no 
other way of supporting himself after being released from jail 
than teaching school! Immorality among young people seems to be 
more prevalent in Sheffield than anywhere else. It is hard to tell 
which town ought to have the prize, and in reading the report one 
believes of each one that this certainly deserves it! The younger 
generation spend the whole of Sunday lying in the street tossing 
coins or fighting dogs, go regularly to the gin palace, where they 
sit with their sweethearts until late at night, when they take walks 
in solitary couples. In an ale-house which the commissioner visited, 
there sat forty to fifty young people of both sexes, nearly all under 
seventeen years of age, and each lad beside his lass. Here and 
there cards were played, at other places dancing was going on, 
and everywhere drinking. Among the company were openly 
avowed professional prostitutes. No wonder, then, that, as all the 
witnesses testify, early, unbridled sexual intercourse, youthful 
prostitution, beginning with persons of fourteen to fifteen years, is 
extraordinarily frequent in Sheffield. Crimes of a savage and 
desperate sort are of common occurrence; one year before the 
commissioner's visit, a band, consisting chiefly of young persons, was 
arrested when about to set fire to the town, being fully equipped 
with lances and inflammable substances. We shall see later that 
the labour movement in Sheffield has this same savage character.* 
Besides these two main centres of the metal industry, there are 
needle factories in Warrington, Lancashire, where great want, 
immorality, and ignorance prevail among the workers, and espe­
cially among the children; and a number of nail forges in the 
neighbourhood of Wigan, in Lancashire, and in the east of 
Scotland. The reports from these latter districts tell almost 
precisely the same story as those of Staffordshire. There is one 
more branch of this industry carried on in the factory districts, 
especially in Lancashire, the essential peculiarity of which is the 
production of machinery by machinery, whereby the workers, 
* Symons Report and Evidence.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 

=====第520页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 495 
crowded out elsewhere, are deprived of their last refuge, the 
creation of the very enemy which supersedes them. Machinery for 
planing and boring, cutting screws, wheels, nuts, etc., with power 
lathes,  has thrown out of employment a multitude of men who 
formerly found regular work at good wages; and whoever wishes 
to do so may see crowds of them in Manchester. 
North of the iron district of Staffordshire lies an industrial 
region to which we shall now turn our attention, the Potteries,3 
whose headquarters are in the borough of Stoke, embracing 
Henley, Burslem, Lane End, Lane Delph, Etruria, Coleridge, 
Langport, Tunstall, and Golden Hill, containing together 70,000 
inhabitants. The Children's Employment Commission reports 
upon this subject that in some branches of this industry, in the 
production of stoneware, the children have light employment in 
warm, airy rooms; in others, on the contrary, hard, wearing labour 
is required, while they receive neither sufficient food nor good 
clothing. Many children complain: "Don't get enough to eat, get 
mostly potatoes with salt, never meat, never bread, don't go to 
school, haven't got no clothes." "Haven't got nothin' to eat today 
for dinner, don't never have dinner at home, get mostly potatoes 
and salt, sometimes bread." "This is all the clothes I have, no 
Sunday suit at home." Among the children whose work is 
especially injurious are the mould-runners, who have to carry the 
moulded article with the form to the drying-room, and afterwards 
bring back the empty form, when the article is properly dried. 
Thus they must go to and fro the whole day, carrying burdens 
heavy in proportion to their age, while the high temperature in 
which they have to do this increases very considerably the 
exhaustiveness of the work. These children, with scarcely a single 
exception, are lean, pale, feeble, stunted; nearly all suffer from 
stomach troubles, nausea, want of appetite, and many of them die 
of consumption. Almost as delicate are the boys called "jiggers", 
from the "jigger" wheel which they turn. But by far the most 
injurious is the work of those who dip the finished article into a 
fluid containing great quantities of lead, and often of arsenic, or 
have to take the freshly dipped article up with the hand. The 
hands and clothing of these workers, adults and children, are 
always wet with this fluid, the skin softens and falls off under the 
constant contact with rough objects, so that the fingers often 
bleed, and are constantly in a state most favourable for the absorp-
tion of this dangerous substance. The consequence is violent pain, 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the name Potteries and below 
"mould-runners" and "jiggers" in English.—Ed. 

=====第521页=====
496 Frederick Engels 
and serious disease of the stomach and intestines, obstinate constipa­
tion, colic, sometimes consumption, and, most common of all, 
epilepsy among children. Among men, partial paralysis of the 
hand muscles, colica pictorum,a and paralysis of whole limbs are 
ordinary phenomena. One witness relates that two children who 
worked with him died of convulsions at their work; another who 
had helped with the dipping two years while a boy, relates that he 
had violent pains in the bowels at first, then convulsions, in 
consequence of which he was confined to his bed two months, 
since when the attacks of convulsions have increased in frequency, 
are now daily, accompanied often by ten to twenty epileptic fits, 
his right arm is paralysed, and the physicians tell him that he can 
never regain the use of his limbs. In one factory were found in the 
dipping-house four men, all epileptic and afflicted with severe 
colic,  and eleven boys, several of whom were already epileptic. In 
short, this frightful disease follows this occupation universally: and 
that, too, to the greater pecuniary profit of the bourgeoisie! In the 
rooms in which the stoneware is scoured, the atmosphere is filled 
with pulverised flint, the breathing of which is as injurious as that 
of the steel dust among the Sheffield grinders. The workers lose 
breath, cannot lie down, suffer from sore throat and violent 
coughing, and come to have so feeble a voice that they can 
scarcely be heard. They, too, all die of consumption. In the 
Potteries district, the schools are said to be comparatively numer­
ous, and to offer the children opportunities for instruction; but as 
the latter are so early set to work for twelve hours and often more 
per day, they are not in a position to avail themselves of the 
schools, so that three-fourths of the children examined by the 
commissioner could neither read nor write, while the whole 
district is plunged in the deepest ignorance. Children who have 
attended Sunday school for years could not tell one letter from 
another, and the moral and religious education, as well as the 
intellectual, is on a very low plane.* 
In the manufacture of glass, too, work occurs which seems little 
injurious to men, but cannot be endured by children. The hard 
labour, the irregularity of the hours, the frequent night-work, and 
especially the great heat of the working place (100 to 130 
Fahrenheit), engender in children general debility and disease, 
stunted growth, and especially affections of the eye, bowel com­
plaint, and rheumatic and bronchial affections. Many of the 
* Scriven Report and Evidence.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
a A professional disease of dyers.— Ed. 

=====第522页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 497 
children are pale, have red eyes, often blind for weeks at a time, 
suffer from violent nausea, vomiting, coughs, colds, and rheuma­
tism. When the glass is withdrawn from the fire, the children must 
often go into such heat that the boards on which they stand catch 
fire under their feet. The glass-blowers usually die young of 
debility and chest affections.* 
As a whole, this report testifies to the gradual but sure 
introduction of the factory system into all branches of industry, 
recognisable especially by the employment of women and children. 
I have not thought it necessary to trace in every case the progress 
of machinery and the superseding of men as workers. Every one 
who is in any degree acquainted with the nature of manufacture 
can fill this out for  himself,  while space fails me to describe in 
detail an aspect of our present system of production, the result of 
which I have already sketched in dealing with the factory system. 
In all directions machinery is being introduced, and the last trace 
of the working-man's independence thus destroyed. In all direc­
tions the family is being dissolved by the labour of wife and 
children, or inverted by the husband's being thrown out of 
employment and made dependent upon them for bread3; 
everywhere inevitable machinery bestows upon the great capitalist 
command of trade and of the workers with it. The centralisation 
of capital5 strides forward without interruption, the division of 
society into great capitalists and non-possessing workers is sharper 
every day, the industrial development of the nation advances with 
giant strides towards the inevitable crisis. 
I have already stated that in the handicrafts the power of 
capital, and in some cases the division of labour too, has produced 
the same results, crushed the small tradesmen, and put great 
capitalists and non-possessing workers in their place. As to these 
handicraftsmen there is little to be said, since all that relates to 
them has already found its place where the proletariat in general1 
was under discussion. There has been but little change here in the 
* Leifchild Report Append., Part II., p. L 2, ss. 11, 12; | Children's Em-
Franks Report Append., Part II., p. K 7, s. 48; f ployment Com-
Tancred Evid. Append., Part II., p. I 76, etc. I mission's Rep't. 
Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
d The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the phrase "and made 
dependent upon them for bread".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "property" instead of "cap­
ital".—  Ed. 
' The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the industrial proletariat in 
general".—Ed. 

=====第523页=====
498 Frederick Engels 
nature of the work and its influence upon health since the beginning 
of the industrial movement. But the constant contact with the fac­
tory operatives, the pressure of the great capitalists, which is much 
more felt than that of the small employer to whom the apprentice 
still stood in a more or less personal relation, the influences of life in 
towns, and the fall of wages, have made nearly all the handicrafts­
men active participators in labour movements. We shall soon have 
more to say on this point, and turn meanwhile to one section of work­
ers in London who deserve our attention by reason of the extraor­
dinary barbarity with which they are exploited by the money-greed 
of the bourgeoisie. I mean the dress-makers and sewing-women. 
It is a curious fact that the production of precisely those articles 
which serve the personal adornment of the ladies of the 
bourgeoisie involves the saddest consequences for the health of the 
workers. We have already seen this in the case of the lace-makers, 
and come now to the dress-making establishments of London for 
further  proof.  They employ a mass of young girls — there are said 
to be 15,000 of them in all — who sleep and eat on the premises, 
come usually from the country, and are therefore absolutely the 
slaves of their employers. During the fashionable season, which 
lasts some four months, working-hours, even in the best establish­
ments, are fifteen, and, in very pressing cases, eighteen a day; but 
in most shops work goes on at these times without any set 
regulation, so that the girls never have more than six, often not 
more than three or four, sometimes, indeed, not more than two 
hours in the twenty-four, for rest and sleep, working nineteen to 
twenty-two hours, if not the whole night through, as frequently 
happens! The only limit set to their work is the absolute physical 
inability to hold the needle another minute. Cases have occurred 
in which these helpless creatures did not undress during nine 
consecutive days and nights, and could only rest a moment or two 
here and there upon a mattress, where food was served them 
ready cut up in order to require the least possible time for 
swallowing. In short, these unfortunate girls are kept by means of 
the moral whip of the modern slave-driver,3 the threat of dis­
charge, to such long and unbroken toil as no strong man, much 
less a delicate girl of fourteen to twenty years, can endure. In ad­
dition to this, the foul air of the work-room and sleeping-places, the 
bent posture, the often bad and indigestible food, all these causes,b 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the moral slave-driver's 
whip".—  Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "but above all the long 
hours of work".— Ed. 

=====第524页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 499 
combined with almost total exclusion from fresh air, entail the 
saddest consequences for the health of the girls. Enervation, 
exhaustion, debility, loss of appetite, pains in the shoulders, back, 
and hips, but especially headache, begin very soon; then follow 
curvatures of the spine, high, deformed shoulders, leanness, 
swelled, weeping, and smarting eyes, which soon become short­
sighted; coughs, narrow chests, and shortness of breath, and all 
manner of disorders in the development of the female organism. 
In many cases the eyes suffer so severely that incurable blindness3 
follows; but if the sight remains strong enough to make continued 
work possible, consumption usually soon ends the sad life of these 
milliners and dress-makers. Even those who leave this work at an 
early age retain permanently injured health, a broken constitution; 
and, when married, bring feeble and sickly children into the 
world. All the medical men interrogated by the commissioner15 
agreed that no method of life could be invented better calculated 
to destroy health and induce early death. 
With the same cruelty, though somewhat more indirectly, the 
rest of the needle-women of London are exploited. The girls 
employed in stay-making have a hard, wearing occupation, trying 
to the eyes. And what wages do they get? I do not know; but this I 
know, that the middleman who has to give security for the 
material delivered, and who distributes the work among the 
needle-women, receives iy2d.c per piece. From this he deducts his 
own pay, at least 72 d., so that Id. at most reaches the pocket of 
the girl. The girls who sew neckties must bind themselves to work 
sixteen hours a day, and receive 4V2S. a week.* But the shirt-
makers' lot is the worst. They receive for an ordinary shirt  l'/^d., 
formerly 2d.-3d.; but since the workhouse of St. Paneras, which is 
administered by a Radical board of guardians, began to undertake 
work at iy 2d., the poor women outside have been compelled to do 
the same. For fine, fancy shirts, which can be made in one day of 
eighteen hours, 6d. is paid.d The weekly wage of these sewing-
* See Weekly Dispatch, March 17th,  1844.—  Note by Engels. (The German editions 
of 1845 and 1892 have  "i.e.,  1 / 2 Prussian talers, but this sum can buy no more 
than 20 silver groschen can in the most expensive German town."—Ed.) 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 also have here "complete disable­
ment of the eye".— Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give here in brackets "Ch. Empl. 
Comm.".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here  "i.e.,  15 Prussian 
pfennigs".—-Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have  "i.e.,  5 silver groschen".— Ed. 

=====第525页=====
500 Frederick Engels 
women according to this and according to testimony from many 
sides,  including both needle-women and employers, is 2s. 6d. to 
3s. for most strained work continued far into the night. And what 
crowns this shameful barbarism is the fact that the women must 
give a money deposit for a part of the materials entrusted to them, 
which they naturally cannot do unless they pawn a part of them 
(as the employers very well know), redeeming them at a loss; or if 
they cannot redeem the materials, they must appear before a 
Justice of the Peace, as happened to a sewing-woman in 
November, 1843. A poor girl who got into this strait and did not 
know what to do next, drowned herself in a canal in 1844.a These 
women usually live in little garret rooms in the utmost distress, 
where as many crowd together as the space can possibly admit, 
and where, in winter, the animal warmth of the workers is the 
only heat obtainable. Here they sit bent over their work, sewing 
from four or five in the morning until midnight, destroying their 
health in a year or two and ending in an early grave, without 
being able to obtain the poorest necessities of life meanwhile.* 
And below them roll the brilliant equipages of the upper 
bourgeoisie, and perhaps ten steps away some pitiable dandy loses 
more money in one evening at faro than they can earn in a year. 
* * * 
Such is the condition of the English manufacturing proletariat. 
In all directions, whithersoever we may turn, we find want and 
disease permanent or temporary, and demoralisation arising from 
the condition of the workers'5; in all directions slow but sure 
undermining, and final destruction of the human being physically 
as well as mentally. Is this a state of things which can last? It 
cannot and will not last. The workers, the great majority of the 
nation, will not endure it. Let us see what they say of it. 
* Thomas Hood, the most talented of all the English humorists now living, 
and, like all humorists, full of human feeling, but wanting in mental energy, 
published at the beginning of 1844 a beautiful poem, The Song of the Shirt, which 
drew sympathetic but unavailing tears from the eyes of the daughters of the 
bourgeoisie. Originally published in Punch, it made the round of all the papers. As 
discussions of the condition of the sewing-women filled all the papers at the time, 
special extracts are needless.—Note by Engels. (The German editions of 1845 and 
1892 have "when accounts of the distress among the sewing-women filled all the 
papers" after "at the beginning of 1844" and "I have not sufficient space to 
reproduce the poem here" after "the daughters of the bourgeoisie".— Ed.) 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "in August 1844".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "we find want, permanent 
or temporary, disease caused by their condition or their work, demoralisation".— Ed. 

=====第526页=====
LABOUR MOVEMENTS 
It must be admitted, even if I had not proved it so often in 
detail, that the English workers cannot feel happy in this condi­
tion; that theirs is not a state in which a man or a whole class of 
men can think, feel, and live as human beings. The workers must 
therefore strive to escape from this brutalising condition, to secure 
for themselves a better, more human position; and this they 
cannot do without attacking the interest of the bourgeoisie which 
consists in exploiting them. But the bourgeoisie defends its 
interests with all the power placed at its disposal by wealth and the 
might of the State. In proportion as the working-man determines 
to alter the present state of things, the bourgeois becomes his 
avowed enemy. 
Moreover, the working-man is made to feel at every moment 
that the bourgeoisie treats him as a chattel, as its property, and for 
this reason, if for no other, he must come forward as its enemy. I 
have shown in a hundred ways in the foregoing pages, and could 
have shown in a hundred others, that, in our present society, he 
can save his manhood only in hatred and rebellion against the 
bourgeoisie. And he can protest with most violent passion against 
the tyranny of the propertied class, thanks to his education, or 
rather want of education, and to the abundance of hot Irish blood 
that flows in the veins of the English working-class. The English 
working-man is no Englishman nowadays; no calculating money-
grubber like his wealthy neighbour. He possesses more fully 
developed feelings, his native northern coldness is overborne by 
the unrestrained development of his passions and their control 
over him. The cultivation of the understanding which so greatly 
strengthens the selfish tendency of the English bourgeois, which 

=====第527页=====
502 Fiederick Engels 
has made selfishness his predominant trait and concentrated all his 
emotional power upon the single point of money-greed, is wanting 
in the working-man, whose passions are therefore strong and 
mighty as those of the foreigner. English nationality is annihilated 
in the working-man. 
Since, as we have seen, no single field for the exercise of his 
manhood is left him, save his opposition to the whole conditions of 
his life, it is natural that exactly in this opposition he should be 
most manly, noblest, most worthy of sympathy. We shall see that 
all the energy, all the activity of the working-men is directed to 
this point, and that even their attempts to attain general education 
all stand in direct connection with this. True, we shall have single 
acts of violence and even of brutality to report, but it must always 
be kept in mind that the social war is avowedly raging in England; 
and that, whereas it is in the interest of the bourgeoisie to conduct 
this war hypocritically, under the disguise of peace and even of 
philanthropy, the only help for the working-men consists in laying 
bare the true state of things and destroying this hypocrisy; that the 
most violent attacks of the workers upon the bourgeoisie and its 
servants are only the open, undisguised expression of that which the 
bourgeoisie perpetrates secretly, treacherously against the workers. 
The revolt of the workers began soon after the first industrial 
development, and has passed through several phases. The inves­
tigation of their importance in the history of the English people I 
must reserve for separate treatment,163 limiting myself meanwhile 
to such bare facts as serve to characterise the condition of the 
English proletariat. 
The earliest, crudest, and least fruitful form of this rebellion 
was that of crime. The working-man lived in poverty and want, 
and saw that others were better off than he. It was not clear to his 
mind why he, who did more for society than the rich idler, should 
be the one to suffer under these conditions. Want conquered his 
inherited respect for the sacredness of property, and he stole. We 
have seen how crime increased with the extension of manufacture; 
how the yearly number of arrests bore a constant relation to the 
number of bales of cotton annually consumed. 
The workers soon realised that crime did not help matters. The 
criminal could protest against the existing order of society only 
singly, as one individual; the whole might of society was brought 
to bear upon each criminal, and crushed him with its immense 
superiority. Besides, theft was the most primitive3 form of 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "and the most instinctive".— Ed. 

=====第528页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 503 
protest, and for this reason, if for no other, it never became the 
universal expression of the public opinion of the working-men, 
however much they might approve of it in silence. As a class, they 
first manifested opposition to the bourgeoisie when they resisted 
the introduction of machinery at the very beginning of the 
industrial period. The first inventors, Arkwright and others, were 
persecuted in this way and their machines destroyed. Later, there 
took place a number of revolts against machinery, in which the 
occurrences were almost precisely the same as those of the 
printers' disturbances in Bohemia in 1844164; factories were de­
molished and machinery destroyed. 
This form of opposition also was isolated, restricted to certain 
localities, and directed against one feature only of our present 
social arrangements. When the momentary end was attained, the 
whole weight of social power fell upon the unprotected evil-doers 
and punished them to its heart's content, while the machinery was 
introduced none the less. A new form of opposition had to be 
found. 
At this point help came in the shape of a law enacted by the old, 
unreformed, oligarchic-Tory Parliament, a law which never could 
have passed the House of Commons later, when the Reform Bill 
had legally sanctioned the distinction between bourgeoisie and 
proletariat, and made the bourgeoisie the ruling class. This was 
enacted in 1824, and repealed all laws by which coalitions between 
working-men for labour purposes had hitherto been forbidden. 
The working-men obtained a right previously restricted to the 
aristocracy and bourgeoisie, the right of free association. Secret 
coalitions had, it is true, previously existed, but could never 
achieve great results. In Glasgow* as Symons* relates, a general 
strike of weavers had taken place in 1812, which was brought 
about by a secret association. It was repeated in 1822, and on this 
occasion vitriol was thrown into the faces of the two working-men 
who would not join the association, and were therefore regarded 
by the members as traitors to their class. Both the assaulted lost 
the use of their eyes in consequence of the injury. So, too, in 
1818,  the association of Scottish miners was powerful enough to 
carry on a general strike. These associations required their 
* Arts and Artisans, p. 137, et seq.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 
(reproduced in the English edition of 1892; in the German editions of 1845 and 
1892 this and similar references are, generally, given in the text —  Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "In Scotland".—Ed. 

=====第529页=====
504 Frederick Engels 
members to take an oath of fidelity and secrecy, had regular lists, 
treasurers, book-keepers, and local branches. But the secrecy with 
which everything was conducted crippled their growth. When, on 
the other hand, the working-men received in 1824 the right of 
free association, these combinations were very soon spread over all 
England and attained great power. In all branches of industry 
Trades Unions3 were formed with the outspoken intention of 
protecting the single working-man against the tyranny and neglect 
of the bourgeoisie. Their objects were to deal,b en masse, as a 
power, with the employers; to regulate the rate of wages according 
to the profit of the latter, to raise it when opportunity offered, 
and to keep it uniform in each trade throughout the country. 
Hence they tried to settle with the capitalists a scale of wages to be 
universally adhered to, and ordered out on strike the employees of 
such individuals as refused to accept the scale. They aimed further 
to keep up the demand for labour by limiting the number of 
apprentices, and so to keep wages high; to counteract, as far as 
possible, the indirect wages reductions which the manufacturers 
brought about by means of new tools and machinery; and finally, 
to assist unemployed working-men financially. This they do either 
directly or by means of a card to legitimate the bearer as a "society 
man", and with which the working-man wanders from place to 
place, supported by his fellow-workers, and instructed as to the 
best opportunity for finding employment. This is tramping, and 
the wanderer a tramp. To attain these ends, a President and 
Secretary are engaged at a salary (since it is to be expected that no 
manufacturer will employ such persons), and a committee collects 
the weekly contributions and watches over their expenditure for 
the purposes of the association. When it proved possible and 
advantageous, the various trades of single districts united in a 
federation and held delegate conventions at set times. The attempt 
has been made in single cases to unite the workers of one branch 
over all England in one great Union; and several times (in 1830 
for the first time) to form one universal trades association for the 
whole United Kingdom, with a separate organisation for each 
trade. These associations, however, never held together long, and 
were seldom realised even for the moment, since an exceptionally 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the words: "Trades Unions", 
"the tramp", "strike", "turnout", "knobsticks" "thugs", etc., in English, often in 
brackets after the German equivalents.— Ed. 
The German edition of 1845 and 1892 have here: "Their objects were to fix 
wages and to deal", etc.— Ed. 

=====第530页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 505 
universal excitement is necessary to make such a federation 
possible and effective. 
The means usually employed by these Unions for attaining their 
ends are the following: If one or more employers refuse to pay 
the wage specified by the Union, a deputation is sent or a petition 
forwarded (the working-men, you see, know how to recognise the 
absolute power of the lord of the factory in his little State); if this 
proves unavailing, the Union commands the employees to stop 
work, and all hands go home. This strike is either partial when 
one or several, or general when all employers in the trade refuse 
to regulate wages according to the proposals of the Union. So far 
go the lawful means of the Union, assuming the strike to take 
effect after the expiration of the legal notice, which is not always 
the case. But these lawful means are very weak when there are 
workers outside the Union, or when members separate from it for 
the sake of the momentary advantage offered by the bourgeoisie. 
Especially in the case of partial strikes can the manufacturer 
readily secure recruits from these black sheep (who are known as 
knobsticks), and render fruitless the efforts of the united workers. 
Knobsticks are usually threatened, insulted, beaten, or otherwise 
maltreated by the members of the Union; intimidated, in short, in 
every way. Prosecution follows, and as the law-abiding bourgeoisie 
has the power in its own hands, the force of the Union is broken 
almost every time by the first unlawful act, the first judicial 
procedure against its members. 
The history of these Unions is a long series of defeats of the 
working-men, interrupted by a few isolated victories. All these 
efforts naturally cannot alter the economic law according to which 
wages are determined by the relation between supply and demand 
in the labour market. Hence the Unions remain powerless against 
all great forces which influence this relation. In a commercial crisis 
the Union itself must reduce wages or dissolve wholly; and in a 
time of considerable increase in the demand for labour, it cannot 
fix the rate of wages higher than would be reached spontaneously 
by the competition of the capitalists among themselves. But in 
dealing with minor, single influences they are powerful. If the 
employer had no concentrated, collective opposition to expect, he 
would in his own interest gradually reduce wages to a lower and 
lower point; indeed, the battle of competition which he has to 
wage against his fellow-manufacturers would force him to do so, 
and wages would soon reach the minimum. But this competition 
of the manufacturers among themselves is, under average conditions, 
somewhat restricted by the opposition of the working-men. 

=====第531页=====
506 Frederick Engels 
Every manufacturer knows that the consequence of a reduction 
not justified by conditions to which his competitors also are 
subjected, would be a strike, which would most certainly injure 
him, because his capital would be idle as long as the strike lasted, 
and his machinery would be rusting, whereas it is very doubtful 
whether he could, in such a case, enforce his reduction. Then he 
has the certainty that if he should succeed, his competitors would 
follow him, reducing the price of the goods so produced, and thus 
depriving him of the benefit of his policy. Then, too, the Unions 
often bring about a more rapid increase of wages after a crisis 
than would otherwise follow. For the manufacturer's interest is to 
delay raising wages until forced by competition, but now the 
working-men demand an increased wage as soon as the market 
improves, and they can carry their point by reason of the smaller 
supply of workers at his command under such circumstances. But, 
for resistance to more considerable forces which influence the 
labour market, the Unions are powerless. In such cases hunger 
gradually drives the strikers to resume work on any terms, and 
when once a few have begun, the force of the Union is broken, 
because these few knobsticks, with the reserve supplies of goods in 
the market, enable the bourgeoisie to overcome the worst effects 
of the interruption of business. The funds of the Union are soon 
exhausted by the great numbers requiring  relief,  the credit which 
the shopkeepers give at high interest is withdrawn after a time, 
and want compels the working-man to place himself once more 
under the yoke of the bourgeoisie. But strikes end disastrously for 
the workers mostly, because the manufacturers, in their own 
interest (which has, be it said, become their interest only through 
the resistance of the workers), are obliged to avoid all useless 
reductions, while the workers feel in every reduction imposed by 
the state of trade a deterioration of their condition, against which 
they must defend themselves as far as in them lies. 
It will be asked, "Why, then, do the workers strike in such cases, 
when the uselessness of such measures is so evident?" Simply 
because they must protest against every reduction, even if dictated 
by necessity; because they feel bound to proclaim that they, as 
human beings, shall not be made to bow to social circumstances, 
but social conditions ought to yield to them as human beings; 
because silence on their part would be a recognition of these social 
conditions, an admission of the right of the bourgeoisie to exploit 
the workers in good times and let them starve in bad ones. Against 
this the working-men must rebel so long as they have not lost all 
human feeling, and that they protest in this way and no other, 

=====第532页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 507 
comes of their being practical English people, who express 
themselves in action, and do not, like German theorists, go to sleep 
as soon as their protest is properly registered and placed ad acta, 
there to sleep as quietly as the protesters themselves. The active 
resistance of the English working-men has its effect in holding the 
money-greed of the bourgeoisie within certain limits, and keeping 
alive the opposition of the workers to the social and political 
omnipotence of the bourgeoisie, while it compels the admission 
that something more is needed than Trades Unions and strikes to 
break the power of the ruling class. But what gives these Unions 
and the strikes arising from them their real importance is this, that 
they are the first attempt of the workers to abolish competition. 
They imply the recognition of the fact that the supremacy of the 
bourgeoisie is based wholly upon the competition of the workers 
among themselves; i.e., upon their want of cohesion.3 And precise­
ly because the Unions direct themselves against the vital nerve of 
the present social order,b however one-sidedly, in however narrow 
a way, are they so dangerous to this social order. The working-
men cannot attack the bourgeoisie, and with it the whole existing 
order of society, at any sorer point than this. If the competition of 
the workers among themselves is destroyed, if all determine not to 
be further exploited by the bourgeoisie, the rule of property is at an 
end. Wages depend upon the relation of demand to supply, upon 
the accidental state of the labour market, simply because the workers 
have hitherto been content to be treated as chattels, to be bought and 
sold. The moment the workers resolve to be bought and sold no 
longer, when, in the determination of the value of labour, they take 
the part of men possessed of a will as well as of working-power, at 
that moment the whole Political Economy of today is at an end.c 
The laws determining the rate of wages would, indeed, come 
into force again in the long run, if the working-men did not go 
beyond this step of abolishing competition among themselves. But 
they must go beyond that unless they are prepared to recede again 
and to allow competition among themselves to reappear. Thus 
once advanced so far, necessity compels them to go farther; to 
abolish not only one kind of competition, but competition itself 
altogether, and that they will do. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "and "the setting of individual 
workers against one another".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "against competition, 
against the vital nerve",  etc.—Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the whole Political Economy of 
today and the laws determining wages are at an end".— Ed. 

=====第533页=====
508 Frederick Engels 
The workers are coming to perceive more clearly with every day 
how competition affects them; they see far more clearly than the 
bourgeois that competition of the capitalists among themselves 
presses upon the workers too, by bringing on commercial crises, 
and that this kind of competition, too, must be abolished. They 
will soon learn how they have to go about it. 
That these Unions contribute greatly to nourish the bitter 
hatred of the workers against the property-holding class need 
hardly be said. From them proceed, therefore, with or without the 
connivance of the leading members, in times of unusual excite­
ment, individual actions which can be explained only by hatred 
wrought to the pitch of despair, by a wild passion overwhelming 
all restraints. Of this sort are the attacks with vitriol mentioned in 
the foregoing pages, and a series of others, of which I shall cite 
several. In 1831, during a violent labour movement, young 
Ashton, a manufacturer in Hyde, near Manchester, was shot one 
evening when crossing a field, and no trace of the assassin 
discovered. There is no doubt that this was a deed of vengeance of 
the working-men.165 Incendiarisms and attempted explosions are 
very common. On Friday, September 29th, 1843,>an attempt was 
made to blow up the saw-works of Padgin, in Howard Street, 
Sheffield. A closed iron tube filled with powder was the means 
employed, and the damage was considerable. On the following 
day, a similar attempt was made in Ibbetson's knife and file works 
at Shales Moor, near Sheffield. Mr. Ibbetson had made himself 
obnoxious by an active participation in bourgeois movements, by 
low wages, the exclusive employment of knobsticks, and the 
exploitation of the Poor Law for his own benefit. He had 
reported, during the crisis of 1842, such operatives as refused to 
accept reduced wages, as persons who could find work but would 
not take it, and were, therefore, not deserving of  relief,  so 
compelling the acceptance of a reduction. Considerable damage 
was inflicted by the explosion, and all the working-men who came 
to view it regretted only "that the whole concern was not blown 
into the air". On Friday, October 6th, 1843, an attempt to set fire 
to the factory of Ainsworth and Crompton, at Bolton, did no 
damage; it was the third or fourth attempt in the same factory 
within a very short time. In the meeting of the Town Council of 
Sheffield, on Wednesday, January 10th, 1844, the Commissioner 
of Police exhibited a cast-iron machine, made for the express 
purpose of producing an explosion, and found filled with four 
pounds of powder, and a fuse which had been lighted but had not 
taken effect, in the works of Mr. Kitchen, Earl Street, Sheffield. 

=====第534页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 509 
On Sunday, January 21st, 1844, an explosion caused by a package 
of powder took place in the sawmill of Bentley  8c White, at Bury, in 
Lancashire, and produced considerable damage. On Thursday, 
February 1st, 1844, the Soho Wheel Works, in Sheffield, were set 
on fire and burnt up. 
Here are six such cases in four months, all of which have their 
sole origin in the embitterment of the working-men against the 
employers. What sort of a social state it must be in which such 
things are possible I need hardly say. These facts are proof 
enough that in England, even in good business years, such as 
1843,  the social war is avowed and openly carried on, and still the 
English bourgeoisie does not stop to reflect! But the case which 
speaks most loudly is that of the Glasgow Thugs,* which came up 
before the Assizes from the 3rd to the 11th of January, 1838. It 
appears from the proceedings that the Cotton-Spinners' Union, 
which existed here from the year 1816, possessed rare organisa­
tion and power. The members were bound by an oath to adhere 
to the decision of the majority, and had during every turnout a 
secret committee which was unknown to the mass of the members, 
and controlled the funds of the Union absolutely. This committee 
fixed a price upon the heads of knobsticks and obnoxious 
manufacturers and upon incendiarisms in mills. A mill was thus 
set on fire in which female knobsticks were employed in spinning 
in the place of men; a Mrs. M'Pherson, mother of one of these 
girls,  was murdered, and both murderers sent to America at the 
expense of the association. As early as 1820, a knobstick named 
M'Quarry was shot at and wounded, for which deed the doer 
received twenty pounds from the Union, but was discovered and 
transported for life.3 Finally, in 1837, in May, disturbances 
occurred in consequence of a turnout in the Oatbank and Mile 
End factories, in which perhaps a dozen knobsticks were mal­
treated. In July, of the same year, the disturbances still continued, 
and a certain Smith, a knobstick, was so maltreated that he died. 
The committee was now arrested, an investigation begun, and the 
leading members found guilty of participation in conspiracies, 
maltreatment of knobsticks, and incendiarism in the mill of James 
* So called from the East Indian tribe, whose only trade is the murder of all the 
strangers who fall into its hands.— Note by Engeb. 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this passage reads: "for which the 
doer received fifteen pounds from the Union. Later a certain Graham was shot at; 
the doer received twenty pounds, but was discovered and transported for 
life."  — Ed. 

=====第535页=====
510 Frederick Engels 
and Francis Wood, and they were transported for seven years. 
What do our good Germans say to this story?* 
The property-holding class, and especially the manufacturing 
portion of it which comes into direct contact with the working-men, 
declaims with the greatest violence against these Unions, and is 
constantly trying to prove their uselessness to the working-men 
upon grounds which are economically perfectly correct, but for 
that very reason partially mistaken, and for the working-man's 
understanding totally without effect. The very zeal of the 
bourgeoisie shows that it is not disinterested in the matter; and 
apart from the direct loss involved in a turnout, the state of the 
case is such that whatever goes into the pockets of the manufactur­
ers comes of necessity out of those of the worker. So that even if 
the working-men did not know that the Unions hold the emula­
tion of their masters in the reduction of wages, at least in a 
measure, in check, they would still stand by the Unions, simply to 
the injury of their enemies, the manufacturers. In war the injury 
of one party is the benefit of the other, and since the working-
men are on a war footing towards their employers, they do merely 
what the great potentates do when they get into a quarrel. Beyond 
all other bourgeois is our friend Dr. Ure, the most furious enemy 
of the Unions. He foams with indignation at the "secret tribunals" 
of the cotton-spinners, the most powerful section of the workers, 
tribunals which boast their ability to paralyse every disobedient 
manufacturer,** "and so bring ruin on the man who had given 
them profitable employment for many a year". He speaks of a 
time***  "when the inventive head and the sustaining heart of 
trade were held in bondage by the unruly lower members". A pity 
that the English working-men will not let themselves be pacified so 
easily with thy fable as the Roman Plebs, thou modern Menenius 
Agrippa! 166 Finally, he relates the following: At one time the 
* "What kind of wild justice must it be in the hearts of these men that 
prompts them, with cold deliberation, in conclave assembled, to doom their brother 
workman, as the deserter of his order and his order's cause, to die as a traitor and 
deserter; and have him executed, since not by any public judge and hangman, then 
by a private one; — like your old Chivalry Femgericht, and Secret-Tribunal, 
suddenly in this strange guise become new; suddenly rising once more on the 
astonished eye, dressed now not in mail-shirts, but in fustian jackets, meeting not in 
Westphalian forests but in the paved Gallowgate of Glasgow!... Such temper must 
be widespread, virulent among the many, when even in its worst acme, it can take 
such a form in a few."—Carlyle, Chartism, p. 40.— Note by Engels. 
** Dr. Ure, Philosophy of Manufactures, p. 282.— Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
*** Ibid., p. 282.—  Note  by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 

=====第536页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 511 
coarse mule-spinners had misused their power beyond all endur­
ance.  High wages, instead of awakening thankfulness towards the 
manufacturers and leading to intellectual improvement (in harm­
less study of sciences useful to the bourgeoisie, of course), in many 
cases produced, pride and supplied funds for supporting rebellious 
spirits in strikes, with which a number of manufacturers were 
visited one after the other in a purely arbitrary manner. During an 
unhappy disturbance of this sort in Hyde, Dukinfield, and the 
surrounding neighbourhood, the manufacturers of the district, 
anxious lest they should be driven from the market by the French, 
Belgians, and Americans, addressed themselves to the 
machine-works of Sharp, Roberts & Co., and requested Mr. Sharp 
to turn his inventive mind to the construction of an automatic 
mule in order "to emancipate the trade from galling slavery and 
impending ruin".* 
"He produced in the course of a few months, a machine apparently instinct 
with the thought, feeling, and tact of the experienced workman—which even in its 
infancy displayed a new principle of regulation, ready in its mature state to fulfil 
the functions of a finished spinner." Thus, the Iron Man, as the operatives fitly call 
it, sprang out of the hands of our modern Prometheus at the bidding of 
Minerva —  a creation destined to restore order among the industrious classes, and 
to confirm to Great Britain the empire of art. The news of this Herculean prodigy 
spread dismay through the Union, and even long before it left its cradle, so to 
speak, it strangled the Hydra of misrule."** 
Ure proves further that the invention of the machine, with 
which four and five colours are printed at once, was a result of the 
disturbances among the calico printers; that the refractoriness of 
the yarn-dressers in the power-loom weaving mills gave rise to a 
new and perfected machine for warp-dressing, and mentions 
several other such cases. A few pages earlier this same Ure gives 
himself a great deal of trouble to prove in detail that machinery is 
beneficial to the workers! But Ure is not the only one; in the 
Factory Report, Mr. Ashworth, the manufacturer, and many 
another, lose no opportunity to express their wrath against the 
Unions. These wise bourgeois, like certain governments, trace 
every movement which they do not understand to the influence of 
ill-intentioned agitators, demagogues, traitors, spouting idiots, and 
* Dr. Ure, Philosophy of Manufactures, p. 367.— Note by Engels to the American 
edition of 1887. 
** Ibid., p. 366, et seq. —Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (In the 
German editions this footnote is given to the words "several other such cases".—Ed.) 
a The German editions give the quotation abridged, the part of the sentence 
following the dash being omitted.— Ed. 

=====第537页=====
512 Frederick Engels 
ill-balanced youth.a They declare that the paid agents of the 
Unions are interested in the agitation because they live upon it, as 
though the necessity for this payment were not forced upon them 
by the bourgeois, who will give such men no employment! 
The incredible frequency of these strikes proves best of all to 
what extent the social war has broken out all over England. No 
week passes, scarcely a day, indeed, in which there is not a strike 
in some direction, now against a reduction, then against a refusal 
to raise the rate of wages, again by reason of the employment of 
knobsticks or the continuance of abuses, sometimes against new 
machinery, or for a hundred other reasons. These strikes, at first 
skirmishes, sometimes result in weighty struggles; they decide 
nothing, it is true, but they are the strongest proof that the 
decisive battle between bourgeoisie and proletariat is approaching. 
They are the military school of the working-men in which they 
prepare themselves for the great struggle which cannot be 
avoided; they are the pronunciamentos of single branches of 
industry that these too have joined the labour movement. And 
when one examines a year's file of the Northern Star, the only sheet 
which reports all the movements of the proletariat, one finds that 
all the proletarians of the towns and of country manufacture have 
united in associations, and have protested from time to time, by 
means of a general strike, against the supremacy of the 
bourgeoisie. And as schools of war, the Unions are unexcelled. In 
them is developed the peculiar courage of the English. It is said 
on the Continent that the English, and especially the-working-
men, are cowardly, that they cannot carry out a revolution 
because, unlike the French, they do not riot at intervals, because 
they apparently accept the bourgeois régime so quietly. This is a 
complete mistake. The English working-men are second to none in 
courage; they are quite as restless as the French, but they fight 
differently. The French, who are by nature political, struggle 
against social evils with political weapons; the English, for whom 
politics exist only as a matter of interest, solely in the interest of 
bourgeois society, fight, not against the Government, but directly 
against the bourgeoisie; and for the time, this can be done only in 
a peaceful manner. Stagnation in business, and the want conse­
quent upon it, engendered the revolt at Lyons, in 1834, in favour 
of the Republic: in 1842, at Manchester, a similar cause gave rise 
to a universal turnout for the Charter and higher wages. That 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "to the influence of ill-
intentioned agitators, malefactors, demagogues, spouting idiots and young peo­
ple".—Erf. 

=====第538页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 513 
courage is required for a turnout, often indeed much loftier 
courage, much bolder, firmer determination than for an insurrec­
tion, is self-evident. It is, in truth, no trifle for a working-man who 
knows want from experience, to face it with wife and children, to 
endure hunger and wretchedness for months together, and stand 
firm and unshaken through it all. What is death, what the galleys 
which await the French revolutionist, in comparison with gradual 
starvation, with the daily sight of a starving family, with the 
certainty of future revenge on the part of the bourgeoisie, all of 
which the English working-man chooses in preference to subjec­
tion under the yoke of the property-holding class? We shall meet 
later an example of this obstinate, unconquerable courage of men 
who surrender to force only when all resistance would be aimless 
and unmeaning. And precisely in this quiet perseverance, in this 
lasting determination which undergoes a hundred tests every day, 
the English working-man develops that side of his character which 
commands most respect. People who endure so much to bend one 
single bourgeois will be able to break the power of the whole 
bourgeoisie. 
But apart from that, the English working-man has proved his 
courage often enough. That the turnout of 1842 had no further 
results came from the fact that the men were in part forced into it 
by the bourgeoisie, in part neither clear nor united as to its object. 
But aside from this, they have shown their courage often enough 
when the matter in question was a specific social one. Not to 
mention the Welsh insurrection of 1839, a complete battle was 
waged in Manchester in May, 1843, during my residence there.167 
Pauling & Henfrey, a brick firm, had increased the size of the 
bricks without raising wages, and sold the bricks, of course, at a 
higher price. The workers, to whom higher wages were refused, 
struck work, and the Brickmakers' Union declared war upon the 
firm. The firm, meanwhile, succeeded with great difficulty in 
securing hands from the neighbourhood, and among the knob­
sticks,  against whom in the beginning intimidation was used; the 
proprietors set twelve men to guard the yard, all ex-soldiers and 
policemen, armed with guns. When intimidation proved unavail­
ing, the brick-yard, which lay scarcely four hundred paces from an 
infantry barracks, was stormed at ten o'clock one night by a crowd 
of brickmakers, who advanced in military order, the first ranks 
armed with guns.* They forced their way in, fired upon the 
* At the corner of Cross Lane and Regent Road. See map of Manchester.— Note 
by Engels (not given in the American and English editions— Ed.). 

=====第539页=====
514 Frederick Engels 
watchmen as soon as they saw them, stamped out the wet bricks 
spread out to dry, tore down the piled-up rows of those already 
dry, demolished everything which came in their way, pressed into 
a building, where they destroyed the furniture and maltreated the 
wife of the overlooker who was living there. The watchmen, 
meanwhile, had placed themselves behind a hedge, whence they 
could fire safely and without interruption. The assailants stood 
before a burning brick-kiln, which threw a bright light upon them, 
so that every ball of their enemies struck home, while every one of 
their own shots missed its mark. Nevertheless, the firing lasted 
half-an-hour, until the ammunition was exhausted, and the object 
of the visit—the demolition of all the destructible objects in the 
yard — was attained. Then the military approached, and the 
brickmakers withdrew to Eccles, three miles from Manchester. A 
short time before reaching Eccles they held roll-call, and each man 
was called according to his number in the section when they 
separated, only to fall the more certainly into the hands of the 
police, who were approaching from all sides. The number of the 
wounded must have been very considerable, but those only could 
be counted who were arrested. One of these had received three 
bullets (in the thigh, the  calf,  and the shoulder), and had travelled 
in spite of them more than four miles on foot. These people have 
proved that they, too, possess revolutionary courage, and do not 
shun a rain of bullets. And when an unarmed multitude, without a 
precise aim common to them all, are held in check in a shut-off 
market-place, whose outlets are guarded by a couple of policemen 
and dragoons, as happened in 1842, this by no means proves a 
want of courage. On the contrary, the multitude would have 
stirred quite as little if the servants of public (i.e., of the bourgeois) 
order had not been present. Where the working-people have a 
specific end in view, they show courage enough; as, for instance, 
in the attack upon Birley's mill, which had later to be protected by 
artillery.168 
In this connection, a word or two as to the respect for the law in 
England. True, the law is sacred to the bourgeois, for it is his own 
composition, enacted with his consent, and for his benefit and 
protection. He knows that, even if an individual law should injure 
him, the whole fabric protects his interests; and more than all, the 
sanctity of the law, the sacredness of order as established by the 
active will of one part of society, and the passive acceptance of the 
other, is the strongest support of his social position. Because the 
English bourgeois finds himself reproduced in his law, as he does 
in his God, the policeman's truncheon which, in a certain measure, 

=====第540页=====
*+ 
*+ 

=====第541页=====

=====第542页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 517 
is his own club, has for him a wonderfully soothing power. But for 
the working-man quite otherwise! The working-man knows too 
well, has learned from too oft-repeated experience, that the law is 
a rod which the bourgeois has prepared for him; and when he is 
not compelled to do so, he never appeals to the law. It is 
ridiculous to assert that the English working-man fears the police, 
when every week in Manchester policemen are beaten, and last 
year an attempt was made to storm a station-house secured by iron 
doors and shutters. The power of the police in the turnout of 
1842 lay, as I have already said, in the want of a clearly defined 
object on the part of the working-men themselves.2 
Since the working-men do not respect the law, but simply 
submit to its power when they cannot change it, it is most natural 
that they should at least propose alterations in it, that they should 
wish to put a proletarian law in the place of the legal fabric of the 
bourgeoisie. This proposed law is the People's Charter,b which 
in form is purely political, and demands a democratic basis for the 
House of Commons. Chartism is the compact form of their 
opposition to the bourgeoisie. In the Unions and turnouts opposi­
tion always remained isolated: it was single working-men or 
sections who fought a single bourgeois. If the fight became 
general, this was scarcely by the intention of the working-men; or, 
when it did happen intentionally, Chartism was at the bottom of it. 
But in Chartism it is the whole working-class which arises against 
the bourgeoisie, and attacks, first of all, the political power, the 
legislative rampart with which the bourgeoisie has surrounded 
itself.  Chartism has proceeded from the Democratic party which 
arose between 1780 and 1790 with and in the proletariat, gained 
strength during the French Revolution, and came forth after the 
peace as the Radical party. It had its headquarters then in 
Birmingham and Manchester, and later0 in London; extorted the 
Reform Bill from the Oligarchs of the old Parliament by a union 
with the Liberal bourgeoisie, and has steadily consolidated  itself, 
since then, as a more and more pronounced working-men's party 
in opposition to the bourgeoisie. In 1838 a committee of the 
General Working-men's Association of London,169 with William 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "in the helplessness of the 
workers themselves".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give such terms and expressions as 
the "People's Charter", "Working-men's Association", "a fair day's wages for a fair 
day's work", "universal suffrage", "complete suffrage", etc. in English in brackets, 
following their German equivalents.— Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "earlier".— Ed. 
18-762 

=====第543页=====
518 Frederick Engels 
Lovett at its head, drew up the People's Charter, whose six points 
are as follows: (1) Universal suffrage for every man who is of age, 
sane and unconvicted of crime; (2) Annual Parliaments; (3) Pay­
ment of members of Parliament, to enable poor men to stand 
for election; (4) Voting by ballot to prevent bribery and intimida­
tion by the bourgeoisie; (5) Equal electoral districts to secure equal 
representation; and (6) Abolition of the even now merely nominal 
property qualification of £300 in land for candidates in order to 
make every voter eligible.170  These six points, which are all limited 
to the reconstitution of the House of Commons, harmless as they 
seem, are sufficient to overthrow the whole English Constitution, 
Queen and Lords included. The so-called monarchical and aristo­
cratic elements of the Constitution can maintain themselves only 
because the bourgeoisie has an interest in the continuance of their 
sham existence; and more than a sham existence neither possesses 
today. But as soon as real public opinion in its totality backs the 
House of Commons, as soon as the House of Commons incorporates 
the will, not of the bourgeoisie alone, but of the whole nation, 
it will absorb the whole power so completely that the last halo must 
fall from the head of the monarch and the aristocracy. The 
English working-man respects neither Lords nor Queen. The bour­
geois,  while in reality allowing them but little influence, yet offers to 
them personally a sham worship. The English Chartist is politically 
a republican, though he rarely or never mentions the word, while 
he sympathises with the republican parties of all countries, and 
calls himself in preference a democrat. But he is more than a mere 
republican, his democracy is not simply political. 
Chartism was from the beginning of 1835 chiefly a movement 
among the working-men, though not yet sharply separated from 
the bourgeoisie.* The Radicalism of the workers went hand in 
hand with the Radicalism of the bourgeoisie; the Charter was the 
shibboleth of both. They held their National Convention every 
year in common, seeming to be one party. The lower middle-class 
was just then in a very bellicose and violent state of mind in 
consequence of the disappointment over the Reform Bill and of 
the bad business years of 1837-1839, and viewed the boisterous 
Chartist agitation with a very favourable eye. Of the vehemence of 
this agitation no one in Germany has any idea. The people were 
called upon to arm themselves, were frequently urged to revolt; 
pikes were got ready, as in the French Revolution, and in 1838, 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "the radical petty-
bourgeoisie".— Ed. 

=====第544页=====
The Condition  of the  Working-Class  in England  519 
one Stephens,  a Methodist parson, said  to the  assembled working-
people  of Manchester: 
"You have  no need  to fear  the  power  of Government,  the  soldiers, bayonets, 
and cannon that  are at the  disposal  of your oppressors;  you  have  a weapon that  is 
far mightier than  all these,  a weapon against which bayonets  and  cannon  are 
powerless,  and a  child  of ten  years  can  wield  it. You  have only  to take  a couple  of 
matches  and a  bundle  of straw dipped  in pitch,  and I  will see what  the Government 
and its hundreds  of thousands  of soldiers will  do against this  one  weapon  if it is 
used boldly."  * 
As early  as that year  the  peculiarly social character  of the 
working-men's Chartism manifested  itself. The  same Stephens said, 
in a meeting  of 200,000  men on  Kersall Moor,  the Mons Sacer  of 
Manchester: 
"Chartism,  my  friends,  is no  political movement, where  the  main point  is your 
getting  the  ballot. Chartism  is a  knife  and  fork question:  the Charter means  a good 
house, good food  and  drink, prosperity,  and  short working-hours." 
The movements against  the New  Poor  Law and for the Ten 
Hours' Bill were already  in the  closest relation  to Chartism.  In all 
the meetings  of that time  the  Tory Oastler  was  active,  and 
hundreds  of petitions  for improvements  of the  social conditions  of 
the workers were circulated along with  the  national petition  for 
the People's Charter adopted  in Birmingham.  In 1839 the  agita­
tion continued  as vigorously  as ever,  and  when  it began  to relax 
somewhat  at the end of the  year, Bussey, Taylor,  and  Frost 
hastened  to call forth uprisings simultaneously  in the  North  of 
England,  in Yorkshire,  and  Wales. Frost's plan being betrayed,  he 
was obliged  to open hostilities prematurely.3 Those  in the  North 
heard  of the  failure  of his  attempt  in time  to withdraw.  Two 
months later,  in January,  1840,  several so-called  spy  outbreaks'5 
took place  in Sheffield  and  Bradford,  in Yorkshire,  and the 
excitement gradually subsided.172 Meanwhile  the  bourgeoisie 
turned  its attention  to more practical projects, more profitable  for 
itself,  namely  the  Corn Laws.  The  Anti-Corn-Law Association  was 
formed  in Manchester,  and the  consequence  was a  relaxation  of 
the tie between  the  Radical bourgeoisie  and the  proletariat.  The 
working-men soon perceived that  for  them  the  abolition  of the 
Corn Laws could  be of  little  use,  while very advantageous  to the 
bourgeoisie;  and  they could therefore  not be won for the  project. 
* We  have seen that  the  workers took this advice seriously.— Note by Engels  (not 
given  in the  American  and  English editions— Ed.). 
a The  German editions  of 1845 and 1892  have  "and  therefore suffered  a 
defeat".—Ed. 
b The  German editions  of 1845 and 1892  give this English term  in bracKets.—  Ed. 
18* 

=====第545页=====
520 Frederick Engels 
The crisis of 1842 came on. Agitation was once more as 
vigorous as in 1839. But this time the rich manufacturing 
bourgeoisie, which was suffering severely under this particular 
crisis,  took part in it. The Anti-Corn Law League, as it was now 
called, assumed a decidedly revolutionary tone. Its journals and 
agitators used undisguisedly revolutionary language, one very 
good reason for which was the fact that the Conservative party 
had been in power since 1841. As the Chartists had previously 
done, these bourgeois leaders called upon the people to rebel; and 
the working-men who had most to suffer from the crisis were not 
inactive, as the year's national petition for the Charter with its 
three and a half million signatures proves. In short, if the two 
Radical parties had been somewhat estranged, they allied them­
selves once more. At a meeting of Liberals and Chartists held in 
Manchester, February 14th, 1842, a petition urging the repeal of 
the Corn Laws and the adoption of the Charter was drawn up. 
The next day it was adopted by both parties. The spring and 
summer passed amidst violent agitation and increasing distress. 
The bourgeoisie was determined to carry the repeal of the Corn 
Laws with the help of the crisis, the want which it entailed, and 
the general excitement. At this time, the Conservatives being in 
power, the Liberal bourgeoisie half abandoned their law-abiding 
habits; they wished to bring about a revolution with the help of 
the workers. The working-men were to take the chestnuts from 
the fire to save the bourgeoisie from burning their own fingers. 
The old idea of a "holy month", a general strike, broached in 
1839 by the Chartists, was revived. This time, however, it was not 
the working-men who wished to quit work, but the manufacturers 
who wished to close their mills and send the operatives into the 
country parishes upon the property of the aristocracy, thus forcing 
the Tory Parliament and the Tory Ministry to repeal the Corn 
Laws.  A revolt would naturally have followed, but the bourgeoisie 
stood safely in the background and could await the result without 
compromising itself if the worst came to the worst. At the end of 
July business began to improve; it was high time. In order not to 
lose the opportunity, three firms in Staleybridge reduced wages in 
spite of the improvement.* Whether they did so of their own 
motion or in agreement with other manufacturers, especially those 
of the League, I do not know. Two withdrew after a time, but the 
third, William Bailey & Brothers, stood firm, and told the 
* Compare Report of Chambers of Commerce of Manchester and Leeds at the 
end of July and beginning of August.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 
1887. 

=====第546页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 521 
objecting operatives that "if this did not please them, they had 
better go and play a bit". This contemptuous answer the hands 
received with jeers. They left the mill, paraded through the town, 
and called upon all their fellows to quit work. In a few hours 
every mill stood idle, and the operatives marched to Mottram 
Moor to hold a meeting. This was on August 5th. August 8th they 
proceeded to Ashton and Hyde five thousand strong, closed all 
the mills and coal-pits, and held meetings, in which, however, the 
question discussed was not, as the bourgeoisie had hoped, the 
repeal of the Corn Laws, but, "a fair day's wages for a fair day's 
work". August 9th they proceeded to Manchester, unresisted by 
the authorities (all Liberals), and closed the mills; on the 11th they 
were in Stockport, where they met with the first resistance as they 
were storming the workhouse, the favourite child of the 
bourgeoisie. On the same day there was a general strike and 
disturbance in Bolton, to which the authorities here, too, made no 
resistance. Soon the uprising spread throughout the whole man­
ufacturing district, and all employments, except harvesting and 
the production of food, came to a standstill. But the rebellious 
operatives were quiet. They were driven into this revolt without 
wishing it. The manufacturers, with the single exception of the 
Tory Birley, in Manchester, had, contrary to their custom, not 
opposed it. The thing had begun without the working-men's 
having any distinct end in view, for which reason they were all 
united in the determination not to be shot at for the benefit of the 
Corn Law repealing bourgeoisie. For the rest, some wanted to 
carry the Charter, others who thought this premature wished 
merely to secure the wages rate of 1840. On this point the whole 
insurrection was wrecked. If it had been from the beginning an 
intentional, determined working-men's insurrection, it would sure­
ly have carried its point; but these crowds who had been driven 
into the streets by their masters, against their own will, and with 
no definite purpose, could do nothing. Meanwhile the bourgeoisie, 
which had not moved a finger to carry the alliance of February 
15th into effect, soon perceived that the working-men did not 
propose to become its tools, and that the illogical manner in which 
it had abandoned its law-abiding standpoint threatened danger. It 
therefore resumed its law-abiding attitude, and placed itself upon 
the side of Government as against the working-men.3 
It swore in trusty retainers as special constables (the German 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "whom it had itself 
provoked and later forced to revolt".—Ed. 

=====第547页=====
522 Frederick Engels 
merchants in Manchester took part in this ceremony, and marched 
in an entirely superfluous manner through the city with their 
cigars in their mouths and thick truncheons in their hands). It 
gave the command to fire upon the crowd in Preston, so that the 
unintentional revolt of the people stood all at once face to face, 
not only with the whole military power of the Government, but 
with the whole property-holding class as well. The working-men, 
who had no especial aim, separated gradually, and the insurrec­
tion came to an end without evil results. Later, the bourgeoisie was 
guilty of one shameful act after another, tried to whitewash itself 
by expressing a horror of popular violence by no means consistent 
with its own revolutionary language of the spring; laid the blame 
of insurrection upon Chartist instigators, whereas it had itself 
done more than all of them together to bring about the uprising; 
and resumed its old attitude of sanctifying the name of the law 
with a shamelessness perfectly unequalled. The Chartists, who 
were all but innocent of bringing about this uprising, who simply 
did what the bourgeoisie meant to do when they made the most of 
their opportunity, were prosecuted and convicted, while the 
bourgeoisie escaped without loss, and had, besides, sold off its old 
stock of goods with advantage during the pause in work. 
The fruit' of the uprising was the decisive separation of the 
proletariat from the bourgeoisie. The Chartists had not hitherto 
concealed their determination to carry the Charter at all costs, 
even that of a revolution; the bourgeoisie, which now perceived, 
all at once, the danger with which any violent change threatened 
its position, refused to hear anything further of physical force, 
and proposed to attain its end by moral force, as though this were 
anything else than the direct or indirect threat of physical force. 
This was one point of dissension, though even this was removed 
later by the assertion of the Chartists (who are at least as worthy of 
being believed as the bourgeoisie3) that they, too, refrained from 
appealing to physical force. The second point of dissension and 
the main one, which brought Chartism to light in its purity, was 
the repeal of the Corn Laws. In this the bourgeoisie13 was directly 
interested, the proletariat not. The Chartists therefore divided into 
two parties whose political programmes agreed literally, but which 
were nevertheless thoroughly different and incapable of union. At 
the Birmingham National Convention, in January, 1843, Sturge, 
the representative of the Radical bourgeoisie, proposed that the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "liberal bourgeoisie".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "radical bourgeoisie".—Ed 

=====第548页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 523 
name of the Charter be omitted from the rules of the Chartist 
Association,173 nominally because this name had become con­
nected with recollections of violence during the insurrection, a 
connection, by the way, which had existed for years, and against 
which Mr. Sturge had hitherto advanced no objection. The 
working-men refused to drop the name, and when Mr. Sturge was 
outvoted, that worthy Quaker suddenly became loyal, betook 
himself out of the hall, and founded a "Complete Suffrage 
Association" within the Radical bourgeoisie. So repugnant had 
these recollections become to the Jacobinical bourgeoisie, that he 
altered even the name Universal Suffrage into the ridiculous title, 
Complete Suffrage. The working-men laughed at him and quietly 
went their way. 
From this moment Chartism was purely a working-men's cause 
freed from all bourgeois elements. The "Complete" journals, the 
Weekly Dispatch, Weekly Chronicle, Examiner, etc., fell gradually into 
the sleepy tone of the other Liberal sheets, espoused the cause of 
Free Trade, attacked the Ten Hours' Bill and all exclusively 
working-men's demands, and let their Radicalism as a whole fall 
rather into the background. The Radical bourgeoisie joined hands 
with the Liberals against the working-men in every collision, and 
in general made the Corn Law question, which for the English is 
the Free Trade question,3 their main business. They thereby fell 
under the dominion of the Liberal bourgeoisie, and now play a 
most pitiful role. 
The Chartist working-men, on the contrary, espoused with 
redoubled zeal all the struggles of the proletariat against the 
bourgeoisie. Free competition has caused the workers suffering 
enough to be hated by them; its apostles, the bourgeoisie, are their 
declared enemies. The working-man has only disadvantages to 
await from the complete freedom of competition. The demands 
hitherto made by him, the Ten Hours' Bill, protection of the 
workers against the capitalist, good wages, a guaranteed position, 
repeal of the New Poor Law, all of the things which belong to 
Chartism quite as essentially as the "Six Points", are directly 
opposed to free competition and Free Trade. No wonder, then, 
that the working-men will not hear of Free Trade and the repeal 
of the Corn Laws (a fact incomprehensible to the whole English 
bourgeoisie), and while at least wholly indifferent to the Corn Law 
question, are most deeply embittered against its advocates. This 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "a question of free compe­
tition".—Ed. 

=====第549页=====
524 Frederick Engels 
question is precisely the point at which the proletariat separates 
from the bourgeoisie, Chartism from Radicalism; and the 
bourgeois understanding cannot comprehend this, because it 
cannot comprehend the proletariat. 
Therein lies the difference between Chartist democracy and all 
previous political bourgeois democracy. Chartism is of an essential­
ly social nature, a class movement.3 The "Six Points" which for the 
Radical bourgeois are the beginning and end of the matter, which 
are meant, at the utmost, to call forth certain further reforms of 
the Constitution, are for the proletarian a mere means to further 
ends.b  "Political power our means, social happiness our end", is 
now the clearly formulated war-cry of the Chartists. The "knife 
and fork question" of the preacher Stephens was a truth for a 
part of the Chartists only, in 1838; it is a truth for all of them in 
1845.  There is no longer a mere politician among the Chartists, 
and even though their Socialism is very little developed, though 
their chief remedy for poverty has hitherto consisted in the 
land-allotment system, which was superseded* by the introduction 
of manufacture,174 though their chief practical propositions0 are 
apparently of a reactionary nature, yet these very measures involve 
the alternative that they must either succumb to the power of 
competition once more and restore the old state of things, or they 
must themselves entirely overcome competition and abolish it. On 
the other hand, the present indefinite state of Chartism, the 
separation from the purely political party, involves that precisely 
the characteristic feature, its social aspect, will have to be further 
developed. The approach to Socialism cannot fail, especially when 
the next crisis directs the working-men by force of sheer want to 
social instead of political remedies. And a crisis must follow the 
present active state of industry and commerce in 1847** at the 
latest, and probably in 1846; one, too, which will far exceed in 
extent and violence all former crises. The working-men will carry 
their Charter, naturally; but meanwhile they will learn to see 
* See Introduction.—Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. 
** (1892) This prophecy has been exactly fulfilled.—Note by Engels to the German 
edition of 1892. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the words "a class 
movement".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the words "to further 
ends".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have in brackets "protection for the 
worker,  etc.".—Ed. 

=====第550页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 525 
clearly with regard to many points which they can make by means 
of it and of which they now know very little. 
Meanwhile the Socialist agitation also goes forward. English 
Socialism comes under our consideration so far only as it affects 
the working-class. The English Socialists demand the gradual 
introduction of possession in common in home colonies m embrac­
ing two to three thousand persons who shall carry on both 
agriculture and manufacture and enjoy equal rights and equal 
education. They demand greater facility of obtaining divorce, the 
establishment of a rational government, with complete freedom of 
conscience and the abolition of punishment, the same to be 
replaced by a rational treatment of the offender. These are their 
practical measures, their theoretical principles do not concern us 
here.  English Socialism arose with Owen, a manufacturer, and 
proceeds therefore with great consideration toward the 
bourgeoisie and great injustice toward the proletariat in its 
methods, although it culminates in demanding the abolition of 
the class antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat.3 
The Socialists are thoroughly tame and peaceable, accept our 
existing order, bad as it is, so far as to reject all other methods but 
that of winning public opinion. Yet they are so dogmaticb that 
success by this method is for them, and for their principles as at 
present formulated, utterly hopeless. While bemoaning the de­
moralisation of the lower classes, they are blind to the element of 
progress in this dissolution of the old social order, and refuse to 
acknowledge that the corruption wrought by private interests and 
hypocrisy in the property-holding class is much greater. They 
acknowledge no historic development, and wish to place the nation 
in a state of Communism at once, overnight,0 not by the unavoida­
ble march of its political development up to the point at which this 
transition becomes both possible and necessary. They understand, 
it is true, why the working-man is resentful against the bourgeois, 
but regard as unfruitful this class hatred, which is, after all, the 
only moral incentive by which the worker can be brought nearer 
the goal. They preach instead, a philanthropy and universal love 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "although essentially it 
goes beyond the framework of the antagonism between the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "abstract" instead of "dog­
matic".— Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the end of this sentence as 
follows: "overnight, without pursuing the political struggle to the end, at which it 
dissolves itself [sich selbst auflöst}." —Ed. 

=====第551页=====
526 Frederick Engels 
far more unfruitful for the present state of England. They 
acknowledge only a psychological development, a development of 
man in the abstract, out of all relation to the Past, whereas the 
whole world rests upon that Past, the individual man included. 
Hence they are too abstract, too metaphysical, and accomplish 
little.  They are recruited in part from the working-class, of which 
they have enlisted but a very small fraction representing, however, 
its most educated and solid elements. In its present form, 
Socialism can never become the common creed of the working-
class;  it must condescend to return for a moment to the Chartist 
standpoint. But the true proletarian Socialism having passed 
through Chartism, purified of its bourgeois elements, assuming 
the form which it has already reached in the minds of many 
Socialists and Chartist leaders (who are nearly all Socialists*), 
must, within a short time, play a weighty part in the history of the 
development of the English people. English Socialism, the basis of 
which is much more ample than that of the French, is behind it in 
theoretical3 development, will have to recede for a moment to the 
French standpoint in order to proceed beyond it later. Meanwhile 
the French, too, will develop farther. English Socialism affords the 
most pronounced expression of the prevailing absence of religion 
among the working-men, an expression so pronounced indeed 
that the mass of the working-men, being unconsciously and merely 
practically irreligious, often draw back before it. But here, too, 
necessity will force the working-men to abandon the remnants of a 
belief which, as they will more and more clearly perceive, serves 
only to make them weak and resigned to their fate, obedient and 
faithful to the vampire property-holding class. 
Hence it is evident that the working-men's movement is divided 
into two sections, the Chartists and the Socialists. The Chartists are 
theoretically15 the more backward, the less developed, but they are 
genuine proletarians all over, the representatives of their class. 
The Socialists are more far-seeing, propose practical remedies 
against distress, but, proceeding originally from the bourgeoisie, 
are for this reason unable to amalgamate completely with the 
* (1892) Socialists, naturally, in the general, not the specifically Owenistic 
sense.— Note by Engels to the German edition of 1892. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the word "theoretical", 
and above, instead of "than that of the French" they have "than French 
Communism".— Ed. 
• The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the word "theoreti­
cally".— Ed. 

=====第552页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 527 
working-class. The union of Socialism with Chartism, the repro­
duction of French Communism in an English manner, will be the 
next step, and has already begun. Then only, when this has been 
achieved, will the working-class be the true intellectual3 leader of 
England. Meanwhile, political and social development will proceed, 
and will foster this new party, this new departure of Chartism. 
These different sections of working-men, often united, often 
separated, Trades Unionists, Chartists, and Socialists, have found­
ed on their own hook numbers of schools and reading-rooms for 
the advancement of education. Every Socialist, and almost every 
Chartist institution, has such a place, and so too have many trades. 
Here the children receive a purely proletarian education, free 
from all the influences of the bourgeoisie; and, in the reading-
rooms, proletarian journals and books alone, or almost alone, are 
to be found. These arrangements are very dangerous for the 
bourgeoisie, which has succeeded in withdrawing several such 
institutes, "Mechanics' Institutes",176 from proletarian influences, 
and making them organs for the dissemination of the sciences 
useful to the bourgeoisie. Here the natural sciences are now 
taught, which may draw the working-men away from the opposi­
tion to the bourgeoisie, and perhaps place in their hands the 
means of making inventions which bring in money for the 
bourgeoisie; while for the working-man the acquaintance with the 
natural sciences is utterly useless now when it too often happens 
that he never gets the slightest glimpse of Nature in his large town 
with his long working-hours. Here Political Economy is preached, 
whose idol is free competition, and whose sum and substance for 
the working-man is this, that he cannot do anything more rational 
than resign himself to starvation. Here all education is tame, 
flabby, subservient to the ruling politics and religion, so that for 
the working-man it is merely a constant sermon upon quiet 
obedience, passivity, and resignation to his fate. 
The mass of working-men naturally have nothing to do with 
these institutes, and betake themselves to the proletarian reading-
rooms and to the discussion of matters which directly concern 
their own interests, whereupon the self-sufficient bourgeoisie says 
its Dixi et salvavi, b and turns with contempt from a class which 
"prefers the angry ranting of ill-meaning demagogues to the 
advantages of solid education". That, however, the working-men 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the word "intellec­
tual".—Ed. 
b Dixi et salvavi (animam meam): I have spoken and saved (my soul).—Ed. 

=====第553页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
appreciate solid education when they can get it unmixed with the 
interested cant of the bourgeoisie, the frequent lectures upon 
scientific, aesthetic, and economic subjects prove which are de­
livered especially in the Socialist institutes,3  and very well attended. 
I have often heard working-men, whose fustian jackets scarcely 
held together, speak upon geological, astronomical, and other 
subjects, with more knowledge than most "cultivated" bourgeois in 
Germany possess. And in how great a measure the English 
proletariat has succeeded in attaining independent education is 
shown especially by the fact that the epoch-making products of 
modern philosophical, political, and poetical literature are read by 
working-men almost exclusively. The bourgeois, enslaved by social 
conditions and the prejudices involved in them, trembles, blesses, 
and crosses himself before everything which really paves the way 
for progress; the proletarian has open eyes for it, and studies it 
with pleasure and success. In this respect the Socialists, especially, 
have done wonders for the education of the proletariat. They have 
translated the French materialists, Helvétius, Holbach, Diderot, 
etc., and disseminated them, with the best English works, in cheap 
editions. 177 Strauss' Life of Jesus and Proudhon's Property also 
circulate among the working-men only.178 Shelley, the genius, the 
prophet, Shelley, and Byron, with his glowing sensuality and his 
bitter satire upon our existing society, find most of their readers in 
the proletariat; the bourgeoisie owns only castrated editions, 
family editions, cut down in accordance with the hypocritical 
morality of today. The two great practical philosophers of latest 
date,  Bentham and Godwin, are, especially the latter, almost 
exclusively the property of the proletariat; for though Bentham 
has a school within the Radical bourgeoisie, it is only the 
proletariat and the Socialists who have succeeded in developing his 
teachings a step forward. The proletariat has formed upon this 
basis a literature, which consists chiefly of journals and pamphlets, 
and is far in advance of the whole bourgeois literature in intrinsic 
worth. On this point more later.179 
One more point remains to be noticed. The factory operatives, 
and especially those of the cotton district, form the nucleus of the 
labour movement. Lancashire, and especially Manchester, is the 
seat of the most powerful Unions, the central point of Chartism, 
the place which numbers most Socialists. The more the factory 
system has taken possession of a branch of industry, the more the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in all proletarian insti­
tutes,  especially the socialist  ones".—Ed. 

=====第554页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 529 
working-men employed in it participate in the labour movement; 
the sharper the opposition between working-men and capitalists, 
the clearer the proletarian consciousness in the working-men. The 
small masters of Birmingham, though they suffer from the crises, 
still stand upon an unhappy middle ground between proletarian 
Chartism and shopkeepers' Radicalism. But, in general, all the 
workers employed in manufacture are won for one form or the 
other of resistance to capital and bourgeoisie; and all are united 
upon this point, that they, as working-men,3 a title of which they 
are proud, and which is the usual form of address in Chartist 
meetings, form a separate class, with separate interests and 
principles, with a separate way of looking at things in contrast with 
that of all property-owners; and that in this class reposes the 
strength and the capacity of development of the nation. 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give the word "working-men" in 
English.— Ed. 

=====第555页=====
THE MINING PROLETARIAT 
The production of raw materials and fuel for a manufacture so 
colossal as that of England requires a considerable number of 
workers. But of all the materials needed for its industries (except 
wool, which belongs to the agricultural districts), England pro­
duces only the minerals: the metals and the coal. While Cornwall 
possesses rich copper, tin, zinc, and lead mines, Staffordshire, 
Wales,3 and other districts yield great quantities of iron, and 
almost the whole North and West of England, central Scotland, and 
certain districts of Ireland, produce a superabundance of coal.* 
* According to the census of 1841, the number of working-men employed in 
mines in Great Britain, without Ireland, was: 
Men Men Women Women Together 
over under over under 
20 years 20 years 20 years 20 years 
Coal-mines 83,408 32,475 1,185 1,165 118,233 
Copper mines 9,866 3,428 913 1,200 15,407 
Lead 9,427 1,932 40 20 11,419 
Iron , 7,773 2,679 424 73 10,949 
Tin „ 4,602 1,349 68 82 6,101 
Various the mineral not 
specified 24,162 6,591 472 491 31,716 
Total 139,238 48,454 3,102 3,031 193,825 
As the coal and iron mines are usually worked by the same people, a part of the 
miners attributed to the coal-mines, and a very considerable part of those mentioned 
under the last heading are to be attributed to the iron mines.— Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "North Wales".— Ed. 

=====第556页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 531 
In the Cornish mines about 19,000 men, and 11,000 women and 
children are employed, in part above and in part below ground. 
Within the mines below ground, men and boys above twelve years 
old are employed almost exclusively. The condition of these 
workers seems, according to the Children's Employment Commis­
sion's Report, to be comparatively endurable, materially, and the 
English often enough boast of their strong, bold miners, who 
follow the veins of mineral below the bottom of the very sea. But 
in the matter of the health of these workers, this same Children's 
Employment Commission's Report judges differently. It shows in 
Dr. Barham's intelligent report how the inhalation of an atmos­
phere containing little oxygen, and mixed with dust and the 
smoke of blasting powder, such as prevails in the mines, seriously 
affects the lungs, disturbs the action of the heart, and diminishes 
the activity of the digestive organs; that wearing toil, and especially 
the climbing up and down of ladders, upon which even vigorous 
young men have to spend in some mines more than an hour a day, 
and which precedes and follows daily work, contributes greatly to 
the development of these evils, so that men who begin this work in 
early youth are far from reaching the stature of women who work 
above ground; that many die young of galloping consumption, and 
most miners at middle age of slow consumption; that they age 
prematurely and become unfit for work between the thirty-fifth 
and forty-fifth years; that many are attacked by acute inflamma­
tions of the respiratory organs when exposed to the sudden 
change from the warm air of the shaft (after climbing the ladder 
in profuse perspiration) to the cold wind above ground; and that 
these acute inflammations are very frequently fatal. Work above 
ground, breaking and sorting the ore, is done by girls and 
children, and is described as very wholesome, being done in the 
open air. 
In the North of England, on the borders of Northumberland 
and Durham, are the extensive lead-mines of Alston Moor. The 
reports from this district* agree almost wholly with those from 
Cornwall. Here, too, there are complaints of want of oxygen, 
excessive dust, powder smoke, carbonic acid gas, and sulphur, in 
the atmosphere of the workings. In consequence, the miners here, 
as in Cornwall, are small of stature, and nearly all suffer from the 
thirtieth year throughout life from chest affections, which end, 
* Also found in the Children's Employment Commission's Report; Commis­
sioner "Mitchell's Report.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887. (In the 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 the reference is given in the text.—Ed.) 

=====第557页=====
532 Frederick Engels 
especially when this work is persisted in, as is almost always the 
case,  in consumption, so greatly shortening the average of life of 
these people. If the miners of this district are somewhat longer 
lived than those of Cornwall, this is the case, because they do not 
enter the mines before reaching the nineteenth year, while in 
Cornwall, as we have seen, this work is begun in the twelfth year. 
Nevertheless, the majority die here, too, between forty and fifty 
years of age, according to medical testimony. Of 79 miners, whose 
death was entered upon the public register of the district, and who 
attained an average of 45 years, 37 had died of consumption and 
6 of asthma. In the surrounding districts, Allendale, Stanhope, 
and Middleton, the average length of life was 49, 48, and 47 years 
respectively, and the deaths from chest affections composed 48, 
54, and 56 per cent of the whole number.3 Let us compare these 
figures with the so-called Swedish tables, detailed tables of mortali­
ty embracing all the inhabitants of Sweden, and recognised in 
England as the most correct standard hitherto attainable for the 
average length of life of the British working-class. According 
to them, male persons who survive the nineteenth year attain an 
average of 57*/2 years; but, according to this, the North of 
England miners are robbed by their work of an average of ten 
years of life. Yet the Swedish tables are accepted as the standard 
of longevity of the workers, and present, therefore, the average 
chances of life as affected by the unfavourable conditions in which 
the proletariat lives, a standard of longevity less than the normal 
one. In this district we find again the lodging-houses and sleeping-
places with which we have already become acquainted in the 
towns, and in quite as filthy, disgusting, and overcrowded a state 
as there. Commissioner Mitchell visited one such sleeping barrack, 
18 feet long, 15 feet wide, and arranged for the reception of 42 
men and 14 boys, or 56 persons altogether, one-half of whom 
slept above the other in berths as on shipboard.6 There was 
no opening for the escape of the foul air; and, although no one 
had slept in this pen for three nights preceding the visit, the smell 
and the atmosphere were such that Commissioner Mitchell could 
not endure it a moment. What must it be through a hot summer 
night, with fifty-six occupants? And this is not the steerage of an 
American slave ship, it is the dwelling of free-born Britons! 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here: "It must be borne in mind 
that all the data refer only to miners who did not begin to work until they were 
nineteen years  old."—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "56 persons in 14 berths, half 
of them above the others as in ships".—Ed. 

=====第558页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 533 
Let us turn now to the most important branch of British mining, 
the iron and coal-mines, which the Children's Employment 
Commission treats in common, and with all the detail which the 
importance of the subject demands. Nearly the whole of the first 
part of this report is devoted to the condition of the workers 
employed in these mines. After the detailed description which 
I have furnished of the state of the industrial workers, I shall, 
however, be able to be as brief in dealing with this subject as the 
scope of the present work requires. 
In the coal and iron mines which are worked in pretty much the 
same way, children of four, five, and seven years are employed.3 
They are set to transporting the ore or coal loosened by the miner 
from its place to the horse-path or the main shaft, and to opening 
and shutting the doors (which separate the divisions of the mine 
and regulate its ventilationb) for the passage of workers and 
material. For watching the doors the smallest children are usually 
employed, who thus pass twelve hours daily, in the dark, alone, 
sitting usually in damp passages without even having work enough 
to save them from the stupefying, brutalising tedium of doing 
nothing. The transport of coal and iron-stone, on the other hand, 
is very hard labour, the stuff being shoved in large tubs, without 
wheels, over the uneven floor of the mine; often over moist clay, 
or through water, and frequently up steep inclines and through 
paths so low-roofed that the workers are forced to creep on hands 
and knees. For this more wearing labour, therefore, older children 
and half-grown girls are employed. One man or two boys per tub 
are employed, according to circumstances; and, if two boys, one 
pushes and the other pulls. The loosening of the ore or coal, 
which is done by men or strong youths of sixteen years or more, is 
also very weary work. The usual working-day is eleven to twelve 
hours,  often longer; in Scotland it reaches fourteen hours, and 
double time is frequent, when all the employees are at work below 
ground twenty-four, and even thirty-six hours at a stretch. Set 
times for meals are almost unknown, so that these people eat 
when hunger and time permit. 
The standard of living of the miners is in general described as 
fairly good and their wages high in comparison with those of the 
agricultural labourers surrounding them (who, however, live at 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "but most of them are over 
eight".—Ed. 
The words "and regulate its ventilation" do not occur in the German editions 
of 1845 and 1892.— Ed. 

=====第559页=====
534 Frederick Engels 
starvation rates), except in certain parts of Scotland and in the 
Irish mines, where great misery prevails. We shall have occasion to 
return later to this statement, which, by the way, is merely relative, 
implying comparison to the poorest class in all England. Mean­
while, we shall consider the evils which arise from the present 
method of mining, and the reader may judge whether any pay in 
money can indemnify the miner for such suffering. 
The children and young people who are employed in transport­
ing coal and iron-stone all complain of being overtired. Even in 
the most recklessly conducted industrial establishments there is no 
such universal and exaggerated overwork. The whole report 
proves this, with a number of examples on every page. It is 
constantly happening that children throw themselves down on the 
stone hearth or the floor as soon as they reach home, fall asleep at 
once without being able to take a bite of food, and have to be 
washed and put to bed while asleep; it even happens that they lie 
down on the way home, and are found by their parents late at 
night asleep on the road. It seems to be a universal practice 
among these children to spend Sunday in bed to recover in some 
degree from the overexertion of the week. Church and school are 
visited by but few, and even of these the teachers complain of 
their great sleepiness and the want of all eagerness to learn. The 
same thing is true of the elder girls and women. They are 
overworked in the most brutal manner. This weariness, which is 
almost always carried to a most painful pitch, cannot fail to affect 
the constitution. The first result of such overexertion is the 
diversion of vitality to the one-sided development of the muscles, 
so that those especially of the arms, legs, and back, of the 
shoulders and chest, which are chiefly called into activity in 
pushing and pulling, attain an uncommonly vigorous develop­
ment, while all the rest of the body suffers and is atrophied from 
want of nourishment. More than all else the stature suffers, being 
stunted and retarded; nearly all miners are short, except those of 
Leicestershire and Warwickshire, who work under exceptionally 
favourable conditions. Further, among boys as well as girls, 
puberty is retarded, among the former often until the eighteenth 
year; indeed, a nineteen years old boy appeared before Commis­
sioner Symons, showing no evidence beyond that of the teeth, that 
he was more than eleven or twelve years old. This prolongation of 
the period of childhood is at bottom nothing more than a sign of 
checked development, which does not fail to bear fruit in later 
years.  Distortions of the legs, knees bent inwards and feet bent 
outwards, deformities of the spinal column and other malforma-

=====第560页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 535 
tions,  appear the more readily in constitutions thus weakened, in 
consequence of the almost universally constrained position during 
work; and they are so frequent that in Yorkshire and Lancashire, 
as in Northumberland and Durham, the assertion is made by 
many witnesses, not only by physicians, that a miner may be 
recognised by his shape among a hundred other persons. The 
women seem to suffer especially from this work, and are seldom, 
if ever, as straight as other women. There is testimony here, too, 
to the fact that deformities of the pelvis and consequent difficult, 
even fatal, child-bearing arise from the work of women in the 
mines. But apart from these local deformities, the coal-miners 
suffer from a number of special affections3 easily explained by the 
nature of the work. Diseases of the digestive organs are first in 
order; want of appetite, pains in the stomach, nausea, and 
vomiting, are most frequent, with violent thirst, which can be 
quenched only with the dirty, lukewarm water of the mine; the 
digestion is checked and all the other affections are thus invited. 
Diseases of the heart, especially hypertrophy, inflammation of the 
heart and pericardium, contraction of the auriculo-ventricular 
communications and the entrance of the aorta are also mentioned 
repeatedly as diseases of the miners, and are readily explained by 
overwork; and the same is true of the almost universal rupture 
which is a direct consequence of protracted overexertion. In part 
from the same cause and in part from the bad, dust-filled 
atmosphere mixed with carbonic acid and hydrocarbon gas, which 
might so readily be avoided, there arise numerous painful and 
dangerous affections of the lungs, especially asthma, which in 
some districts appears in the fortieth, in others in the thirtieth 
year in most of the miners, and makes them unfit for work in a 
short time. Among those employed in wet workings the oppression 
in the chest naturally appears much earlier; in some districts of 
Scotland between the twentieth and thirtieth years, during which 
time the affected lungs are especially susceptible to inflammations 
and diseases of a feverish nature. The peculiar disease of workers 
of this sort is "black spittle",b which arises from the saturation of 
the whole lung with coal particles, and manifests itself in general 
debility, headache, oppression of the chest, and thick, black 
mucous expectoration. In some districts this disease appears in a 
mild form; in others, on the contrary, it is wholly incurable, 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "which are the same as 
those of other miners and are", etc.— Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this English term is given in 
brackets.— Ed. 

=====第561页=====
536 Frederick Engels 
especially in Scotland. Here, besides the symptoms just mentioned, 
which appear in an intensified form, short, wheezing breathing, 
rapid pulse (exceeding 100 per minute), and abrupt coughing, 
with increasing leanness and debility, speedily make the patient 
unfit for work. Every case of this disease ends fatally. Dr. 
Mackellar, in Pencaitland, East Lothian, testified that in all 
the coal-mines which are properly ventilated this disease is 
unknown, while it frequently happens that miners who go from 
well- to ill-ventilated mines are seized by it. The profit-greed of 
mine owners which prevents the use of ventilators is therefore 
responsible for the fact that this working-men's disease exists at all. 
Rheumatism, too, is, with the exception of the Warwick and 
Leicestershire workers, a universal disease of the coal-miners, and 
arises especially from the frequently damp working-places. The 
consequence of all these diseases is that, in all districts without 
exception, the coal-miners age early and become unfit for work 
soon after the fortieth year, though this is different in different 
places. A coal-miner who can follow his calling after the 45th or 
50th year is a very great rarity indeed. It is universally recognised 
that such workers enter upon old age at forty. This applies to 
those who loosen the coal from the bed; the loaders, who have 
constantly to lift heavy blocks of coal into the tubs, age with the 
twenty-eighth or thirtieth year, so that it is proverbial in the 
coal-mining districts that the loaders are old before they are 
young. That this premature old age is followed by the early death 
of the colliers is a matter of course, and a man who reaches sixty is 
a great exception among them. Even in South Staffordshire, 
where the mines are comparatively wholesome, few men reach 
their fifty-first year. Along with this early superannuation of the 
workers we naturally find, just as in the case of the mills, frequent 
lack of employment of the elder men, who are often supported by 
very young children. If we sum up briefly the results of the work 
in coal-mines, we find, as Dr. Southwood Smith, one of the 
commissioners, does, that through prolonged childhood on the 
one hand and premature age on the other, that period of life in 
which the human being is in full possession of his powers, the 
period of manhood, is greatly shortened, while the length of life 
in general is below the average. This, too, on the debit side of the 
bourgeoisie's reckoning! 
All this deals only with the average of the English coal-mines. 
But there are many in which the state of things is much worse, 
those, namely, in which thin seams of coal are worked. The coal 
would be too expensive if a part of the adjacent sand and clay 

=====第562页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 537 
were removed; so the mine owners permit only the seams to be 
worked; whereby the passages which elsewhere are four or five 
feet high and more are here kept so low that to stand upright in 
them is not to be thought of. The working-man lies on his side 
and loosens the coal with his pick; resting upon his elbow as a 
pivot, whence follow inflammations of the joint, and in cases 
where he is forced to kneel, of the knee also. The women and 
children who have to transport the coal crawl upon their hands 
and knees, fastened to the tub by a harness and chain (which 
frequently passes between the legs), while a man behind pushes 
with hands and head. The pushing with the head engenders local 
irritations, painful swellings, and ulcers. In many cases, too, the 
shafts are wet, so that these workers have to crawl through dirty 
or salt water several inches deep, being thus exposed to a special 
irritation of the skin. It can be readily imagined how greatly the 
diseases already peculiar to the miners are fostered by this 
especially frightful, slavish toil. 
But these are not all the evils which descend upon the head of 
the coal-miner. In the whole British Empire there is no occupation 
in which a man may meet his end in so many diverse ways as in 
this one. The coal-mine is the scene of a multitude of the most 
terrifying calamities, and these come directly from the selfishness 
of the bourgeoisie. The hydrocarbon gas which develops so freely 
in these mines, forms, when combined with atmospheric air, an 
explosive which takes fire upon coming into contact with a flame, 
and kills every one within its reach. Such explosions take place, in 
one mine or another, nearly every day; on September 28th, 1844, 
one killed 96 men in Haswell Colliery, Durham. The carbonic acid 
gas, which also develops in great quantities, accumulates in the 
deeper parts of the mine, frequently reaching the height of a man, 
and suffocates every one who gets into it. The doors which 
separate the sections of the mines are meant to prevent the 
propagation of explosions and the movement of the gases; but 
since they are entrusted to small children, who often fall asleep or 
neglect them, this means of prevention is illusory. A proper 
ventilation of the mines by means of fresh air-shafts could almost 
entirely remove the injurious effects of both these gases. But for 
this purpose the bourgeoisie has no money to spare, preferring to 
command the working-men to use the Davy lamp, which is wholly 
useless because of its dull light, and is, therefore, usually re­
placed by a candle. If an explosion occurs, the recklessness of the 
miner is blamed, though the bourgeois might have made the 
explosion well-nigh impossible by supplying good ventilation. 

=====第563页=====
538 Frederick Engels 
Further, every few days the roof of a working falls in, and buries 
or mangles the workers employed in it. It is the interest of the 
bourgeois to have the seams worked out as completely as possible, 
and hence the accidents of this sort. Then, too, the ropes by which 
the men descend into the mines are often rotten, and break, so 
that the unfortunates fall, and are crushed. All these accidents, 
and I have no room for special cases, carry off yearly, according to 
the Mining Journal, some fourteen hundred human beings.180 The 
Manchester Guardian reports at least two or three accidents every 
week for Lancashire alone. In nearly all mining districts the 
people composing the coroner's juries are, in almost all cases, 
dependent upon the mine owners, and where this is not the case, 
immemorial custom insures that the verdict shall be: "Accidental 
Death". Besides, the jury takes very little interest in the state of 
the mine, because it does not understand anything about the 
matter. But the Children's Employment Commission does not 
hesitate to make the mine owners directly responsible for the 
greater number of these cases. 
As to the education and morals of the mining population, they 
are, according to the Children's Employment Commission, pretty 
good in Cornwall, and excellent in Alston Moor; in the coal 
districts, in general, they are, on the contrary, reported as on an 
excessively low plane. The workers live in the country in neglected 
regions, and if they do their weary work, no human being outside 
the police force troubles himself about them. Hence, and from the 
tender age at which children are put to work, it follows that their 
mental education is wholly neglected. The day schools are not 
within their reach, the evening and Sunday schools mere shams, 
the teachers worthless. Hence, few can read and still fewer write. 
The only point upon which their eyes are as yet open is the fact 
that their wages are far too low for their hateful and dangerous 
work. To church they go seldom or never; all the clergy complain 
of their irreligion as beyond comparison. As a matter of fact, their 
ignorance of religious and of secular things, alike, is such that the 
ignorance of the factory operatives, shown in numerous examples 
in the foregoing pages, is trifling in comparison with it. The 
categories of religion are known to them only from the terms of 
their oaths. Their morality is destroyed by their work  itself.  That 
the overwork of all miners must engender drunkenness is  self-
evident. As to their sexual relations, men, women, and children 
work in the mines, in many cases, wholly naked, and in most cases, 
nearly so, by reason of the prevailing heat, and the consequences 
in the dark, lonely mines may be imagined. The number of 

=====第564页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 539 
illegitimate children is here disproportionately large, and indicates 
what goes on among the half-savage population below ground; but 
proves too, that the illegitimate intercourse of the sexes has not 
here,  as in the great cities, sunk to the level of prostitution. The 
labour of women entails the same consequences as in the factories, 
dissolves the family, and makes the mother totally incapable of 
household work. 
When the Children's Employment Commission's Report was laid 
before Parliament, Lord Ashley hastened to bring in a bill wholly 
forbidding the work of women in the mines, and greatly limiting 
that of children. The bill was adopted,181 but has remained a 
dead letter in most districts, because no mine inspectors were 
appointed to watch over its being carried into effect. The evasion 
of the law is very easy in the country districts in which the mines 
are situated; and no one need be surprised that the Miners' Union 
laid before the Home Secretary an official notice, last year, that in 
the Duke of Hamilton's coal-mines in Scotland, more than sixty 
women were at work; or that the Manchester Guardian reported 
that a girl perished in an explosion in a mine near Wigan, and no 
one troubled himself further about the fact that an infringement 
of the law was thus revealed. In single cases the employment of 
women may have been discontinued, but in general the old state 
of things remains as before. 
These are, however, not all the afflictions known to the 
coal-miners. The bourgeoisie, not content with ruining the health 
of these people, keeping them in danger of sudden loss of life, 
robbing them of all opportunity for education, plunders them in 
other directions in the most shameless manner. The truck system 
is here the rule, not the exception, and is carried on in the most 
direct and undisguised manner. The cottage system, likewise, is 
universal, and here almost a necessity; but it is used here, too, for 
the better plundering of the workers. To these means of oppres­
sion must be added all sorts of direct cheating.3 While coal is sold 
by weight, the worker's wages are reckoned chiefly by measure; 
and when his tub is not perfectly full he receives no pay whatever, 
while he gets not a farthing for overmeasure. If there is more 
than a specified quantity of dust in the tub, a matter which 
depends much less upon the miner than upon the nature of the 
seam, he not only loses his whole wage but is fined besides. The 
fine system in general is so highly perfected in the coal-mines, that 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this sentence reads "To these must 
be added various other forms of fraud."—Ed. 

=====第565页=====
540 Frederick Engels 
a poor devil who has worked the whole week and comes for his 
wages, sometimes learns from the overseer, who fines at discretion 
and without summoning the workers, that he not only has no 
wages but must pay so and so much in fines extra! The overseer 
has, in general, absolute power over wages; he notes the work 
done, and can please himself as to what he pays the worker, who 
is forced to take his word. In some mines, where the pay is 
according to weight, false decimal scales are used, whose weights 
are not subject to the inspection of the authorities; in one 
coal-mine there was actually a regulation that any workman who 
intended to complain of the falseness of the scales must give notice 
to the overseer three weeks in advance! In many districts, especially in 
the North of England, it is customary to engage the workers by 
the year; they pledge themselves to work for no other employer 
during that time, but the mine owner by no means pledges himself 
to give them work, so that they are often without it for months 
together, and if they seek elsewhere, they are sent to the treadmill 
for six weeks for breach of contract. In other contracts, work to 
the amount of 26s. every 14 days, is promised the miners, but not 
furnished; in others still, the employers advance the miners small 
sums to be worked out afterwards, thus binding the debtors to 
themselves. In the North, the custom is general of keeping the 
payment of wages one week behindhand, chaining the miners in 
this way to their work. And to complete the slavery of these 
enthralled workers, nearly all the Justices of the Peace in the coal 
districts are mine owners themselves, or relatives or friends of 
mine owners, and possess almost unlimited power in these poor, 
uncivilised regions where there are few newspapers, these few in 
the service of the ruling class, and but little other agitation.3 It is 
almost beyond conception how these poor coal-miners have been 
plundered and tyrannised over by Justices of the Peace acting as 
judges in their own cause. 
So it went on for a long time. The workers did not know any 
better than that they were there for the purpose of being swindled 
out of their very lives. But gradually, even among them, and 
especially in the factory districts, where contact with the more 
intelligent operatives could not fail of its effect, there arose a spirit 
of opposition to the shameless oppression of the "coal kings". The 
men began to form Unions and strike from time to time. In 
civilised districts they joined the Chartists body and soul. The 
great coal district of the North of England, shut off from all 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "political agitation".—Ed. 

=====第566页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 541 
industrial intercourse, remained backward until, after many ef­
forts,  partly of the Chartists and partly of the more intelligent 
miners themselves, a general spirit of opposition arose in 1843. 
Such a movement seized the workers of Northumberland and 
Durham that they placed themselves at the forefront of a general 
Union of coal-miners throughout the kingdom, and appointed W, 
P. Roberts, a Chartist solicitor, of Bristol, their "Attorney Gener­
al", he having distinguished himself in earlier Chartist trials. The 
Union soon spread over a great majority of the districts; agents 
were appointed in all directions, who held meetings everywhere 
and secured new members; at the first conference of delegates, in 
Manchester, in 1844,a there were 60,000 members represented, 
and at Glasgow, six months later, at the second conference, 
100,000. Here all the affairs of the coal-miners were discussed and 
decisions as to the greater strikes arrived at. Several journals were 
founded, especially the Miner's Advocate* at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, 
for defending the rights of the miners. On March 31st, 1844, the 
contracts of all the miners of Northumberland and Durham 
expired. Roberts was empowered to draw up a new agreement, in 
which the men demanded: (1) Payment by weight instead of 
measure; (2) Determination of weight by means of ordinary scales 
subject to the public inspectors; (3) Half-yearly renewal of con­
tracts;  (4) Abolition of the fines system and payment according to 
work actually done; (5) The employers to guarantee to miners in 
their exclusive service at least four days' work per week, or wages 
for the same. This agreement was submitted to the "coal kings", 
and a deputation appointed to negotiate with them; they an­
swered, however, that for them the Union did not exist, that they 
had to deal with single workmen only, and should never recognise 
the Union. They also submitted an agreement of their own which 
ignored all the foregoing points, and was, naturally, refused by the 
miners. War was thus declared. On March 31st, 1844, 40,000 
miners laid down their picks, and every mine in the county stood 
empty. The funds of the Union were so considerable that for 
several months a weekly contribution of 2s. 6d. could be assured 
to each family. While the miners were thus putting the patience 
of their masters to the test, Roberts organised with incompa­
rable perseverance both strike and agitation, arranged for the 
holding of meetings, traversed England from one end to the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "in January 1844".—Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 here have "the monthly Miner's 
Advocate".—Ed. 

=====第567页=====
542 Frederick Engels 
other,3 preached peaceful and legal agitation, and carried on a cru­
sade against the despotic Justices of the Peace and truck masters, 
such as had never been known in England. This he had begun at 
the beginning of the year. Wherever a miner had been condemned 
by a Justice of the Peace, he obtained a  habeas corpus  from the Court 
of Queen's bench, brought his client to London, and always 
secured an acquittal.182 Thus, January 13th, Judge Williams of 
Queen's bench acquitted three miners condemned by the Justices 
of the Peace of Bilston, South Staffordshire; the offence of these 
people was that they refused to work in a place which threatened 
to cave in, and had actually caved in before their return! On an 
earlier occasion, Judge Patteson had acquitted six working-men, so 
that the name Roberts began to be a terror to the mine owners.b 
In Preston four of his clients were in jail. In the first week of 
Januaryc he proceeded thither to investigate the case on the spot, 
but found, when he arrived, the condemned all released before 
the expiration of the sentence. In Manchester there were seven in 
jail; Roberts obtained a habeas corpus and acquittal for all from 
Judge Wightman. In Prescott nine coal-miners were in jail, 
accused of creating a disturbance in St. Helens, South Lancashire, 
and awaiting trial; when Roberts arrived upon the spot, they were 
released at once. All this took place in the first half of 
February. In April, Roberts released a miner from jail in Derby, 
four in Wakefield,d and four in Leicester. So it went on for a time 
until these Dogberries6 came to have some respect for the miners. 
The truck system shared the same fate. One after another Roberts 
brought the disreputable mine owners before the courts, and 
compelled the reluctant Justices of the Peace to condemn them; 
such dread of this "lightning" "Attorney General" who seemed to 
be everywhere at once spread among them, that at Belper/ for 
instance, upon Roberts' arrival, a truck firm published the follow­
ing notice: 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "made collections in aid of 
the strikers",  etc.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "who were Justices of the 
Peace".—Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give "February".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give "Yorkshire" in brackets.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "as these Justices of the 
Peace were called after the famous character in Shakespeare's Much Ado About 
Nothing",  etc.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "at Belper, near Derby".—Ed. 

=====第568页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 543 
NOTICE! 
"Pentrich Colliery 
"Messrs. Haslam think it right (to prevent mistake), to give notice that all men 
employed at their colliery will receive their wages wholly in money, and be at 
liberty to spend it where they like. If they buy at Messrs. Haslam's shop they will be 
supplied (as heretofore) at wholesale prices; but they are not expected to buy there, 
and will have the same work and wages whether they go to that shop or any 
other." 
This triumph aroused the greatest jubilation throughout the 
English working-class, and brought the Union a mass of new 
members. Meanwhile the strike in the North was proceeding. Not 
a hand stirred, and Newcastle, the chief coal port, was so stripped 
of its commodity that coal had to be brought from the Scotch 
coast, in spite of the proverb.3 At first, while the Union's funds 
held out, all went well, but towards summer the struggle became 
much more painful for the miners. The greatest want prevailed 
among them; they had no money, for the contributions of the 
workers of all branches of industry in England availed little among 
the vast number of strikers, who were forced to borrow from the 
small shop-keepers at a heavy loss. The whole press, with the 
single exception of the few proletarian journals, was against them; 
the bourgeois, even the few among them who might have had 
enough sense of justice to support the miners, learnt from the 
corrupt Liberal and Conservative sheets only lies about them. A 
deputation of twelve miners who went to London received a sum 
from the proletariat there, but this, too, availed little among the 
mass who needed support. Yet, in spite of all this, the miners 
remained steadfast, and what is even more significant, were quiet 
and peaceable in the face of all the hostilities and provocation of 
the mine owners and their faithful servants. No act of revenge was 
carried out, not a renegade was maltreated, not one single theft 
committed. Thus the strike had continued well on towards four 
months, and the mine owners still had no prospect of getting the 
upper hand. One way was, however, still open to them. They 
remembered the cottage system; it occurred to them that the 
houses of the rebellious spirits were THEIR property. In July, 
notice to quit was served the workers, and, in a week, the whole 
forty thousand were put out of doors. This measure was carried 
out with revolting cruelty. The sick, the feeble, old men and little 
a In the German text the last phrase is expanded as follows: "although in 
English 'to carry coals to Newcastle' means the same as in Greek 'to carry owls to 
Athens', namely, to do something entirely superfluous".— Ed. 

=====第569页=====
544 Frederick Engels 
children, even women in child-birth, were mercilessly turned from 
their beds and cast into the roadside ditches. One agent dragged 
by the hair from her bed, and into the street, a woman in the 
pangs of child-birth. Soldiers and police in crowds were present, 
ready to fire at the first symptom of resistance, on the slightest 
hint of the Justices of the Peace, who had brought about the whole 
brutal procedure. This, too, the working-men endured without 
resistance. The hope had been that the men would use violence; 
they were spurred on with all force to infringements of the laws, 
to furnish an excuse for making an end of the strike by the 
intervention of the military. The homeless miners, remembering 
the warnings of their Attorney General, remained unmoved, set 
up their household goods upon the moors or the harvested fields, 
and held out. Some, who had no other place, encamped on the 
roadsides and in ditches, others upon land belonging to other 
people, whereupon they were prosecuted, and, having caused 
"damage of the value of a halfpenny", were fined a pound, and, 
being unable to pay it, worked it out on the treadmill. Thus they 
lived eight weeks and more of the wet fag-end of last3 summer 
under the open sky with their families, with no further shelter for 
themselves and their little ones than the calico curtains of their 
beds;  with no other help than the scanty allowances of their Union 
and the fast shrinking credit with the small dealers. Hereupon 
Lord Londonderry, who owns considerable mines in Durham, 
threatened the small tradesmen in "his" town of Seaham with his 
most high displeasure if they should continue to give credit to 
"his"  rebellious workers. This "noble" lord made himself the first 
clown of the turnout in consequence of the ridiculous, pompous, 
ungrammatical ukases addressed to the workers, which he pub­
lished from time to time, with no other result than the merriment 
of the nation.* When none of their efforts produced any effect, 
the mine owners imported, at great expense, hands from Ireland 
and such remote parts of Wales as have as yet no labour 
movement. And when the competition of workers against workers 
was thus restored, the strength of the strikers collapsed. The mine 
owners obliged them to renounce the Union, abandon Roberts, 
and accept the conditions laid down by the employers. Thus 
ended at the close b of September the great five months' battle of 
* (1892) Nothing new under the sun, at least in Germany. Our "König Stumm" 
are only copies of long-past English originals which are now impossible in their 
native country.— Note by Engels to the German edition of 1892. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give "1844" in brackets.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "at the beginning".— Ed. 

=====第570页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 545 
the coal-miners against the mine owners, a battle fought on the 
part of the oppressed with an endurance, courage, intelligence, 
and coolness which demands the highest admiration. What a 
degree of true human culture, of enthusiasm and strength of 
character, such a battle implies on the part of mena who, as we 
have seen in the Children's Employment Commission's Report, 
wiere described as late as 1840, as being thoroughly brutal and 
wanting in moral sense! But how hard, too, must have been the 
pressure which brought these forty thousand colliers to rise as one 
man and to fight out the battle like an army not only well-
disciplined but enthusiastic, an army possessed of one single 
determination, with the greatest coolness and composure, to a 
point beyond which further resistance would have been madness. 
And what a battle! Not against visible, mortal enemies, but against 
hunger, want, misery, and homelessness, against their own pas­
sions provoked to madness by the brutality of wealth. If they had 
revolted with violence, they, the unarmed and defenceless, would 
have been shot down, and a day or two would have decided the 
victory of the owners. This law-abiding reserve was no fear of the 
constable's  staff,  it was the result of deliberation, the best proof of 
the intelligence and self-control of the working-men. 
Thus were the working-men forced once more, in spite of their 
unexampled endurance, to succumb to the might of capital. But 
the fight had not been in vain. First of all, this nineteen weeks' 
strike had torn the miners of the North of England forever from 
the intellectual death in which they had hitherto lain; they have 
left their sleep, are alert to defend their interests, and have 
entered the movement of civilisation, and especially the movement 
of the workers. The strike, which first brought to light the whole 
cruelty of the owners, has established the opposition of the 
workers here, forever, and made at least two-thirds of them 
Chartists; and the acquisition of thirty thousand such determined, 
experienced men is certainly of great value to the Chartists. Then, 
too, the endurance and law-abiding which characterised the whole 
strike, coupled with the active agitation which accompanied it, has 
fixed public attention upon the miners. On the occasion of the 
debate upon the export duty on coal, Thomas Duncombe, the only 
decidedly Chartist member of the House of Commons, brought up 
the condition of the coal-miners, had their petition read, and by 
his speech forced the bourgeois journals to publish, at least in 
their reports of Parliamentary proceedings, a correct statement of 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "a mass of 40,000 men".— Ed. 

=====第571页=====
546 Frederick Engels 
the case.183  Immediately after the strike, occurred the explosion at 
Haswell; Roberts went to London, demanded an audience with 
Peel, insisted as representative of the miners upon a thorough 
investigation of the case, and succeeded in having the first 
geological and chemical notabilities of England, Professors Lyell 
and Faraday, commissioned to visit the spot. As several other 
explosions followed in quick succession, and Roberts again laid the 
details before the Prime Minister, the latter promised to propose the 
necessary measures for the protection of the workers, if possible, 
in the next session of Parliament, i. e., the present one of 1845. All 
this would not have been accomplished if these workers had not, by 
means of the strike, proved themselves freedom-loving men worthy 
of all respect, and if they had not engaged Roberts as their counsel. 
Scarcely had it become known that the coal-miners of the North 
had been forced to renounce the Union and discharge Roberts, 
when the miners of Lancashire formed a Union of some ten 
thousand men, and guaranteed their Attorney General a salary of 
£1,200 a year. In the autumn of last year they collected more than 
£700,  rather more than £200 of which they expended upon 
salaries and judicial expenses, and the rest chiefly in support of 
men out of work, either through want of employment or through 
dissensions with their employers. Thus the working-men are 
constantly coming to see more clearly that, united, they too are a 
respectable power, and can, in the last extremity, defy even the 
might of the bourgeoisie. And this insight, the gain of all labour 
movements, has been won for all the miners of England by the 
Union and the strike of 1844. In a very short time the difference 
of intelligence and energy which now exists in favour of the 
factory operatives will have vanished, and the miners of the 
kingdom will be able to stand abreast of them in every respect. 
Thus one piece of standing ground after another is undermined 
beneath the feet of the bourgeoisie; and how long will it be before 
their whole social and political edifice collapses with the basis upon 
which it rests?* 
But the bourgeoisie will not take warning. The resistance of the 
miners does but embitter it the more. Instead of appreciating this 
forward step in the general movement of the workers,3 the 
* The coal-miners have at this moment, 1886, six of their body sitting in the 
House of Commons.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 (reproduced in 
the English edition of 1892  —Ed.). 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "instead of being brought 
to their senses by this movement",  etc.—Ed. 

=====第572页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 547 
property-holding class saw in it only a source of rage against a 
class of people who are fools enough to declare themselves no 
longer submissive to the treatment they had hitherto received. It 
saw in the just demands of the non-possessing workers only 
impertinent discontent, mad rebellion against "Divine and human 
order", and, in the best case, a success (to be resisted by the 
bourgeoisie with all its might) won by "ill-intentioned demagogues 
who live by agitation and are too lazy to work". It sought, of 
course, without success, to represent to the workers that Roberts 
and the Union's agents, whom the Union very naturally had to 
pay, were insolent swindlers, who drew the last farthing from the 
working-men's pockets. When such insanity prevails in the proper­
ty-holding class, when it is so blinded by its momentary profit that 
it no longer has eyes for the most conspicuous signs of the times, 
surely all hope of a peaceful solution of the social question for 
England must be abandoned. The only possible solution is a 
violent revolution, which cannot fail to take place. 

=====第573页=====
THE AGRICULTURAL PROLETARIAT 
We have seen in the introduction how, simultaneously with the 
small bourgeoisie and the modest independence of the former 
workers, the small peasantry also was ruined when the former 
Union of industrial and agricultural work was dissolved, the 
abandoned fields thrown together into large farms, and the small 
peasants superseded by the overwhelming competition of the large 
farmers. Instead of being landowners or leaseholders, as they had 
been hitherto, they were now obliged3 to hire themselves as 
labourers to the large farmers or the landlords. For a time this 
position was endurable, though a deterioration in comparison with 
their former one. The extension of industry kept pace with the 
increase of population until the progress of manufacture began to 
assume a slower pace, and the perpetual improvement of machin­
ery made it impossible for manufacture to absorb the whole 
surplus of the agricultural population. From this time forward, the 
distress which had hitherto existed only in the manufacturing 
districts, and then only at times, appeared in the agricultural 
districts too. The twenty-five years' struggle with France came to 
an end at about the same time184; the diminished production at the 
various seats ®f the wars, the shutting off of imports, and the 
necessity of providing for the British army in Spain, had given 
English agriculture an artificial prosperity, and had besides with­
drawn to the army vast numbers of workers from their ordinary 
occupations. This check upon the import trade, the opportunity 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "obliged to give up their owr 
farms and".— Ed. 

=====第574页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 549 
for exportation, and the military demand for workers, now 
suddenly came to an end; and the necessary consequence was what 
the English call agricultural distress.3 The farmers had to sell their 
corn at low prices, and could, therefore, pay only low wages. In 
1815,  in order to keep up prices, the Corn Laws were passed, 
prohibiting the importation of corn so long as the price of wheat 
continued less than 80 shillings per quarter. These naturally 
ineffective laws were several times modified, but did not succeed 
in ameliorating the distress in the agricultural districts. All that 
they did was to change the disease, which, under free competition 
from abroad, would have assumed an acute form, culminating in a 
series of crises, into a chronic one which bore heavily but 
uniformly upon the farm labourers. 
For a time after the rise of the agricultural proletariat, the 
patriarchal relation between master and man, which was being 
destroyed for manufacture, developed here the same relation of 
the farmer to his hands which still exists almost everywhere in 
Germany. So long as this lasted, the poverty of the farm-hands 
was less conspicuous; they shared the fate of the farmer, and were 
discharged only in cases of the direst necessity. But now all this is 
changed. The farm-hands have become day-labourers almost 
everywhere, are employed only when needed by the farmers, and, 
therefore, often have no work for weeks together, especially in 
winter. In the patriarchal time, the hands and their families lived 
on the farm, and their children grew up there, the farmer trying 
to find occupation on the spot for the oncoming generation; 
day-labourers, then, were the exception, not the rule. Thus there 
was, on every farm, a larger number of hands than were strictly 
necessary. It became, therefore, the interest of the farmers to 
dissolve this relation, drive the farm-hand from the farm, and 
transform him into a day-labourer. This took place pretty general­
ly towards the year 1830,b and the consequence was that the 
hitherto lajentc over-population was set free, the rate of wages 
forced down, and the poor-rate enormously increased. From this 
time the agricultural districts became the headquarters of perma­
nent, as the manufacturing districts had long been of periodic, 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give "agricultural distress" in English, 
followed by the German equivalent.— Ed. 
b The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "towards the end of the 
twenties of the present century".—Ed. 
1 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "to use an expression from 
physics".— Ed. 
19-762 

=====第575页=====
550 Frederick Engels 
pauperism3; and the modification of the Poor Law was the first 
measure which the State was obliged to apply to the daily 
increasing impoverishment of the country parishes. Moreover, the 
constant extension of farming on a large scale, the introduction of 
threshing and other machines, and the employment of women and 
children (which is now so general that its effects have recently 
been investigated by a special official commission), threw a large 
number of men out of employment. It is manifest, therefore, that 
here,  too, the system of industrial production has made its 
entrance, by means of farming on a large scale, by the abolition of 
the patriarchal relation, which is of the greatest importance just 
here,  by the introduction of machinery, steam, and the labour of 
women and children. In so doing, it has swept the last and most 
stationary portion of working humanity into the revolutionary 
movement. But the longer agriculture had remained stationary, 
the heavier now became the burden upon the worker, the more 
violently broke forth the results of the disorganisation of the old 
social fabric. The "over-population" came to light all at once, and 
could not, as in the manufacturing districts, be absorbed by the 
needs of an increasing production. New factories could always be 
built, if there were consumers for their products, but new land 
could not be created. The cultivation of waste common land was 
too daring a speculation for the bad times following the conclusion 
of peace.b The necessary consequence was that the competition of 
the workers among each other reached the highest point of 
intensity, and wages fell to the minimum. So long as the Old Poor 
Law existed, the workers received relief from the rates; wages 
naturally fell still lower, because the farmers forced the largest 
possible number of labourers to claim  relief.  The higher poor-rate, 
necessitated by the surplus population, was only increased by this 
measure, and the New Poor Law, of which we shall have more to 
say later, was now enacted as a remedy. But this did not improve 
matters. Wages did not rise, the surplus population could not be 
got rid of, and the cruelty of the new law did but serve to embitter 
the people to the utmost. Even the poor-rate, which diminished at 
first after the passage of the new law, attained its old height after 
a few years. Its only effect was that whereas previously three to 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this sentence reads: "From this time 
the agricultural districts became the main seats of permanent, as the manufac­
turing districts of periodic, pauperism."—Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892, this sentence reads: "The 
cultivation of waste common land was too risky a speculation for big capital to be 
invested in it following the conclusion of peace."—Ed. 

=====第576页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 551 
four million half-paupers had existed, a million of total paupers 
now appeared, and the rest, still half-paupers, merely went 
without  relief.  The poverty in the agricultural districts has in­
creased every year. The people live in the greatest want, whole 
families must struggle along with 6, 7, or 8 shillings a week, and at 
times have nothing. Let us hear a description of this population 
given by a Liberal member of Parliament as early as 1830*: 
"That is an English peasant or pauper; for the words are synonymous. His sire 
was a pauper, and his mother's milk wanted nourishment. From infancy his food 
has been bad as well as insufficient; and he now feels the pains of unsatisfied 
hunger nearly whenever he is awake. But half-clothed, and never supplied with 
more warmth than suffices to cook his scanty meals, cold and wet come to him, and 
stay by him with the weather. He is married, but he has not tasted the highest joys 
of husband and father. His partner, and little ones being, like  himself,  often 
hungry, seldom warm, sometimes sick without aid, and always sorrowful without 
hope, are greedy, selfish, and vexing; so, to use his own expression, he 'hates the 
sight of them', and resorts to his hovel, only because a hedge affords less shelter 
from the wind and rain." He must support his family, though he cannot do so. 
"This brings begging, trickery, and quarrelling; and ends in settled craft. Though 
he have the inclination, he wants the courage to become, like more energetic men 
of his class, a poacher or smuggler on a large scale; but he pilfers occasionally, and 
teaches his children to lie and steal. His subdued and slavish manner towards his 
great neighbours shows that they treat him with suspicion and harshness. 
Consequently, he at once dreads and hates them; but he will never harm them by 
violent means. Too degraded to be desperate, he is thoroughly depraved. His 
miserable career will be short; rheumatism and asthma are conducting him to the 
workhouse, where he will breathe his last without one pleasant recollection, and so 
make room for another wretch who may live and die in the same way."3 
Our author adds that besides this class of agricultural labourers, 
there is still another, somewhat more energetic and better en­
dowed physically, mentally, and morally; those, namely, who live 
as wretchedly, but were not born to this condition. These he 
represents as better in their family life, but smugglers and 
poachers who get into frequent bloody conflicts with the 
gamekeepers and revenue officers of the coast, become more 
embittered against society during the prison life which they often 
undergo, and so stand abreast of the first class in their hatred of 
the property-holders. 
* E. G. Wakefield, M. P., Swing Unmasked; or, the Causes of Rural Incendiarism, 
London, 1831. Pamphlet. The foregoing extracts may be found pp. 9-13, the 
passages dealing in the original with the then still existing Old Poor Law being here 
omitted.— Note by Engels. 
After the words "English peasant" at the beginning of the quotation the 
German editions of 1845 and 1892 have in brackets  "i.e.,  agricultural labourer"; the 
words "hates the sight of them" are given in brackets after the German equivalent. 
—Ed. 
19* 

=====第577页=====
552 Frederick Engels 
"By courtesy," he says, in closing, "the entire body is called 'the bold peasantry 
of England'."3 
Down to the present time, this description applies to the greater 
portion of the agricultural labourers of England. In June, 1844, 
the Times sent a correspondent into the agricultural districts to 
report upon the condition of this class, and the report which he 
furnished agreed wholly with the foregoing.185 In certain districts 
wages were not more than six shillings a week; not more, that is, 
than in many districts in Germany, while the prices of all the 
necessaries of life are at least twice as high. What sort of life these 
people lead may be imagined; their food scanty and bad, their 
clothing ragged, their dwellings cramped and desolate, small, 
wretched huts, with no comforts whatsoever; and, for young 
people, lodging-houses, where men and women are scarcely 
separated, and illegitimate intercourse thus provoked. One or two 
days without work in the course of a month must inevitably 
plunge such people into the direst want. Moreover, they cannot 
combine to raise wages, because they are scattered, and if one 
alone refuses to work for low wages, there are dozens out of work, 
or supported by the rates,b who are thankful for the most trifling 
offer, while to him who declines work, every other form of relief 
than the hated workhouse is refused by the Poor Law guardians as 
to a lazy vagabond; for the guardians are the very farmers from 
whom or from whose neighbours and acquaintances alone he can 
get work. And not from one or two special districts of England do 
such reports come. On the contrary, the distress is general, equally 
great in the North and South, the East and West. The condition of 
the labourers in Suffolk and Norfolk corresponds with that of 
Devonshire, Hampshire, and Sussex. Wages are as low in Dorset­
shire and Oxfordshire as in Kent and Surrey, Buckinghamshire 
and Cambridgeshire. 
One especially barbaric cruelty against the working-class0 is 
embodied in the Game Laws, which are more stringent0 than in 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "by courtesy" and "the 
bold peasantry of England" are given in English in brackets after their German 
equivalents. Engels attributed the phrase "the bold peasantry of England" to 
Shakespeare, an inaccuracy which was corrected in the American and English 
editions. In fact, the phrase "a bold peasantry, their country's pride" appears in 
Goldsmith's The Deserted Village.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "out of work and 
workhouse inmates".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "agricultural proletariat" instead 
of the "working-class".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here"in England".— Ed. 

=====第578页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 553 
any other country, while the game is plentiful beyond all concep­
tion. The English peasant who, according to the old English 
custom and tradition, sees in poaching only a natural and noble 
expression of courage and daring, is stimulated still further by the 
contrast between his own poverty and the car tel est notre plaisir 3 of 
the lord, who preserves thousands of hares and game birds for his 
private enjoyment. The labourer lays snares, or shoots here and 
there a piece of game. It does not injure the landlord as a matter 
of fact, for he has a vast superfluity, and it brings the poacher a 
meal for himself and his starving family. But if he is caught he 
goes to jail, and for a second offence receives at the least seven 
years'  transportation. From the severity of these laws arise the 
frequent bloody conflicts with the gamekeepers, which lead to a 
number of murders every year. Hence the post of gamekeeper is 
not only dangerous, but of ill-repute and despised. Last year, in 
two cases, gamekeepers shot themselves rather than continue their 
work. Such is the moderate price at which the landed aristocracy 
purchases the noble sport of shooting; but what does it matter to 
the lords of the soil b? Whether one or two more or less of the"sur-
plus"  live or die matters nothing, and even if in consequence of the 
Game Laws half the surplus population could be put out of the way, 
it would be all the better for the other half — according to the 
philanthropy of the English landlords. 
Although the conditions of life in the country, the isolated 
dwellings, the stability of the surroundings and occupations, and 
consequently of the thoughts, are decidedly unfavourable to all 
development, yet poverty and want bear their fruits even here. 
The manufacturing and mining proletariat emerged early from 
the first stage of resistance to our social order, the direct rebellion 
of the individual by the perpetration of crime; but the peasants 
are still in this stage at the present time. Their favourite method 
of social warfare is incendiarism. In the winter which followed the 
Revolution of July, in  1830-31,  these incendiarisms first became 
general. Disturbances had taken place, and the whole region of 
Sussex and the adjacent counties had been brought into a state of 
excitement in October, in consequence of an increase of the 
coastguard (which made smuggling much more difficult and 
"ruined the coast"—in the words of a farmer), changes in the 
Poor Law, low wages, and the introduction of machinery. In the 
a For such is our pleasure.— Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this expression is given in 
English.— Ed. 

=====第579页=====
554 Frederick Engels 
winter the farmers' hay and corn-stacks were burnt in the fields, 
and the very barns and stables under their windows. Nearly every 
night a couple of such fires blazed up, and spread terror among 
the farmers and landlords. The offenders were rarely discovered, 
and the workers attributed the incendiarism to a mythical person 
whom they named "Swing". Men puzzled their brains to discover 
who this Swing could be and whence this rage among the poor of 
the country districts. Of the great motive power, Want, Oppres­
sion, only a single person here and there thought, and certainly no 
one in the agricultural districts. Since that year the incendiarisms 
have been repeated every winter, with each recurring unemployed 
season of the agricultural labourers. In the winter of 1843-44, they 
were once more extraordinarily frequent. There lies before me a 
series of numbers of the Northern Star of that time, each one of 
which contains a report of several incendiarisms, stating in each 
case its authority. The numbers3 wanting in the following list 
I have not at hand; but they, too, doubtless contain a number of 
cases.  Moreover, such a sheet cannot possibly ascertain all the cases 
which occur. November 25th, 1843, two cases; several earlier ones 
are discussed. December 16th, in Bedfordshire, general excitement 
for a fortnight past in consequence of frequent incendiarisms, of 
which several take place every night. Two great farm-houses burnt 
down within the last few days; in Cambridgeshire four great 
farm-houses, Hertfordshire one, and besides these, fifteen other 
incendiarisms in different districts. December 30th, in Norfolk 
one, Suffolk two, Essex two, Cheshire one, Lancashire one, Derby, 
Lincoln, and the South twelve. January 6th, 1844, in all ten. 
January 13th, seven. January 20th, four incendiarisms. From this 
time forward, three of four incendiarisms per week are reported, 
and not as formerly until the spring only, but far into July and 
August. And that crimes of this sort are expected to increase in 
the approaching hard season of 1844-45, the English papers 
already indicate .b 
What do my readers think of such a state of things in the quiet, 
idyllic country districts of England? Is this social war, or is it not? 
Is it a natural state of things which can last? Yet here the 
landlords and farmers are as dull and stupefied, as blind to 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "of this weekly".—Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this sentence reads: "The English 
papers I have received since then and the reports in German papers prove that 
crimes of this sort increased with the approach of the hard season of 1844-
45."—Ed. 

=====第580页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 555 
everything which does not directly put money into their pockets, 
as the manufacturers and the bourgeoisie in general in the 
manufacturing districts. If the latter promise their employees 
salvation through the repeal of the Corn Laws, the landlords and 
a great part of the farmers promise theirs Heaven upon earth 
from the maintenance of the same laws. But in neither case do the 
property-holders succeed in winning the workers to the support of 
their pet hobby. Like the operatives, the agricultural labourers are 
thoroughly indifferent to the repeal or non-repeal of the Corn 
Laws.  Yet the question is an important one for both. That is to 
say — by the repeal of the Corn Laws, free competition, the 
present social economy is carried to its extreme point; all further 
development within the present order comes to an end, and the 
only possible step farther is a radical transformation of the social 
order.* For the agricultural labourers the question has, further, 
the following important bearing: Free importation of corn involves 
(how, I cannot explain here) the emancipation of the farmers from 
the landlords, their transformation into Liberals. Towards this 
consummation the Anti-Corn Law League has already largely 
contributed, and this is its only real service. When the farmers 
become Liberals, i.e., conscious bourgeois, the agricultural labour­
ers will inevitably become Chartists and Socialists3; the first change 
involves the second. And that a new movement is already 
beginning among the agricultural labourers is proved by a meeting 
which Earl Radnor, a Liberal landlord, caused to be held in 
October, 1844, near Highworth, where his estates lie, to pass 
resolutions against the Corn Laws. At this meeting, the labourers, 
perfectly indifferent as to these laws, demanded something wholly 
different, namely small holdings, at low rent, for themselves, 
telling Earl Radnor all sorts of bitter truths to his face. Thus the 
movement of the working-class is finding its way into the remote, 
stationary, mentally dead agricultural districts; and, thanks to the 
general distress, will soon be as firmly rooted and energetic as in 
the manufacturing districts.** 
* This has been literally fulfilled. After a period of unexampled extension of 
trade, Free Trade has landed England in a crisis, which began in 1878, and is still 
increasing in energy in 1886.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 
(reproduced in the English edition of 1892 — Ed.). 
** The agricultural labourers have now a Trade's Union; their most energetic 
representative, Joseph Arch, was elected M. P. in 1885.— Note by Engels to the 
American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the English edition of 1892 — Ed.). 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here  "i.e.,  conscious pro­
letarians".— Ed. 

=====第581页=====
556 Frederick Engels 
As to the religious state o£ the agricultural labourers, they are, it 
is true, more pious than the manufacturing operatives; but they, 
too, are greatly at odds with the Church—for in these districts 
members of the Established Church almost exclusively are to be 
found. A correspondent of the Morning Chronicle, who, over the 
signature, "One who has whistled at the plough",3 reports his tour 
through the agricultural districts, relates, among other things, the 
following conversation with some labourers after service: 
"I inquired if the clergyman who had preached was the one who usually 
ministered there? 'Yes, blast him! he be our own parson sure enough—he be always 
a-begging; he be always, sin' ever I knowed him.' " (The sermon had been upon a 
mission to the heathen.) "'And sin' I knowed him,' said another, 'I never knowed a 
parson as wasn't a-begging for summat or tother.' 'Ah!' says a woman who came 
just out of the church: 'And look at wages a comin' down, look at them rich 
wagerbonds as the parsons hunt and dine and drink with! So help me God, we 
bes more fitter to be taken into the union and starved, than pay for parsons to go 
abroad.' 'Why don't they,' said another, 'send them parsons as be chantering every 
day in Salisbury Cathedral to nobody but the bare stones, why don't  they  go?' 'They 
don't go,' said the old man who spoke first, 'because they be so rich as to have so 
much land all over, they wants the money to send away the poor uns; I knows what 
they want; I been knowing them too long not to know that.' 'But my good friends,' 
said I, 'you surely don't go to church always and come out of it with such bitter 
dislike to the parsons. If you do, why go at all?' 'Why go at all?' said the woman, 
'we be like to go, and we wouldn't lose everything, work and all; we be like to go.' 
I learned later that they 'could get a few privileges in regard to fuel and ground 
for potatoes' (to be paid for!) if they went to church." 
After describing their poverty and ignorance, the correspondent 
closes by saying: 
"Now I assert fearlessly that the condition of these people, their poverty, their 
hatred of the churches, their outward compliance with, but inward bitterness 
towards, its dignitaries, is the rule throughout rural England; and that anything to 
the contrary is the exception." 
If the peasantry of England shows the consequences which a 
numerous agricultural proletariat in connection with large farming 
involves for the country districts, Wales illustrates the ruin of the 
small holders. If the English country parishes reproduce the 
antagonism between capitalist and proletarian, the state of the 
Welsh peasantry corresponds to the progressive ruin of the small 
bourgeoisie in the towns. In Wales are to be found, almost 
exclusively, small holders, who cannot with like profit sell their 
products as cheaply as the larger, more favourably situated 
English farmers, with whom, however, they are obliged to com­
pete.  Moreover, in some places the quality of the land admits of 
a The pen-name of Alexander Somerville.—Ed. 

=====第582页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 557 
the raising of livestock only, which is but slightly profitable. Then, 
too, these Welsh farmers, by reason of their separate nationality, 
which they retain pertinaciously, are much more stationary than 
the English farmers. But the competition among themselves and 
with their English neighbours (and the increased mortgages upon 
their land consequent upon this) has reduced them to such a state 
that they can scarcely live at all; and because they have not 
recognised the true cause of their wretched condition, they 
attribute it to all sorts of small causes, such as high tolls, etc., 
which do check the development of agriculture and commerce, 
but are taken into account as standing charges by every one who 
takes a holding, and are therefore really ultimately paid by the 
landlord. Here, too, the New Poor Law is cordially hated by the 
tenants, who hover in perpetual danger of coming under its sway. 
In 1843, a the famous "Rebecca" disturbances broke out among the 
Welsh peasantry; the men dressed in women's clothing, blackened 
their faces, and fell in armed crowds upon the toll-gates, destroyed 
them amidst great rejoicing and firing of guns, demolished the 
toll-keepers' houses, wrote threatening letters in the name of the 
imaginary "Rebecca", and once went so far as to storm the 
workhouse of Carmarthen. Later, when the militia was called out 
and the police strengthened, the peasants drew them off with 
wonderful skill upon false scents, demolished toll-gates at one 
point while the militia, lured by false signal bugles, was marching 
in some opposite direction; and betook themselves finally, when 
the police was too thoroughly reinforced, to single incendiarisms 
and attempts at murder. As usual, these greater crimes were the 
end of the movement. Many withdrew from disapproval, others 
from fear, and peace was restored of  itself.  The Government 
appointed a commission to investigate the affair and its causes, 
and there was an end of the matter. The poverty of the peasantry 
continues, however, and will one day, since it cannot under 
existing circumstances grow less, but must go on intensifying, 
produce more serious manifestations than these humorous Rebec­
ca masquerades. 
If England illustrates the results of the system of farming on a 
large scale and Wales on a small one, Ireland exhibits the 
consequences of overdividing the soil. The great mass of the 
population of Ireland consists of small tenants who occupy a sorry 
hut without partitions, and a potato patch just large enough to 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "In February 1843".—Ed. 

=====第583页=====
558 Frederick Engels 
supply them most scantily with potatoes through the winter. In 
consequence of the great competition which prevails among these 
small tenants, the rent has reached an unheard-of height, double, 
treble, and quadruple that paid in England. For every agricultural 
labourer seeks to become a tenant-farmer, and though the division 
of land has gone so far, there still remain numbers of labourers in 
competition for plots. Although in Great Britain 34,000,000 acres 
of land are cultivated, and in Ireland but 14,000,000; although 
Great Britain produces3 agricultural products to the value of 
£150,000,000, and Ireland of but £36,000,000, there are in 
Ireland 75,000 agricultural proletarians more than in the neigh­
bouring island.* How great the competition for land in Ireland 
must be is evident from this extraordinary disproportion, especial­
ly when one reflects that the labourers in Great Britain are living 
in the utmost distress. The consequence of this competition is that 
it is impossible for the tenants to live much better than the 
labourers, by reason of the high rents paid. The Irish people is 
thus held in crushing poverty, from which it cannot free itself 
under our present social conditions. These people live in the most 
wretched clay huts, scarcely good enough for cattle-pens, have 
scant food all winter long, or, as the report above quoted 
expresses it, they have potatoes half enough thirty weeks in the 
year, and the rest of the year nothing. When the time comes in 
the spring at which this provision reaches its end, or can no longer 
be used because of its sprouting, wife and children go forth to beg 
and tramp the country with their kettle in their hands. Meanwhile 
the husband, after planting potatoes for the next year, goes in 
search of work either in Ireland or England, and returns at the 
potato harvest to his family. This is the condition in which 
nine-tenths of the Irish country folks live. They are poor as 
church mice, wear the most wretched rags, and stand upon the 
lowest plane of intelligence possible in a half-civilised country. 
According to the report quoted, there are, in a population of 8V2 
millions, 585,000 heads of families in a state of total destitution15; 
and according to other authorities, cited by Sheriff Alison,** 
* Report of the Poor Law Commissioners for Ireland. Parliamentary Session 
of 1837.—Note by Engels. 
** Principles of Population, vol. ii.— Note by Engels. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "annually produces".— Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the word "destitution" is given in 
English in brackets after the German equivalent.— Ed. 

=====第584页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 559 
there are in Ireland 2,300,000 persons who could not live without 
public or private assistance — or 27 per cent of the whole popula­
tion paupers! 
The cause of this poverty lies in the existing social conditions, 
especially in competition here found in the form of the subdivision 
of the soil. Much effort has been spent in finding other causes. It 
has been asserted that the relation of the tenant to the landlord 
who lets his estate in large lots to tenants, who again have their 
sub-tenants, and sub-sub-tenants, in turn, so that often ten 
middlemen come between the landlord and the actual cul­
tivator— it has been asserted that the shameful law which gives the 
landlord the right of expropriating the cultivator who may have 
paid his rent duly, if the first tenant fails to pay the landlord, that 
this law is to blame for all this poverty. But all this determines 
only the, form in which the poverty manifests  itself.  Make the small 
tenant a landowner himself and what follows? The majority could 
not live upon their holdings even if they had no rent to pay, and 
any slight improvement which might take place would be lost 
again in a few years in consequence of the rapid increase of 
population. The children would then live to grow up under the 
improved conditions who now die in consequence of poverty in 
early childhood. From another side comes the assertion that the 
shameless oppression inflicted by the English is the cause of the 
trouble. It is the cause of the somewhat earlier appearance of this 
poverty, but not of the poverty  itself.  Or the blame is laid on the 
Protestant Church forced upon a Catholic nation; but divide 
among the Irish what the Church takes from them, and it does 
not reach six shillings3 a head. Besides, tithes are a tax upon 
landed property, not upon the tenant, though he may nominally 
pay them; now, since the Commutation Bill of 1838,187 the 
landlord pays the tithes directly and reckons so much higher rent, 
so that the tenant is none the better off. And in the same way a 
hundred other causes of this poverty are brought forward, all 
proving as little as these. This poverty is the result of our social 
conditions; apart from these, causes may be found for the manner 
in which it manifests  itself,  but not for the fact of its existence. 
That poverty manifests itself in Ireland thus and not otherwise, is 
owing to the character of the people, and to their historical 
development. The Irish are a people related- in their whole 
character to the Latin nations, to the French, and especially to the 
Italians. The bad features of their character we have already had 
3 The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "two talers". —Ed. 

=====第585页=====
560 Frederick Engels 
depicted by Carlyle. Let us now hear an Irishman,3 who at least 
comes nearer to the truth than Carlyle, with his prejudice in 
favour of the Teutonic character*: 
"They are restless yet indolent, shrewd and indiscreet, impetuous, impatient 
and improvident, instinctively brave, thoughtlessly generous; quick to resent and 
forgive offences, to form and renounce friendships. With genius they are profusely 
gifted; with judgment sparingly." 
With the Irish, feeling and passion predominate; reason must 
bow before them. Their sensuous, excitable nature prevents 
reflection and quiet, persevering activity from reaching develop­
ment— such a nation is utterly unfit for manufacture as now 
conducted. Hence they held fast to agriculture, and remained 
upon the lowest plane even of that. With the small subdivisions of 
land, which were not here artificially created, as in France and on 
the Rhine, by the division of great estates,** but have existed from 
time immemorial, an improvement of the soil by the investment of 
capital was not to be thought of; and it would, according to Alison, 
require 120 million pounds sterling to bring the soil up to the not 
very high state of fertility already attained in England. The 
English immigration, which might have raised the standard of 
Irish civilisation, has contented itself with the most brutal plunder­
ing of the Irish people; and while the Irish, by their immigration 
into England, have furnished England a leaven which will produce 
its own results in the future, they have little for which to be 
thankful to the English immigration. 
The attempts of the Irish to save themselves from their present 
ruin, on the one hand, take the form of crimes. These are the 
order of the day in the agricultural districts, and are nearly always 
directed against the most immediate enemies, the landlords' 
agents, or their obedient servants, the Protestant intruders, whose 
large farms are made up of the potato patches of hundreds of 
ejected families. Such crimes are especially frequent in the South 
and West. On the other hand, the Irish hope for relief by means 
of the agitation for the repeal of the Legislative Union with 
England.188 From all the foregoing, it is clear that the uneducated 
* The State of  Ireland,  London, 1807; 2nd ed., 1821. Pamphlet.—Note by Engels. 
** (1892) Mistake. Small-scale agriculture had been the prevailing form of 
farming ever since the Middle Ages. Thus the small peasant farms existed even 
before the Revolution. The only thing the latter changed was their ownership; that 
it took away from the feudal lords and transferred, directly or indirectly, to the 
peasants.— Note by Engels to the German edition of 1892. 
a John Wilson Croker.—Ed. 

=====第586页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 561 
Irish must see in the English their worst enemies; and their first 
hope of improvement in the conquest of national independence. 
But quite as clear is it, too, that Irish distress cannot be removed 
by any Act of Repeal. Such an Act would, however, at once lay 
bare the fact that the cause of Irish misery, which now seems to 
come from abroad, is really to be found at home. Meanwhile, it is 
an open question whether the accomplishment of repeal will be 
necessary to make this clear to the Irish. Hitherto, neither 
Chartism nor Socialism has had marked success in Ireland. 
I close my observations upon Ireland at this point the more 
readily, as the Repeal Agitation of 1843 and O'Connell's trial189 
have been the means of making the Irish distress more and more 
known in Germany. 
We have now followed the proletariat of the British Islands 
through all branches of its activity, and found it everywhere living 
in want and misery under totally inhuman conditions. We have 
seen discontent arise with the rise of the proletariat, grow, 
develop, and organise; we have seen open bloodless and bloody 
battles of the proletariat against the bourgeoisie. We have investi­
gated the principles according to which the fate, the hopes, and 
fears of the proletariat are determined, and we have found that 
there is no prospect of improvement in their condition. 
We have had an opportunity, here and there, of observing the 
conduct of the bourgeoisie towards the proletariat, and we have 
found that it considers only  itself,  has only its own advantage in 
view. However, in order not to be unjust, let us investigate its 
mode of action somewhat more exactly. 

=====第587页=====
THE ATTITUDE OF THE BOURGEOISIE 
TOWARDS THE PROLETARIAT 
In speaking of the bourgeoisie I include the so-called aristocra­
cy, for this is a privileged class, an aristocracy, only in contrast 
with the bourgeoisie, not in contrast with the proletariat. The 
proletarian sees in both only the property-holder  — i.e., the 
bourgeois. Before the privilege of property all other privileges 
vanish. The sole difference is this, that the bourgeois proper 
stands in active relations with the manufacturing, and, in a 
measure, with the mining proletarians, and, as farmer, with the 
agricultural labourers, whereas the so-called aristocrat comes into 
contact with the agricultural labourer only.3 
I have never seen a class so deeply demoralised, so incurably 
debased by selfishness, so corroded within, so incapable of prog­
ress,  as the English bourgeoisie; and I mean by this, especially the 
bourgeoisie proper, particularly the Liberal, Corn Law repealing 
bourgeoisie. For it nothing exists in this world, except for the sake 
of money, itself not excluded.b It knows no bliss save that of rapid 
gain, no pain save that of losing gold.* In the presence of this 
* Carlyle gives in his Past and Present (London, 1843) a splendid description of 
the English bourgeoisie and its disgusting money-greed. Part of this description I 
translated for the  Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher, to which I refer the reader.—  Note 
by Engels. (The last sentence is not given in the American edition of 1887 and the 
English edition of 1892.—Ed.) 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the end of the sentence reads: 
"comes into contact with part of the mining and with the argicultural labourers 
only".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "for it lives only to make 
money".—Ed. 

=====第588页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 563 
avarice and lust of gain, it is not possible for a single human 
sentiment or opinion to remain untainted. True, these English 
bourgeois are good husbands and family men, and have all sorts 
of other private virtues, and appear, in ordinary intercourse, as 
decent and respectable as all other bourgeois; even in business 
they are better to deal with than the Germans; they do not higgle 
and haggle so much as our own pettifogging merchants; but how 
does this help matters? Ultimately it is self-interest, and especially 
money gain, which alone determines them. I once went into 
Manchester with such a bourgeois, and spoke to him of the bad, 
unwholesome method of building, the frightful condition of the 
working-people's quarters, and asserted that I had never seen so 
ill-built a city. The man listened quietly to the end, and said at the 
corner where we parted: "And yet there is a great deal of money 
made here3; good morning, sir." It is utterly indifferent to the 
English bourgeois whether his working-men starve or not, if only 
he makes money. All the conditions of life are measured by 
money, and what brings no money is nonsense, unpractical, 
idealistic bosh. Hence, Political Economy, the Science of Wealth, is 
the favourite study of these bartering Jews. Every one of them is a 
Political Economist. The relation of the manufacturer to his 
operatives has nothing human in it; it is purely economic. The 
manufacturer is Capital, the operative Labour. And if the opera­
tive will not be forced into this abstraction, if he insists that he is 
not Labour, but a man, who possesses, among other things, the 
attribute of labour-force,b if he takes it into his head that he need 
not allow himself to be sold and bought in the market, as the 
commodity "Labour", the bourgeois reason comes to a standstill. 
He cannot comprehend that he holds any other relation to the 
operatives than that of purchase and sale; he sees in them not 
human beings, but hands, as he constantly calls them to their 
faces;  he insists, as Carlyle says, that "Cash Payment is the only 
nexus between man and man." Even the relation between himself 
and his wife is, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, mere "Cash 
Payment".0 Money determines the worth of the man; he is "worth 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this remark is given in English 
followed by the German translation.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "the ability to work" instead of 
"the attribute of labour-force".—Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the sentence follows: "The shameful 
slavery in which money holds the bourgeoisie is imprinted even on the language 
through the rule of the bourgeoisie."—Ed. 

=====第589页=====
564 Frederick Engels 
ten thousand pounds".3  He who has money is of "the better sort 
of people", is "influential", and what he does counts for something 
in his social circle. The huckstering spirit penetrates the whole 
language, all relations are expressed in business terms, in 
economic categories. Supply and demand are the formulas accord­
ing to which the logic of the English bourgeois judges all human 
life. Hence free competition in every respect, hence the régime 
of laissez-faire, laissez-aller 190 in government, in medicine, in 
education, and soon to be in religion, too, as the State Church 
collapses more and more. Free competition will suffer no limi­
tation, no State supervision; the whole State is but a burden to 
it. It would reach its highest perfection in a wholly ungov-
erned anarchic society, where each might exploit the other to 
his heart's content.0 Since, however, the bourgeoisie cannot dis­
pense with government, but must have it to hold the equally 
indispensable proletariat in check, it turns the power of govern­
ment against the proletariat and keeps out of its way as far as 
possible. 
Let no one believe, however, that the "cultivated" Englishman 
openly brags with his egotism. On the contrary, he conceals it 
under the vilest hypocrisy. What? The wealthy English fail to 
remember the poor? They who have founded philanthropic 
institutions, such as no other country can boast of! Philanthropic 
institutions forsooth! As though you rendered the proletarians a 
service in first sucking out their very life-blood and then practising 
your self-complacent, Pharisaic philanthropy upon them, placing 
yourselves before the world as mighty benefactors of humanity 
when you give back to the plundered victims the hundredth part 
of what belongs to them! Charity which degrades him who gives 
more than him who takes; charity which treads the downtrodden 
still deeper in the dust, which demands that the degraded, the 
pariah cast out by society, shall first surrender the last that 
remains to him, his very claim to manhood, shall first beg for 
mercy before your mercy deigns to press, in the shape of an alms, 
the brand of degradation upon his brow. But let us hear the 
English bourgeoisie's own words. It is not yet a year since I read in 
the Manchester Guardian the following letter to the editor, which 
a The German edition of 1845 and 1892 have here  "i.e.,  he owns that much". 
The expressions "he is worth ten thousand pounds", "the better sort of people", 
and "influential", are given in English with their German equivalents.—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "as, e.g., in friend Stirner's 
'society'".—Ed. 

=====第590页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 565 
was published without comment as a perfectly natural, reasonable 
thing: 
"MR. EDITOR,— For some time past our main streets are haunted by swarms 
of beggars, who try to awaken the pity of the passers-by in a most shameless and 
annoying manner, by exposing their tattered clothing, sickly aspect, and disgusting 
wounds and deformities. I should think that when one not only pays the poor-rate, 
but also contributes largely to the charitable institutions, one had done enough to 
earn a right to be spared such disagreeable and impertinent molestations. And why 
else do we pay such high rates for the maintenance of the municipal police, if they 
do not even protect us so far as to make it possible to go to or out of town in 
peace? I hope the publication of these lines in your widely-circulated paper may 
induce the authorities to remove this nuisance; and I remain,— Your obedient 
servant, 
"A Lady." 
There you have it! The English bourgeoisie is charitable out of 
self-interest; it gives nothing outright, but regards its gifts as a 
business matter, makes a bargain with the poor, saying: "If I spend 
this much upon benevolent institutions, I thereby purchase the 
right not to be troubled any further, and you are bound thereby 
to stay in your dusky holes and not to irritate my tender nerves by 
exposing your misery. You shall despair as before, but you shall 
despair unseen, this I require, this I purchase with my subscrip­
tion of twenty pounds for the infirmary!" It is infamous, this 
charity of a Christian bourgeois! And so writes "A Lady"; she 
does well to sign herself such, well that she has lost the courage to 
call herself a woman! But if the "Ladies" are such as this, what 
must the "Gentlemen" be? It will be said that this is a single case; 
but no, the foregoing letter expresses the temper of the great 
majority of the English bourgeoisie, or the editor would not have 
accepted it, and some reply would have been made to it, which I 
watched for in vain in the succeeding numbers. And as to the 
efficiency of this philanthropy, Canon Parkinson himself says3 that 
the poor are relieved much more by the poor than by the 
bourgeoisie; and such relief given by an honest proletarian who 
knows himself what k is to be hungry, for whom sharing his scanty 
meal is really a sacrifice, but a sacrifice borne with pleasure, such 
help has a wholly different ring to it from the carelessly-tossed 
alms of the luxurious bourgeois. 
In other respects, too, the bourgeoisie assumes a hypocritical, 
boundless philanthropy, but only when its own interests require it; 
as in its Politics and Political Economy. It has been at work now 
a R. Parkinson, On the Present Condition of the Labouring Poor in Manchester.—Ed. 

=====第591页=====
566 Frederick Engels 
well on. towards five years to prove to the working-men that it 
strives to abolish the Corn Laws solely in their interest. But the 
long and short of the matter is this: the Corn Laws keep the price of 
bread higher than in other countries, and thus raise wages; but 
these high wages render difficult competition of the manufactur­
ers against other nations in which bread, and consequently wages, 
are cheaper. The Corn Laws being repealed, the price of bread 
falls,  and wages gradually approach those of other European 
countries, as must be clear to every one from our previous 
exposition of the principles according to which wages are deter­
mined. The manufacturer can compete more readily, the demand 
for English goods increases, and, with it, the demand for labour. 
In consequence of this increased demand wages would actually 
rise somewhat, and the unemployed workers be re-employed; but 
for how long? The "surplus population" of England, and especial­
ly of Ireland, is sufficient to supply English manufacture with the 
necessary operatives, even if it were doubled; and, in a few years, 
the small advantage of the repeal of the Corn Laws would be 
balanced, a new crisis would follow, and we should be back at the 
point from which we started, while the first stimulus to manufac­
ture would have increased population meanwhile. All this the 
proletarians understand very well, and have told the manufactur­
ers to their faces; but, in spite of that, the manufacturers have in 
view solely the immediate advantage which the repeal of the Corn 
Laws would bring them. They are too narrow-minded to see that, 
even for themselves, no permanent advantage can arise from this 
measure, because their competition with each other would soon 
force the profit of the individual back to its old level; and thus they 
continue to shriek to the working-men that it is purely for the sake 
of the starving millions that the rich members of the Liberal party 
pour hundreds and thousands of'pounds into the treasury of the 
Anti-Corn Law League, while every one knows that they are only 
sending the butter after the cheese, that they calculate upon 
earning it all back in the first ten years after the repeal of the 
Corn Laws.3 But the workers are no longer to be misled by the 
bourgeoisie, especially since the insurrection of 1842. They de­
mand of every one who presents himself as interested in their 
welfare, that he should declare himself in favour of the People's 
Charter as proof of the sincerity of his professions, and in so 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the end of the sentence reads: 
"upon earning it all back ten- and a hundredfold in the first years after the 
repeal of the Corn Laws".—Ed. 

=====第592页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 567 
doing, they protest against all outside help, for the Charter is a 
demand for the power to help themselves. Whoever declines so to 
declare himself they pronounce their enemy, and are perfectly 
right in so doing, whether he be a declared foe or a false friend. 
Besides, the Anti-Corn Law League has used the most despicable 
falsehoods and tricks to win the support of the workers. It has 
tried to prove to them that the money price of labour is in inverse 
proportion to the price of corn; that wages are high when grain is 
cheap, and vice versa, an assertion which it pretends to prove with 
the most ridiculous arguments, and one which is, in  itself,  more 
ridiculous than any other that has proceeded from the mouth of 
an Economist. When this failed to help matters, the workers were 
promised bliss supreme in consequence of the increased demand 
in the labour market; indeed, men went so far as to carry through 
the streets two models of loaves of bread, on one of which, by far 
the larger, was written: "American Eightpenny  Loaf,  Wages Four 
Shillings per Day", and upon the much smaller one: "English 
Eightpenny  Loaf,  Wages Two Shillings a Day". But the workers 
have not allowed themselves to be misled. They know their lords 
and masters too well. 
But rightly to measure the hypocrisy of these promises, the 
practice of the bourgeoisie must be taken into account. We have 
seen in the course of our^report how the bourgeoisie exploits the 
proletariat in every conceivable way for its own benefit! We have, 
however, hitherto seen only how the single bourgeois maltreats the 
proletariat upon his own account. Let us turn now to the manner 
in which the bourgeoisie as a party, as the power of the State, 
conducts itself towards the proletariat.3 Laws are necessary only 
because there are persons in existence who own nothing; and 
although this is directly expressed in but few laws, as, for instance, 
those against vagabonds and tramps, in which the proletariat as 
such is outlawed, yet enmity to the proletariat is so emphatically 
the basis of the law that the judges, and especially the Justices of 
the Peace, who are bourgeois themselves, and with whom the 
proletariat comes most in contact, find this meaning in the laws 
without further consideration. If a rich man is brought up, or 
rather summoned, to appear before the court, the judge regrets 
that he is obliged to impose so much trouble, treats the matter as 
favourably as possible, and, if he is forced to condemn the 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the sentence follows "It is quite 
obvious that all legislation is calculated to protect those who possess property 
against those who do  not."—Ed. 

=====第593页=====
568 Frederick Engels 
accused, does so with extreme regret, etc., etc., and the end of it 
all is a miserable fine, which the bourgeois throws upon the table 
with contempt and then departs. But if a poor devil gets into such 
a position as involves appearing before the Justice of the 
Peace — he has almost always spent the night in the station-house 
with a crowd of his peers — he is regarded from the beginning as 
guilty; his defence is set aside with a contemptuous "Oh! we know 
the excuse", and a fine imposed which he cannot pay and must 
work out with several months on the treadmill. And if nothing can 
be proved against him, he is sent to the treadmill, none the less, 
"as a rogue and a vagabond".3 The partisanship of the Justices of 
the Peace, especially in the country, surpasses all description, and 
it is so much the order of the day that all cases which are not too 
utterly flagrant are quietly reported by the newspapers, without 
comment. Nor is anything else to be expected. For on the one 
hand, these Dogberries do merely construe the law according to 
the intent of the farmers,b and, on the other, they are themselves 
bourgeois, who see the foundation of all true order in the interests 
of their class. And the conduct of the police corresponds to that of 
the Justices of the Peace. The bourgeois may do what he will and 
the police remain ever polite, adhering strictly to the law, but the 
proletarian is roughly, brutally treated; his poverty both casts the 
suspicion of every sort of crime upon him and cuts him off from 
legal redress against any caprice of the administrators of the law; 
for him, therefore, the protecting forms of the law do not exist, 
the police force their way into his house without further cere­
mony, arrest and abuse him; and only when a working-men's 
association, such as the miners, engages a Roberts, does it become 
evident how little the protective side of the law exists for the 
working-man, how frequently he has to bear all the burdens of the 
law without enjoying its benefits. 
Down to the present hour, the property-holding class in Parlia­
ment still struggles against the better feelings of those not yet 
fallen a prey to egotism, and seeks to subjugate the proletariat still 
further. One piece of common land after another is appropriated 
and placed under cultivation, a process by which the general 
cultivation is furthered, but the proletariat greatly injured. Where 
there were still commons, the poor could pasture an ass, a pig, or 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 give "a rogue and a vagabond" in 
English in brackets followed by the remark: "these words almost always go together". 
—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "construe the law according 
to its original meaning".—Ed. 

=====第594页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 569 
geese, the children and young people had a place where they 
could play and live out of doors; but this is gradually coming to an 
end. The earnings of the worker are less, and the young people, 
deprived of their play-ground, go to the beer-shops. A mass of 
acts for enclosing and cultivating commons is passed at every 
session of Parliament. When the Government determined during 
the session of 1844 to force the all monopolising railways to make 
travelling possible for the workers by means of charges propor­
tionate to their means, a penny a mile,3 and proposed therefore to 
introduce such a third class train upon every railway daily, the 
"Reverend Father in God", the Bishop of London, proposed that 
Sunday, the only day upon which working-men in work can travel, 
be exempted from this rule, and travelling thus be left open to the 
rich and shut off from the poor. This proposition was, however, 
too direct, too undisguised to pass through Parliament, and was 
dropped. I have no room to enumerate the many concealed 
attacks of even one single session upon the proletariat. One from 
the session of 1844 must suffice. An obscure member of Parlia­
ment, a Mr. Miles, proposed a bill regulating the relation of 
master and servant which seemed comparatively unobjectionable. 
The Government became interested in the bill, and it was referred 
to a committee. Meanwhile the strike among the miners in the 
North broke out, and Roberts made his triumphal passage 
through England with his acquitted working-men. When the bill 
was reported by the committee, it was discovered that certain most 
despotic provisions had been interpolated in it, especially one 
conferring upon the employer the power to bring before anyb 
Justice of the Peace every working-man who had contracted 
verbally or in writing to do any work whatsoever, in case of refusal 
to work or other misbehaviour, and have him condemned to 
prison with hard labour for two months, upon the oath of the 
employer or his agent or overlooker, i.e., upon the oath of the 
accuser. This bill aroused the working-men to the utmost fury, the 
more so as the Ten Hours' Bill was before Parliament at the same 
time,  and had called forth a considerable agitation. Hundreds of 
meetings were held, hundreds of working-men's petitions for­
warded to London to Thomas Duncombe, the representative of 
the interests of the proletariat. This man was, except Ferrand, the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "about 5 silver groschen a 
German mile".— Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "any" here and 
"misbehaviour" below are given in English in brackets after the corresponding 
German words.— Ed. 

=====第595页=====
570 Frederick Engels 
representative of "Young England",191 the only vigorous opponent 
of the bill; but when the other Radicals saw that the people were 
declaring against it, one after the other crept forward and took his 
place by Duncombe's side; and as the Liberal bourgeoisie had not 
the courage to defend the bill in the face of the excitement among 
the working-men,3 it was ignominiously lost. 
Meanwhile the most open declaration of war of the bourgeoisie 
upon the proletariat is Malthus' Law of Population and the New 
Poor Law framed in accordance with it. We have already alluded 
several times to the theory of Malthus. We may sum up its final 
result in these few words, that the earth is perennially over-popu­
lated, whence poverty, misery, distress, and immorality must 
prevail; that it is the lot, the eternal destiny of mankind, to exist in 
too great numbers, and therefore in diverse classes, of which some 
are rich, educated, and moral, and others more or less poor, 
distressed, ignorant, and immoral. Hence it follows in practice, 
and Malthus himself drew this conclusion, that charities and 
poor-rates are, properly speaking, nonsense, since they serve only 
to maintain, and stimulate the increase of, the surplus population 
whose competition crushes down wages for the employed; that the 
employment of the poor by the Poor Law Guardians is equally 
unreasonable, since only a fixed quantity of the products of labour 
can be consumed, and for every unemployed labourer thus 
furnished employment, another hitherto employed must be driven 
into enforced idleness, whence private undertakings suffer at cost 
of Poor Law industry; that, in other words, the whole problem is 
not how to support the surplus population, but how to restrain it 
as far as possible. Malthus declares in plain English that the right 
to live, a right previously asserted in favour of every man in the 
world, is nonsense. He quotes the words of a poet, that the poor 
man comes to the feast of Nature and finds no cover laid for him, 
and adds that "she bids him begone",b for he did not before his 
birth ask of society whether or not he is welcome.0 This is now the 
pet theory of all genuine English bourgeois, and very naturally, 
since it is the most specious excuse for them, and has, moreover, a 
good deal of truth in it under existing conditions. If, then, the 
problem is not to make the "surplus population" useful, to 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and as nobody had any 
lively interest in defending it against the people",  etc.—Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 this English phrase is given in 
brackets after its German equivalent.— Ed. 
c Th. R. Malthus, An Essay on the Principle of Population.—Ed. 

=====第596页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 5*71 
transform it into available population, but merely to let it starve to 
death in the least objectionable way ahd to prevent its having too 
many children, this, of course, is simple enough, provided the 
surplus population perceives its own superfluousness and takes 
kindly to starvation. There is, however, in spite of the violent 
exertions of the humane bourgeoisie, no immediate prospect of its 
succeeding in bringing about such a disposition among the 
workers. The workers have taken it into their heads that they, with 
their busy hands, are the necessary, and the rich capitalists, who 
do nothing, the surplus population. 
Since, however, the rich hold all the power, the proletarians 
must submit, if they will not good-temperedly perceive it for 
themselves, to have the law actually declare them superfluous.. 
This has been done by the New Poor Law. The Old Poor Law 
which rested upon the Act of 1601 (the 43rd of Elizabeth), 
naively started from the notion that it is the duty of the parish to 
provide for the maintenance of the poor. Whoever had no work 
received  relief,  and the poor man regarded the parish as pledged 
to protect him from starvation. He demanded his weekly relief as 
his right, not as a favour, and this became, at last, too much for 
the bourgeoisie. In 1833, when the bourgeoisie had just come into 
power through the Reform Bill, and pauperism in the country 
districts had just reached its full development, the bourgeoisie 
began the reform of the Poor Law according to its own point of 
view. A commission was appointed, which investigated the ad­
ministration of the Poor Laws, and revealed a multitude of abuses. 
It was discovered that the whole working-class in the country was 
pauperised and more or less dependent upon the rates, from 
which they received relief when wages were low; it was found that 
this system by which the unemployed were maintained, the ill-paid 
and the parents of large families relieved, fathers of illegitimate 
children required to pay alimony, and poverty, in general, recog­
nised as needing protection, it was found that this system was 
ruining the nation, was  — 
"a check to industry, a reward for improvident marriages, a stimulant to 
population, and a blind to its effects on wages;' a national institution for 
discountenancing the industrious and honest, and for protecting the idle, the 
improvident and the vicious; the destroyer" of the bonds of family life; "a system 
for preventing the accumulation of capital, for destroying that which exists, and 
for reducing the rate-payer to pauperism; and a premium for illegitimate children" 
in the provision of aliment. (Words of the Report of the Poor Law Commissioners.)* 
* Extracts from Information received from the Poor Law Commissioners. 
Published by authority. London,  1833.—  Note by Engels. 

=====第597页=====
572 Frederick Engels 
This description of the action of the Old Poor Law is certainly 
correct; relief fosters laziness and increase of "surplus popula­
tion". Under present social conditions it is perfectly clear that the 
poor man is compelled to be an egotist, and when he can choose, 
lhsng equally well in either case, he prefers doing nothing to 
working. But what follows therefrom? That our present social 
conditions are good for nothing, and not as the Malthusian 
Commissioners conclude, that poverty is a crime, and, as such, to 
be visited with heinous penalties which may serve as a warning to 
others.3 
But these wise Malthusians were so thoroughly convinced of the 
infallibility of their theory that they did not for one moment 
hesitate to cast the poor into the Procrustean bed of their 
economic notions and treat them with the most revolting cruelty. 
Convinced with Malthus and the rest of the adherents of free 
competition that it is best to let each one take care of  himself,b 
they would have preferred to abolish the Poor Laws altogether. 
Since, however, they had neither the courage nor the authority to 
do this, they proposed a Poor Law constructed as far as possible in 
harmony with the doctrine of Malthus, which is yet more barba­
rous than that of laissez-faire, because it interferes actively in cases 
in which the latter is passive. We have seen how Malthus 
characterises poverty, or rather the want of employment, as a 
crime under the title "superfluity", and recommends for it 
punishment by starvation. The commissioners were not quite so 
barbarous; death outright by starvation was something too terrible 
even for a Poor Law Commissioner. "Good," said they, "we grant 
you poor a right to exist, but only to exist; the right to multiply 
you have not, nor the right to exist as befits human beings. You 
are a pest, and if we cannot get rid of you as we do of other pests, 
you shall feel, at least, that you are a pest, and you shall at least be 
held in check, kept from bringing into the world other 'surplus', 
either directly or through inducing in others laziness and want of 
employment. Live you shall, but live as an awful warning to all 
those who might have inducements to become 'superfluous'." 
They accordingly brought in the New Poor Law, which was 
passed by Parliament in 1834, and continues in force down to the 
present day. All relief in money and provisions was abolished; the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 word the end of the sentence as 
follows: "that poverty should be treated as a crime according to the theory of 
determent".— Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "to pursue a consistent 
laissez-faire policy".—Ed. 

=====第598页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 573 
only relief allowed was admission to the workhouses immediately 
built. The regulations for these workhouses, or, as the people call 
them, Poor Law Bastilles,3 is such as to frighten away every one 
who has the slightest prospect of life without this form of public 
charity. To make sure that relief be applied for only in the most 
extreme cases and after every other effort had failed, the 
workhouse has been made the most repulsive residence which the 
refined ingenuity of a Malthusian can invent. The food is worse 
than that of the most ill-paid working-man while employed, and 
the work harder, or they might prefer the workhouse to their 
wretched existence outside. Meat, especially fresh meat, is rarely 
furnished, chiefly potatoes, the worst possible bread and oatmeal 
porridge, little or no beer. The food of criminal prisoners is 
better, as a rule, so that the paupers frequently commit some 
offence for the purpose of getting into jail. For the workhouse is a 
jail too; he who does not finish his task gets nothing to eat; he 
who wishes to go out must ask permission, which is granted or 
not, according to his behaviour or the inspector's whim; tobacco is 
forbidden, also the receipt of gifts from relatives or friends 
outside the house; the paupers wear a workhouse uniform, and 
are handed over, helpless and without redress, to the caprice of 
the inspectors. To prevent their labour from competing with that 
of outside concerns, they are set to rather useless tasks: the men 
break stones, "as much as a strong man can accomplish with effort 
in a day"; the women, children, and aged men pick oakum, for 
I know not what insignificant use. To prevent the "superfluous" 
from multiplying, and "demoralised" parents from influencing 
their children, families are broken up; the husband is placed in 
one wing, the wife in another, the children in a third, and they are 
permitted to see one another only at stated times after long 
intervals, and then only when they have, in the opinion of the 
officials, behaved well. And in order to shut off the external world 
from contamination by pauperism within these bastilles, the 
inmates are permitted to receive visits only with the consent of the 
officials, and in the reception-rooms; to communicate in general 
with the world outside only by leave and under supervision. 
Yet the food is supposed to be wholesome and the treatment 
humane with all this. But the intent of the law is too loudly 
outspoken for this requirement to be in any wise fulfilled. The 
Poor Law Commissioners and the whole English bourgeoisie 
a In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the words "workhouses" and "Poor 
Law Bastilles" are given in brackets following their German equivalents.— Ed. 

=====第599页=====
574 Frederick Engels 
deceive themselves if they believe the administration of the law 
possible without these results. The treatment, which the letter of 
the law prescribes, is in direct contradiction of its spirit. If the law 
in its essence proclaims the poor criminals, the workhouses 
prisons, their inmates beyond the pale of the law, beyond the pale 
of humanity, objects of disgust and repulsion, then all commands 
to the contrary are unavailing. In practice, the spirit and not the 
letter of the law is followed in the treatment of the poor, as in the 
following few examples 192: 
In the workhouse at Greenwich, in the summer of 1843, a boy 
five years old was punished by being shut into the dead-room,a 
where he had to sleep upon the lids of the coffins. In the 
workhouse at Herne, the same punishment was inflicted upon a 
little girl for wetting the bed at night, and this method of 
punishment seems to be a favourite one. This workhouse, which 
stands in one of the most beautiful regions of Kent, is peculiar, in 
so far as its windows open only upon the court, and but two, 
newly introduced, afford the inmates a glimpse of the outer world. 
The author who relates this in the Illuminated Magazine, 13 closes his 
description with the words: 
"If God punished men for crimes as man punishes man for poverty, then woe 
to the sons of Adam!" 
In November, 1843, a man died at Leicester, who had been 
dismissed two days before from the workhouse at Coventry. The 
details of the treatment of the poor in this institution are 
revolting. The man, George Robson, had a wound upon the 
shoulder, the treatment of which was wholly neglected; he was set 
to work at the pump, using the sound arm; was given only the 
usual workhouse fare, which he was utterly unable to digest by 
reason of the unhealed wound and his general debility; he 
naturally grew weaker, and the more he complained, the more 
brutally he was treated. When his wife0 tried to bring him her 
drop of beer, she was reprimanded, and forced to drink it herself 
in the presence of the female warder. He became ill, but received 
no better treatment. Finally, at his own request, and under the 
most insulting epithets, he was discharged, accompanied by his 
wife.  Two days later he died at Leicester, in consequence of the 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "for three nights".—Ed. 
Douglas Jerrold.— Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "who was also in the 
workhouse ".— Ed. 

=====第600页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 575 
neglected wound and of the food given him, which was utterly 
indigestible for one in his condition, as the surgeon present at the 
inquest testified. When he was discharged, there were handed to 
him letters containing money, which had been kept back six weeks, 
and opened, according to a rule of the establishment, by the 
inspector! In Birmingham such scandalous occurrences took place, 
that finally, in  1843, a an official was sent to investigate the case. 
He found that four trampsb had been shut up naked under a 
stair-case in a black hole, eight to ten days, often deprived of food 
until noon, and that at the severest season of the year. A little boy 
had been passed through all grades of punishment known to the 
institution; first locked up in a damp, vaulted, narrow, lumber-
room; then in the dog-hole twice, the second time three days and 
three nights; then the same length of time in the old dog-hole, 
which was still worse; then the tramp-room, a stinking, disgusting­
ly filthy hole, with wooden sleeping stalls, where the official, in the 
course of his inspection, found two other tattered boys, shrivelled 
with cold, who had been spending three days there. In the 
dog-hole there were often seven, and in the tramp-room, twenty 
men huddled together. Women, also, were placed in the dog-hole, 
because they refused to go to church and one was shut four days 
into the tramp-room, with God knows what sort of company, and 
that while she was ill and receiving medicine! Another woman was 
placed in the insane department for punishment, though she was 
perfectly sane. In the workhouse at Bacton, in Suffolk, in January, 
1844,  a similar investigation revealed the fact that a feeble-minded 
woman was employed as nurse, and took care of the patients 
accordingly0 ; while sufferers, who were often restless at night, or 
tried to get up, were tied fast with cords passed over the covering 
and under the bedstead, to save the nurses the trouble of sitting 
up at night. One patient was found dead, bound in this way. In 
the St. Paneras workhouse in London (where the cheap shirts 
already mentioned are made d), an epileptic died of suffocation 
during an attack in bed, no one coming to his  relief;  in the same 
house, four to six, sometimes eight children, slept in one bed. In 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "in December 1843".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 note here in brackets that this word 
("trampers" in the German original) was explained above. (See p. 504 of this volume.) 
The words "black hole" are also given in English in brackets after the German 
équivalent. —Ed. 
c The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have "was employed as nurse and 
did all sorts of inconceivable things to the patients".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the words: "already 
mentioned" (the reference is to p. 499 of this volume).—Ed. 

=====第601页=====
576 Frederick Engels 
Shoreditch workhouse a man was placed, together with a fever 
patient violently ill, in a bed teeming with vermin. In Bethnal 
Green workhouse, London, a woman in the sixth month of 
pregnancy was shut up in the reception-room with her two-year-
old child, from February 28th to March 19th, without being 
admitted into the workhouse  itself,  and without a trace of a bed or 
the means of satisfying the most natural wants. Her husband, who 
was brought into the workhouse, begged to have his wife released 
from this imprisonment, whereupon he received twenty-four 
hours imprisonment, with bread and water, as the penalty of his 
insolence. In the workhouse at Slough, near Windsor, a man lay 
dying in September, 1844. His wife journeyed to him, arriving at 
midnight; and hastening to the workhouse, was refused admission. 
She was not permitted to see her husband until the next morning,3 
and then only in the presence of a female warder, who forced 
herself upon the wife at every succeeding visit, sending her away 
at the end of half-an-hour. In the workhouse at Middleton, in 
Lancashire, twelve, and at times eighteen, paupers, of both sexes, 
slept in one room. This institution is not embraced by the New 
Poor Law, but is administered under an old special act (Gilbert's 
Act194).  The inspector had instituted a brewery in the house for 
his own benefit. In Stockport, July 31st, 1844, a man, seventy-two 
years old, was brought before the Justice of the Peace for refusing 
to break stones, and insisting that, by reason of his age and a stiff 
knee,  he was unfit for this work. In vain did he offer to undertake 
any work adapted to his physical strength; he was sentenced to 
two weeks upon the treadmill. In the workhouse at Basford, an 
inspecting official found b that the sheets had not been changed in 
thirteen weeks, shirts in four weeks, stockings in two to ten 
months, so that of forty-five boys but three had stockings, and all 
their shirts were in tatters. The beds swarmed with vermin, and 
the tableware was washed in the slop-pails. In the west of London 
workhouse, a porter who had infected four girls with syphilis was 
not discharged, and another who had concealed a deaf and dumb 
girl four days and nights in his bed was also retained. 
As in life, so in death. The poor are dumped into the earth like 
infected cattle. The pauper burial-ground of St. Brides, London, is 
a bare morass, in use as a cemetery since the time of Charles IL, 
and filled with heaps of bones; every Wednesday the paupers are 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "and then only for 
half-an-hour".— Ed. 
} The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "in February 1844".— Ed. 

=====第602页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 577 
thrown into a ditch fourteen feet deep; a curate rattles through 
the Litany at the top of his speed; the ditch is loosely covered in, 
to be reopened the next Wednesday, and filled with corpses as 
long as one more can be forced in. The putrefaction thus 
engendered contaminates the whole neighbourhood. In Manches­
ter, the pauper burial-ground lies opposite to the Old Town, along 
the Irk; this, too, is a rough, desolate place. About two years ago a 
railroad was carried through it. If it had been a respectable 
cemetery, how the bourgeoisie and the clergy would have shrieked 
over the desecration! But it was a pauper burial-ground, the 
resting-place of the outcast and superfluous, so no one concerned 
himself about the matter. It was not even thought worth while to 
convey the partially decayed bodies to the other side of the 
cemetery; they were heaped up just as it happened, and piles were 
driven into newly made graves, so that the water oozed out of the 
swampy ground, pregnant with putrefying matter, and filled the 
neighbourhood with the most revolting and injurious gases. The 
disgusting brutality which accompanied this work I cannot de­
scribe in further detail. 
Can any one wonder that the poor decline to accept public relief 
under these conditions? That they starve rather than enter these 
bastilles? I have the reports of five cases in which persons actually 
starving, when the guardians refused them outdoor  relief,  went 
back to their miserable homes and died of starvation rather than 
enter these hells. Thus far have the Poor Law Commissioners 
attained their object. At the same time, however, the workhouses 
have intensified, more than any other measure of the party in 
power, the hatred of the working-class against the property-
holders, who very generally admire the New Poor Law. 
From Newcastle to Dover, there is but one voice among the 
workers — the voice of hatred against the new law. The 
bourgeoisie has formulated so clearly in this law its conception of 
its duties towards the proletariat, that it has been appreciated even 
by the dullest. So frankly, so boldly has the conception never yet 
been formulated, that the non-possessing class exists solely for the 
purpose of being exploited, and of starving when the property-
holders can no longer make use of it. Hence it is that this New 
Poor Law has contributed so greatly to accelerate the labour move­
ment, and especially to spread Chartism; and, as it is carried out 
most extensively in the country, it facilitates the development of the 
proletarian movement which is arising in the agricultural districts. 
Let me add that a similar law in force in Ireland since 1838, 
affords a similar refuge for eighty thousand paupers. Here, too, it 

=====第603页=====
578 Frederick Engels 
has made itself disliked, and would have been intensely hated if it 
had attained anything like the same importance as in England. But 
what difference does the ill-treatment of eighty thousand pro­
letarians make in a country in which there are two and a half 
millions of them? In Scotland there are, with local exceptions, no 
Poor Laws. 
I hope that after this picture of the New Poor Law and its 
results, no word which I have said of the English bourgeoisie will 
be thought too stern. In this public measure, in which it acts in 
corpore  as the ruling power, it formulates its real intentions, reveals 
the animus of those smaller transactions with the proletariat, of 
which the blame apparently attaches to individuals. And that this 
measure did not originate with any one section of the bourgeoisie, 
but enjoys the approval of the whole class, is proved by the 
Parliamentary debates of 1844. The Liberal party had enacted the 
New Poor Law; the Conservative party, with its Prime Minister 
Peel at the head, defends it, and only alters some pettifogging 
trifles in the Poor Law Amendment Bill of 1844. A Liberal 
majority carried the bill, a Conservative majority approved it, and 
the "Noble Lords" gave their consent each time. Thus is the 
expulsion of the proletariat from State and society outspoken, thus 
is it publicly proclaimed that proletarians are not human beings, 
and do not deserve to be treated as such. Let us leave, it to the 
proletarians of the British Empire to reconquer their human 
rights.* 
* To prevent misconstructions and consequent objections, I would observe that 
I have spoken of the bourgeoisie as a class, and that all such facts as refer to 
individuals serve merely as evidence of the way of thinking and acting of a class. 
Hence I have not entered upon the distinctions between the diverse sections, 
subdivisions and parties of the bourgeoisie, which have a mere historical and 
theoretical significance. And I can, for the same reason, mention but casually the 
few members of the bourgeoisie who have shown themselves honourable exceptions. 
These are, on the one hand, the pronounced Radicals, who are almost Chartists, 
such as a few members of the House of Commons, the manufacturers Hindley of 
Ashton, and Fielden of Todmorden (Lancashire), and, on the other hand, the 
philanthropic Tories, who have recently constituted themselves "Young England", 
among whom are the Members of Parliament, Disraeli, Borthwick, Ferrand, Lord 
John Manners, etc., Lord Ashley, too, is in sympathy with them. The hope of 
"Young England" is a restoration of the old "merry England" with its brilliant 
features and its romantic feudalism. This object is of course unattainable and 
ridiculous, a satire upon all historic development; but the good intention, the 
courage to resist the existing state of things and prevalent prejudices, and to 
recognise the vileness of our present condition, is worth something anyhow. Wholly 
isolated is the half-German Englishman, Thomas Carlyle, who, originally a Tory, 
goes beyond all those hitherto mentioned. He has sounded the social disorder more 
deeply than any other English bourgeois, and demands the organisation of labour. 

=====第604页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 579 
Such is the state of the British working-class as I have come to 
know it in the course of twenty-one months, through the medium 
of my own eyes, and through official and other trustworthy 
reports. And when I call this condition, as I have frequently 
enough done in the foregoing pages, an utterly unbearable one, 
I am not alone in so doing. As early as 1833, Gaskell declared that 
he despaired of a peaceful issue, and that a revolution can hardly 
fail to follow. In 1838, Carlyle explained Chartism and the 
revolutionary activity of the working-men as arising out of the 
misery in which they live, and only wondered that they have sat so 
quietly eight long years at the Barmecide feast,195 at which they 
have been regaled by the Liberal bourgeoisie with empty promises. 
And in 1844 he declared that the work of organising labour must 
be begun at once 
"if Europe, at any rate if England, is to continue inhabitable much longer."3 
And the Times, the "first journal of Europe", said in June, 
1844: 
"War to the mansion, peace to the cottage — is a watchword of terror which 
may yet ring through the land. Let the wealthy beware!" 
Meanwhile, let us review once more the chances of the English 
bourgeoisie.15 In the worst case, foreign manufacture, especially 
that of America, may succeed in withstanding English competition, 
even after the repeal of the Corn Laws, inevitable in the course of 
a few years. German manufacture is now making great efforts, 
and that of America has developed with giant strides. America, 
with its inexhaustible resources, with its unmeasured coal and iron 
fields,  with its unexampled wealth of water-power and its naviga­
ble rivers, but especially with its energetic, active population, in 
comparison with which the English are phlegmatic dawdlers,— 
America has in less than ten years created a manufacture 
I hope that Carlyle, who has found the right path, will be capable of following it. 
He has my best wishes and those of many other Germans.— Note by Engels. (The 
last two sentences were omitted in the American edition of 1887 and the English 
edition of 1892.—Ed.) 
(1892) But the February Revolution made him an out-and-out reactionary. 
His righteous wrath against the Philistines turned into sullen Philistine grumbling 
at the tide of history that cast him ashore.— Added by Engels to the German edition of 
1892. 
a T. Carlyle, Past and  Present.—  Ed. 
In the German edition of 1845 the concluding section does not begin with this 
passage, but with the first paragraph on this page. In the German edition of 1892 it is 
not separated at all from the  rest.—Ed. 

=====第605页=====
580 Frederick Engels 
which already competes with England in the coarser cotton 
goods,3 has excluded the English from the markets of North and 
South America, and holds its own in China, side by side with 
England.b If any country is adapted to holding a monopoly of 
manufacture, it is America. Should English manufacture be thus 
vanquished — and in the course of the next twenty years, if the 
present conditions remain unchanged, this is inevitable — the 
majority of the proletariat must become forever superfluous, and 
has no other choice than to starve or to rebel. Does the English 
bourgeoisie reflect upon this contingency? On the contrary; its 
favourite economist, McCulloch, teaches from his student's desk, 
that a country so young as America, which is not even properly 
populated, cannot carry on manufacture successfully or dream of 
competing with an old manufacturing country like England. It 
were madness in the Americans to make the attempt, for they 
could only lose by it; better far for them to stick to their 
agriculture, and when they have brought their whole territory 
under the plough, a time may perhaps come for carrying on 
manufacture with a profit. So says the wise economist, and the 
whole bourgeoisie worships him, while the Americans take posses­
sion of one market after another, while a daring American 
speculator recently even sent a shipment of American cotton 
goods to England, where they were sold for re-exportation! 
But assuming that England retained the monopoly of manufac­
tures,  that its factories perpetually multiply, what must be the 
result? The commercial crises would continue, and grow more 
violent, more terrible, with the extension of industry and the 
multiplication of the proletariat. The proletariat would increase in 
geometrical proportion, in consequence of the progressive ruin of 
the lower middle-class and the giant strides with which capital is 
concentrating itself in the hands of the few; and the proletariat 
would soon embrace the whole nation, with the exception of a few 
millionaires. But in this development there comes a stage at which 
the proletariat perceives how easily the existing pow^r may be 
overthrown, and then follows a revolution. 
Neither of these supposed conditions may, however, be expected 
to arise. The commercial crises, the mightiest levers for all 
independent development of the proletariat, will probably shorten 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here in brackets "the main 
product of English industry".—Ed. 
In the German editions of 1845 and 1892 the sentence follows: "The position 
is the same in other branches of industry."—Ed. 

=====第606页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 581 
the process, acting in concert with foreign competition and the 
deepening ruin of the lower middle-class. I think the people will 
not endure more than one more crisis. The next one, in 1846 or 
1847,  will probably bring with it the repeal of the Corn Laws* and 
the enactment of the Charter. What revolutionary movements the 
Charter may give rise to remains to be seen. But, by the time of 
the next following crisis, which, according to the analogy of its 
predecessors, must break out in 1852 or 1853, unless delayed 
perhaps by the repeal of the Corn Laws or hastened by other 
influences, such as foreign competition — by the time this crisis 
arrives, the English people will have had enough of being 
plundered by the capitalists and left to starve when the capitalists 
no longer require their services. If, up to that time, the English 
bourgeoisie does not pause to reflect—and to all appearance it 
certainly will not do so — a revolution will follow with which none 
hitherto known can be compared. The proletarians, driven to 
despair, will seize the torch which Stephens has preached to them; 
the vengeance of the people will come down with a wrath of which 
the rage of 1793 gives no true idea. The war of the poor against 
the rich will be the bloodiest ever waged. Even the union of a part 
of the bourgeoisie with the proletariat, even a general reform of 
the bourgeoisie, would not help matters. Besides, the change of 
heart of the bourgeoisie could only go as far as a lukewarm 
juste-milieu; the more determined, uniting with the workers, would 
only form a new Gironde, and succumb in the course of the 
mighty development. The prejudices of a whole class cannot be 
laid aside like an old coat: least of all, those of the stable, narrow, 
selfish English bourgeoisie. These are all inferences which may be 
drawn with the greatest certainty: conclusions, the premises for 
which are undeniable facts, partly of historical development, partly 
facts inherent in human nature. Prophecy is nowhere so easy as in 
England, where all the component elements of society are clearly 
defined and sharply separated. The revolution must come; it is 
already too late to bring about a peaceful solution; but it can be 
made more gently than that prophesied in the foregoing pages. 
This depends, however, more upon the development of the 
proletariat than upon that of the bourgeoisie. In proportion, as 
the proletariat absorbs socialistic and communistic elements, will 
the revolution diminish in bloodshed, revenge, and savagery. 
Communism stands, in principle, above the breach between 
* And it did.— Note by Engels to the American edition of 1887 (reproduced in the 
English edition of 1892—-Erf.). 
20-762 

=====第607页=====
582 Frederick Engels 
bourgeoisie and proletariat, recognises only its historic significance 
for the present, but not its justification for the future: wishes, 
indeed, to bridge over this chasm, to do away with all class 
antagonismsa Hence it recognises as justified, so long as the 
struggle exists, the exasperation of the proletariat towards its 
oppressors as a necessity, as the most important lever for a labour 
movement just beginning; but it goes beyond this exasperation, 
because Communism is a question of humanity and not of the 
workers alone. Besides, it does not occur to any Communist to 
wish to revenge himself upon individuals, or to believe that, in 
general, the single bourgeois can act otherwise, under existing 
circumstances, than he does act. English Socialism, i.e., Commu­
nism, rests directly upon the irresponsibility of the individual. Thus 
the more the English workers absorb communistic ideas, the more 
superfluous becomes their present bitterness, which, should it 
continue so violent as at present, could accomplish nothing; and 
the more their action against the bourgeoisie will lose its savage 
cruelty. If, indeed, it were possible to make the whole proletariat 
communistic before the war breaks out, the end would be very 
peaceful; but that is no longer possible, the time has gone by. 
Meanwhile, I think that before the outbreak of open, declared war 
of the poor against the rich,b  there will be enough intelligent 
comprehension of the social question among the proletariat, to 
enable the communistic party, with the help of events, to conquer 
the brutal element of the revolution and prevent a "Ninth 
Thermidor". In any case, the experience of the French will not 
have been undergone in vain, and most of the Chartist leaders 
are, moreover, already Communists. And as Communism stands 
above the strife between bourgeoisie and proletariat, it will be 
easier for the better elements of the bourgeoisie (which are, 
however, deplorably few, and can look for recruits only among the 
rising generation) to unite with it than with purely proletarian 
Chartism. 
If these conclusions have not been sufficiently established in the 
course of the present work, there may be other opportunities for 
demonstrating that they are necessary consequences of the histori­
cal development of England. But this I maintain, the war of the 
poor against the rich now carried on in detail and indirectly will 
a The German editions of 1845 and 1892 do not have the phrase "to do away 
with all class antagonisms".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1845 and 1892 have here "which has now become 
inevitable in England".—Ed. 

=====第608页=====
The Condition of the Working-Class in England 583 
become direct and universal. It is too late for a peaceful solution. 
The classes are divided more and more sharply, the spirit of 
resistance penetrates the workers, the bitterness intensifies, the 
guerilla skirmishes become concentrated in more important bat­
tles, and soon a slight impulse will suffice to set the avalanche in 
motion. Then, indeed, will the war-cry resound through the land: 
"War to the mansion, peace to the cottage!"—but then it will be 
too late for the rich to beware. 

=====第609页=====
Frederick Engels 
Postscript 
to THE CONDITION OF THE WORKING-CLASS 
IN ENGLAND  M 
AN ENGLISH TURNOUT 3 
In my book on the above subject I was unable to give factual 
proof of individual points. In order not to make the book too 
thick and indigestible, I had to consider my statements sufficiently 
proven when I had confirmed them by quotations from official 
documents, impartial writers or the writings of the parties whose 
interests I was attacking. This sufficed to guard me against 
contradiction in those cases where I was unable to speak from 
personal observation when describing particular living conditions. 
But it was not sufficient to produce in the reader the incontestable 
certainty which can only be given by striking, irrefutable facts, and 
which, especially in an age in which we are obliged by the infinite 
"wisdom of the fathers" to be sceptical, can never be generated by 
mere reasoning, no matter how good the authorities. Above all 
when it is a question of important consequences, of facts coales­
cing into principles, when it is not the condition of separate, small 
sections of the people that has to be described, but the position of 
whole classes in relation to each other, then facts are absolutely 
essential. For the reasons just mentioned, I was unable to provide 
these in all cases in my book. I will now make good this 
unavoidable deficiency and, from time to time, will present facts as 
I find them in the sources available to me. In order, at the same 
time,  to demonstrate that my account is still correct today, I will 
only use facts which have taken place since I left England last 
year, and have become known to me only since my book was 
published. 
The author gives this term in English.— Ed. 

=====第610页=====
Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England 585 
Readers of my book will remember that I was chiefly concerned 
to describe the position of the bourgeoisie and the proletariat in 
relation to each other and the necessity of struggle between these 
two classes; and that I attached especial importance to proving 
how completely justified the proletariat was in waging this strug­
gle, and to rebutting the English bourgeoisie's fine phrases by 
means of their ugly deeds. From the first page to the last, I was 
writing a bill of indictment against the English bourgeoisie. I will 
now provide a few more choice pieces of evidence. However, since 
I have already displayed enough passion over these English 
bourgeois it is not my intention to work myself up over them once 
again and, so far as I can, I will keep my temper. 
The first good citizen and worthy paterfamilias we are going to 
meet is an old friend, or rather there are two of them. By 1843 
Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey had already had Lord knows how many 
conflicts with their workers, who, refusing to be dissuaded even by 
the best of arguments from their demand that they should receive 
increased wages for increased work, stopped work. Pauling & 
Henfrey, who are important building contractors and employ 
many brickmakers, carpenters, and so on, took on other workers; 
this led to a conflict and in the end to a bloody battle with guns and 
cudgels in Pauling & Henfrey's brickyard, which resulted in the 
transportation of half a dozen workers to Van Diemen's Land,198 
all of which is dealt with at length in my book.a But Messrs. 
Pauling & Henfrey have to try something on with their workers 
every year, otherwise they are not happy; so they began baiting 
them again in October 1844. This time it was the carpenters whose 
well-being the philanthropic building contractors were anxious to 
promote. From time immemorial the custom had prevailed among 
the carpenters of Manchester and the surrounding area of not 
"striking a light" from Candlemasb to November 17, i.e., of 
working from six in the morning till six in the evening during the 
long days, and of starting as soon as it was light and finishing as 
soon as it began to get dark during the short days. Then from 
November 17 onwards the lights were lit and work carried on for 
the full time. Pauling & Henfrey, who had long had enough of 
this "barbaric" custom, decided to put an end to this relic of the 
"Dark Ages" with the help of gas lighting, and when one evening 
before six o'clock the carpenters could not see any longer and put 
away their tools and went for their coats, the foreman lit the gas 
See pp. 513-14 of this volume.—Ed. 
b February 2.— Ed. 

=====第611页=====
586 Frederick Engels 
and said that they had to work till six o'clock. The carpenters, 
whom this did not suit, called a general meeting of the workers in 
their trade. Mr. Pauling, much astonished, asked his workers if 
they were dissatisfied about something since they had called a 
meeting. Some of the workers said that it was not they who were 
directly responsible for calling the meeting, but the committee of 
the craft union, to which Mr. Pauling replied that he didn't care a 
fig for the craft union, but he would like to put a proposition to 
them: if they would agree to the lights being lit he would be 
prepared in return to give them three hours off on Saturdays, 
and — generous fellow — also to allow them to work an extra 
quarter of an hour every day for which they would get extra pay! 
They on their part should work half an hour longer when all 
other workshops began to put on their lights. The workers 
considered this proposal and calculated that as a result Messrs. 
Pauling & Henfrey would gain a whole working hour every day 
during the short days, that each worker would have to work 
altogether 92 hours, i.e., 9V4 days extra without getting a farthing 
in return, and that taking into account all the workers employed by 
the firm, the above-named gentlemen would save £400 (2,100 
taler) in wages during the winter months. So the workers held 
their meeting and explained to their fellow-workers that if one 
firm succeeded in putting this through, all the other firms would 
follow suit and, as a result, there would be a general indirect 
reduction in wages which would rob the carpenters in the district 
of about £4,000 a year. It was decided that on the following 
Monday all the carpenters employed by Pauling & Henfrey should 
hand in their 3-months' notice and if their employers did not 
change their minds, should stop work when this notice expired. 
The union on its part promised to support them by a general levy 
in the event of a stoppage of work. 
On Monday, October 14, the workers went and gave in their 
notice, whereupon they were told that they could leave right away, 
which of course they did. The same evening another meeting of 
all the building workers took place, at which all categories of 
building workers pledged their support to the strikers. On the 
Wednesday and Thursday following, all the carpenters in the 
vicinity employed by Pauling & Henfrey also stopped work and 
the strike was thus in full swing. 
The building employers, left so suddenly high and dry, im­
mediately sent people out in all directions, even as far as Scotland, 
to recruit workers since in the whole vicinity there was not a soul 
willing to work for them. In a few days thirteen men did arrive 

=====第612页=====
Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England 587 
from Staffordshire. But as soon as the strikers found an opportu­
nity of talking to them and explaining the dispute and the reasons 
why they had stopped work, several of the new arrivals refused 
to continue working. But the masters had an effective way of 
dealing with this: they had the recalcitrants, along with those 
who led them astray, brought before Daniel Maude, Esquire, 
Justice of the Peace. But before we follow them there, we 
must first put the virtues of Daniel Maude, Esq., in their proper 
light. 
Daniel Maude, Esq., is the "stipendiary magistrate"3  or paid 
Justice of the Peace in Manchester. The English magistrates are 
usually rich bourgeois or landowners, occasionally also clergymen, 
who are appointed by the Ministry. But since these Dogberries 
understand nothing about the law, they make the most flagrant 
blunders, bring the bourgeoisie into ridicule and do it harm, since, 
even when faced with a worker, they are frequently reduced to a 
state of confusion if he is defended by a skilful lawyer, and either 
neglect some legal form when sentencing him, which results in a 
successful appeal, or let themselves be misled into acquitting him. 
Besides, the rich manufacturers in the big towns and industrial 
areas have no time to spare for passing days of boredom in a 
court of law and prefer to instal a remplaçante As a result in these 
towns, on the initiative of the towns themselves, paid magistrates 
are usually appointed, men versed in law, who are able to take 
advantage of all the twists and subtle distinctions of English law, 
and when necessary to supplement and improve it for the benefit 
of the bourgeoisie. Their efforts in this respect are illustrated by 
the following example. 
Daniel Maude, Esq., is one of those liberal justices of the peace 
who were appointed in large numbers under the Whig Govern­
ment. Among his heroic exploits, inside and outside the arena of 
the Manchester Borough Court,c we will mention two. When in 
1842 the manufacturers succeeded in forcing the workers of South 
Lancashire into an insurrection, which broke out in Stalybridge 
and Ashton at the beginning of August, some 10,000 workers, 
with Richard Pilling, the Chartist, at their head, marched on 
August 9 from there to Manchester 
"to meet their masters on the Exchange and to see how the Manchester market 
>. 199 
was . 
a "Stipendiary magistrate" is in English in the original.—Ed. 
b Substitute.—Ed. 
c "Borough Court" is in English in the original.—Ed. 

=====第613页=====
588 Frederick Engels 
When they reached the outskirts of the town, they were met by 
Daniel Maude, Esq., with the whole estimable police force, a 
detachment of cavalry and a company of riflemen. But this was all 
only for the sake of appearances since it was in the interest of the 
manufacturers and liberals that the insurrection should spread 
and force the repeal of the Corn Laws. In this Daniel Maude, 
Esq., was in complete agreement with his worthy colleagues, and 
he began to come to terms with the workers and allowed them to 
enter the town on their promise to "keep the peace" and follow a 
prescribed route. He knew very well that the insurgents would not 
do this nor did he in the least wish them to — he could have 
nipped the whole contrived insurrection in the bud with a little 
energy but, had he done so, he would not have been acting in the 
interest of his Anti-Corn Law friends but in the interest of Sir 
Robert Peel. So he withdrew the soldiers and allowed the workers 
to enter the town, where they immediately brought all the 
factories to a standstill. But as soon as the insurrection proved to 
be definitely directed against the liberal bourgeoisie and complete­
ly ignored the "hellish Corn Laws", Daniel Maude, Esq., once 
more assumed his judicial office and had workers arrested by the 
dozen and marched off to prison without mercy for "breach of 
the peace"—so that he first caused the breaches and then 
punished them. Another characteristic feature in the career of this 
Manchester Solomon is revealed by the following. Since the Anti-
Corn Law League was several times beaten up in public in Man­
chester, it holds private meetings, admission to which is by 
ticket only — but the decisions and petitions of which are pre­
sented to the public as those of public meetings, and as manifesta­
tions of Manchester "public opinion". In order to put a stop to 
this fraudulent boasting by the liberal manufacturers, three or 
four Chartists, among them my good friend James Leach, secured 
tickets for themselves and went to one of these meetings. When 
Mr. Cobden rose to speak, James Leach asked the Chairman 
whether this was a public meeting. Instead of answering, the 
Chairman called the police and had Leach arrested without more 
ado. A second Chartist asked the question again, then a third, and 
a fourth, all were set upon one after the other by the "bluebottles" 
(police) who stood massed at the door, and packed off to the 
Town Hall. They appeared the next morning before Daniel 
Maude, Esq., who was already fully informed about everything. 
They were charged with having caused a disturbance at a meeting, 
were hardly allowed to say a word, and then had to listen to a 
solemn speech by Daniel Maude, Esq., who told them that he 

=====第614页=====
Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England 589 
knew them, that they were political vagabonds who did nothing 
but cause uproar at meetings and disturb decent, law-abiding 
citizens and a stop must be put to this kind of thing. There­
fore—  and Daniel Maude, Esq., knew very well that he could not 
impose any real punishment on them — therefore, he would 
sentence them to pay the costs this time. 
It was before this same Daniel Maude, Esq., whose bourgeois 
virtues we have just described, that the recalcitrant workers from 
Pauling & Henfrey's were hauled. But they had brought a lawyer 
with them as a precaution. First to be heard was the worker newly 
arrived from Staffordshire who had refused to continue working 
at a place where others had stopped work in self-defence. Messrs. 
Pauling & Henfrey had a written contract signed by the workers 
from Staffordshire, and this was submitted to the magistrate.* The 
defending lawyer interjected that this agreement had been signed 
on a Sunday and was therefore invalid. With much dignity Daniel 
Maude, Esq., admitted that "business transactions" concluded on a 
Sunday were not valid, but said that he could not believe that 
Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey regarded this as a "business transac­
tion"! So without spending very much time asking the worker 
whether he "regarded" the document as a "business transaction", 
he told the poor devil that he must either continue working or 
amuse himself on the treadmill for three months.—O Solomon of 
Manchester! — After this case had been dealt with, Messrs. Pauling 
& Henfrey brought forward the second accused. His name was 
Salmon, and he was one of the firm's old workers who had stopped 
work. He was accused of having intimidated the new workers into 
taking part in the strike. The witness — one of these latter—stated 
that Salmon had taken him by the arm and spoken to him. Daniel 
Maude, Esq., asked whether the accused had perhaps used threats 
or beaten him? — No, said the witness. Daniel Maude, Esq., 
delighted at having found an opportunity to demonstrate his 
impartiality — after having just fulfilled his duty to the bour­
geoisie— declared that there was nothing in the case incrimi­
nating the accused. He had every right to take a walk on the 
public highway and to talk to other people as long as he did not 
* This contract contained the following: the worker pledged himself to work 
for Pauling & Henfrey for six months and to  be satisfied with the wages which they would 
give him; but Pauling & Henfrey were not bound to keep him for six months and 
could dismiss him at any moment with a week's notice, and although Pauling & 
Henfrey would pay his travelling expenses from Staffordshire to Manchester, they 
were to recover them by a weekly deduction of 2 shillings (20 silver groschen) from 
his wages. How do you like that really marvellous contract?—Note by Engels. 

=====第615页=====
590 Frederick Engels 
indulge in intimidating words or actions — he was therefore 
acquitting him. But Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey had at least had 
the satisfaction, by paying the costs of the case, of having the said 
Salmon sent to the lock-up for a night—and that was something 
after all. Nor did Salmon's happiness last long. For after having 
been discharged on Thursday, October 31, he was up again before 
Daniel Maude, Esq., on Tuesday, November 5th, charged with 
having assaulted Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey in the street. On that 
same Thursday on which Salmon had been acquitted, a number of 
Scotsmen arrived in Manchester, decoyed by false statements that 
the disputes were over and that Pauling & Henfrey could not find 
enough workers in their district to cope with their extensive 
contracts. On the Friday a number of Scottish joiners who had 
been working for some time in Manchester, came to explain the 
cause of the stoppage to their countrymen. A large number of 
their fellow-workers — some 400 — gathered around the inn where 
the Scots were quartered. But these Scotsmen were kept there like 
prisoners with a foreman on guard at the door. After some time, 
Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey arrived in order to escort in person 
their new workers to their place of work. When the group came 
out, those gathered outside called to the Scots not to take work 
against the Manchester rules of the trade and not to disgrace their 
fellow-countrymen. Two of the Scots did in fact lag behind a little 
and Mr. Pauling himself ran back to drag them forward. The 
crowd remained quiet, only prevented the group from moving too 
quickly and called to the Scots not to interfere in other people's 
business, to go back home, etc. Mr. Henfrey finally lost his 
temper; he saw several of his old workers in the crowd, among 
them Salmon* and in order to put an end to the affair, he gripped 
the latter by the arm. Mr. Pauling seized him by the other arm 
and both shouted for the police with all their might. The police 
inspector came up and asked what charge was being made against 
the man, at which both partners were greatly embarrassed. But 
they said, "We know the man." "Oh," said the inspector, "that's 
enough then, we can let him go for the time being." Messrs. 
Pauling 8c Henfrey, needing to bring some kind of charge against 
Salmon, considered the matter for several days until finally, on the 
advice of their lawyer, they lodged the above charge. After all the 
witnesses against Salmon had been heard, W. P. Roberts, the 
"Miners' Attorney General", the terror of all magistrates, suddenly 
rose up on behalf of the accused and asked whether he should still 
call his witnesses, since nothing had been brought against Salmon. 
Daniel Maude, Esq., let him question his witnesses, who testified 

=====第616页=====
Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England 591 
that Salmon had behaved calmly until Mr. Henfrey took hold of 
him. When the proceedings for and against had been concluded, 
Daniel Maude, Esq., said that he would pass sentence on Saturday. 
Clearly, the presence of "Attorney General" Roberts led him to 
think twice before he spoke once. 
On Saturday, Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey brought an additional 
criminal charge of conspiracy and intimidation against three of 
their old workers — Salmon, Scott and Mellor. By this they hoped to 
deliver a mortal blow to the craft union and, in order to be secure 
against the dreaded Roberts, they called in a distinguished 
barrister from London, Mr. Monk. As his first witness, Mr. Monk 
produced Gibson, one of the newly engaged Scotsmen, who had 
also acted as witness against Salmon the previous Tuesday. He 
declared that on Friday, November 1, as he and his companions 
came out of the inn, they were surrounded by a crowd of people 
who pushed and pulled them and that the three accused were 
among the crowd. Roberts now began to cross-question this 
witness, confronted him with another worker, and asked whether 
he, Gibson, had not told this worker the previous night that he had 
not known he was under oath when he was giving his evidence the 
previous Tuesday and that he had not really understood what he 
was supposed to do and say in court. Gibson replied that he did 
not know the man, he had been with two men the previous 
evening but could not say whether this man was one of them as it 
had been dark. It was possible that he said something of the sort since 
the form of oath in Scotland was different from that in England; 
he couldn't quite remember. Mr. Monk then rose and declared 
that Mr. Roberts had no right to put questions like that, to which 
Mr. Roberts replied that objections of that kind were quite in 
place when one was representing a bad cause, but that he had the 
right to ask what he wanted, not only where the witness was born 
but also where he had stayed every day since that time, and what 
he had had to eat every day. Daniel Maude, Esq., confirmed that 
Mr. Roberts had this right but gave him the fatherly advice to 
keep to the point as much as possible. Then, after Mr. Roberts 
had obtained from the witness a statement that he only really 
began working for Pauling & Henfrey on the day after the 
incident on which the charge was based, that is, on November 2, 
he dismissed him. Then Mr. Henfrey himself appeared as a 
witness and repeated what Gibson had said about the incident. At 
this, Mr. Roberts asked him: Are you not looking for an unfair 
advantage over your competitors? Mr. Monk again objected to this 
question. 

=====第617页=====
592 Frederick Engels 
Very well, said Mr. Roberts, I will put it more clearly. Mr. 
Henfrey, do you know that the working hours of the carpenters in 
Manchester are fixed by certain rules? 
Mr. Henfrey: I have nothing to do with those rules, I have the 
right to make my own rules. 
Mr. Roberts: Quite so. On oath, Mr. Henfrey, do you not 
demand longer working hours from your workers than other 
building contractors and master carpenters? 
Mr. Henfrey: Yes. 
Mr. Roberts: How many hours, approximately? 
Mr. Henfrey did not know exactly and took out his notebook in 
order to calculate. 
Daniel Maude, Esq.: You need not spend a long time working it 
out, just tell us roughly how many. 
Mr. Henfrey: Well, about an hour in the mornings and an hour 
in the evenings for six weeks before the time when the lights are 
usually turned on, and the same for six weeks after the day when 
it is usual to stop putting on the lights. 
Daniel Maude, Esq.: So every one of your workers has to work an 
extra 72 hours before the lights are turned on and 72 hours after, 
that is, 144 hours in 12 weeks? 
Mr. Henfrey: Yes. 
This statement was received with signs of great indignation by 
the public. Mr. Monk looked angrily at Mr. Henfrey and Mr. 
Henfrey looked at his barrister in confusion and Mr. Pauling 
tugged at Mr. Henfrey's coat-tails — but it was too late; Daniel 
Maude, Esq., who obviously saw that he would have to play at 
being impartial again that day, had heard the admission and made 
it public. 
After two unimportant witnesses had been heard, Mr. Monk 
said that his evidence against the accused was now concluded. 
Daniel Maude, Esq., then said that the plaintiff had not made 
out any case for a criminal investigation against the accused, not 
having shown that the threatened Scots had been taken on by 
Pauling & Henfrey before November 1, since there was no proof 
of a hire contract or employment of the men concerned before 
November 2, while charge had been lodged on November 1st. 
Thus on this date the men were not yet employed by Pauling & 
Henfrey and the accused had every right to try and deter them by 
every legal means from going to work for Pauling & Henfrey. In 
reply to this, Mr. Monk said that the defendants had been 
engaged from the moment they left Scotland and boarded the 
steamer. Daniel Maude, Esq., remarked that it had indeed been 

=====第618页=====
Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England 593 
stated that such hire contract had been made out but this 
document had not been produced. Mr. Monk replied that the 
document was in Scotland and he asked Mr. Maude to adjourn the 
case until it could be laid before the court. Mr. Roberts inter­
vened here to say: this was something new to him. Evidence for the 
plaintiff had been declared concluded and now the plaintiff was 
demanding that the case be adjourned in order to introduce new 
evidence. He insisted that the case proceed. Daniel Maude, Esq., de­
cided that both pleas were superfluous since no substantiated charge 
was before the court—upon which the accused were dismissed. 
Meanwhile the workers had likewise not been inactive. Week 
after week they held meetings in the Carpenters' Hall or the 
Socialist Hall, called for aid from the different craft unions, which 
was given in plenty, never ceased to make known everywhere the 
behaviour of Pauling & Henfrey and finally sent delegates in all 
directions in order to inform their fellow craftsmen in all the areas 
where Pauling & Henfrey were recruiting workers, of the reasons 
for this recruitment and to prevent them taking work with this 
firm. Only a few weeks after the strike began there were seven 
delegates on their way and posters on the street corners in all the 
big towns in the country warned unemployed carpenters about 
Pauling & Henfrey. On November 9 some of the delegates who 
had returned reported on their mission. One of these, named 
Johnson, who had been in Scotland, described how Pauling & 
Henfrey's representative had recruited thirty workers in Edin­
burgh but as soon as they heard from him the real facts of the 
case they decided they would sooner starve than go to Manchester 
in such circumstances. A second delegate had been in Liverpool 
keeping watch on the arriving steamers, but not a single man had 
arrived and so he found that he had nothing to do. A third man 
had been in Cheshire but wherever he went he found he had 
nothing more to do, for the Northern Star, the workers' paper, had 
broadcast the real state of affairs far and wide and had put an end 
to any desire people had of going to Manchester. Indeed in one 
town, Macclesfield, the carpenters had already taken a collection in 
support of the strikers and promised to contribute a further 
shilling per man should the necessity arise. In other places he was 
able to stimulate the local craftsmen to initiate such contributions. 
In order to provide Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey with another 
opportunity of coming to an agreement with the workers, all the 
craftsmen employed in the building trade gathered at the Carpen­
ters' Hall on Monday, November 18th, elected a deputation to 
present an address to these gentlemen and marched in procession 

=====第619页=====
594 Frederick Engels 
with flags and emblems to the premises of Pauling & Henfrey. 
First came the deputation followed by the strike committee, then 
the carpenters, the brick-moulders and kiln-workers, the day 
labourers, bricklayers, sawyers, glaziers, plasterers, painters, a 
band, stonemasons, cabinetmakers. They passed the hotel where 
their "Attorney General", Roberts, was staying and greeted him with 
loud hurrahs as they marched by. Arrived at the premises, the 
deputation fell out while the crowd marched on to Stevenson 
Square where they were to hold a public meeting. The deputation 
was received by the police who demanded their names and 
addresses before allowing them to proceed any further. When 
they had entered the office, the partners Sharps 8c Pauling told 
them that they would accept no written address from a crowd of 
workers brought together merely for the purpose of intimidation. 
The deputation denied that this was their aim, since the proces­
sion had not even stopped, but had at once gone on its way. While 
this procession of  5,000  workers continued its march, the deputa­
tion was finally received and taken into a room in which were 
present the Chief Constable, an officer and three newspaper 
reporters. Mr. Sharps, a partner in Pauling  8c Henfrey, usurped the 
Chairman's seat, remarking that the deputation should be careful 
what it said as everything would be duly recorded and, in certain 
circumstances, would be used against them in court.—They 
now began to ask the deputation what they were complaining about, 
etc., and said that they wanted to give the men work according 
to the rules customary in Manchester. The deputation asked 
if the men picked up in Staffordshire and Scotland were working 
according to the regulations for craftsmen prevailing in Manchester. 
No, was the answer, we have a special arrangement with these men. Then your 
people are to be given work again, and on the usual conditions? Oh, we are not 
going to negotiate with any deputation but just let the men come and they will find 
out on what conditions we are willing to give them work. 
Mr. Sharps added that all firms with which he was connected 
had always treated their workers well and paid them the highest 
wages. The deputation replied that if, as they had heard, he was 
associated with the firm of Pauling 8c Henfrey, this firm had 
fiercely opposed the best interests of the workers.— A brickmaker, 
a member of the deputation, was asked what the members of his 
craft had to complain about.— 
Oh, nothing just now, but we've had enough.* 
* See above — the bloody fight at Pauling & Henfrey's brickyard.— Note by 
Engels . 

=====第620页=====
Postscript to The Condition of the Working-Class in England 595 
Oh, you've had enough, have you? answered Mr. Pauling with a 
sneer, and then took the opportunity of delivering them a long 
lecture about craft unions, strikes, etc., and the misery to which 
they brought the workers — whereupon one of the deputation 
remarked they were not by any means disposed to allow their 
rights to be taken away from them bit by bit, and, for example, to 
work 144 hours a year for nothing, as was now being demanded.— 
Mr. Sharps remarked that they ought also to take into account the 
loss incurred by those taking part in the procession because they 
were not working that day, as well as the cost of the strike, the loss 
of wages suffered by the strikers, etc. One of the deputation said: 
That's nobody's business but ours and we won't ask you to contribute a farthing 
from your pocket. 
With that the deputation left and reported to the assembled 
workers in the Carpenters' Hall, where it was revealed that not 
only had all those in the area working for Pauling & Henfrey 
(those who were not carpenters and were therefore not on strike) 
come to take part in the procession, but that many of the newly 
imported Scotsmen had also struck that very morning. A painter 
also declared that Pauling 8c Henfrey had made the same unjust 
demands on the painters as they had on the joiners but that they 
too intended to resist. In order to simplify the whole business and 
shorten the struggle it was decided that all building workers 
employed by Pauling & Henfrey should stop work. This they did. 
The painters stopped work on the following Saturday and the 
glaziers on the Monday, and on the new theatre for which Pauling 
8c Henfrey had received the contract only two bricklayers and four 
day labourers were working after a few days instead of 200 men. 
Some of the new arrivals also stopped work. 
Pauling 8c Henfrey foamed with rage. When three more.of the 
new arrivals stopped work they were hauled before Daniel Maude, 
Esq., on Friday, November 22. The previous reverses had had no 
effect. A worker called Read was the first to be dealt with, charged 
with breach of contract; a contract which the accused had signed 
in Derby was laid before the court. Roberts, who was again 
defending, stated at once that there was not the slightest connec­
tion between the contract and the charge, they were two quite 
different things. Daniel Maude, Esq., saw the point right away 
once the formidable Roberts had made it, but it took him a long, 
harassing time to make it clear to the Counsel for the other side. 
Finally, the latter asked permission to alter the charge and after a 
while he came back with one that was much worse than the first. 

=====第621页=====
596 Frederick Engels 
When he saw that this would not do either, he asked for a further 
adjournment of the case and Daniel Maude, Esq., gave him until 
Friday, November 29, that is, a whole week, to consider the 
matter. I have not been able to find out whether or not he 
succeeded because the one issue of the paper which must have 
contained a report of the verdict is missing from my files. 
Meanwhile, Roberts went over to the offensive and had several of 
the recruited workers and one of Pauling & Henfrey's foremen 
brought before the court for forcing their way into the house of 
one of the strikers and assaulting his wife; in two other cases some 
of the workers on strike had been attacked. To his great regret, 
Daniel Maude, Esq., had to find all the accused guilty but he dealt 
with them as leniently as he possibly could and only bound them 
over to keep the peace themselves in future. 
Finally, at the end of December, Messrs. Pauling & Henfrey 
succeeded in getting sentence against two of their opponents, 
likewise on charges of assault against one of their workers. But 
this time the court was not so lenient. Without more ado, it 
sentenced them to a month's imprisonment and bound them over 
to keep the peace after their release. 
From here on news about the strike becomes meagre. It was still 
in full swing on January 18. I have found no later reports.200 It 
has probably come to an end like most others; in the course of 
time Pauling & Henfrey will have secured a sufficient number of 
workers from distant parts and from a few turncoats from the 
workers' side; after a longer or shorter strike and its accompany­
ing misery, for which the strikers will have been consoled by the 
consciousness that they have nothing to reproach themselves with 
and that they have helped to maintain the level of wages of their 
fellow workers, the majority of them will have found jobs 
elsewhere. And as for the points in dispute, Messrs. Pauling & 
Henfrey will have learnt that they cannot impose their will so 
rigorously, since for them also the strike involved considerable loss, 
and the other employers, after such a fierce struggle, will not think 
of changing the old rules of the craftsmen carpenters so soon. 
Brussels 
Written in the summer Printed according to the journal 
and autumn 1845 
First published in 
Das Westphälische Dampfboot 
Bielefeld, 1846. I and II 
Signed: F. Engels 

=====第622页=====
Karl Marx 
PEUCHET: ON SUICIDE 201 
French criticism of society has, at least, in part the great merit of 
having shown up the contradictions and unnaturalness of modern 
life not only in the relationships of particular classes, but in all 
circles and forms of modern intercourse. And it has done that in 
accounts evincing the warmth of life  itself,  broadness of view, 
refined subtlety, and bold originality of spirit, which one will seek 
in vain in any other nation. Compare the critical writings of Owen 
and Fourier, for example, so far as they concern the relationships 
of life, to gain an idea of this superiority of the French. It is by no 
means only to the French "socialist" writers proper that one must 
look for the critical presentation of social conditions; but to writers 
in every sphere of literature, and in particular of novels and 
memoirs. In a few excerpts on suicide from the "Mémoires tires des 
Archives de la Police etc." par Jacques Peuchet I shall give an example 
of this French criticism. It may at the same time show what 
grounds there are for the idea of the philanthropic bourgeois that 
it is only a question of providing a little bread and a little 
education for the proletarians, and that only the worker is stunted 
by the present state of society, but otherwise the existing world is 
the best of all possible worlds. 
With Jacques Peuchet, as with many of the older, now almost 
extinct, French professional men, who have lived through the 
numerous upheavals since 1789, the numerous disappointments, 
enthusiasms, constitutions, rulers, defeats and victories, criticism of 
the existing property, family, and other private relations, in a 
word of private life, appears as the necessary outcome of their 
political experiences. 

=====第623页=====
598 Karl Marx 
Jacques Peuchet (born 1760) proceeded from belles lettres to 
medicine, from medicine to law, from law to administration and 
the police. Before the outbreak of the French Revolution he was 
working with Abbé Morellet on a Dictionnaire du commerce, of 
which, however, only the prospectus was published, and at that 
time he was occupied mainly with political economy and adminis­
tration. Peuchet was an adherent of the French Revolution for only 
a very short time; he very soon turned to the royalist party, for a 
time held the editorship of the Gazette de France and later even 
took over the notorious royalist Mercure from Mallet du Pan. 
Nevertheless, he wound his way very cleverly through the revolu­
tion, sometimes persecuted, sometimes occupied in the Depart­
ment of Administration and the Police. The Géographie commer­
çante, 5 vol. in folio, which he published in 1800, attracted the 
attention of Bonaparte, the First Consul, and he was appointed a 
member of the Conseil de commerce et des arts. Later he occupied a 
higher position in the administration under the ministry of 
François de Neufchâteau. In 1814 the Restoration appointed him 
censor. During the 100 days 202 he retired. At the restoration of 
the Bourbons he was given the post of keeper of archives in the 
Paris police prefecture, which he held until 1827. Peuchet was not 
without influence, both directly and as a writer, on the speakers in 
the Constituent Assembly, the Convention, the Tribunate,203 and 
the Chambers of Deputies under the Restoration. The best known 
of his many, mostly economic, works apart from the Geography of 
Commerce already referred to, is his statistics of France3 (1807). 
Peuchet wrote his memoirs, the materials for which he gathered 
partly from the Paris police archives, partly from his long practical 
experience in police and administration, as an old man and had 
them published only after his death, so that in no circumstances can 
he be counted among the "hasty" Socialists and Communists, who 
are known to lack so completely the marvellous thoroughness and 
comprehensive knowledge of the general run of our writers, 
officials and professional citizens. 
Let us listen to our archive-keeper of the Paris police prefecture 
on suicidel 
"The annual number of suicides, which is, as it were, normal and recurrent 
among us, must be regarded as a symptom of the faulty organisation of our 
society; for at times when industry is at a standstill and in crisis, in periods of dear 
food and hard winters, this symptom is always more conspicuous and assumes an 
epidemic character. Prostitution and theft then increase in the same proportion. 
Although poverty is the greatest source of suicide, we find it in all classes, among 
a J. Peuchet, Statistique élémentaire de la France. —Ed. 

=====第624页=====
®etttfdE>eS 
pftrijetbttd) 
für 1845. 
ÇerauSgegeben 
g}. JJüttmann. 
©armftabt,  1843. 
Druit u n 6 SBertaa son <£. SB. \Je«fe. 
Cover of the journal Deutsches Bürgerbuch, to which Engels contributed 

=====第625页=====
SDaê 
IP*fty()ttlif*dK Patnpfbaat 
(Sine Sïïoimtôftfrift 
»on 
Dr. ©tto SMng* 
Breitet 3aÇrgang.  
^»»»^»e-^  
©tclcfcto, 1846. 
SSerlag »on 91. £elmt$. — 3>rucf »on 3. SD. Lüfter, ffîittoe. 
Cover of the journal Dai Westphälische Dampfboot, to which Engels contributed 

=====第626页=====
Uicnctlidi erfdieinl ein -.Vft. Vtr P«i» îe» jJabracnj.» »on fttiëlf «.Srilcn iff in allm 
liuihH^nfiiidieii mir 2 tïblr.. M îrn prenfiifAen PcjISmitrn 2 ûhlr. 10 Sjr. — 
S3* 1 vriniplnc >sri°lr fmî a 7'/, Sjf. in allen l'uAtyanfluiiAtn tu b^en. 
Cover of the journal Gesellschaftsspiegel, to which Engels contributed 

=====第627页=====

=====第628页=====
Peuchet: On Suicide 603 
the idle rich as well as among artists and politicians. The variety of the causes 
which give rise to it seems to mock the monotonous and callous condemnation of 
the moralists. 
"Consumptive diseases, towards which science is at present indifferent and 
ineffectual, abused friendship, deceived love, frustrated ambition, family suffering, 
repressed rivalry, dissatisfaction with a monotonous life, suppressed enthusiasm, 
are indubitably the causes of suicide in more generously endowed natures, and the 
love of life  itself,  this energetic driving force of personality, very often leads to 
putting an end to a detestable existence. 
"Madame de Staël? whose greatest merit is to have expressed commonplaces in 
brilliant style, has attempted to show that suicide is an act contrary to nature, and 
that it cannot be regarded as a deed of courage; she claims in particular that to 
fight despair is more worthy than to succumb to it. Such arguments little affect 
souls which are overwhelmed by misfortune. If they are religious, they look 
forward to a better world; if, on the contrary, they do not believe in anything, they 
seek the calm of Nothing. Philosophical tirades have no value in their eyes and are 
a poor refuge from suffering. It is above all in bad taste to maintain that an act so 
frequently committed is contrary to nature; suicide is in no way contrary to nature, 
since we witness it daily. What is against nature does not happen. On the contrary, 
it is in the nature of our society to produce many suicides, while Tartars do not kill 
themselves. Hence all  societies  do not have the same products. That is what we must tell 
ourselves, so as to work for the reform of our society and make it rise to a higher 
stage. As for courage, if it is considered courageous to defy death in broad daylight 
on the battlefield, under the domination of every form of excitement, there is 
nothing to prove lack of courage in one who administers death to himself in dark 
solitude. Such a debatable question is not disposed of by insulting the dead. 
"Everything that has been said against suicide goes round and round in the same 
circle of ideas. People cite against it the decrees of Providence, but the existence of 
suicide is itself an open protest against her indecipherable decrees. They talk to us 
of our duties to this society without explaining or implementing our own claims on 
society, and finally they exalt the thousand times greater merit of overcoming pain 
rather than succumbing to it, a merit as sad as the prospects it opens up. In short, 
they make of suicide an act of cowardice, a crime against the law, society and 
honour. 
"Why is it that in spite of so many anathemas people kill themselves? Because the 
blood of men in despair does not run through their veins in the same way as that 
of the cold beings who take the time to coin all those fruitless phrases. Man  seems  to 
be a mystery to man; he can only be  blamed,  he is not known. When we see how 
light-mindedly the institutions under whose domination Europe lives dispose of the 
blood and life of the nations, how civilised justice surrounds itself lavishly with 
prisons, chastisements and instruments of death so as to sanction its insecure 
decisions; when we see the numerical immensity of the classes which on all sides 
are left in misery, and the social pariahs who are battered by brutal contempt, 
meant to be preventive, perhaps to save the trouble of lifting them out of their 
squalor; when we see all this, we fail to understand what entitles us to command 
the individual to respect in himself an existence which our customs, our prejudices, 
our laws and our morals generally trample underfoot. 
"It was thought that it would be possible to prevent suicide by degrading 
punishments and by branding the memory of the culprit with infamy. What can 
a Marx's italics here and below.—Ed. 
The word "society" is added by Marx.— Ed. 

=====第629页=====
604 Karl Marx 
one say of the unworthiness of such branding of people who are no longer there to 
plead their case? The unfortunates, by the way, are little worried by that; and if 
suicide accuses anybody, it accuses above all the people who are left behind, 
because there is not one in this multitude who deserves that anyone should stay 
alive for him. Have the childish and cruel means devised been victorious against 
the whisperings of despair? What does he who wants to flee the world care about 
the insults which the world promises to his corpse? He only sees in them yet 
another act of cowardice on the part of the living. What kind of  society  is it,  indeed, 
where one finds the profoundest solitude in the midst of millions; where one can be 
overwhelmed by an  irrepressible  desire to kill oneself without anybody being aware of it? This 
society is no society, it is as Rousseau says, a desert inhabited by wild animals In the 
positions which I held in the police administration suicides were part of my 
responsibility; I wished to learn whether among the causes motivating them there 
were any whose effect could be obviated. I undertook extensive work on the 
subject." I found that any attempts short of a total reform of the present order of  society 
would be in vain.a 
"Among the causes of despair which induce nervous, very excitable persons, 
passionate beings with deep feelings, to seek death, I discovered as the predomin­
ant factor the maltreatment, the injustices, the secret punishments, which hard 
parents and superiors inflict on persons dependent on them. The revolution has not 
overthrown all tyrannies; the evils of which the arbitrary authorities were accused persist in 
the family, where they cause crises analogous to those of revolutions. 
"The relations between interests and temperaments, the true relations among 
individuals, have first to be created among ourselves from the very foundations and 
suicide is only one of the thousand and one symptoms of the universal social struggle which 
is for ever spurring on to fresh deeds and from which so many fighters withdraw 
because they are tired of being counted among the victims, or because they rebel 
against the thought of occupying a place of honour among the hangmen. If you 
want a few examples, I will cull them from authentic protocols. 
"In the month of July 1816 the daughter of a tailor became engaged to a 
butcher, a young man of good morals, thrifty and hardworking, very devoted to his 
beautiful bride, who in turn was very fond of him. The young girl was a seamstress; 
she enjoyed the respect of all who knew her, and the bridegroom's parents loved 
her dearly. These good people missed no opportunity to hasten the day when they 
would have her as their daughter-in-law  ; they gave parties at which she was the 
queen and idol. 
"The time of the marriage approached; all arrangements between the two 
families had been made and the contracts concluded. On the eve of the day fixed 
for the visit to the registrar, the young daughter and her parents were to have 
supper with the family of the bridegroom; an insignificant incident unexpectedly 
prevented this. Orders which had to be met for rich customers kept the tailor and 
his wife at home. They sent their apologies; but the butcher's mother came herself 
to fetch her daughter-in-law, who was given permission to go with her. 
"Despite the absence of two of the principal guests the meal was one of the 
gayest. Many family jokes were told, which the prospect of a marriage makes 
permissible. They drank, they sang; they spoke about the future. The joys of a 
good marriage were eagerly discussed. They were still at table very late at night. By 
an easily explained indulgence the parents of the young man closed their eyes to 
This conclusion from the arguments of the author of the Mémoires is 
formulated by Marx  himself.  Instead of this sentence Peuchet says: "Without 
engaging in any theoretical investigation, I shall try to adduce facts." — Ed. 

=====第630页=====
Peuchet: On Suicide 605 
the silent understanding of the engaged couple. Their hands sought each other, 
love and intimacy went to their heads. Besides, the marriage was considered as 
accomplished and these young people had been visiting each other for quite a long 
time without giving cause for the slightest reproach. The emotion of the 
bridegroom's parents, the advanced hour, the mutual longing desire, loosed by the 
indulgence of their mentors, the unrestrained gaiety which always prevails at such 
meals,  all this combined with the opportunity which offered itself smilingly, and the 
wine which was effervescing in the head, everything favoured an outcome which 
may be imagined. The lovers met again in the dark, when the lights had gone out. 
Everyone pretended not to notice, to suspect nothing. Their happiness had only 
friends here, no enviers. 
"The young daughter only returned to her parents the next morning. A proof of 
how little guilty she believed herself to be lies in the fact that she returned alone. 
She slipped into her room and prepared her toilette; but no sooner did her parents 
notice her, than with fury they heaped the most shameful names and abuses on 
their daughter. The neighbourhood witnessed it, the scandal had no bounds. 
Imagine the shock which this child suffered from her modesty and the outrageous 
violation of her secret. In vain did the bewildered girl put it to her parents that 
they themselves were bringing her into disrepute, that she admitted her wrong, her 
folly, her disobedience, but that everything could be put right again. Her 
arguments and her grief failed to disarm the tailor couple." 
The most cowardly, unresisting people become implacable as 
soon as they can exercise their absolute parental authority. The abuse of 
this authority is, as it were, a crude compensation for all the 
submissiveness and dependence to which they abase themselves 
willy-nilly in bourgeois society. 
"Busybodies of both sexes came running to the scene and joined in the clamour. 
The feeling of shame caused by this abominable scene brought the child to the 
decision to take her own life. She hurried downstairs, through the crowd of the 
abusive and swearing neighbours; her eyes clouded with madness," she rushed to 
the Seine "and threw herself into the river. Boatmen brought her out of the water, 
dead, still in her wedding finery. Needless to say, those who at first had shouted 
against the daughter at once turned against her parents; this catastrophe fright­
ened their empty souls.3 A few days later the parents came to the police to claim a 
golden chain which the child had worn round her neck, a present from the future 
father-in-law, a silver watch and various other small pieces of jewelry, all of which 
had been deposited with the police. I did not fail to reproach these people 
energetically for their stupidity and barbarity. To say to these mad people that they 
would have to render account to God would have made very little impression on 
them in view of their egoistic prejudices and the peculiar kind of religiosity which 
prevails in the lower mercantile classes. 
"Greed had brought them to me, not the desire to possess two or three 
keepsakes; I thought I could punish them through their greed. They were claiming 
their daughter's jewels; I refused these to them; I kept the certificates which they 
needed to reclaim these effects from the office where they had been deposited 
according to custom. So long as I held this post, their claims were in vain, and I 
found pleasure in defying their insults. 
"In the same year there appeared in my office a young créole of attractive 
Peuchet has "this catastrophe struck fear into their souls".—Ed. 

=====第631页=====
606 Karl Marx 
appearance from one of the richest families of Martinique. He objected most 
emphatically to the handing over of the corpse of a young woman, his sister-in-law, 
to the claimant, his own brother and her husband. She had drowned  herself.  This 
kind of suicide is the commonest. Her body had been found not far from the 
Grève d'Argenteuil by the officials employed to recover corpses. From one of the 
well-known instincts of modesty which prevail in women even in the blindest 
despair, the drowned woman had wound the seam of her skirt carefully round her 
feet. This modest precaution proved her suicide beyond doubt. As soon as she had 
been found she was taken to the morgue. Her beauty, her youth, her rich apparel 
gave rise to a thousand speculations as to the cause of this catastrophe. The despair 
of her husband, who was the first to identify her, was boundless; he did not fathom 
this calamity, at least so I was told. I myself had not seen him before. I put it to the 
créole that the claims of the husband had precedence over all others; he was 
already having a magnificent marble tombstone erected for his unfortunate wife. 
'After he has killed her, the monster!' shouted the créole, rushing to and fro in 
his rage. 
"From the excitement and despair of this young man, from his urgent pleading 
to grant his request, from his tears, I believed I could conclude that he was in love 
with her, and I told him so. He admitted his love; but with the most ardent 
assurances that his sister-in-law had never known of it. He swore to that. He 
wanted to bring to light the barbarities of his brother, even if it meant putting 
himself in the dock, only to save the reputation of his sister-in-law, whose suicide 
public opinion would, as usual, attribute to an intrigue. He begged me for my 
support. What I could gather from his fragmentary, passionate declarations was 
this: Monsieur de M..., his brother, rich and a connoisseur of the arts, a friend of 
luxury and high society, had married this young woman about a year earlier, 
apparently from mutual inclination; they were the most beautiful couple you could 
see. After the marriage a blood defect, perhaps hereditary, in the constitution of 
the young husband had broken out suddenly and violently. Formerly so proud of 
his handsome appearance and his elegant figure, an excellence, a matchless 
perfection of form, this man suddenly fell a prey to an unknown scourge against 
whose devastations science was powerless; from head to foot he was most horribly 
disfigured. He had lost all his hair, his spine had grown crooked. Day by day 
emaciation and wrinkles changed him most strikingly, at least for others; for his 
self-love tried to deny the obvious. Yet all this did not make him take to his bed; an 
iron strength seemed to triumph over the attacks of the scourge. He vigorously 
survived his own ruination. His body became a wreck, and his soul remained 
buoyant. He continued to give banquets, to preside over hunting parties and to 
lead the rich and magnificent way of life which seemed to be the law of his 
character and his nature. But the insults, the jibes, the taunts of schoolboys and 
street urchins when he exercised his horse in the promenades, the rude and 
mocking laughter, solicitous warnings of friends about the countless occasions on 
which he exposed himself to ridicule by insisting on gallant manners towards ladies, 
eventually dispelled his illusion and made him cautious about  himself.  As soon as 
he admitted to himself his ugliness and deformity, as soon as he was conscious of it, 
his character became embittered; he became dejected. He seemed less keen on 
taking his wife to parties, to balls, to concerts; he fled to his country residence; he 
put an end to all invitations, avoided people under a thousand pretexts, and the 
compliments his friends paid to his wife, which he had tolerated as long as his 
pride gave him the certainty of his superiority, made him jealous, suspicious and 
violent. He detected in all who insisted on visiting him the firm resolve to conquer 
the heart of his wife, who was his last pride and his last consolation. At this time 
the créole arrived, from Martinique with business whose success seemed to be 

=====第632页=====
Peuchet: On Suicide 607 
favoured by the restoration of the Bourbons to the French throne. His sister-in-law 
received him with cordiality, and in the shipwreck of innumerable connections 
which she had contracted the newcomer preserved the advantage which his title of 
brother quite naturally gave him with Monsieur de M.... The créole foresaw the 
loneliness which would surround the household both as a result of the direct 
quarrels which his brother had with several of his friends and through a thousand 
indirect incidents which drove away and discouraged visitors. Without being clearly 
aware of the motives of love which made him jealous too, the créole approved 
these measures of isolation and encouraged them by his own advice. Monsieur de 
M... finished up by withdrawing entirely into a beautiful house in Passy, which in a 
short time became a desert. Jealousy feeds on the smallest things; when it does not 
know whereon to fasten, it turns against itself and becomes inventive; everything 
serves to sustain it. Perhaps the young woman longed for the pleasures of her age. 
Walls obstructed the view of neighbouring residences; the shutters were closed 
from morning to night." 
The unfortunate wife was sentenced to the most intolerable 
slavery, and this slavery was only enforced by Monsieur de M... on 
the basis of the Code civil and the right of property, on the basis of 
social conditions which render love independent of the free 
sentiments of the lovers and allow the jealous husband to 
surround his wife with locks as the miser does his coffers; for she 
is only a part of his inventory. 
"At night Monsieur de M... prowled round the house armed, making his rounds 
with dogs. He imagined he saw tracks in the sand and was misled into strange 
suspicions on the occasion of a ladder having been moved by a gardener. The 
gardener  himself,  a drunkard of almost 60, was placed as guard at the gate. The 
spirit of exclusion knows no bounds to its extravagances, it goes on to the 
absurd. The brother, innocent accomplice in all this, at last understood that he 
was assisting in making the misfortune of the young woman who, day by day kept 
under guard, insulted, bereft of everything which can divert a rich and happy 
imagination, became as gloomy and melancholy as she had been free and gay. She 
cried and concealed her tears, but their traces were visible. The créole was plagued 
by his conscience. Determined to declare himself openly to his sister-in-law and to 
make amends for his mistake, which had surely originated in his furtive feeling of 
love,  he crept one morning into a small wooded pleasure garden where the 
prisoner went from time to time to get fresh air and look after her flowers. We 
must take it that availing herself of this very limited freedom she knew that she 
remained under the eyes of her jealous husband; for on seeing her brother-in-law, 
who for the first time had come face to face with her unexpectedly, the young 
woman displayed the greatest dismay. She wrung her hands. 'Go away, in heaven's 
name,' she cried to him in fright, 'go away!' 
"And indeed, scarcely had he time to hide in a greenhouse, when Monsieur de 
M... suddenly appeared. The créole heard cries, he tried to listen; the beating of 
his heart prevented him from understanding the least word of an explanation to 
which his concealment, should the husband discover it, could give a deplorable 
outcome. This event spurred on the brother-in-law; he saw the need henceforth to 
be the protector of a victim. He resolved to abandon all restraint of his love. Love 
can sacrifice everything but its right to protect, for this last sacrifice would be that 
of a coward. He continued to visit his brother, ready to speak to him openly, to 

=====第633页=====
608 Karl Marx 
reveal himself to him, to tell him everything. Monsieur de M... had as yet no 
suspicion of him, but his brother's insistence aroused it. Without being entirely 
clear on the causes of this interest, Monsieur de M... mistrusted them, anticipating 
where it might lead. The créole soon saw that his brother was not always absent, as 
he afterwards maintained, when people rang in vain at the gate of the house in 
Passy. A locksmith's apprentice made him keys after the models of those which his 
master had made for Monsieur de M.... After an interval of ten days, the créole, 
embittered by fear and tormented by the maddest imaginings, climbed the walls at 
night, smashed a railing in front of the main yard, reached the roof by a ladder 
and slid down the drain-pipe to below the window of a store-room. Violent cries 
caused him to creep unnoticed as far as a glass door. What he saw rent his heart. 
The light of a lamp shone in an alcove. Behind the bed-curtains, hair dishevelled 
and face purple with fury, Monsieur de M..., crouching half-naked near his wife on 
the bed which she dared not leave though half and half wresting herself from him, 
was heaping on her the most biting reproaches and seemed like a tiger ready to 
tear her to pieces. 'Yes,' he said to her, 'I am ugly, I am a monster and, I know it 
only too well, I inspire fear in you. You wish to be freed of me so that the sight of 
me may no longer be a burden to you. You are longing for the moment which will 
make you free. And don't tell me the opposite, I guess your thoughts in your fright 
and your resistance. You blush at the unworthy laughter which I arouse, you 
inwardly rebel against me! You no doubt count the minutes, one by one, which 
must elapse until I no longer beleaguer you with my weaknesses and my presence. 
Stop!  I am seized with horrible desires, the frenzied wish to make you like  myself,  to 
disfigure-you, so that you can no longer hope to console yourself with lovers for 
the misfortune of having known me. I shall break all the mirrors in this house so 
that ihey shall not reproach me with the contrast, so that they cease to nurture 
your pride. Perhaps I should take you out into the world, or let you go there, to 
see how everybody encourages you to hate me? No, no, you shall not leave this 
house until you have killed me. Kill me, anticipate what I am tempted to do every 
day!' And the savage rolled on the bed with loud cries, gnashing his teeth, 
foaming at the mouth, with a thousand symptoms of madness, and striking himself 
in his fury, near this unfortunate woman who wasted on him the tenderest caresses 
and the most pathetic entreaties. At last she calmed him. No doubt, pity had 
replaced love, but that was not enough for this man who had become so terrible to 
look at, whose passion had retained so much energy. A long spell of depression was 
the sequel to this scene, which petrified the créole. He shuddered and did not 
know to whom to turn to save the unfortunate woman from this deadly 
martyrdom. This scene was apparently repeated every day, since for the convul­
sions which followed Madame de M. had recourse to bottles of medicine prepared 
for the purpose of restoring a little calm to her torturer. 
"The créole was the only representative of the family of Monsieur de M. in Paris 
at the time. It is in such cases above all that one wants to curse the slowness of 
judicial procedure and the callousness of the laws which nothing can divert from 
their nicely arranged routine, particularly when it is a question only of a woman, a 
being whom the legislator surrounds with the least guarantees. A warrant for an 
arrest, some drastic measure, would alone have prevented the disaster which the 
witness of this madness foresaw too well. He decided, however, to risk everything, 
to take all consequences upon  himself,  since his wealth enabled him to make 
enormous sacrifices and not to fear responsibility for any risk involved. Already 
several doctors among his friends, determined like  himself,  were preparing to 
obtain entrance into Monsieur de M.'s house so as to diagnose these fits of 
madness and to separate the two spouses by direct force, when the occurrence of 
the suicide justified the belated preparations and put an end to the problem. 

=====第634页=====
Peuchet: On Suicide 609 
"Certainly, for anybody who does not limit the entire spirit of words to their 
letter, this suicide was a treacherous murder committed by the husband; but it was 
also the outcome of an extraordinary fit of jealousy. The jealous man needs a 
slave, the jealous man can love, but the love he feels is only a luxurious counterpart 
for jealousy; the jealous man is above all a private property-owner? I prevented the 
créole from making a useless and dangerous scandal, dangerous above all to the 
memory of his loved one, for the idle public would have accused the victim of an 
adulterous connection with her husband's brother. I witnessed the funeral. Nobody 
but the brother and myself knew the truth. Around me I heard discreditable 
murmurings about this suicide and I despised them. One blushes for public 
opinion when one sees it close at hand with its cowardly embitterment and its dirty 
insinuations. Opinion is too much divided by people's isolation, too ignorant, too 
corrupt, because each is a stranger to himself and all are strangers to one another. 
"Incidentally, few weeks passed without bringing me more revelations of the 
same kind, In the same year I registered love liaisons caused by the parents' refusal 
to give their consent, and which ended with a double pistol shot. 
"I also-  recorded suicides of men of the world reduced to impotence in the 
flowering of their age, whom the abuse of enjoyment had thrown into insuperable 
melancholy. 
"Many people, after long and useless torture by harmful prescriptions, end their 
days dominated by the belief that medicine is incapable of freeing them from their 
ills. 
"One could make a remarkable collection of quotations from famous authors and 
of poems written by despairing people preparing for their death with a certain 
ostentation. During the marvellously cold-blooded moment which follows the 
decision to die, a kind of infectious enthusiasm is exhaled from these souls and 
flows on to paper, even among classes which are bereft of all education. While they 
compose themselves for the sacrifice, whose depth they are pondering, all their 
strength is concentrated so as to gush out in a warm and characteristic expression. 
"Some of these poems, which are buried in the archives, are masterpieces. A 
ponderous bourgeois, who puts his soul into his business and his god into 
commerce, may find all this very romantic and by his scornful laughter deny 
suffering which he does not understand: his disdain does not surprise us." 
What else can one expect of three-percenters, who do not even 
suspect that daily, hourly, piece by piece, they are murdering 
themselves, their human nature! 
"But what shall one say of the good people who pass for devout and educated, 
and who echo such filth? Without doubt it is of great importance that the poor 
devils should endure life, if only in the interests of the privileged classes of this 
world, which a general suicide of the trash would ruin; but is there no other means 
of making the existence of this class bearable than insults, sneers and fine words? 
Besides, there must exist a certain greatness of soul in these wretches who, 
determined as they are to die, destroy themselves and do not take the way of 
suicide by the detour of the scaffold. It is true that, the more our commercial 
This sentence was taken by Marx -from the description of another case of 
suicide given by Peuchet below (cf. t. IV, p.  159).—Ed. 
The last sentence is taken by Marx from the description of another case of 
suicide given by Peuchet below (cf. t. IV, p. 167). Marx gave a free rendering and 
added the concluding words: "because each is a stranger to himself and all are 
strangers to one another."—Ed. 

=====第635页=====
610 Karl Marx 
epoch3 progresses, the rarer these noble suicides of misery become. Conscious 
hostility takes their place, and the miserable one inconsiderately runs the risk of 
theft and murder. It is easier to receive the death penalty than to get work. 
"In rummaging through the police archives I have come across only one single 
case of cowardice in the list of suicides. That was a young American, Wilfrid 
Ramsay, who killed himself in order to escape a duel. 
"The classification of the various causes of suicide would be the classification of 
the very dejects of our society. One killed himself because he was robbed of an 
invention by intriguers, on which occasion the inventor, thrown into the direst 
poverty as a consequence of the lengthy scientific investigations to which he had to 
devote  himself,  was not even in a position to buy himself a patent. Another killed 
himself to avoid the enormous costs and the degrading legal prosecution conse­
quent on monetary embarrassments which, by the way, are so common that men 
entrusted with the conduct of the general interest are not in the least concerned 
about them. Another again killed himself because he could not find work, after he 
had groaned for a long time under the insults and the stinginess of those in our 
midst who are the arbitrary distributors of work. [...] 
"One day a doctor consulted me about a death of which he accused himself of 
having been the cause. 
"One evening, returning to Belleville, where he lived, he was stopped by a veiled 
woman in the dark, in a narrow street from which his house stood off aside. She 
begged him in a tremulous voice to listen to her. At some distance a person whose 
features he could not distinguish was walking up and down. She was being watched 
by a man. 'Sir,' she told the doctor, 'I am pregnant, and when this is discovered I shall 
be disgraced. My family, public opinion, people of honour will not pardon me. The 
woman whose confidence I have betrayed would lose her reason, and without 
doubt would divorce her husband. I am not defending my case. I am the centre of 
a scandal which only my death could prevent from becoming public. I wanted to 
kill myself,  people want me to live. I have been told that you have compassion, and 
this convinced me that you will not want to be an accomplice in the murder of a 
child, even if this child is not yet in the world. You see, it is a question of an 
abortion. I shall not debase myself by pleading extenuation for something I regard 
as the most reprehensible crime. In presenting myself to you I have merely yielded 
to the pleadings of others; for I shall know how to die. I shall summon death 
myself,  and I need nobody for that. One can pretend to find pleasure in watering 
the garden; one can put on wooden clogs for it; one can choose a slippery plac 
where one fetches water every day; one can arrange to disappear in the depth 
the well; and people will say that it was an 'accident'. I have foreseen everythi. 
Sir. I wish it could be the morning after, I would like to go with all my hea .. 
Everything has been prepared so that it will happen just like that. I have be«*"" id 
to say this to you, and I have done so. You have to decide whether one muiuer 
shall occur or two. Because of my cowardice I had to swear that I would without 
reservation abide by your decision. Decide!' 
"'This choice,' the doctor continued, 'horrified me. The voice of this woman 
had a pure and harmonious sound; her hand, which I held in mine, was fine and 
delicate; her frank and determined despair bespoke an excellent spirit. But the 
point at issue was one that really made me shudder; although in a thousand cases, 
in difficult deliveries, for example, when the surgeon's choice lies between saving 
a Peuchet writes: "les époques d'incrédulité". —Ed. 
Marx omits the description of the case given by Peuchet in his Mémoires, t. IV, 
pp. 143-68; the text that follows is taken by Marx from the concluding part of the 
chapter, p. 169 et seq.—Ed. 

=====第636页=====
Peuchet: On Suicide 611 
the mother or the child, either politics or humaneness decides at will, without 
scruple.' 
"'Flee abroad,' I said. 'Impossible,' she replied, 'it is not to be contemplated.' 
"'Take the proper precautions.' 
"'I can't, I sleep in the same alcove as the woman whose friendship I have 
betrayed.' 'She is your relative?' 'I must not tell you any more.' 
'"I would have given my heart's blood,' the doctor continued, 'to save this 
woman from suicide or crime, or that she might escape this conflict without 
needing me. I charged myself with barbarism because I shrank from complicity in 
a murder. The struggle was terrible. Then a demon whispered to me that one does 
not kill oneself merely because one wishes to die; that compromised people can be 
forced to renounce their vices if their power to do evil is taken from them. I 
guessed luxury from the embroideries with which her fingers played, and the 
resources of wealth from the elegant diction of her speech. We believe that we owe 
less compassion to the rich; my self-esteem revolted against the thought of being 
tempted with gold, although up till then this matter had not been touched on, 
which was one more sign of delicacy and proof that my character was respected. 
My reply was a refusal; the lady went quickly away; the noise of a cabriolet 
convinced me that I would be unable to remedy what I had done. 
"'A fortnight later the newspapers gave me the solution of the mystery. The 
young niece of a Paris banker, 18 years old at the most, the beloved ward of her 
aunt, who since the death of her mother had not let the girl out of her sight, had 
slipped and fallen into a brook on the estate of her guardians at Villemomble and 
had drowned. Her guardian was inconsolate; in his capacity of uncle the cowardly 
seducer could give way to his grief before the world.' 
"One perceives that for want of something better, suicide is the extreme resort 
against the evils of private life. 
"Among the causes of suicide I have very often found dismissal from office, 
refusal of work, or a sudden reduction in salary, as a consequence of which families 
can no longer procure the means of subsistence, the more so since most of them 
live from hand to mouth. 
"At the time when the guards in the royal palace were being reduced, a good 
man was dismissed like the rest without more ado. His age and his lack of influence 
made it impossible for him to have himself transferred back into the army; 
industry was closed to him by his lack of knowledge. He tried to enter the civil 
service; competitors, numerous here as everywhere, stood in his way. He fell into 
gloomy distress and killed  himself.  In his pocket were found a letter and 
information about his circumstances. His wife was a poor seamstress; their two 
daughters, 16 and 18 years old, worked with her. Tarnau, our suicide, said in the 
papers he left behind that, 'since he could no longer be of use to his family and 
was compelled to be a burden on his wife and children, he considered it his duty to 
take his life so as to relieve them of this additional burden. He recommended his 
children to the Duchess of Angoulême; he hoped that in her goodness this princess 
would have compassion on so much misery.' I made a report to police prefect 
Angles, and when the necessary formalities were completed the duchess had 600 
francs sent to the unfortunate Tarnau family. 
"Sad aid indeed, after such a loss. But how could one family3 help all the 
unfortunate, since when everything is taken into account, the whole of France in its 
present state could not feed them. The charity of the rich would not suffice even if 
our whole nation were religious, which is far from the case. Suicide solves the worst of 
the difficulty, the scaffold the rest. Sources of income and real wealth can be expected only 
a Peuchet writes "the royal family".—Ed. 

=====第637页=====
612 Karl Marx 
from a recasting of our general system of agriculture and industry. It is easy to proclaim 
constitutions on paper, the right of every citizen to education, to work, and above 
all to a minimum of the means of subsistence. But it is not enough to write these 
generous wishes on paper, the proper task is to fructify these liberal ideas with 
material and intelligent social3 institutions. 
"The ancient world, paganism, has thrown up magnificent creations on the 
earth; will modern liberty lag behind her rival? Who will weld together these two 
splendid elements of might?" 
Thus far Peuchet. 
In conclusion we shall give one of his tables on the annual suicides 
in Paris. 
From another of the tables given by Peuchet we learn that from 
1817 to 1824 (inclusive) 2,808 suicides occurred in Paris.b Actually, 
of course, the figure was larger. In particular, as regards drowned 
persons whose bodies are exhibited in the morgue it is known in 
only very rare cases whether they were suicides or not. 
Table of Suicides in Paris in the year 1824 
Number J lst  half year  198 l Total 371 
1 2nd „ » 173 I 
Of whom the attempt at suicide was survived by 125 
.. »» .. »» » ». ,, not survived by 246 
Of the male sex 239 
" " female sex 132 
Unmarried 207 
Married 164 
Voluntary heavy fall 47 
Strangulation 38 
By cutting instruments 40 
» firearms 42 
.. poisoning 28 
.» coal fumes 61 
Suffocation by voluntary plunge into water 115 
Passionate love, domestic quarrels and grief 71 
Illness, weariness of life, unsound mind 128 
Misbehaviour, gaming, lotteries, fear of accusations and pun­
ishments 53 
Misery, poverty, loss of position, loss of job 59 
Unknown 60 
Written in the second half of 1845 Printed according to the journal 
Published in 1846 in Gesellschaftsspiegel Published in English for the first 
Bd. II, Heft VII time 
Signed: K. Marx 
a The word "social" was added by Marx.—Ed. 
b Peuchet writes "in the Seine Department".—Ed. Manner of 
death 
Motives 

=====第638页=====
Frederick Engels 
A FRAGMENT OF FOURIER'S ON TRADE 204 
The Germans are gradually beginning to spoil the communist 
movement too. Here also being as always the last and most 
inactive, they believe they can conceal their somnolence by 
contempt for their predecessors and empty philosophical boasting. 
Communism has hardly come into existence in Germany before it 
is being seized on by a whole host of speculative minds who 
imagine they have performed miracles by translating into the 
language of Hegelian logic propositions that long ago became 
commonplaces in France and England and now offering this new 
wisdom to the world as something unprecedented, as "true 
German theory", in order to be able to throw mud to their heart's 
content at the "bad practice" and "ridiculous" social systems of 
the narrow-minded French and English. This always ready Ger­
man theory, which has had the boundless good fortune to get a 
whiff of Hegel's philosophy of history and to become embodied in 
the scheme of the eternal categories by some dried-up Berlin 
professor, and which then perhaps leafed through Feuerbach, a 
few German communist writings and Herr Stein's book on French 
socialism, 3 this German theory of the very worst sort has already, 
without the slightest difficulty, reconstrued French socialism and 
communism according to Herr Stein, has allotted it a subordinate 
position, has "overcome" it, and "elevated" it to the "higher stage of 
development" of the always ready "German theory". 205 It has 
never occurred to it, of course, to acquaint itself to any extent with 
a Lorenz von Stein, Der Socialismus und Communismus des heutigen Frankreichs. 
Ein Beitrag zur Zeitgeschichte. —Ed. 
21-762 

=====第639页=====
614 Frederick Engels 
the things to be elevated themselves, to take a look at Fourier, 
Saint-Simon, Owen and the French Communists— Herr Stein's 
meagre extracts are quite sufficient to bring about this brilliant 
victory of German theory over the wretched efforts of foreigners. 
In contrast to this comical arrogance of German theory, which is 
incapable of dying, it is absolutely necessary to show the Germans 
what a lot they owe to foreigners since they became concerned 
with social questions. Among all the pompous phrases now loudly 
proclaimed in German literature as the basic principles of true, 
pure,  German, theoretical communism and socialism, there has so 
far not been a single idea which has grown on German soil. What 
the French or the English said as long as ten, twenty and even 
forty years ago — and said very well, very clearly, in very fine 
language — the Germans have now at last during the past year 
become acquainted with in bits and have Hegelianised, or at best 
belatedly rediscovered it and published it in a much worse, more 
abstract form as a completely new discovery. I make no exception 
here of my own writings. What is peculiar to the Germans is only 
the bad, abstract, unintelligible and clumsy form in which they 
have expressed these ideas. And as befits genuine theoreticians, 
from what the French have produced — they still know almost 
nothing at all of the English — they have so far found worthy of 
their attention, apart from the most general principles, only what is 
worst and most theoretical: the schematic plans of future society, 
the social  systems.  The best aspect, the criticism of existing  society,  the 
real basis, the main task of any investigation of social questions, 
they have calmly pushed aside. Not to mention the fact that these 
wise theoreticians are accustomed also to speak contemptuously of, 
or to ignore altogether, the only German who has really achieved 
something, namely: Weitling. 
I want to put before these wise gentlemen a short chapter from 
Fourier, which they could take as an example. It is true that 
Fourier did not start out from the Hegelian theory and for this 
reason unfortunately could not attain knowledge of absolute truth, 
not even of absolute socialism. It is true that owing to this 
shortcoming Fourier unfortunately allowed himself to be led 
astray and to substitute the method of series for the absolute 
method and thereby arrived at such speculative constructions as 
the conversion of the sea into lemonade, the couronnes  boréale  and 
australe* the anti-lion, and the conjunction of the planets. 206 But, 
if it has to be, I shall prefer to believe with the cheerful Fourier in 
Northern and southern coronas.— Ed. 

=====第640页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 615 
all these stories rather than in the realm of the absolute spirit, 
where there is no lemonade at all, in the identity of Being and 
Nothing and the conjunction of the eternal categories. French 
nonsense is at least cheerful, whereas German nonsense is gloomy 
and profound. And then, Fourier has criticised existing social 
relations so sharply, with such wit and humour that one readily 
forgives him for his cosmological fantasies, which are also based 
on a brilliant world outlook. 
The fragment which I am reproducing here was found among 
Fourier's works after his death and was printed in the first 
number of the periodical Phalange,* published by the Fourierists 
from the beginning of 1845. I am omitting what relates to 
Fourier's positive system and what otherwise is of no interest, and 
in general am making such free use of the text as is absolutely 
necessary with the foreign Socialists in order to make the things 
they wrote with definite aims in view readable to a public which is 
alien to these aims. This fragment is by no means the most 
brilliant of Fourier's writings, nor is it the best of what he wrote 
about trade — and yet no German Socialist or Communist, with the 
exception of Weitling, has so far written anything remotely 
comparable to this rough sketch. 
To save the German public the trouble of reading the Phalange 
itself,  I should mention that this periodical is a purely monetary 
speculation on the part of the Fourierists, and Fourier's manu­
scripts published in it are of very unequal value. Messieurs the 
Fourierists who publish this review are germanised, pompous 
theoreticians who have replaced the humour with which their 
teacher unmasked the world of the bourgeoisie by a holy, 
thoroughgoing theoretical, learned seriousness, for which they 
are deservedly ridiculed in France and prized in Germany. The 
description of the imaginary triumphs of Fourierism which they 
present in the first issue of the Phalange could send a professor of 
the absolute method into raptures. 
I begin my reproductions with a passage which has already been 
reprinted in the Theorie des quatre mouvements. This is the case with 
considerable sections of the present fragment of which, however, I 
shall give only what is most essential. 
* La Phalange. Revue de la science sociale, XIV e année, l re se'rie in 8°, Paris, 
aux Bureaux de la Phalange, 1845.—Publication des Manuscrits de Fourier: 
"Section ébauchée des trois unités externes", pp. 1-42 of the January and February 
issue.—Note by Engels. 
21* 

=====第641页=====
616 Frederick Engels 
j207 
"We now touch on civilisation's most sensitive spot; it is an unpleasant task to 
raise one's voice against the folly of the day, against chimeras that are downright 
epidemical. 
"To speak against the absurdities of trade today means to expose oneself to 
anathemas just as much as if one had spoken against the tyranny of the popes and 
the barons in the twelfth century. If it were a matter of choosing between two 
dangerous roles, I think it would be less dangerous to offend a sovereign with 
bitter truths than to offend the mercantile spirit which now rules as a despot over 
civilisation and even over sovereigns. 
"And yet a superficial analysis will prove that our commercial systems debase and 
disorganise civilisation, and that in trade as in all other things we are going astray 
more and more under the guidance of the inexact sciences. 
"The controversy on trade is hardly half a century old and has already produced 
thousands of volumes; and yet its originators have not seen that the trade 
mechanism is organised in such a way that it is a slap in the face for all common 
sense. It has subordinated the whole of society to one class of parasitical and 
unproductive people, the merchants. All the essential classes of society — the 
proprietor,* the farmer, the manufacturer, and even the government—find 
themselves dominated by an inessential, accessory class, the merchant, who should 
be their subordinate, their employed agent, removable and accountable, and who, 
nevertheless, directs and obstructs at will all the mainsprings of circulation. 
"In respect of errors other than those of trade, public opinion and the learned 
bodies are, indeed, more tractable; it is pretty well agreed that the philosophical 
systems are dangerous illusions, that experience belies our boasting of perfection, 
that our theories of freedom do not square with civilisation, that our virtues are 
social comedies and our legislations labyrinths; there are even jokes about a 
fashionable controversy, ideology. But tongue-wagging about commerce, with its 
theories of imports and exports, counterbalance, balance, and guarantee, has 
become the Ark of the Covenant before which everything bows down. This, then, is 
the illusion which we have to dispel. 
"First of all we must show that our trade systems, which are now gaped at with 
stupid veneration, are the antipodes of truth, of justice, and therefore also of unity. 
"It is difficult to make clear to a century that precisely that operation which it 
considers to be the masterpiece of all wisdom is nothing but the seal of ignorance 
stamped on its entire policy. Let us but look at the already known results: maritime 
monopoly, fiscal monopoly, growing national debts, bankruptcies in unbroken 
succession resulting from paper money, increasing villainy in all business relations. 
Already now we can stigmatise the mechanism of free trade, i.e., of free lying? that 
veritable industrial anarchy, that monstrous power in society. 
"How is it that the most lying class in the social body is most protected by the 
'apostles of truth1 ? How does it happen that today learned men who preach 
contempt of vile wealth praise only the class which pursues wealth per fas et nefas, 
the class of stock exchange gamblers and corner-men? Formerly the philosophers 
were unanimous in censuring certain corporations which defended with flexibility 
of conscience the proposition that there is a difference between taking and stealing. 
How then have the same philosophers now become the apologists of a class which 
* It must not be forgotten that Fourier was not a Communist.— Note by Engels. 
a Engels' italics here and below.— Ed. 
By legal or illegal means.— Ed. 

=====第642页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 617 
affirms, with still greater immorality, that haggling is not lying, that to dupe the 
buyer is not the same as robbing him, that stockjobbing and cornering are by no 
means plundering the productive class, in  brief,  that one must work only for 
money, not for fame; — for that is the refrain which the merchants sing in chorus: 
We don't pursue business pour la gloirel* Is it then to be wondered at that the 
modern sciences went astray when they espoused the cause of those who openly 
profess such principles?" 
Trade takes various forms according to the various social stages; for as it is the 
pivot of all social life, it exists as soon as there is any social condition in general. A 
people becomes social, forms a society, from the moment when it begins to carry 
out exchange. For this reason trade exists already among the savages, where it takes 
the form of direct barter. Under patriarchy it becomes indirect commerce; in 
barbarism the basis of the commercial method is formed by the monopolies, the 
fixing of maximums and prices and forcible government requisitions, and in 
civilisation by individual competition or lying and bewildering struggle.3 
"There is no need for us to dwell on direct barter among the savages who have 
no knowledge of money. One man is lucky at the hunt and exchanges a piece of 
game for arrows made by another, who has not been hunting and needs eatables. 
This method is not even trade, it is barter." 
The second method, indirect commerce, is "primitive trade. It is carried on 
through a go-between, who  becomes  the owner of something which he did not produce and 
does not intend to consume. This method, although it is bad and leaves room for 
arbitrariness, is nevertheless highly advantageous in the following three cases: 
"1) in young countries, where only agriculture exists without industry; this is the 
state in which all colonies find themselves at the beginning; 
"2) in harsh lands, as in Siberia and the African deserts; a merchant who defies 
heat and cold to carry objects of necessity to distant parts is a very useful man; 
"3) in oppressed and constricted lands, where the Bedouin plunder caravans, 
exact ransom from merchants and often murder them — every kind of protection is 
due to him who braves these dangers in order to bring supplies to a distant land. 
When such a merchant becomes rich he certainly deserves it. 
"In these three cases the merchants are neither Stock Exchange gamblers nor 
corner-men; they do not hawk, one speculator to another, the objects intended for 
consumption. On their arrival they offer them openly to the consumer in a bazaar 
or public market; they are the accelerators of industrial movement. They want to 
earn — nothing is more reasonable in the civilised world: he who has sown deserves 
to harvest. But it is very rare that the merchants content themselves with this 
function of theirs; singly or in alliance they scheme to obstruct the circulation of 
commodities in order to make prices immediately soar. 
"Trade becomes pernicious from the moment the go-betweens, due to their excessive 
number, become parasites [on the social  body]  and are ready to conceal goods, to let 
them rise in price under the pretext of an artificially produced scarcity, in  brief,  to 
rob simultaneously the producer and the consumer through speculation tricks 
instead of serving both as simple, open go-betweens. We still see this openness at 
our small markets in villages and towns. The man who buys a hundred calves or 
* This expression exists in literally the same form also among German 
merchants.— Note by Engels. 
In this paragraph Engels gives in his own words the content of Fourier's Table: 
De l'échelle des méthodes commerciales appliquées aux diverses périodes. —Ed. 
The words in brackets were added by Engels. —Ed. 

=====第643页=====
618 Frederick Engels 
sheep is a useful intermediary for twenty peasants, who would otherwise lose whole 
working days to bring them to market in town. When, on arriving at the market, 
he publicly offers his animals for sale, he thereby renders a service also to the 
consumers; but when by means of heaven knows what tricks he agrees with other 
'friends of trade'3 to hide three-quarters of the sheep, to tell the butchers that 
sheep are scarce, that he can only supply a few friends, to sell them half as dear 
again under this pretext, to alarm the buyers, and then to bring the hidden sheep 
out one after the other, to sell them at inflated prices in the atmosphere of alarm 
previously created and thus to extort a high ransom from the consumers — then 
this is no longer simple commerce, open offering of commodities free from any 
intrigue, it is compound commerce, whose endlessly changing tricks give birth to 
the thirty-six typical vices of our trade system and are tantamount to a legal 
monopoly. When one lays hands on the total product by ruse in order to make it 
dearer, that is robbing more by means of intrigues than the monopoly does by 
armed force. 
"I shall not dwell any longer on the method of the barbarians. It comprises 
fixing of maximums, forcible requisitions and monopolies, which are still quite 
customary also in the civilised state. As I have already said elsewhere, the various 
methods of individual periods overlap; one must not wonder, therefore, that 
civilisation borrows individual features from both higher and lower stages. Our 
civilised trade mechanism is thus an amalgamation of the characters of all periods, 
with those of the civilised stage, however, predominating—and these are much 
more despicable still than those of barbarism, because our trade is nothing but 
organised and legitimised robbery under the mask of legality. As a result, the 
racketeers and intermediaries can unite to cause artificial dearth of any foodstuffs 
and thus plunder both producers and consumers to heap up in a hurry scandalous 
fortunes of fifty millions, whose owners nevertheless complain that there is no 
protection of trade, that the merchants cannot subsist, that nothing is done, and 
that the state is being ruined if the merchant is reduced to the inability to make 
more than fifty millions! 
"Meanwhile we are taught by a newc science that these people should be granted 
complete freedom. Let the merchants do their job, we are told; without this 
freedom the corner-man, who even so has earned only fifty million, would perhaps 
not even have made a single million, and his respectable family would have to 
manage on fifty thousand francs revenue — 
"DU, talem avertite casum! 
"... Contempt of commerce, a contempt inborn in all peoples, was prevalent in all 
nations considered to be honourable except for a few coastal clans of hucksters who 
derived benefit from commercial extortions and villainies. Athens, Tyre and 
Carthage, which profited by commerce, could not mock at it; everybody refrains 
from mocking at the ways in which he has enriched  himself,  and the financier least 
of all will mock at the art of adding ciphers to bills, or allowing the enemy to take 
away the ledgers and putting the cash in safety while reporting it also as having 
been taken by the enemy. 
"In reality with ancient as well as with modern peoples commerce has always 
been an object of mockery on the part of all honourable classes. How can one have 
a Quotes by Engels here and below.—Ed. 
Charles Fourier, Théorie de l'unité universelle, t. 2.— "Prolégomène". —Ed. 
c The word "new" was added by Engels.—Ed. 
Ye gods, ward off such an occurrence! (A paraphrase from Virgil's poem 
Aeneid,  Book  III.)—Ed. 

=====第644页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 619 
any esteem for an out-and-out rascally profession or a class of people who lie with 
every word they say and by means of this magic art earn millions while the honest 
landowner who cultivates his piece of land with great effort and exertion, using the 
best of his experience, barely achieves an insignificant increase in its yield? 
"Meanwhile, for a century a new science called Economics has been exalting 
hucksters, stockjobbers, corner-men, usurers, bankrupts, monopolisers and com­
mercial parasites to the peak of honours: the governments, daily deeper and 
deeper in debt, always intent on finding means of borrowing money, have found 
themselves forced to conceal their contempt and to spare this class of mercantile 
blood-suckers which keeps the money-coffers locked to civilisation and pumps out 
all the treasures of agricultural and industrial diligence under the pretext of 
serving it. It is not denied that trade ensures transportation, victualling, and 
distribution, but it does so like a servant who performs service actually worth a 
thousand francs annually and on the other hand robs his master of ten thousand 
francs, or ten times as much as he produces. 
"As a young spendthrift secretly despises the Jew to whom he goes every week to 
get himself fleeced, but still always greets him very politely, so also the modern 
governments have, with obvious contempt, concluded an armistice with trade, 
which is doing all the better for the fact that it knows how to have itself lumped 
together with the very manufacturers whom it plunders. The economists, who have 
found in this merchants' hotch-potch a nursery of new dogmas, a mine of systems, 
have overthrown morality with all its high-sounding talk of truth in order to 
enthrone their favourites, the stockjobbers and bankrupts. Thereupon all the 
scholars rivalled in self-abasement; in the beginning science admitted those 'friends 
of trade' as its equals—Voltaire dedicated a tragedy to an English merchant.3 
Today these stockjobbers would have a good laugh if a scholar presumed to 
dedicate a tragedy to them! Stockjobbing has discarded the mask, it no longer 
needs the incense of the scholars; it wants secret—and soon legal—participation in 
government] And indeed we have seen the Aachen Congress unable to decide 
anything until two bankers arrived. 
"Despite the fact that the economic systems have exalted the Golden Calf of 
trade, they have been unable to put an end to the natural contempt which the 
nations feel towards it. It remains despised by the nobility, the clergy, the 
propertied classes, the officials, the lawyers, the scholars, despised by artists, 
soldiers, and every class worthy of respect. In vain has trade heaped sophism on 
sophism to prove to them that the stockjobbing blood-sucker should be re­
spected— a natural disdain for this class of upstarts still prevails. Everybody yields 
to the upswing of a dogma favoured by fortune, but everybody continues in secret 
to despise the mercantile hydra, which takes no notice of this and pursues the 
course of its conquests. 
"How is it that our century has made public the crimes of so many classes, even 
those of the Federates, who only existed for a month in 1815, whence comes it 
that it has never occurred to this century, which has spared neither kings nor popes in 
its collections on crimes, to make public the crimes of the merchants? Yet writers are 
unanimous in complaining that they suffer from a lack of material. To show them 
how fruitful this material is, I shall make a methodical analysis of only a single one 
of the" (thirty-six) "crimes of civilised trade. These thirty-six reprehensible features 
of our trade under the domination of individual competition and of bewildering 
and lying struggle are the following: 
a Voltaire, Zaire (a tragedy dedicated to E. Falkner, an admirer and friend of 
the author).—Ed. 

=====第645页=====
620 Frederick Engels 
Synoptical Table of the Features of Civilised Trade* 
Pivotal points: Intermediate ownership and the dismemberment of agriculture. 
The two-sidedness of trade. 
Arbitrary determination of value. 
Freedom of fraudulence. 
Insolidarity, lack of mutual liability. 
Theft, removal of capital. 
Decrease in wages. 
Artificial obstruction of supply sources. 
Oppressive surpluses. 
Perverse interferences. 
Destructive policy. 
Torpidness or general lack of credit (recoil, repercussion). 
Fictitious money. 
Financial confusion. 
Epidemical crime. 
Obscurantism. 
Parasitism. 
Cornering (accaparement). 
Stockjobbing. 
Usury. 
Unfruitful work. 
Industrial lotteries (speculation on risk). 
Indirect corporative monopoly. 
Fiscal monopoly, state administration enforced by falsification. 
The exotic, or colonial monopoly. 
Maritime monopoly. 
Feudal, caste monopoly. 
Baseless provocation. 
Loss. 
Falsification. 
Ruin of health. 
Bankruptcy. 
Smuggling. 
Piracy. 
Fixing of maximums and requisitions. 
Speculative slavery. 
Universal egoism." 
Of these thirty-six features we shall consider in detail only one, bankruptcy; 
before that I shall say a few words about some others. 
II 
FALSENESS OF THE ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES ON CIRCULATION 
(Proved by three features  of the Table,  Nos. 7, 8 and 12:  artificial obstruction 
of supply  sources,  oppressive surpluses and fictitious money) 
"Our century, which has been so prolifi<* of theories about the movement of 
industry, still cannot distinguish circulation from obstruction. It confuses circulation 
interrupted in places with that which is uninterrupted, simple circulation with 
In his work Fourier gives this table in the introductory section.—Ed. 
The words "lack of mutual liability" were added by Engels. —Ed. 

=====第646页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 621 
compound. However, let us leave these dull distinctions; the facts may speak and 
serve us as a basis for principles which are directly opposed to those of economics. 
"Both governments and peoples agree that forgers, both of money and of public 
securities, should be punished with death. Those who counterfeit coins and 
bank-notes are indeed condemned to death. A very wise precautionary measure. 
But why does trade enjoy the right to forge money when this practice brings other people to 
the gallows? 
"Every bill of exchange made out by a merchant bears the seed of counterfeit, for 
it is extremely uncertain whether it will ever be paid. Everyone who steers a course 
towards bankruptcy floods circulation with his bills of exchange without intend­
ing ever to pay them. In this way he in fact makes and spreads counterfeit money. 
"Will it be objected that everyone else enjoys the same privilege, that a 
property-owner, like a merchant, can put bills of exchange into circulation? 
"That is not true. A property-owner cannot do that. A right is illusory when it 
cannot be exercised. Witness the constitutional right of the people to sovereignty, a 
pompous prerogative in spite of which the plebeian cannot even get his midday 
meal if he has not a sou in his pocket. And yet how far from the pretension to 
sovereignty is the claim to a midday meal. Many rights exist thus on paper, but not 
in reality, and their granting is an insult to him who cannot even ensure himself 
rights a hundred times less important. 
"So it is with the property-owner as regards the issuing of bills of exchange. He 
has the right to issue them as the plebeian has the right to claim sovereignty; but to 
possess the right and to exercise it are two very different things. When the 
property-owner makes out a bill of exchange he will not find anybody who will 
accept it without a guarantee, and he will be treated as one who forges money. He 
will be required to hypothecate a completely debt-free immovable property and to 
pay a usurious rate of interest into the bargain. His bills of exchange would be 
accepted at this price, and with such a security they would be money with real 
value, not fictitious money like those of a second-hand dealer who, by virtue of his 
title as a 'friend of trade, finds means of putting into circulation 'good'a bills to 
the value of a million when he does no.t possess even the hundredth part of that 
sum, even 10,000 francs as guarantee for that million. 
"How beautifully those governments let themselves be cheated who deprive 
themselves of this ability and guarantee it for the merchant! A merchant who has 
ten thousand francs security issues bills of exchange to the amount of a million 
when he pleases; he is protected and authorised to do so; he has the right to set 
this mass of paper in circulation without the law being entitled to investigate how 
he places his capital and what securities he has. The Treasury, offering a guarantee 
of say ten million, would have to be able, according to this ratio, to issue securities up 
to a thousand million. But if a government tries to do so without consulting public 
opinion, without informing it of the move, it will see its credit ruined and its.country 
exposed to political disturbances; and yet it is only doing the same, only availing 
itself of the same privilege which is enjoyed by so many schemers, who often 
cannot offer the hundredth part of these guarantees and cannot run their business. 
"It will be answered that these schemers know how to talk over the foolish and 
insinuate themselves into their confidence; it is therefore set up as a principle of 
commerce that the art of duping and plundering good-natured, credulous people 
deserves to be protected in every way and that this protection must be limited to 
the merchant and not be enjoyed by the government. I do not maintain that this 
fine art should be allowed to both, but on the contrary that it should be denied 
both to rulers and to merchants. 
a The word "good" has been inserted by Engels. — Ed. 

=====第647页=====
622 Frederick Engels 
"From this it follows that the merchant enjoys the ability to issue fictitious money 
in the form of bilk of exchange (twelfth feature)—a crime which is equivalent to 
forging money, for which the other categories of rascals are sent to the 
gallows — and that the trade system of civilised people legalises and protects 
competition of fraudulence (third feature). 
"The accusation of forging money, like the other points of the accusation, will be 
answered as follows: there must be merchants in order to ensure circulation, and 
business would become impossible if these agents were placed under restraint; the 
state would disrupt the public credit and place the whole of its industry in 
jeopardy. 
"It is true enough that a quality of trade is that it forges our fetters still tighter 
whenever the social body shows any signs of resistance. As soon as any administrative 
measure hampers the machinations of trade, trade restricts credit and paralyses 
circulation, while the state, which wanted to eliminate an old disorder, in the end 
adds new ones. This effect is called repercussion (eleventh feature) in the Table. 
"This danger is used as the basis for establishing the principle: Let the merchants 
do their job, their complete freedom is the guarantee of circulation. An exceeding­
ly false principle, for it is precisely this complete freedom which gives rise to all the 
tricks that are so obstructive to circulation: stockjobbing, cornering, bankruptcy, 
and so on, the consequences of which are the two features: 
"7. Artificial obstruction of supply sources. 
"8. Oppressive surpluses. 
"Let us see what influence these two features have on circulation." 
Trade does not content itself with delivering commodities from the producer to 
the consumer,3 "it schemes by means of cornering and stockjobbing speculation to 
produce an artificial dearth of those food articles which are not exactly plentiful. In 
1807 a stockjobbing manoeuvre suddenly raised the price of sugar to five francs in 
the month of May, and the same sugar dropped to two francs in July, although not 
the slightest new supplies had arrived. But the stockjobbing had been countered by 
means of false information and thus the sugar had been brought down to its value; 
the scheming and artificially aroused fears that there would be no supply had been 
disposed of. These schemes and artificial fears play their tricks every day with some 
food article and make it scarce without a real scarcity existing. In 1812, when the 
harvest was assured and the corner-men were disappointed in their hopes, 
enormous quantities of grain and flour were suddenly seen coming from their 
warehouses. So there had been no shortage at all and absolutely no danger of 
famine, if only these foodstuffs had been distributed rationally." But trade has the 
peculiarity that even  before  there is a danger, with an eye to its possibility, it diverts 
supplies, stops circulation, arouses panicky fears, produces artificial food shortage. 
"The same effect is produced in times of surplus, when trade obstructs supplies 
out of affected fear of profusion. In the former case it operates positively, by 
buying up foodstuffs in anticipation; in the latter case negatively, by not buying 
and thus causing prices to drop so low that the peasant does not even get his 
production costs refunded. Hence arises the eighth feature, oppressive surpluses. 
"Trade will retort that it does not need to buy when it foresees no profit, and 
that it will not be so insane as to overload itself with grain which offers no 
probability at all of a surcharge, while it, trade, can invest its capital far more 
usefully in such commodities as hold out profit for it because of their scarcity, 
which can easily be increased by cornering. 
a Here Fourier refers to the third method (le trafic ou négoce indirect inter­
médiaire) quoted in his Table: De l'échelle des méthodes commerciales appliquées aux 
diverses  périodes. — Ed. 

=====第648页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 623 
"There you have convenient and pleasant principles in a social system in which 
people talk about nothing but mutual guarantees. Trade is therefore exempted 
whenever it pleases from serving the social body. It acts like an army which would 
be authorised to refuse to fight whenever danger were present, and to do service 
only in its own interest, without any consideration for the state interest. Such is our 
mercantile policy, so one-sidedly does it determine all obligations. 
"In 1820 the price of grain dropped below three francs in various provinces in 
which a price of four francs hardly covered the costs. This would not have 
occurred had French trade bought in advance six months' food supplies for thirty 
million persons," as it would have had to do under a system of mutuality adapting 
itself to the interests of both parties.3 "This reserve stock, withdrawn from 
circulation and locked up in granaries, would have kept up the price of the rest, 
and the peasant would not have suffered from the depreciation and the 
impossibility to market his products. But our trade system works exactly in the 
opposite direction: it aggravates the pressure of surplus and the evils of famine and 
thus has a destructive effect on both sides. 
"I have chosen the eighth feature, oppressive surplus, to show that the existing 
mode of trade has both negative and positive defects, and that it often sins by 
non-intervention, by omitting a service which it could easily render. For when in a 
time of famine the sum of five hundred million is required to buy up the corn, it is 
immediately available; but if this sum is needed for precautionary measures to 
increase stocks in times of surplus, not even five hundred talers c can be scraped 
together. There is neither mutuality nor guarantee in the contract concluded 
between the social body and the commercial body. The latter serves only its own 
interest, not that of society, and hence the abundant capital which it uses is a  robbery 
perpetrated against industry as a whole. In the Table I have listed this robbery as the 
fifth feature: 'Removal of capital." 
Thus,  on both sides of trade "there is not the slightest sense of obligation 
towards the social body, which surrenders  itself,  bound hand and foot, to the  • 
Minotaur, to whom it guarantees despotic power over capitals and foodstuffs." Yes, 
indeed, despotic power! "After so many declamations against despotism we still 
have not discovered the real one,, which is no other than f/ie despotism of trade, that 
real satrap of the civilised world! 
"To sum up, it follows Irom this that the civilised mechanism guarantees the 
merchants complete impunity for the crime of forging money, for which other 
classes are punished with death — and that this impunity is based on the pretence 
of help which they allegedly render to circulation but in reality refuse — positively 
by artificial obstruction of supply sources and negatively by oppressive profusion. 
"To this falsity in the results must be added the lack of any principles. The 
economists admit that their science has absolutely no fixed principles; and it is 
indeed the height of unprincipledness to grant complete freedom to a class of so 
exceedingly depraved agents as the merchants. 
"The consequence of all this is that the commercial movement proceeds by fits 
and starts, in spasms, surprises and excesses of all descriptions, as can be seen every 
day in the present trade mechanism, which can achieve only a periodically 
interrupted circulation, without regular graduation, without balance and guarantees. 
a This summarises the ideas contained in the two preceding paragraphs of 
Fourier's work, which Engels omitted.— Ed. 
b The last sentence is given by Engels abridged.— Ed. 
c Fourier has  "ecus".—Ed. 
Engels gives the text of this paragraph in a somewhat abridged form.—Ed. 

=====第649页=====
624 Frederick Engels 
"An amusing result of this disorder is that people have the courage to reproach 
the government with financial abuses which they never dare to reproach trade 
with. Witness the two bankruptcies—that of Law's bank-notes and that of the 
assignats. 211 These were gradual bankruptcies, they were seen approaching from 
afar; with a timely partial sacrifice they could have been guarded against. Despite 
these extenuating circumstances the public gave no quarter. It rightly declared 
Law's notes and the assignats to be forgery, armed plunder. 
"Why then does the same public good-naturedly tolerate the issue of counterfeit 
money by the merchants when it does not allow it for governments, even when 
these are cautious enough to prepare for the bankruptcy by a slow depreciation 
which affords the holders of the papers the possibility to evade it? This possibility 
does not exist for the holders of the securities issued by trade. Bankruptcy strikes 
them like a thunderclap. Many a man goes to sleep tonight in possession of 300,000 
francs and wakes up tomorrow with no more than 100,000 as a result of a bankruptcy. 
The National Convention copied this manoeuvre in the operation of the 
Consolidated Third ; people did not tire of reproaching it with this as a fully 
established robbery. And yet every merchant is allowed the right to commit still 
more vexatious robberies and to steal by bankruptcy two-thirds of what he 
received, whereas the Convention withheld two-thirds of sums it had never 
received. How outrageous the crimes of trade become when compared with other, 
and even the biggest, political infamies!3 
"The following details will demonstrate that modern politics, by handing over 
trade to completely free merchants exempt from any kind of obligation, has set the 
wolf among the fold and provoked robberies of all kinds." 
Let us now go on to bankruptcy to describe it in somewhat greater detail. 
Ill 
HIERARCHY OF BANKRUPTCY 
"When a crime becomes very frequent, one gets accustomed to it and witnesses it 
with indifference. In Italy or Spain people remain quite cool at the sight of a 
hired assassin stabbing his designated victim and taking refuge in a church, where 
he enjoys immunity. In Italy one sees fathers mutilate and murder their children to 
improve their voice, while the servants of 'the God of peace' encourage them to 
perpetrate these brutalities so as to obtain good singers for their choirs. Such 
abominations would arouse the indignation of all other civilised nations if they 
occurred amongst them," but on the other hand they "have other outrageous 
customs which would make the Italians' blood boil. 
"If the customs and opinions within civilisation differ so much from nation to 
nation, how much more must they differ from one social epoch to another; how 
hateful would the vices which are tolerated in civilisation seem in less imperfect 
social stages! One can hardly believe that countries which call themselves well 
ordered can tolerate for a moment such abominations as bankruptcy.b 
"Bankruptcy is the most ingenious and shameless villainy that has ever existed; it 
guarantees every merchant the ability to rob the public of a sum proportionate to 
his fortune or his credit, so that a rich man can say: 'I set up as a tradesman in 
1808;  on such and such a day in the year 1810 I will steal so and so many millions, 
whoever they may belong to.' 
Fourier has "such as the infamies of the Convention", which Engels 
omits.—Ed. 
The last sentence is given by Engels abridged.—Ed. 

=====第650页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 625 
"Let us leave aside a present development, the new French code2  4 and its 
intention to punish bankruptcy. There is no unanimity in respect of the success of 
this intention and means of evading the new laws are already being suggested. 
Therefore we shall first let practice decide and meanwhile base our arguments on 
already known facts; consider the disorders which result from the philosophical 
system and the principle: Leave the merchants complete freedom, without 
demanding any guarantee of the cleverness, the honesty or the solvency of each 
individual. 
"From these arises, alongside other abuses, bankruptcy, a still more heinous 
robbery than highway robbery. However, people have become accustomed to it and 
put up with it so well that they even recognise honest bankruptcies—those in which 
the speculator steals only  half. 
"Let us go on to a detailed description of this kind of heroism, which was little 
known in antiquity. Since then it has experienced a brilliant upswing. It presents 
analysts with a series of developments which testify to our progress towards 
perfectibility. 
Hierarchy of Bankruptcy.—Feature 31.—The Crime* of Trade.—A Free Series 
in Three Orders, Nine Genera, and Thirty-Six Species215 
"Right or ascending wing. Light hues. 
I. The Innocent. 
1) Child bankruptcy. 
2) Daredevil bankruptcy. 
3) Stealthy bankruptcy. . 
4) Posthumous bankruptcy. 
II. The Honourable. 
5) Goose bankruptcy. 
6) Ecstatic bankruptcy. 
7) Unprincipled bankruptcy. 
III. The Seductive. 
8) Amiability bankruptcy. 
9) Bankruptcy de bon ton. 
10) Amorous bankruptcy. 
11) Bankruptcy by favour. 
12) Sentimental bankruptcy. 
"Centre of the Series. Grandiose Hues. 
IV. The Tacticians. 
13) Fat bankruptcy. 
14) Cosmopolitan bankruptcy. 
15) Hopeful bankruptcy. 
16) Transcendent bankruptcy. 
17) Graded bankruptcy. 
V. The Manoeuvrers. 
18) Running fire bankruptcy. 
19) Close-column bankruptcy. 
20) Marching-in-file bankruptcy. 
21) Skirmisher bankruptcy. 

=====第651页=====
626 Frederick Engels 
VI. The Agitators. 
22) Bankruptcy in grand style. 
23) Large-scale bankruptcy. 
24) Attila bankruptcy. 
"Left or Descending Wing. Dirty Hues. 
VII. The Cunning Sneakers. 
25) Compensation bankruptcy. 
26) Bankruptcy out of rank. 
27) Crescendo bankruptcy. 
28) Godly bankruptcy. 
VIII. The Bunglers 
29) Fools' bankruptcy. 
30) Invalids' bankruptcy. 
31) Crushing bankruptcy. 
32) Swinish bankruptcy. 
IX. The False Brothers. 
33) Villains' bankruptcy. 
34) Gallows-bird bankruptcy. 
35) Fugitive bankruptcy. 
36) Bankruptcy for fun. 
IV 
ASCENDING WING OF BANKRUPTS 
"In a very depraved, very grasping century one would be a general laughing­
stock if one declaimed in a schoolmaster's tone against the accredited vices, against 
bankruptcy. It is much more sensible to chime in the dominant tone and to see the 
funny side of social crimes. So I shall try to prove that bankruptcy is an even much 
more laughable villainy than it is believed to be by its promoters and protectors, 
who see nothing but well-behaved trifles in its mercantile plunder. 
"Everything is relative, in vice as in virtue. Even robbers have their standards of 
justice and honour. It is therefore no wonder that among themselves bankrupts 
adrnit principles and degrees in rascality. I have sought to use these as a basis for 
my division. I have divided them according to the custom in three corps, the first 
of which contains the light, graceful hues, the second the imposing, lofty 
characters, and the third the rather inconspicuous, trivial genera. The right wing 
will open the march-past." 
The Innocent 
"I. Child bankruptcy is that of the greenhorn who is making his debut in the 
career, and inconsiderately, without any preparatory tactics, indulges in the mad 
prank of going bankrupt. The notary easily puts the affair in order. He presents it 
as a folly of youth and says: 'Youth counts on your indulgence, Messieurs the 
Creditors.' The annoying business is wound up to the merriment of the public, for 

=====第652页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 627 
these greenhorn bankruptcies are always interlarded with amusing incidents: 
duped usurers, mystified skinflints,3 etc. 
"The bankrupt of this genus can risk masses of shabby affairs: appropriation of 
goods, scandalous Joans, thefts from relatives, friends, neighbours—everything is 
washed away by the argument of a relative who says to the irate creditors: 'What 
can you expect—he is a child without any knowledge of business; one must close 
one's eyes where young people are concerned, he will improve with time.' 
"These child bankrupts have a strong support on their side, namely mockery. 
One likes to mock in trade; one is inclined to mock at those who are duped rather 
than to censure the villains, and when a bankrupt has the laughers on his side he is 
sure to see the majority of his creditors capitulate immediately and to win his 
composition by assault. 
"2. Daredevil bankruptcy; that of certain beginners who play double or quits, 
people who gallop off at full speed, speculate and manage their affairs like mad, 
make ducks and drakes with huge sums of money and play the grand gentleman to 
achieve by storm a temporary credit which they manage to secure by some secret 
sacrifice. When these daredevils once get going they heap blunder on blunder and 
usually end up in flight. The affair will be excused as botch work and easily arranged, 
for it provides material for mockery like the preceding one. 
"These daredevils are extremely common in France and are here honoured with 
the title of speculators. They are very sure of their game if they hasten the 
discovery so that they can turn their somersault at the very moment when they are 
believed to have hardly got going, when everybody is ready to grant them credit for 
a first deal and thinks: 'he will certainly not come a cropper in the very first year.' 
"3. Stealthy bankruptcy, the type carried out underhand, is one in which the 
embarrassed debtor proposes 'a small arrangement', a rebate of 25 per cent or 
coverage in goods to be over-assessed by 25 per cent. The mediator remarks to the 
creditors that this is very advantageous for them, for if they press the debtor and 
oblige him to go bankrupt they will lose at least 50 per cent. 
"This kind of relative calculation is very much insisted upon in trade. One often 
comes across villains who, after they have robbed you of 30 per cent, try to prove 
that you are making an enormous profit because they are not fleecing you of 50 
per cent. Others maintain that they have to bear heavy losses because they are 
earning no more than 40 per cent on you and actually should be earning 60 per cent. 
This apparently ridiculous way of reckoning is recognised everywhere in commerce; 
it has its greatest triumph in underhand bankruptcy. People insist that this small 
rebate of 25 per cent is a clear net profit compared with the 50 per cent that 
bankruptcy would cost. Shaken by the force of this argument, the creditors agree 
to the 'small arrangement'. He who was to*receive 4,000 francs gets 3,000, and 
that is by no means called bankruptcy. 
"4. Posthumous bankruptcy, which is adjudicated after the hero's death; it becomes 
a plea in defence of the deceased who hoped to set his business in order again and 
would certainly have been a credit to it if he had but lived. After that his excellent 
qualities are praised and his poor orphans sincerely pitied. Surely the creditors will 
not wish to worry a tearful widow! If she is beautiful that would be altogether 
barbaric! Meanwhile, the widow, with the help of a few persons of trust, has 
managed some sizable defalcations before the sealing. The deficiencies will be 
charged to the deceased, who did not have time to put his affairs in order and who 
will not come back to disprove this little fib. If there was a deficit of 25 per cent it 
will easily be increased to 50 per cent, it does not cost any more once one has made 
a beginning; besides, how stupid it would be to go bankrupt with a 25 per cent 
a Here Fourier has "Harpagons" instead of "skinflints".— Ed. 

=====第653页=====
628 Frederick Engels 
deficit when people with one of 50 per cent are still considered honest—especially 
when the fault lies with a highly respectable deceased person, whose memory it 
would be abominable to discredit!" 
The Honourable 
"The four species mentioned are those of fictitious innocence. We now let those 
of real innocence pass in review. It would be unfair to brand bankrupts en masse 
because nine-tenths of them are scoundrels. I shall adduce three truly excusable 
classes. We shall have but too many guilty ones to accuse; so let us first seek some 
honest people among this confraternity, which has become so numerous since the 
revolution3 that in some towns one no longer asks who has, but who has not gone 
bankrupt. 
"5. Goose bankruptcy is that of an unfortunate one who does not peculate a mite, 
hands everything over to the creditors and throws himself on their mercy without 
any deception. The other bankrupts mock at him and declare him to be a 
simpleton for not at least feathering his nest; and in fact such a loyal man is 
unworthy of our century of perfectibility. 
"6. Ecstatic bankruptcy is the work of a man who is desperate, considers himself 
dishonoured and sometimes shoots himself or jumps into the water. It means one 
is well behind the times if one wishes to be an honest man in the 19th century, and 
moreover in trade! 
"All the same it is a pleasure for me to have to say that one still comes across 
such people in trade, but they are few and far between—rari nautes in gurgite 
vasto.0  Everybody foretells them their fate, so well known is the fact that out of ten 
villains that plunge into trade nine make their fortune, whereas out of ten honest 
people nine are ruined. 
"7. Unprincipled bankruptcy is that of a booby who lets justice intervene and 
pronounce sentence branding him and stripping him naked instead of doing as so 
many clever people do, who manage to emerge from this predicament with honour 
and profit.— These three honest knights are so little worthy of the exalted 
confraternity that I pass over them quickly. We now come to a sort which is more 
capable of earning the applause of experts." 
The Seductive 
"Why should one not let oneself be seduced by bankrupts as one is by so many 
other wicked classes? We shall now inspect a clique which possesses every kind of 
charm and is made to conquer all hearts. 
"8. Amiability bankruptcy, economical bankruptcy, is that of a little man as sweet as 
honey who desires nothing but the good of his creditors, would be desperate if he 
had to put them out of pocket, and presses them to negotiate for 50 per cent in 
order to avoid the intervention of justice which would devour the lot. He has the 
creditors notified that he wants to treat them as friends whose interests are dear to 
him. Full of gratitude for the friendly services they have rendered him, he trembles 
at the thought of having to cause them lawsuit costs. These smooth words and 
other guiles seduce some while others yield for fear of justice swallowing up the lot. 
Here Fourier has "la régénération" . (He associated with the French Revolution 
a rebirth of the trade system which goes with civilisation.)—Ed. 
Fourier has "Jocrjsse"—the simpleton in the popular French theatre and 
in Molière's comedy Sganarelle.—Ed. 
Rare swimmers in a vast gulf (Virgil, Aeneid).—Ed. 

=====第654页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 629 
"9. Bankruptcy de bon ton is that of people who are very much liked in refined 
society and maintain their household on an excellent footing till the last moment. 
As they are comme il faut in all respects, they have abundant protection and when 
they are not at more than 60 per cent in deficit they easily get a composition; 
especially when the lady and the daughters of the house can be used as pleaders 
and avail themselves of the decision of a Sanchez who allows them to wear a 
very transparent scarf when they go soliciting in important matters. 
"10. Amorous bankruptcy is that of pretty ladies; it is not decent to complain about 
it, the fair sex is entitled to consideration. A pretty woman has a business, goes 
bankrupt,3  robs you of a thousand talers ; if you pester her it only goes to show that 
you have no savoir vivre; she is right when she has no patience with the intractable. 
I heard one such lady say about a creditor: 'What a man! They even say he is still 
grumbling; I advise him, indeed, to complain about his fifty louis, I should have 
chalked him up for twice as much!' He had had certain intimacies with the lady, she 
had the right to treat him as ungrateful. 
"11. Bankruptcy by favour, in the case of which it is obvious that the creditors 
derive profit—and how does that happen? When the bankrupt steals only a little, 
40 per cent, and provides security, a very substantial caution, for the rest. This is 
considered so fortunate that the notary congratulates the assembled creditors, 
congratulates them on an excellent piece of business, a 'real favour'. To lose only 
four thousand francs out of ten thousand and to get six thousand paid back is a 
real advantage. Somebody not accustomed to commerce would be unable to 
appreciate this favour; he would want to have all of his ten thousand and would 
think he had been robbed of four thousand. What bad manners! To claim that a 
man robs you when he deducts 40 per cent discount and otherwise treats you in a 
friendly way! 
"12. Sentimental bankruptcy occurs with certain people who deliver speeches to 
break your heart and pour out such floods of feeling and virtue over the creditor 
that he would be a barbarian if he did not instantly surrender, did not esteem 
himself happy to oblige such fine people who tenderly love all those whose money 
they cause to disappear. People of this kind pay with excellent excuses and 
very flattering eulogies, they catch the creditor by his feelings, converse with him 
only about his and their virtues; you feel so much improved when the conversation 
is over; you discover in yourself à multitude of virtues which amply outweigh the 
sum abstracted. You have a few thousand francs less but all the more virtues; it is a 
clear profit for beautiful souls. 
"One of those actors0 said to me one day: 'I was so sorry for the gentlemen, they 
are very fine, very respectable people'—and the good young man, as proof of his 
respect, robbed them at once in the first deal with a bill of exchange which he 
gave them as a present and a token of welcome. He had drawn the sum in order to 
come into contact with them, and a month later he went bankrupt. What a joy for 
these gentlemen to have received his  respect  as a security for ten thousand francs! 
"I have kept my word, I had promised a seductive company. There is nothing but 
friendship, favour,  bon ton, and tender feelings in all bankruptcies of this truly amiable 
series.  But if it is calculated to win hearts, others will command wonder, give rise to 
brilliant upswings, transcendent characters, and represent the heroes of their genus." 
a The words "has a business, goes bankrupt" were added by Engels. —Ed. 
Fourier has  "ecus".—Ed. 
Fourier has "histrions" —literally actors in Ancient Rome; later it came to 
mean buffoons or comedians; figuratively—charlatans.—Ed. 
Fourier has "of 10,000 francs".—Ed. 

=====第655页=====
630 Frederick Engels 
V 
CENTRE.—GRANDIOSE HUES 
"We now come to the magnificent manifestations of the spirit of commerce, to 
the extensive operations which demonstrate the century's immense progress 
towards rebirth and perfectibility. Bankruptcy will here unfold its mastery and 
operate according to far-reaching plans, the exposition of which will prove the 
wisdom of the principle: Let the merchants do their job, leave them complete 
freedom for their lofty conceptions of deceit and plunder." 
The Tacticians 
"13. Fat bankruptcy is that of speculators of high standing who possess the genius 
of trade. Banker Dorante has two million and wishes to achieve as soon as 
possible by some means a fortune of four to five million. By virtue of his known 
capital he receives credit amounting to eight million in bills of exchange, goods, 
etc., so he has a fund of ten million to play with. He plunges into grand 
speculation and deals in goods and state securities. At the end of the year he may 
have lost his two million instead of doubling them; you consider him as 
ruined—not at all, he will have the four million just as if he had transacted good 
business; for he still has the eight million that he has received and by means of an 
'honest' bankruptcy he arranges to pay half of this over several years. So it 
happens that after losing his own two million he finds himself in possession of four 
million that he has abstracted from the public. What a wonderful thing, this free 
trade! Do you now grasp why one hears it said every day of a merchant: 'He is 
doing very well since his bankruptcy'? 
"A further opportunity for the bankrupt: Dorante, after a peculation of four 
million, retains intact his honour and public respect, not as a lucky villain, but as an 
unlucky merchant. Let us explain this. 
"Dorante obtained control over public opinion while he was pondering his 
bankruptcy: his fêtes in town, his country parties secured him warm supporters; 
the gilded youth is for him; the belles sympathise with his misfortune—misfortune 
today is a synonym for bankruptcy; there is praise for his noble character, which 
deserves a better lot. It almost seems, according to what his defenders say, that the 
bankrupt has come off worse than those whose fortune he has destroyed. It is all 
blamed on political events, the unfavourable conditions and other verbiage current 
among notaries who are adepts at holding off attacks by irate creditors. After the 
first storm Dorante brings in a few middlemen, a few opportunely distributed wads 
of money, and soon public opinion is so well hedged in that anybody who dares to 
speak against Dorante is declared to be a cannibal. And besides, those whom he 
robbed of the biggest sums are a hundred or two hundred miles 3 away, in Hamburg 
or in Amsterdam; they will cool down in time, they do not matter much, their 
distant yapping does not affect opinion in Paris. Moreover, Dorante only causes 
them to lose half of their money, and custom has it that he who steals only half is 
more unfortunate than guilty; so that in the public mind Dorante stands clean 
from the start. After a month public attention is diverted by other bankruptcies 
which create a bigger sensation and in which between two-thirds and three-quarters 
went west. New splendour for Dorante, who took only  half,  and then it is an old 
forgotten story. Dorante's house begins gradually to open to the public again, his 
cook recovers his old sway over hearts and minds and unheeded are the cries of 
Fourier has "lieues". —Ed. 

=====第656页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 631 
some black-galled creditors who have no sympathy for misfortune and have no 
regard for the consideration due to good society. 
"Thus in less than six months ends the operation by which Dorante and those of 
his kind rob the public of millions, ruin families whose fortunes they hold in their 
hands,  hurl honest merchants into bankruptcy which assimilates them to villains. 
Bankruptcy is the only social crime which spreads epidemically and plunges the 
honest man into the same disgrace as the rascal. The more honest merchant who 
has suffered from the bankruptcies of twenty knaves is himself forced in the end to 
cease his payments. 
"Hence it comes that the villainous bankrupts, i.e., nine-tenths of the tribe, claim 
to be honest people who have been unfortunate and shout in chorus: We are to be 
pitied more than blamed. If you listen to them, they are all little saints, like 
galley-slaves, who all claim to have done nothing wrong. 
"To this the supporters of free commerce will retort with talk of repressive laws, 
of tribunals; yes, indeed! Tribunals for people who steal several million at one go! 
Incidentally, the saying that petty thieves are hanged while the big ones go 
scot-freea is false as regards trade, for even the smallest bankruptcy evades justice 
under the protection of the merchants. 
"14. Cosmopolitan bankruptcy. This is an alliance of the commercial mind with the 
philosophical. A bankrupt is a true cosmopolite if after exploiting one kingdom he 
goes through a series of bankruptcies in several others. This is a safe speculation. 
On arrival one is unknown, if necessary one changes one's name, as Jews do, and 
receives credit at once on the strength of the capital amassed as a result of an 
earlier bankruptcy. It is a delightful idea of modern politics to hand over the 
general administration of the industrial product to people who are not tied by any 
solid link, any big landed estate to their native country and who, as cosmopolites, 
can reckon on half a dozen successive bankruptcies in Paris, London, Hamburg, 
Trieste, Naples and Cadiz. I shall depict this bankruptcy under the heading of 
running fire, which has a cosmopolite as the pivotal point of its manoeuvre. 
"15. Hopeful bankruptcy. This dates really from after the revolution and is hardly 
half a century old. Young people formerly did not make their debut in commerce 
so early, they were never chiefs before their thirtieth year. Now at the age of 
eighteen they run a house and at twenty they can have their first bankruptcy, 
which justifies great hopes for the future. There are some who before they are 
thirty have already been bankrupt three times and more than once got through 
one hundred talers belonging to their sleeping partner. When one sees them one 
says:  'he is very young to have such fame, but we are living in the age of young 
people.' 
"16. Transcendent bankruptcy requires a far-reaching plan, an immense upswing, 
an office with thirty to forty clerks, numerous ships, colossal interests in all 
countries, then a sudden crash, a terrible somersault the counterblasts of which 
echo in the four corners of the world, and a chaos of liquidations on the fat of 
which businessmen can thrive for ten years. It is an operation in which the 
mercantile genius is unfolded in all its brilliance; it must entail a loss of at least 
three-quarters, for in this mighty picture everything must be laid out magnificently. 
"17. Graded bankruptcy is that of a speculator who, by wisely directing his 
operation, can achieve a career of seven or eight successive bankruptcies. In this 
case he must adopt a different course than the one who aims at only one or two. 
"The principles are: 
a The words "the big ones go scot-free" were added by Engels. — Ed. 
Fourier has "la régénération" .— Ed. 

=====第657页=====
632 Frederick Engels 
"1) in the first bankruptcy to plunder only with measure; 50 per cent is 
sufficient, one must not make the people wild from the start, and the second 
bankruptcy would be too difficult if one discredited oneself at the first trial stroke 
through too great covetousness; 
"2) in the second bankruptcy to plunder only very little, not more than 30 per 
cent, in order to prove that the bankrupt has learned something, that he already 
operates more skilfully and cautiously, and that he will become an accomplished mer­
chant, a worthy 'friend of trade' , when he has recovered from this second blow; 
"3) in the third to plunder abundantly, at least 80 per cent, claiming that it is no 
ordinary deficit, but one caused by extraordinary mischance; to see it through by 
pleading some critical circumstances, to draw attention to one's good behaviour in 
the second bankruptcy in order to prove that the blame lies entirely with events; 
"4) in the fourth to plunder only 50 per cent in order to prove that one is a 
cautious man and knows how to remain within the appropriate bounds when not 
swept away by circumstances; 
"5) in the fifth one can go as far as 60 per cent, because the public is accustomed 
to it; 10 per cent more or less spoils no speculation of this kind when public 
opinion has become accustomed to it; for it is known that whoever has had four 
bankruptcies will also have a fifth and a sixth. I have seen one bankrupt who was 
laughed at after his fourth bankruptcy because he wore a clerical hat as a sign of 
piety and good morals; he did not let himself be put off and prepared the fifth. 
"The sixth and seventh are ad libitum, one has them only as age draws on and 
when one thinks of resting on one's laurels. Nothing is easier than to excuse a sixth 
bankruptcy; one is too old to change, nobody is surprised any longer. For the rest, 
it is argued that the government refuses to protect trade and is the cause of these 
little setbacks of honest businessmen. 
"Let no one be surprised if I give here a few principles to be used in bankruptcy; 
it is a quite new art which, like economics, from which it sprang, has as yet no 
fixed principles, nor even a methodical nomenclature. For instance, titles have been 
given only to the first four stages in graded bankruptcy. 
"The man who has had his first bankruptcy is simply a 'Knight', 
'At the second he receives the title of 'Prince', 
"At the third the title of 'King', 
"At the fourth 'Emperor'. 
"For the fifth, sixth and seventh grade there are not yet any names among the 
members of the trade. A true 'friend of trade' must rise to the full octave. In 
order to be a 'harmonious' bankrupt one must have had seven tionest' 
bankruptcies with average losses of 50 per cent, and then a reinforced, a complete 
bankruptcy, as the pivotal point in the series; it is then allowed to plunder to the extent 
of at least 80 per cent as an indemnity for the moderation shown in the others; the 
fifty per cent of earlier bankruptcies is only the honest  tariff,  a quite small slice, 
giving nobody the right to censure, because it is the accepted rate for bankruptcies, 
a fixed price, exactly like the price of tartlets or coach fares." 
The Manoeuvrers 
"In this item we deal with the mass evolutions which require co-operation of 
different bankrupts for the good of trade and the triumph of lofty truth. These 
collective manoeuvres will show us four sorts of evolution artists. 
"18. Running fire bankruptcy. This is generally caused by counterblasts, through a 
concatenation of bankruptcies, one caused by another. I shall describe one of the 
medium sort, the bourgeois kind, because they are most understandable for the 

=====第658页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 633 
bulk of readers. We shall take one of the cosmopolitan artists, whose definition I 
have postponed, as the pivotal point of the running fire manoeuvre. 
"Judas.  Iscariot arrives in France with 100,000 francs3 capital, which he 
earned in his first bankruptcy; he establishes himself as a merchant in a town 
where he has six respected and accredited houses as rivals. In order to take away 
their clientele and their good reputation, Iscariot immediately begins to sell his 
wares at cost price, a sure way of attracting the multitude. Soon his rivals clamour 
in a most pitiful way about him; he laughs at their complaints and continues all the 
more to sell off everything at cost price. 
"Thereupon the people shout so that it is a pleasure to hear them: Long live 
competition, long live the Jews, long live philosophy and fraternity! All com­
modities have become cheaper since Iscariot's arrival, and the public say to his 
rivals:  You, Gentlemen, are the real Jews, you want to earn too much; Iscariot 
alone is an honest man, he is content with a moderate profit, because he runs no 
brilliant household as you do.—Vain are all the representations made by the old 
houses that Iscariot is a villain in disguise who sooner or later will come to  grief;  the 
public accuse them of jealousy and calumny and crowd more and more to the Jew. 
"The calculation that this thief makes is as follows: By selling at cost price he 
loses only the interest on his capital, let it come to 10,000 francs annually, but 
ensures a good outlet for  himself,  makes a name for himself in the maritime towns 
as a good consumer and by prompt payment gets big credit. This trick is pursued 
for two years, after which Iscariot has earned nothing, though he has sold 
enormous quantities. His manoeuvre remains undetected, because Jews have only 
Jewish office  staff,  people who are the secret enemies of all nations and will never 
betray a villainy thought up by their 'own' people. 
"When all is ripe for development, Iscariot puts in his whole credit, places giant 
orders in all maritime towns, buys goods on credit for the sum of 5-600,000 francs. 
He sends his wares abroad and sells his whole stock dirt cheap. When he has 
exchanged everything for money the good Iscariot vanishes with his briefcase and 
returns to Germany, where he has despatched the goods he bought on credit, sells 
them quickly and is four times as rich when he leaves France as he was on his 
arrival; he has 400,000 francs, and he goes to London or Leghorn to get a third 
bankruptcy under way. 
"Now the veil suddenly falls and people come to their senses in the town where 
he struck his blow. People realise how dangerous it is to permit Jews to trade, those 
vagabonds who are not tied to anything. But this bankruptcy of Iscariot is only the 
first act of the farce; let us follow the running fire. 
"The Jew has six rivals; we shall call them A, B, C, D, E, F. 
"A had been in straits for a long time, he held out without capital, only by virtue 
of his good reputation; but through the arrival of the Jew he is robbed of all his 
clients, he could pursue the race only for a year, and, not mature for these new 
philosophical systems which protect vagabonds, he finds himself compelled to bow 
down before Iscariot's tactics and to declare himself bankrupt. 
"B endured the blow longer; he already saw the Jew's villainy from afar and 
waited for the storm to pass in order to win back his clientele which the rascal 
Iscariot had taken away. But meanwhile he is involved in a bankruptcy abroad; that 
is enough to accelerate his fall; he thought he could hold out for two years but he 
is obliged to go bankrupt after only fifteen months. 
"C was associated with a foreign house which is ruined by another Iscariot—for 
they are to be found in all towns; C is brought down by the fall of his associate, 
Here and elsewhere Fourier has "livres". — Ed. 

=====第659页=====
634 Frederick Engels 
arid after making sacrifices for eighteen months to hold out against the competition 
from the Jewish blackguard, he finds himself forced to go bankrupt. 
"D seems more honest than he is in reality. He still has the means to hold out, 
although he has been suffering from the Jew's competition for twenty months; but 
embittered by the losses which the latter has caused him, he lets himself be carried 
away by the vice of which he sees so many examples. He realises that three of his 
confraternity have opened up the march and that he will pass as a fourth in the 
alliance, pretexting real or fictitious misfortunes. Thus D, wearied by twenty 
months of struggle against Iscariot, sees that there is nothing cleverer for him than 
to go bankrupt. 
"£ had advanced considerable sums to his four successively bankrupt colleagues; 
he thought they were all solvent, and they were indeed, until Iscariot's manoeuvre 
spoilt their business for them. £ finds himself stripped by the bankruptcies of these 
four houses; besides, he himself has no more clients; the entire public crowd to 
Iscariot, who sells off goods at cost price. £ sees his funds annihilated, his credit 
destroyed, he is pressed, and as he can no more meet his commitments, he puts an 
end to it by going bankrupt. 
"F has sufficient means, but as a result of the five previous bankruptcies, which 
warrant the conclusion that his will soon follow, he has lost his credit in all the 
maritime towns. Moreover, some of the bankrupts, having achieved a composition, 
are now selling at very low prices to be able to afford their payments when the first 
terms expire. In order to accelerate their sales, they lose one-tenth of the value and 
yet earn four-tenths, because they settled at 50 per cent. This entirely crushes F, 
and there is nothing left for him but to go bankrupt like his rivals. 
"So the establishment of one vagabond or one Jew is sufficient to disorganise the 
whole merchant body of a large town and to draw the most honest people into 
crime; for every bankruptcy is more or less a crime, no matter how much it is 
extenuated by excellent pretexts such as those with which I have tinted these six 
bankruptcies, and there is hardly ever a word of truth in any of them. The truth of 
the matter is that everybody avidîy seizes the opportunity to commit a theft if it 
remains unpunished. 
"Occasionally running fire takes the form of ricochet fire, which is effective at a 
distance and involves a dozen houses in different countries simultaneously. They 
have common interests and the fall of the main house causes all the subsidiary 
houses concerned to crash, like a row of tin soldiers when the man at the end of 
the row is pushed.* This is a serious combination, worthy of figuring among the 
great manoeuvres, and in any case this ricochetting at a distance will have to form a 
special genus in a more accurate classification. 
"19. Close-column bankruptcy requires favourable circumstances which serve as 
excuses, and prompt masses of merchants to risk the fateful leap. In this case they 
find support one in the other and are saved because of their number, like a 
regiment in close-column formation forces a way for itself with bayonets. Thus, 
when a favourable opportunity presents  itself,  bankrupts must close their ranks 
and post up a column of bankruptcies every day at the Stock Exchange; they must 
have them succeeding one another so quickly that public opinion is confused and 
compositions become easy to achieve in consideration of the difficult circumstances. 
These bankruptcies are seen occurring periodically in London; Paris too made a 
very beautiful attempt in close column in 1800, and it ended very happily for many 
'friends of trade'. 
"20. Marching-in-file bankruptcy is a series of bankruptcies which are linked 
a Fourier has "comme une file de capucins de carte". —Ed. 

=====第660页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 635 
together, but break out at suitable intervals of two to three months. Contrary to the 
close columns, which follow one another day after day, marching-in-file bankrupt­
cies require mutual agreement so that one goes bankrupt when one's turn comes, 
at the very instant when the predecessor has squared his composition. For instance, 
A has achieved his composition three months after bankruptcy and B must 
instantaneously declare himself insolvent because the mediators now find the public 
well disposed and can say: it is the same story as in the case of A, one was bound to 
lead to the other, the same composition must be made. Just the same for C, who 
will go bankrupt three months later, then D, E, F, and G; if they maintain their 
co-operation properly and succeed in keeping to the interval, they achieve the same 
composition for all. Marching in file is a very safe manoeuvre when it is cleverly 
directed; but it does not fit all circumstances, and only the genius of the pros­
pective bankrupt can determine in which cases it is applicable. 
"21. Skirmisher bankruptcy involves at the start those starving wretches who initiate 
a great movement and here and there cause small bankruptcies in their retail trade. 
From this one concludes that business will be difficult and the campaign a fierce 
one. And indeed soon after that the heavy artillery is heard, bankruptcies involving 
millions break out and hold public attention for a long time. Then the movement 
ends with the rearguard skirmishers, the retailer bankrupts, the grocers in small 
towns, who bring the session to an end with their plunges." 
The Agitators 
"What! Is there not yet enough vexation and can you show us something still 
worse than the litany already described? 
"I have only named the most honest. We are approaching the descending, 
despicable wing and can place here the bankrupts who operate according to 
far-reaching plans but disregard moral methods and compromise the lofty corpora­
tion. 
"22. Bankruptcy in grand style affects all classes of society down to the smallest 
people, domestics and others, who deposit their modest savings with a hypocrite. 
Soon bankruptcy plunders landowners, the smaller middle class and the good-
natured people in their hundreds. An entire town becomes involved. In general 
this type of bankruptcy affects particularly the non-trading classes of society and 
does significant harm to the corporation by arousing in the people and the petty 
bourgeoisie reflections which are hardly flattering for the respectable confraternity 
of the merchants. 
"23. Large-scale bankruptcy is that of some obscure upstart who, without funds or 
backing, succeeds in breaking into big business and pulls off just as enormous a 
bankruptcy as the high and mighty bankers. It is generally wondered how this 
camp-follower could manage to strike up such acquaintances and to organise such a 
fat bankruptcy. 
"This individual is the opposite of the preceding one; he takes a different road 
to attain the same goal, namely to excite public opinion against the tricks of the 
merchants and the preposterous laws which leave this scum complete freedom. 
"24. Attila bankruptcy raises the fame of the bankrupts to the clouds and lays a 
country waste as if a whole army of vandals had swept across it. One can cite in this 
genus a brilliant bankruptcy pulled off in 1810 in Orleans by an amateur named 
T. He went bankrupt with a deficit of 16 million so excellently distributed over 
Orleans that the whole unfortunate town was laid low by it. All classes of citizens 
suffered from the devastation. Fugitives went as far as Lyons and spread the tidings: 
Orleans is destroyed, we are all ruined, T. is plunging everything into the abyss. 

=====第661页=====
636 Frederick Engels 
According to detailed reports, he had carried out his scheme so well that he had 
hoodwinked and plundered all classes, from rich capitalists to poor domestics who 
had saved a few talers 3 in their whole life and deposited them with the mercantile 
dealer and let themselves be robbed by him — under the protection of the fine 
principle: Let the merchants do their job, they know best what is in their interest. 
"What robberies! What multiformity of crime in a single branch of commercial 
heroism! A single one, for let it be noted that bankruptcy is only the thirty-first 
feature of this lying trade for which science demands complete freedom under the 
pretext that the merchants know best what is in their interest—they know that 
indeed all too well, but they know only too little what is in the interest of the state 
and of industry, and so we are mystified by science and its theories on the absolute 
freedom of merchants. " 
VI 
DESCENDING WING.—DIRTY HUES 
"From the description of great feats of heroism we go on to more modest 
trophies. Not everything is great in bankruptcy like the three categories of the 
centre. Still, in the left wing too we shall bring together a remarkable collection, 
bankrupts in softened shades, people whose more burgherly virtues and failings 
will do good to the eye after the vivid brilliance of so many heroic deeds; we shall 
still find cohorts capable of cheering the reader—especially the last, that of the 
false brothers, who bring ill fame on the corps of bankrupts.—Let us begin with 
a more serious hue." 
The Cunning Sneakers 
"25. Compensation bankruptcy is declared to obtain compensation for some 
accident. For instance, a speculator loses a lawsuit today which costs him 100,000 
francs. So tomorrow he declares himself bankrupt, and this brings him 200,000. 
Thus he wins the sum in litigation instead of losing it. This capacity of trade to 
compensate itself for the disfavour of circumstances is one of its finest qualities; it 
can find its interest in every mishap on land and sea.c If a shipowner experiences a 
shipwreck, he rehabilitates himself the next day by a good bankruptcy; and this 
type of bankruptcy is accepted without any contradiction because the notary says: 'It 
is not his fault, events forced him to it, he is more to be pitied than blamed.' 
"To this a landowner whose deposit thus goes west will answer: 'I cannot get 
compensation when hail or a flood ruin my crops, I have nobody to fall back 
on.'—A fine argument! Should not landowners know that under the present order 
of things they are a dependent class, dependent on the unproductive people called 
merchants who dig their claws into every product of industry to get themselves 
paid at the expense of the masses like a volunteer corps which, for lack of an 
enemy to plunder, strips its own friends and the good people? Such is the 
merchant, a veritable  cossack  of industry whose motto is: 'I do not work pour la gloire, I 
must have something to rake in.' Every merchant wants to rake in, and if somebody 
Fourier has  "ecus".—Ed. 
The last two sentences as given by Engels differ somewhat from the 
original.—Ed. 
The words "on land and sea" were added by Engels. —Ed. 
Fourier has "cosaques industriels" .—Ed. 

=====第662页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 637 
hopes to rake anything in from him by a lawsuit or otherwise, the merchant has his 
resources at hand and rakes in from others by means of a compensation 
bankruptcy. 
"26. Bankruptcy out of rank is that of a wise man who has foreseen everything and 
put something aside with which he can face the storm and tame the intractable. If 
he wants to earn 200,000 francs by bankruptcy, he puts 300,000 aside, placing a 
third of it in useful hand-outs, presents, etc.; he knows how to quieten the most 
loud-mouthed, how to paralyse justice; a wad here, a wad there, and his case is 
briskly carried through. His bankruptcy brings him in the end a good number of 
friends, who get their piece of the cake and say that he is a man comme il faut who 
knows business inside out. 
"27. Crescendo bankruptcy plays a farce in several acts which increase in interest as 
they develop. To start with, the affair is presented as a slight embarrassment, a case 
of shortage of disposable capital with a discount of 30 per cent necessary to prevent 
a crash. The creditors become worried and negotiate on the quiet, for they have 
been given to understand that things could take a bad turn and that the man in 
question must be supported. Meanwhile, in three months he is tottering again. 
Again the creditors are visited and made to fear his ruin; it is admitted that things 
are worse than was thought and that 50 per cent must be agreed to. Some of the 
creditors are vexed, the matter becomes entangled and bankruptcy is de­
clared—and indeed on such terms that 80-90 per cent is lost instead of 50 per cent 
and the rest can be paid up only after some years. But the composition is still easy 
to bring about because the creditors, who have been skilfully handled and have 
successively become accustomed to a loss of 30, then 50, then 70 per cent, are 
weary of war; they sign and give the cursed business up as altogether lost, although 
it was said at the beginning that only 30 per cent was going to be lost. This method 
is not the worst and can be recommended to speculators who stick to principles. 
"28. Godly bankruptcy is that of a holy man who belongs to all the confraternities 
and holds the cordon of the canopy at processions. He easily finds credit and 
depositors and can prepare a far-reaching bankruptcy underhand. I have seen 
some bankruptcies of this type when the loss was 90 per cent. The advantage in 
such a case is that the bankrupt finds enough people who excuse him: 'Ah, he is a 
very pious man; if he has had no luck in business it is because he sets no store by 
the goods of this world.'—This piety is held up in order to hasten the composition, 
by which the pious apostle retains a good part of the goods of this world, together 
with the prospects of those of the other." 
The Bunglers 
"In every profession one finds ignoramuses who work without any principles and 
can produce only a bad job with the best material. So among bankrupts too there 
are dunces who can do nothing else but change gold into copper and ruin 
themselves in a very stupid manner where others would do splendid business. I 
want to adduce and deal briefly with four genera, for this really honest category 
has nothing entertaining. I only let them march past for the sake of completeness 
of our analysis. 
"29. Foob' bankruptcy is that of those befooled people who, enticed by fashionable 
catchwords, venture into trade without knowing its tricks and naturally scorch their 
wings like moths in the candlelight. Since 1789 there have been many big property-
owners who had no need whatever to get involved in this turmoil; they have been 
seen to lose a rich heritage and end up in bankruptcy by which they parted with 
their fortune and their honour. It must be noted incidentally that only the honest 

=====第663页=====
638 Frederick Engels 
man loses his honour in bankruptcy, whereas the rascal, who knows the great 
principles of trade, can manage his bankruptcies in such a way that he acquires 
wealth and honour. But the great gentlemen who found themselves in this wasps' 
nest of trade wanted to negotiate honestly; they were surrounded by intriguers, 
played with like a ball and forced to end up with the bankruptcy of their illusions. 
Many small landowners have made the same mistake. Swept along by the 
mercantile race, they have abandoned their field, sold their small plot of land to set 
up a shop in town and meet their inevitable ruin. 
"30. Invalids' bankruptcy is that of an incorrigible who wants to die with arms in 
hand. One sees many who ought to retire and who, weakened by age, can do 
nothing but bungle, are ignorant of the latest achievements and in their old age 
lose a slowly amassed fortune and obstinately hold out until repeated blunders 
make bankruptcy inevitable. How is one to describe a man of eighty who is a 
bachelor and has a fortune of two million, indeed sufficient for a single and aged 
man, and still obstinately continues huckstering at an age when he should retire 
and weep over his sins? When such a man gets himself ruined and loses his 
brilliant fortune in his eightieth year he is truly a mercantile fanatic. Such a man 
was the invalid bankrupt who is the prototype of this paragraph; for I have a 
prototype to show for all these species* so that I shall not be accused of 
exaggerating. Incidentally, many of these aged fanatics are to be found in every 
town; because they insist on continuing their trade, they deserve to be shamefully 
ruined, for today, when everything is raised to its quintessence, the need, in trade 
as in war, is for young people educated in modern tactics; and if bankruptcy is 
regarded as a harmless game for young people, it is indeed shameful for wealthy 
old men who should have thought of retiring twenty years ago. 
"31. Crushing bankruptcy is that of enraged competitors who consciously rush 
towards ruin and indeed ruin themselves to dispute a small share of profit from a 
rival. One sees a great number of these who work at a loss in the hope that their 
rival will be ruined before they are, and that they themselves will remain masters of 
the battlefield. This disorder is prevalent particularly in the carrying trade and in 
the cloth markets such as Beaucaire, and it leads to the 'crushed' being forced 
to go bankrupt. 
"32. Swinish  bankruptcy  is that of a greenhorn who, instead of operating according 
to the principles, ruins  himself,  his wife and children and moreover exposes himself 
to the talons of justice and the contempt of the 'friends of trade', who respect 
only fat bankrupts who conform to the principles. In the jargon of commercial 
knaves they say of a bankrupt who thus ruins  himself,  his wife and children: That 
is indeed really swinish.— If he had had a fat bankruptcy, they would have called him a 
smart young man, a clever brain." 
The False Brothers 
"I give the name of false brothers to those who expose the honourable clan of 
the bankrupts to the contempt of the public. Some of them provoke indignation, 
others laughter. I do not include in this class the transcendents, who steal by the 
million — these are always respectable and never compromise the clan; a great thief 
has never been contemptible in civilisation, whereas the small ones are the people 
to be hanged, and when they excite public opinion against villains and small 
bankruptcies they are unworthy of admission to the corporation and deserve to be 
styled as false brothers. 
* The names of these prototypes are given by Fourier in the original.—Note by 
Engels . 

=====第664页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 639 
"33. Villains' bankruptcy is that of small-scale blackguards who commit such 
obnoxious petty thefts in their bankruptcy that the neighbourhood says they ought 
to be hanged. That would not be the case with thefts of 100,000 talers; but thefts 
of 100 talers 3 suggest the idea of the gallows. Incidentally these ideas are not 
dangerous for the knave, because the confraternity of the bankrupts never allows 
its colleagues to be molested; otherwise justice would soon feel authorised to pass 
on from the petty thieves to the big ones, which would be very awkward for those 
who act according to great principles and have found a place in good society after 
an 'honest' bankruptcy. 
"34. Gallows-bird bankruptcy is that by which besides dirty tricks, the man con­
cerned commits also learned acts of perfidy, for instance, robs himself to provide an 
occasion for sentimental tactics. 
"Scapin, a petty crook, indulges in a scaramouch bankruptcy involving only 
40,000 francs; he steals 30,000 francs, which constitutes the profit on the 
operation, and then offers the creditors the remainder, amounting to 10,000 
francs. When he is asked about the deficit of 30,000 francs, he says that he does 
not know book-keeping like big merchants, and that he has been 'unlucky'. 
Perhaps you believe Scapin will be punished because he is a petty thief who steals 
only 30,000 francs—but do not the creditors know that if justice intervenes it will 
eat up the remaining 10,000 francs just for breakfast? And even when these 10,000 
francs have disappeared, nothing will be settled; if they want to have Scapin 
hanged, it will cost them perhaps an additional 10,000 francs and it is still not 
known whether they will succeed. It is therefore better in any case to accept the 
moderate sum of 10,000 francs than to lose it and still have to pay just as much 
over and above. Through his notary Scapin puts forward this argument, so that the 
bankrupt himself threatens his creditors with justice. And why should Scapin's creditors 
be furious with him? Some of them think of following his noble example, the 
others are already ahead of him in their career. So, as wolf does not eat  wolf, 
Scapin soon finds a number of signatories who declare themselves satisfied with his 
proposals; others sign for fear that justice may intervene; others again are 
intractable and speak of sacrificing all to have a blackguard sent to the galleys. 
Then Scapin sends them his wife and children, who implore his mercy with 
well-practised wailings, and so in a few days Scapin and his notary receive the 
majority of signatures. Thereupon the obstreperous, who are no longer needed, 
are made fun of. Their rage is laughed at. Scapin answers them with ingratiating 
words and profound bows, and immediately after the happy issue of the first 
bankruptcy, he starts to think of a new one. 
"35. Fugitive bankruptcy is customary among small tenants in large towns. As the 
date of payment approaches they bolt and bring their wretched movables to safety 
'under cover of the night.' It is very much in vogue among the silk weavers in 
Lyons; it is also resorted to by all elegant individuals of both sexes who order the 
very best things at restaurants, the tailor's and the shoemaker's, and are very 
accommodating as far as the price goes because they intend to pay with fine words 
and to bolt as soon as their creditors begin to get unpleasant. 
"This kind of bankruptcy is droll and shows the corporation in a bad light. When 
one scoffs at a man who has cheated twenty petty shopkeepers, one easily becomes 
accustomed to scoffing at a man comme il faut whose bankruptcy ruins twenty 
families. These freedoms of criticism must be suppressed in order not to imperii 
the respect due to the honourable bankrupts among the 'friends of trade'. 
Here Fourier has "ecus" and further on "livres", which Engels translates as 
"francs".— Ed. 
Fourier has "la corporation des banqueroutiers" .— Ed. 

=====第665页=====
640 Frederick Engels 
"36. Bankruptcy for fun is that of a small retailer who goes bankrupt according to 
the very best form just like the high and mighty bankers and does not give his 
creditors more than five per cent. Among others, a Lyons actor, distinguished for 
his comical roles and therefore very much loved by the public, went bankrupt in 
this way. In all due form he offered his creditors the sum of three per cent. Some of 
them were vexed and wanted to send the bailiff to him; but he mystified justice as 
he mystified it on the stage in the Avocat Patelin, and all the public were on his 
side.  His bankruptcy was a highly amusing comedy, which afforded many a 
priceless scene. The creditors could swear, the public only laughed at them as they 
did at Guillaume in the Avocat Patelin. 
"I have now gone rapidly through all these definitions. However, my list is so 
incomplete that it can be considered as a mere outline to which everybody can 
supply the missing features.3 There are masses of remarkable ones. Only a few 
days ago the Paris papers reported a brilliant bankruptcy, that of a certain Y., who 
established a pompously publicised agency with no more than 10,000 francs. I 
believe it was an office for the regeneration of trade or some other pompous title, 
by means of which he obtained a million from a few jackanapes, whom he paid as 
usual with a good bankruptcy. In a word, the number of bankruptcy genera which 
I have collected here can easily be doubled." 
VII 
CONCLUSION b 
"When one reflects that bankruptcy is only a single one of the thirty-six features 
of trade, one finds difficulty in explaining why this so fearful mine of crimes, this 
mechanism of trade, has not yet been analysed; and that in this century, which is so 
uncompromising towards the crimes of all classes in society and has made public 
the crimes of kings and popes. 
"When one reads this collection of merchants' filth, one cannot help wondering 
how it comes that a century which calls itself the friend of lofty truth has been able 
in all seriousness to grow enthusiastic over this lying trade, arguing that after all 
one cannot do without trade; as if for that reason one must accept fraud and 
theft such as those which we have listed in one single crime of trade, namely 
bankruptcy. 
"However, let us finish what we have to say about this. 
"The saying that justice sends only petty thieves to the gallows is proved false in 
trade. The bankrupt, even the smallest, evades prosecution, protected by the 
merchants themselves. We saw that under the last category (false brothers), which is 
that of miniature bankrupts. 
"It would be vain to quote the punishment of a few fraudulent bankrupts; 
ninety-nine manage to get away with it, and if the hundredth fails he must be a 
stupid devil and not know how to pursue his intrigue. For the operation is so 
simple nowadays that the old precautionary measures have long ago been 
forgotten. Formerly a bankrupt used to flee to Trient, Liège or Carouge, but since 
the rebirth of 1789 this custom has been abandoned. Everybody now goes 
bankrupt en famille. The matter is quietly prepared, and when it explodes, one 
goes for a month to the country, to the intimacy of one's relatives and friends; 
a At the beginning and the end of this paragraph Fourier's text is somewhat 
paraphrased by Engels.— Ed. 
Fourier has "Conclusion on Bankruptcy".—Ed. 

=====第666页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 641 
the notary meanwhile puts everything in order. After a few weeks one reappears, 
and the public is so accustomed to this kind of story that it regards it as a pleasant 
joke;  it is called 'being confined' and one says quite dispassionately: 'So-and-so is 
back, he has just had his confinement.' 
"I have noted that bankruptcy is the only social crime which becomes epidemical 
and forcibly carries the honest man along the road of the scoundrel. If to bankruptcy 
we add stockjobbing and so many other infamies, we shall find that I was right when I 
affirmed that civilised people had never committed so many political follies as since 
they plunged into trade. Never have the philosophers, who dream of nothing but 
counterbalance and guarantees, thought of providing the social body with the 
guarantee which governments, judiciously enough, demand of their fiscal agents! A 
prince assures himself of the rectitude of his treasurer by means of a cash security 
and the prospect of inevitable punishment if he were to dare risk or squander the 
public monies deposited with him. Why does it" not happen that the collectors of 
public monies appropriate the revenues from taxes and write letters of lamentation 
to the government saying: The misfortunes of the times, the critical circumstances, 
the deplorable accidents, etc., in a word, I have gone bankrupt, insolvent, or 
whatever you call it. Your treasury should contain ten million; I offer you half of 
that sum, five million, payable in five years. Allow yourself to be moved by the 
misfortune of a lamentable treasurer, maintain me in your confidence and the 
administration of your treasury, without which I am not even able to pay you the 
half which I now offer you; but if you leave me my position and my income, I shall 
endeavour to discharge my obligations towards you honourably, that is, to treat you 
to a second bankruptcy as soon as the treasury is full again. 
"Such in brief is the content of all bankrupts' letters. If treasurers do not follow 
this example, it is because they know that no philosophical theory can save them 
from the punishment which the bankrupt evades — under the protection of the 
principle: 'Leave the merchants complete r~eedom without demanding any guaran­
tee against their machinations.'" 
* * * 
So writes Fourier. The continuation of this article in the second 
issue of the Phalange contains three chapters on Stock Exchange 
operations, speculative purchase (accaparement) and parasitism, the 
greater part of which, however, has already been reprinted in the 
Quatre mouvements. 222 Partly for this reason, partly because the 
fragment given above is fully adequate for my purpose, I break it 
off here. 
Let the learned German Herren, who so zealously sail the 
"stormy sea" of bottomless 3 theories, and above all fish for the 
"principle" of "socialism", follow the example of the commis 
marchand* Fourier. Fourier was no philosopher, he had a great 
hatred of philosophy and savagely ridiculed it in his writings and 
in this connection said a multitude of things which our German 
a The German word "grundlos" can mean both "bottomless" and "without 
foundation".— Ed. 
b Salesman.—Ed. 

=====第667页=====
642 Frederick Engels 
"philosophers of socialism" would do well to take to heart. True, 
they will object that Fourier, too, was abstract, that by means of his 
series he speculatively constructed God and the world in defiance 
of Hegel, but that will not save them. Fourier's eccentricities, 
which are, after all, products of genius, are no excuse for the 
boring so-called systematic expositions of arid German theory. 
Fourier speculatively constructs the future, after correctly under­
standing the past and the present; German theory first of all ar­
ranges past history according to its liking and then prescribes to the 
future, too, what direction it should take. Compare, for example, 
Fourier's epochs of social development (savagery, patriarchate, 
barbarism, civilisation) and his characterisation of them with Hegel's 
Absolute Idea, which laboriously makes its way through the 
labyrinth of history and despite the four world empires223  at the 
end, but still grunting and groaning, achieves the semblance of a 
trichotomy—not to speak of the post-Hegelian speculative construc­
tions.  For, although Hegel's speculative construction still made 
some sense, even if it is turned upside-down, that of the post-
Hegelian system manufacturers no longer makes any sense at all. 
It is truly high time that the Germans at last stopped making 
such a fuss about their thoroughness. With a few meagre data they 
are capable not only of concocting any kind of theory, but also of 
linking it with world history. On the basis of the first fact that 
happens to reach them at third hand, concerning which they do 
not even know at all whether it occurred in such and such a way 
or some other, they will prove to you that it must have occurred in 
this particular way and no other. Has anyone in Germany written 
on social questions without also saying something about Fourier by 
which German thoroughness has most thoroughly exposed itself to 
ridicule! Among them is a Herr Kaiser, 3 who immediately used 
"L. Stein's excellent work" b for a world-historic speculative construc­
tion, the only pity about which is that all the facts it is based on 
are false. German theory has already at least twenty times allotted 
Fourier his "place in the development of the Absolute Idea"— 
each time a different place—and each time German theory relied 
for the facts on Herr Stein or other dubious sources. For this very 
reason, too, German "absolute socialism" is such terribly poor 
stuff.  A little "humanitarianism", as the thing is called nowadays, 
a little "realisation" of this humanitarianism or, rather, monstros­
ity, a very little about property from Proudhon—at third or fourth 
a H. W. Kaiser, Die Persönlichkeit des Eigenthums. —Ed. 
L. Stein, Der Socialismus und Communismus des heutigen Frankreichs. —Ed. 

=====第668页=====
A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade 643 
hand—a little moaning about the proletariat, and a little about the 
organisation of labour and wretched associations for raising the 
lower classes of the people224 — together with boundless ignorance 
of political economy and the real character of society—that is the 
sum total of all this "socialism", which moreover loses its last drop 
of blood, the last trace of energy and strength through its non-
partisanship in matters of theory, its "absolute tranquillity of 
thought". And with this tedious stuff they want to revolutionise 
Germany, set the proletariat in motion, and make the masses think 
and act! 
If our German half or fully communist university lecturers had 
only taken the trouble to have a look at Fourier's main writings, 
which after all are as easy for them to obtain as any German 
book — what a treasure-trove of material for speculative construc­
tion and other uses they would have found in them! What a mass 
of new ideas — still new for Germany even today — would have 
offered itself to them there! Up to now these good people find 
nothing to reproach present-day society with except the condition 
of the proletariat, and even about that they are not capable of 
saying very much. Of course, the condition of the proletariat is the 
main point, but does that exhaust the criticism of present-day 
society? Fourier, who, except in his later works, hardly touches 
on this point at all, provides the proof that even without it existing 
society can be seen to be thoroughly reprehensible, and that by 
criticism of the bourgeoisie alone — namely of the bourgeoisie in its 
inner relationships, apart from its attitude to the proletariat— 
one can arrive at the necessity of a social reconstruction. For this 
aspect of criticism, Fourier up to now remains unique. Fourier 
inexorably exposes the hypocrisy of respectable society, the con­
tradiction between its theory and its practice, the dullness of its 
entire mode of life; he ridicules its philosophy, its striving for 
perfection de la perfectibilité perfectibilisante* and auguste vérité b; he 
ridicules its "pure morality", its uniform social institutions, and 
contrasts all this with its practice, le doux commerce, which he 
criticises in a masterly manner, its dissolute delights which are no 
delights, its organisation of adultery in marriage, its general chaos. 
All these are aspects of contemporary society which have never yet 
been mentioned in Germany. True, there has been talk here and 
there about free love, about the position of woman and her 
emancipation; but what has been the result? A few confused 
Perfecting the perfectibility which is in process of becoming perfect.— Ed. 
August truth.— Ed. 

=====第669页=====
644 Frederick Engels 
phrases, a few blue-stockings, a little hysteria and a good deal of 
moaning about the German family — not even one bastard came 
out of it! 
Let the Germans first acquaint themselves with the social move­
ment abroad, both practical and literary—the practical movement 
includes the whole of English and French history during the last 
eighty years, English industry and the French Revolution—let them 
then do as much as their neighbours as regards practice and 
literature, and only after that will the time have come to raise such 
idle questions as that of the greater or lesser achievement of the 
various nations. But by then there will no longer be any audience 
for these sophistical disquisitions. 
Until then it would be best for the Germans above all to acquaint 
themselves with what has been achieved abroad. All the books 
about this that have so far appeared are without exception bad. 
Anyhow, brief summaries of that kind can at best give only a 
criticism of those works, not the works themselves. The latter are 
partly rare and unobtainable in Germany, partly too voluminous, 
and in part mixed with matters which are now only of historical or 
literary interest and no longer interest the German public of 1845. 
To make available those works, the valuable contents of which are 
even now still new for Germany, requires a selection and editorial 
treatment such as the French, being in such matters also much 
more practical than we are, carry out in respect of all material 
coming to them from abroad. Such editions of the epoch-making 
socialist literature from abroad will shortly begin to be published. 
A number of German Communists, among them the best brains of 
the movement, who could just as easily produce works of their 
own, have joined in this undertaking,225 which, it is to be hoped, 
will show the wise German theoreticians that all their wisdom is old 
stuff,  the pros and cons of which have already been thoroughly 
discussed on the other side of the Rhine and the English Chan­
nel long ago. Only after they have seen what was done  before  them 
will they have an opportunity to show what they  themselves  can do. 
Brussels 
Written in the latter half of 1845 Printed according to the yearbook 
First published in the yearbook Published in English for the first 
Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1846 time 
Signed: F. Engels 

=====第670页=====
AND NATIONAL TRADES' JOURNAL. 
VOL.  VIII. NO. 409. LONDON, SATURDAY, SEPTEMBER 13.1845. """V 
Frederick Engels 
THE LATE BUTCHERY AT LEIPZIG.—THE GERMAN 
WORKING MEN'S MOVEMENT226 
The massacre at Leipzig,227 which you commented on in your 
last number, and of which you £ave a more detailed account some 
weeks ago, is continuing to occupy the attention of the German 
papers. This massacre,— surpassed in infamy by that of Peterloo228 
only,— is by far the most villainous act of scoundrelism that 
military despotism ever devised in this country. When the people 
were shouting, "Ronge for ever! down with Popery!" Printe John 
of Saxony, who, by-the-bye, is another of our many rhyming and 
book-writing princes, having published a very bad translation of 
the Italian poet Dante's "Hell"; this "hellish" translator tried to 
add military glory to his literary fame by planning a most 
dastardly campaign against the unarmed masses. He ordered the 
battalion of rifles, called in by the authorities, to divide into several 
detachments and to block up the passages to the hotel in which his 
literary "royal highness" had taken up his quarters. The soldiers 
obeyed, and pressed the people by enclosing them in a narrow 
circle, and advancing upon them into the gateway of the hotel; 
and from this unavoidable entering of the people into the sacred 
gateway of the royal residence, brought on by the military acting 
under Prince John's orders; from this very circumstance the 
pretext was taken to fire upon the people; by this very cir­
cumstance the firing has been tried to be justified by the 
Government papers! Nor is this all; the people were taken 
between the several detachments, and the plan of his royal 
highness was executed by a cross fire upon the defenceless masses; 
wherever they turned they met with a repeated volley from the 
22-762 

=====第671页=====
646 Frederick Engels 
rifles,  and had not the soldiers, more humane than Prince John, 
fired mostly over the heads of the people, the slaughter would 
have been terrible. The indignation created by this piece of 
scoundrelism is general; the most loyal subjects, the warmest 
supporters of the present order of things, share in it, and 
pronounce their utter disgust at such proceedings. The affair will 
do a great deal of good in Saxony, a part of Germany that before 
all others, has always evinced an inclination for talking, and where 
action was sadly wanted. The Saxons, with their little constitutional 
government, their talking houses of parliament, their liberal 
deputies, liberal and enlightened parsons, etc., were, in Northern 
Germany, the representatives of moderate Liberalism, of German 
Whiggery; and yet, with all that, greater slaves of the King of 
Prussia than the Prussians themselves. Whatever the Prussian 
Government resolved, the Saxon ministry had to execute; nay, of 
late, the Prussian Government did not even take the trouble to 
apply to the Saxon ministry, but direct to the Saxon inferior 
authorities, as if they were not Saxon, but their own employees! 
Saxony is governed in Berlin, not in Dresden! and with all their 
talking and boasting the Saxons know very well that the leaden 
hand of Prussia presses hard enough upon them. To all this 
talking and boasting, to all this self-conceit and contentment which 
would make the Saxons a peculiar nation opposed to the Prussian, 
etc., this Leipzig massacre will put an end. The Saxons must see, 
now, that they are under the same military rule as all other 
Germans, and that, with all their constitution, liberal laws, liberal 
censorship, and liberal king's speeches,3 martial law is the only one 
that has any practical existence in their little country. And there is 
another thing to aid this Leipzig affair in spreading the spirit of 
rebellion in Saxony; notwithstanding all the talking of the Saxon 
Liberals, the great majority of the Saxon people are only begin­
ning to talk; Saxony is a manufacturing country, and among her 
linen-weavers, frame-work-knitters, cotton-spinners, pillow-
lace-makers, coal and metal-miners, there has been, from time 
immemorial, an appalling amount of distress. The proletarian 
movement, which, from the Silesian riots, the weavers' battle as it 
is called, in June, 1844,229 has spread all over Germany, has not left 
Saxony untouched. There have been movements at several places 
among the railway constructing workmen, and also among the 
calico-printers some time ago, and it is more than likely, though 
positive evidence cannot now be given, that communism is making 
a Frederick Augustus II.— Ed. 

=====第672页=====
The Late Butchery at Leipzig 647 
its progress there as well as everywhere else, among the working 
people; and if the workers of Saxony enter the field, they are sure 
not to be satisfied with talking like their employers, the liberal 
"bourgeois". 
Let me direct your attention somewhat more to the working 
class movement in Germany. In your paper of last week,3 you 
predict a glorious revolution,— not such a one as that of 
1688, 230 — to this country. In this you are perfectly right—I only 
would beg to correct, or rather to more clearly define your 
expression, that it is the youth of Germany that will bring about 
such a change. This youth is not to be looked for among the 
middle classes. It is from the very heart of our working people 
that revolutionary action in Germany will commence. It is true, 
there are among our middle classes a considerable number of 
Republicans and even Communists, and young men too, who, if a 
general outbreak occurred now, would be very useful in the 
movement, but these men are "bourgeois", profit-mongers, man­
ufacturers by profession; and who will guarantee us that they will 
not be demoralised by their trade, by their social position, which 
forces them to live upon the toil of other people, to grow fat by 
being the leeches, the "exploiteurs" of the working classes? And if 
they remain proletarians in mind, though bourgeois in profession, 
their number will be infinitely small in comparison with the real 
number of the middle-class men, who stick to the existing order of 
things through interest, and care for nothing but the filling of 
their purses. Fortunately, we do not count on the middle classes at 
all. The movement of the proletarians has developed itself with 
such astonishing rapidity, that in another year or two we shall be 
able to muster a glorious array of working Democrats and 
Communists — for in this country Democracy and Communism 
are, as far as the working classes are concerned, quite synony­
mous.  The Silesian weavers, in 1844, gave the signal; the Bohemian 
and Saxon calico-printers and railway constructors, the Berlin 
calico-printers, and, indeed, the manufacturing classes of almost 
all parts of Germany, responded by turnouts and partial riots; the 
latter of which were almost always produced by the laws prohibit­
ing combinations. The movement is now almost general through­
out the country, and goes on quietly, but steadily, whilst the 
middle classes spend their time with agitating for "Constitutions", 
"Liberty of the Press", "Protective Duties", "German Catholicity", 
and "Protestant Church Reform". All these middle-class move-
a The Northern Star No. 408, September 6, 1845.— Ed. 
22* 

=====第673页=====
648 Frederick Engels 
ments, although not without some merit, do not touch the working 
classes at all, who have a movement of their own — a knife-and-
fork movement. In my next letter more on this subject.231 
Written September 8-11, 1845 
First published in the newspaper 
The Northern Star No. 409, 
September 13, 1845 
with an editorial note: 
"From our own correspondent" Printed according to the news­
paper 

=====第674页=====
Frederick Engels 
VICTORIA'S VISIT.—THE "ROYALS" AT LOGGERHEADS.— 
ROW BETWIXT VIC AND THE GERMAN BOURGEOISIE.— 
THE CONDEMNATION OF THE PARIS CARPENTERS 
Your little Queen has made a pretty mess of her visit to the 
Prussians. She treated the king3 with such contempt, that he was 
glad to get rid of her, and showed that very plainly after her 
departure. The middle classes too are highly incensed at the 
contemptuous way she treated the daughters of the "haute 
bourgeoisie" of Cologne. The daughter of the Mayor of Cologne 
had to present "her Majesty" with a cup of tea, and Vic took not 
the cup, because touched by the hand of one not "noble". (!) She 
only took the spoon, and with it sipped the tea; at the same time 
turning her head aside, and treating the girl with the most marked 
contempt. The poor girl stood trembling awfully, not knowing 
whether to stand or to go away. Served her right; these purse-
proud bourgeois, with all their cunning, are with their worship of 
kings and queens but spoons after all, and as such deserve to be 
treated. Your Queen carried her contempt so far as to rouse what 
little spirit they possess to show some resistance. She had sub­
scribed 3,500 dollars (£500), to the building fund of the Cologne 
Cathedral, and the insulted Bourgeois of Cologne got up a 
meeting to discuss the propriety of returning her the money! The 
meeting was dispersed by the police and military. I hear, however, 
that they still contemplate subscribing the money amongst them­
selves, and sending it to England or Ireland, to relieve your starving 
poor. I hope they will do so. John Bull has been made to bleed 
pretty freely for bloodsucking German princes, and it is only fair 
that the German bourgeoisie should return a little of what poor 
John has been shamefully drained. The marked contempt with 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 
22^762 

=====第675页=====
650 Frederick Engels 
which your Queen treated our precious King and his court, arose, 
I hear, from the fact of the limping Queen of Prussia3 refusing the 
arm of Prince Albert, and preferring that of Archduke Frederick 
at Austria, as being of higher birth. It is very comical to see these 
princes at loggerheads amongst themselves, and the bourgeoisie 
at loggerheads with the princes; all the time not seeing the move­
ment arising in the lowest depths around them—not seeing their 
danger until too late. 
You never gave in the Star the judgment of the Paris Tribunal 
against the carpenters on strike, accused of combination—Vin­
cent, the  chief,  was sentenced to three years, two others to a year, 
some more to six months, I believe (imprisonment). However, they 
are keeping out at least those whose masters won't give way. 
Two-thirds of the masters have acceded to the workmen's de­
mands, and in consequence of the above sentence, the sawyers 
(scieurs-à-long) and other trades connected with building, have 
turned out too. This affair does a tremendous deal of good. 
Written between September 14 and 18, Printed according to the news-
1845 paper 
Published in the newspaper 
The Northern Star No. 410, 
September 20, 1845 
with an editorial note: 
"From our own correspondent" 
a Elisabeth.— Ed. 

=====第676页=====
Frederick Engels 
"YOUNG GERMANY" IN SWITZERLAND^ 
(Conspiracy Against Church and State!) 
The Constitutionnel Neuchâtelois gives a long, apparently official, 
report on a "vast conspiracy of atheists spread all over Switzer­
land" We take from it the following extracts: — 
"After the discovery made some time ago of the Communist secret society, in 
the canton of Neuchâtel, another far more dangerous association has been 
discovered—an association extending its nets all over the Swiss confederacy, and 
purposing to overthrow, by means of Atheism, the fundamental principles of 
morality, and to revolutionize Germany by any means, Regicide not excepted. The 
members of this Association, which is known by the name of Young Germany, or the 
Leman Confederacy, are almost without exception German working men, with some 
of the old political refugees. In consequence of some information at the headquar­
ters of the conspiracy, Lausanne, the chiefs of the great club of La Chaux-de-Fonds 
were apprehended, and a commission of inquiry appointed, the results of which 
are the following disclosures. This secret society exists since 1838, and has at its 
head Messrs. Standau and Döleke, professors of the German language, Wm. 
Marr, editor of their paper a; and Hoffmann, druggist. Dr. Fein and Dr. Rauschen­
platt, German refugees; the first imprisoned at Lucerne on account of his having 
taken part in the late civil war —the secondât Strasburg, appear also to be 
connected with this society. The rules of the association contain the following 
articles: 
The society is essentially and necessarily a secret one, its end being political 
propaganda. Every member obliges himself to remain within the association until 
forty years of age, to devote all his powers to the attainment of its aims, and 
not to stand in fear of any sacrifice. Every member engages himself to destroy 
all written documents, by which the association or its members might be traced. In 
Switzerland a central office is formed, corresponding with all those members that 
are returned to Germany, and leading the whole of the operations. None to be 
admitted as members who do not profess themselves atheists and revolutionists. 
By the incredible activity of its members among the German working men — of 
whom there is a floating population of about 25,000 in Switzerland  — this society 
a Blätter der Gegenwart für soziales Leben. — Ed. 
22** 

=====第677页=====
652 Frederick Engels 
has succeeded in establishing its branch-clubs in 26 towns in Switzerland, 
viz.: — Carouge, Nyon, Rolle, Aubonne, Morges, Lausanne, Aigle, Vevey, Yverdon, 
Moudon, Payerne, Chaux-de -Fonds, Fleurier, Berne, Biel, St. Imer, Porentruy, 
Burgdorf,  Chur, Zug, Zurich, Winterthur, Basel, Lucerne, Friburg, and Geneva, 
besides two clubs in France, in Strasburg and Marseilles. Every six months the 
deputies of these clubs assemble in one of the localities, which for the next six 
months is then charged with the management of the general business. The 
incredible activity, and the really diabolic means brought into bearing by these 
propagandists for attracting the Germans, are frightful indeed. One of them, 
writing from Zurich to the central office, says: 
"We are obliged to use great caution, on account of most of the newly arriving men 
being frightened by the ordinances and intimidations of the German governments. 
They will never enter a club unless they are told that it is not a political one. Thus 
we are obliged to treat them very cautiously, to bring them bit by bit into the right 
road, and the principal thing in this respect is to show them that religion is nothing 
but a pile of rubbish and dung. The only thing we can do is to prepare them here 
for the clubs in French Switzerland, and there we send those who intend leaving 
Zurich." 
When the Morges club wanted to get into connection with the whitesmiths of that 
town, none of whom was a member, they instantly wrote to the central office, to send 
them a whitesmith who might be clever enough to bring those workmen into the 
society. The clubs were all in correspondence with each other, as well as with the 
central office. This correspondence has been partly seized, and shows by its 
contents how much the whole conspiracy was pervaded by a revolutionary spirit. 
Every club had a committee for preparing the subjects of discussion. The debates 
extended over all political, social, and religious questions. Some clubs were 
comparatively rich, and possessed libraries, newsrooms, pianos, &c; they were 
furnished with everything which might attract the workmen. The most powerful 
clubs were those of Geneva, Berne, Zurich, Lausanne, and La Chaux-de-Fonds; the 
last named club numbered (in a very small town) 200 members; and if we consider 
that in this same town, besides Young Germany, there existed a very numerous 
Communist club, we may think ourselves entitled to say, that Atheists and 
Communists in Switzerland are to be numbered by thousands. The association had 
a secret agitation committee, which was generally not known to the members at 
large; but every club contained one or two of those "Propagandists", whose 
business it was to keep up the steam, to direct the proceedings, and to develop the 
spirit of Atheism and revolutionism. Unfortunately, they succeeded but too well in 
this, as is proved by the fact, that the "infernal" periodical of Young Germany, 
published by Marr, numbered above 500 subscribers among the working people 
only. The paper openly proclaims Atheism as its principle.— "Germany," says this 
paper, "wants a political, religious, and social revolution; and if religion and politics 
should, during the course of this revolution, end in smoke, so much the better; 
socialised man will come forth purer and better from this purgatory." 
Thus far the report, which is altogether written in an infamous 
and calumniatory style. Young Germany had existed in Switzer­
land since 1831, when, in consequence of the many insurrections 
in Germany, great numbers of young men, students, workmen, 
&c; were obliged to leave their country. After a period of 
considerable activity this association collapsed towards 1837, when 
the general Bourgeoisie Government throughout Europe sue-

=====第678页=====
"Young Germany" in Switzerland 653 
ceeded in suppressing the spirit of political agitation. Soon 
afterwards, however, the Communist clubs commenced to form 
themselves in the old home of Young Germany, on the shores of 
the Leman Lake, and to commence an animated debate with that 
merely political association. This debate ended in a settled quarrel, 
and decided enmity of the two parties; the main result, however, 
was, that Young Germany was obliged to extend its field of action, 
and not only to better define their political principles, as those of 
Radical, Republic, and Democratic, but also to take up social 
questions. While the middle classes of Germany kill their time; 
with "German Catholicity" and "Protestant Reforms" while they 
run after Ronge, and play the "Friends of Light" 234; thus making 
it their chief business to effect some very little, almost invisible, 
good-for-nothing (but a Bourgeois) reform in religious matters, 
the working people of our country read and digest the writings of 
the greatest German philosophers such as Feuerbach, &c, and 
embrace the result of their inquiries, as radical as this result may 
appear. The people of Germany have no religion. How else would 
it have been possible to convert masses of them, not only in 
Switzerland, but in France, England, and at home, within the short 
space of a year? I refer to what I said last week but one on 
Bourgeoise movements and working-class movements'; I think 
these disclosures are a full confirmation of my statement. 
Written between September 20 
and 26, 1845 
Published in the newspaper 
The Northern Star No. 411, 
September 27, 1845 
with an editorial note 
"From our German correspondent" Printed according to the news­
paper 
See pp. 645-48 of this volume.—Ed. 

=====第679页=====
Frederick Engels 
PERSECUTION AND EXPULSION OF COMMUNISTS 
Germany.— On the 1 lth instant, the authorities of the Grand 
Dukedom of Hesse, seized at Darmstadt, at the publisher's 
premises, the first number of a Communist Magazine, the Rhenish 
Annals,* edited by Püttmann. There were, however, only fifty-five 
copies found, the remainder of the edition having been previously 
sold. The publisher, Mr. Leske, was at the same time informed 
that the Magazine was placed under the control of the police, he 
having to produce every number before it was issued, to the 
police, and to procure a license for issuing the same, under a 
penalty, in case of non-compliance, of 500 florins (forty-five 
pounds sterling), or, according to the merits of the case, imprison­
ment. This blow aimed at the Communists, and at the same time 
at that little bit of a free press we have in Germany, will, however, 
prove useless. There are hundreds of means to elude this 
unconstitutional interference, which, no doubt, has been pro­
ceeded to at the instigation of the hated Prussian Government. 
This same Prussian Government has procured from the Saxon 
authorities the expulsion of several public authors from Leipsic, 
among whom is Mr. W. Marr, one of the heads of that Young 
German Conspiracy in Switzerland mentioned in my last. b In his 
case,  as well as that of Weitling last year, 235 the authorities were 
afraid of imprisoning and bringing to judgment the party, 
although they had every legal pretence; they were satisfied with 
driving them away. 
a Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform. — Ed. 
See pp. 651-653 of this volume.— Ed. 

=====第680页=====
Persecution and Expulsion of Communists 655 
Switzerland.— The Democratic Government of the Pays de 
Vaud has expelled from the canton Mr. A. Becker, a talented 
German Communist writer, as well as Mr. S. Schmidt and Dr. 
Kuhlmann, belonging to the same party, and dissolved the 
German Communist Club at Lausanne. The Radical Government 
of Zurich has likewise expelled Dr. Püttmann, editor of the 
above-named Rhenish Annals, and belonging, too, to the Commu­
nist party. a 
Written in the middle of October 1845 
Published in the newspaper 
The Northern Star No. 415, 
October 25, 1845 
with an editorial note: 
"From our own correspondent" Printed according to the news­
paper 
a [A German friend informs us that the above announcement, as regards the 
expulsion of Mr. S. Schmidt, is premature. That, as yet, Mr. Schmidt has not been 
expelled from the Pays de Vaud.— Ed. N. S.] 

=====第681页=====
Frederick Engels 
HISTORY OF THE ENGLISH CORN LAWS236 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 193, December 1845] 
Until the middle of the last century England exported grain 
almost every year and very seldom needed to import this foodstuff 
from abroad. Since that time, however, the situation has been 
reversed. Under these circumstances the price of grain, on the 
one hand, was necessarily low and that of meat, on the other, was 
high, much arable land was converted into cattle pasture, while at 
the same time industry, and with it the population, owing to the 
invention of important machines, experienced an unprecedented 
growth. Hence England was first compelled to give up exporting 
corn and later had to import it from abroad. The twenty-five 
years'  war against France during the revolution, which made imports 
difficult, compelled England more or less to restrict itself to its 
own soil. The obstacles which the war put in the way of im­
ports had the same effect as a protective  tariff.  Grain prices 
rose,  ground-rents likewise rose, in most cases to double the 
previous figure, and in some cases even fivefold. The result was 
that a large part of the area that had recently been converted into 
pasture was again used for corn. This increase in their incomes 
tempted the English landowners, who, incidentally, consist of a 
few hundred lords and some 60,000 baronets and squires not 
belonging to the nobility, to adopt an extravagant mode of living 
and a mutual emulation in luxury for which very soon even their 
increased rents no longer sufficed. Before long the estates were 
encumbered with a heavy burden of debt. When in 1814 peace 
removed the obstacles to import, the price of corn fell and the 
tenant-farmers, in view of the high rents, could no longer cover 
the cost of producing their corn. Only two ways out were possible: 
either that the landowners should reduce the rent or that a real 

=====第682页=====
History of the English Corn Laws 657 
protective tariff should be imposed instead of the nominal one. 
The landowners, who not only dominated the Upper House and the 
Ministry but also (prior to the Reform Bill237) possessed fairly 
unrestricted power in the Lower House, naturally chose the latter 
course and in 1815 introduced the Corn Laws amid the furious 
outcry of the middle classes and the people, at that time still 
guided by the latter, and under the protection of bayonets. The 
first Corn Law of 1815 prohibited import of corn altogether as 
long as the price of corn in England remained under 80 shillings 
a quarter. At this price or over,» foreign corn could be imported 
freely. But this law was not in accord with the interests of either 
the industrial or the agricultural population, and in 1822 it was 
somewhat modified. However, this modification never came 
into practical effect, for during the next few years prices always 
remained low and never reached the level at which the import of 
foreign corn was allowed. Despite all the improvements in the law 
and despite the investigations of several parliamentary committees, 
the tenant-farmers were unable to cover their production costs. 
Finally, therefore, Huskisson and Canning invented their famous 
sliding scale,b which their successors in the Ministry embodied in 
the law.238 By this scale, the import duty rose as the price of 
home-produced corn fell and vice versa. By this means the English 
farmer was to be ensured a high and constant price for his corn, 
so that he could comfortably cope with his high ground-rent. But 
this measure was of no avail either. The system became increasing­
ly untenable; the middle classes, whose representatives were 
predominant in the Lower House after the Reform Bill, became 
more and more opposed to the Corn Laws, and within a year after 
Sir Robert Peel's entry into the Ministry he found himself 
compelled to lower the import  tariff. 
Meanwhile, opposition to the Corn Laws had become organised. 
The industrial middle class, which had to pay its workers higher 
wages because of the increase in the price of corn, resolved to do 
its utmost to secure at any cost the abolition of these hated 
laws — the last survivals of the old dominance of the agricultural 
interests, which at the same time facilitated foreign competition 
against English industry. Towards the end of 1838, some of the 
leading Manchester manufacturers founded an anti-Corn Law 
association, which soon spread in the neighbourhood and in other 
factory districts, adopted the name of Anti-Corn Law League, 
a The original has "under".— Ed. 
In the original the words "sliding scale" are given in English.—Ed. 

=====第683页=====
658 Frederick Engels 
started a subscription fund, founded a journal (the Anti-Bread-Tax 
Circular),  sent paid speakers from place to place and set in motion 
all the means of agitation customary in England for achieving its 
aim. During its first years, which coincided with a four-years' 
slump in business, the Anti-Corn-Law League was extremely 
active. When, however, at the beginning of 1842, the business 
slump turned into a downright commercial crisis which threw 
the working class into the most atrocious poverty, the Anti-
Corn-Law League became definitely revolutionary. It took as 
its motto the saying of Jeremiah: "They that be slain with the 
sword are better than they that be slain with hunger."3 Its journal 
in clear language called on the people to revolt and threatened the 
landowners with the "pick-axe and the torch". Its itinerant 
agitators ranged the whole country and preached in a language no 
way less forceful than that of the journal. Meeting after meeting 
was held, petition after petition to Parliament was circulated, and 
when Parliament opened its session, a Congress of League rep­
resentatives assembled simultaneously in the immediate neighbour­
hood of the Houses of Parliament. When, in spite of all this, Peel 
failed to abolish the Corn Laws, but only modified them, the 
Congress declared: 
"The people has nothing more to expect from the government; it must rely only 
on itself;  the wheels of the government machinery must be halted all at once and 
on the spot; the time for talking is over, the time has come for action. It is to be 
hoped that the people will no longer be willing to starve for the benefit of an 
aristocracy living in luxury; and if naught else avails, there is still a means by which 
the government can be compelled to give way: we must" (stated this Congress of 
leading manufacturers and municipal officials of the great factory towns) "we must 
throw the people on to the agricultural districts which have produced all the 
pauperism; but the people must not go there like a crowd of humble 'paupers', but 
as if they had to 'quarter themselves on a mortal enemy'." 
This great means in the hands of the manufacturers, by which 
they wished in 24 hours to bring together a meeting of 500,000 
persons on the Manchester racecourse and to raise an insurrec­
tion against the Corn Laws, consisted in closing down their factories. 
[Telegraph für Deutschland No. 194, December 1845] 
In July, business began to improve. The manufacturers received 
increased orders and they noted that the crisis was coming to an 
end. The people was still in a highly excited state and distress was 
Lamentations of Jeremiah,  4:9.—Ed. 
This passage has been retranslated from the German since it was not possible 
to trace the English original.—Ed. 

=====第684页=====
History of the English Corn Laws 659 
universal; but if anything was to happen, it was high time for 
action. And so, when an increase in wages was to be expeeted 
owing to the improvement in business a manufacturer in Staly-
bridge suddenly reduced the wages of his workers, thereby 
compelling them to strike in order to maintain their wages at the 
previous level. The workers, to whom the signal for an insurrec­
tion was thus given, brought all the factories in the town and its 
environs to a standstill, which was easy for them to do since 
the manufacturers (all members of the Anti-Corn Law League), 
contrary to their custom, offered no resistance at all. The workers 
held meetings presided over by the manufacturers themselves, 
who tried to draw the people's attention to the Corn Laws. 
On August 9, 1842, four days after the outbreak of the insurrec­
tion, the workers marched to Manchester, where they met with no 
resistance at all, and brought all the factories to a standstill. The 
only manufacturer who opposed them was a conservative and 
hostile to the League. The insurrection spread to all the factory 
districts; nowhere did the urban authorities (on whom everything 
depends in England in such cases, as is well known), who were all 
members of the Anti-Corn [Law] League, offer any resistance. So 
far everything proceeded as the League wanted. But in one 
respect it had miscalculated. The people, whom it had driven 
into insurrection in order to force the abolition of the Corn Laws, 
did not care in the least about these laws. They demanded the 
wages of 1840 and the People's Charter.239 As soon as the League 
noticed this, it turned against its allies. All its members were sworn 
in as special constables and formed a new army for the suppres­
sion of the insurrection, at the service of the government that was 
hostile to them. The involuntary insurrection of the people, who 
were not yet at all prepared for anything of the sort, was soon 
suppressed; the Corn Laws remained in force, and both the 
middle class and the people were given a profitable lesson. The 
Anti-Corn Law League, in order to furnish conspicuous proof that 
it had not been defeated by the failure of the insurrection, started 
a new large-scale campaign in 1843, with the demand for con­
tributions from its members amounting to £50,000, and it 
amassed more than this sum in the course of a year. It began its 
agitation afresh, but it soon found itself compelled to seek a new 
audience. It always made a great boast that it found nothing more 
to do in the factory districts after 1843 and could therefore turn 
to the agricultural districts. But there was a snag to this. After the 
insurrection of 1842 it could no longer hold any public meetings 
in the factory districts without its representatives being most 

=====第685页=====
660 Frederick Engels 
ignominiously driven from the platform and literally beaten up by 
the angry people whom it had so shamefully betrayed. Conse­
quently, if it wanted to propagate its doctrines, it was compelled 
to go to the agricultural districts. Here the League was of 
some real service by arousing among the tenant-farmers a certain 
feeling of shame at their dependence hitherto on the landowners, 
and by making the agricultural class aware of more general 
interests. In 1844, encouraged by its success with previous contri­
butions, the League opened a new subscription list of £100,000. 
On the following day the manufacturers in Manchester assembled 
and within half an hour had subscribed £12,000. By Novem­
ber 1844, £82,000 had been collected, of which £57,000 had 
already been spent. A few months later the League opened an 
exhibition in London, which also must have brought in enormous 
sums.  If now one asks what has been the motive of this colossal 
movement, which has spread from Manchester to the whole of 
England and has carried with it the vast majority of the English 
middle class, but which—we repeat—has not received an atom of 
sympathy from the working class, it must be acknowledged that this 
motive is the private interest of the industrial and commercial 
middle class of Great Britain. For this class it is of the greatest 
importance to have a system which, as it believes at least, ensures it 
for all time a world monopoly of trade and industry by enabling it 
to pay just as low wages as its competitors and to exploit all the 
advantages that England possesses as a result of its 80 years' start 
in the development of modern industry. From this point of view 
the middle class alone, and not the people, benefits from the 
abolition of the Corn Laws. Secondly, the middle class demands 
this measure as a supplementary law to the Reform Bill. Through 
the Reform Bill, which introduced suffrage based on a property 
qualification and abolished the old electoral privileges of particular 
individuals and corporations, the monied middle class had come, in 
principle, to power. In reality, however, the landowning class still 
retained a considerable preponderance in Parliament since it sends 
there directly 143 members for the counties and indirectly almost all 
the members representing small towns, and is represented in 
addition by the Tory members from the towns. In 1841, this 
majority of the agricultural interest brought  Peel  and the Tories into 
the cabinet. The abolition of the Corn Laws would deal a fatal 
blow to the political power of the landowners in the Lower House, 
and hence in fact in the whole English legislature, since it would 
make the tenant-farmers independent of the landowners. It would 
proclaim capital to be the supreme power in England, but at the 

=====第686页=====
History of the English Corn Laws 661 
same time it would shake the English Constitution to its founda­
tions;  it would rob an essential constituent of the legislative body, 
viz. the landed aristocracy, of all wealth and all power, and 
thereby exert a different and greater influence on the future of 
England than many other political measures. Once again, however, 
we find that from this aspect too the abolition of the Corn Laws' 
offers no advantage to the people. 
Written in the autumn of 1845 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the journal Published in English for the first 
Telegraph für Deutschland Nos. 193 time 
and 194, December 1845 
The name of the author is given 
in the editorial note 

=====第687页=====

=====第688页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY 
MATERIALS 

=====第689页=====

=====第690页=====
Karl Marx 
HEGELS CONSTRUCTION 
OF THE PHENOMENOLOGY 240 
1) Self-consciousness instead of man. Subject—object. 
2) The differences of things are unimportant, because substance is 
conceived as self-distinction or because self-distinction, the distin­
guishing, the mental activity is regarded as the essential. Within the 
framework of speculation Hegel therefore makes distinctions that 
really grasp the vital point. 
3) Abolition of estrangement is identified with abolition of objectivity 
(an aspect evolved by Feuerbach in particular). 
4) Your abolition of the imagined object, of the object as object of 
consciousness, is identified with the real objective abolition, with 
sensuous action, practice and real activity as distinct from thinking. 
(Has still to be developed.) 
Written presumably in November 1844 Printed according to the manuscript 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Published in English for the first 
Gesamtausgabe, Abt. l, Bd. 5, 1932 time 

=====第691页=====
Karl Marx 
DRAFT PLAN 
FOR A WORK ON THE MODERN STATE 
1) The history of the origin of the modern state or the French 
Revolution. 
The self-conceit of the political sphere—to mistake itself 
for the ancient state. The attitude of the revolutionaries towards 
civil society. All elements exist in duplicate form, as civic elements 
and [those of] the state. 
2) The proclamation of the rights of man and the constitution of the 
state. Individual freedom and public authority. 
Freedom, equality and unity. Sovereignty of the people. 
3) State and civil society. 
4) The representative state and the charter. 
The constitutional representative state, the democratic representa­
tive state. 
5) Division of power. Legislative and executive power. 
6) Legislative power and the legislative bodies. Political clubs. 
7) Executive power. Centralisation and hierarchy. Centralisation 
and political civilisation. Federal system and industrialism. State 
administration and local government. 
8') Judicial power and law. 
8") Nationality and the people. 
9')The political parties. 
^Suffrage, the fight for the abolition of the state and of 
bourgeois society. 
Written presumably in November 1844 
First published in: Marx/Engels, Gesam­
tausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 5, 1932 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第692页=====
Karl Marx 
PLAN OF THE "LIBRARY OF THE BEST 
FOREIGN SOCIALIST WRITERS" 242 
Morelly Cercle  soc[ial\ 24* B entkam 
Mably Hébert Godwin 
Babeuf 
Buonarroti Jac. Roux* 
Ledere 
Holbach Helvétius 
St. Simon Fourier Helvétius 
St. Simon 
Owen 
(La lande) 
Considérant Writings 
of the School 
Producteur. Globe. 
Cabet Dézamy. Gay. 
and x 
"Fraternité", l'égalitaire, etc. 
l'humanitaire  244 
Proudhon 
Written between March 7 and 17, 1845 Printed according to the manu 
First published in: Marx/Engels,  Gesamt­
ausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 5, 1932 script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
In the manuscript: Leroux. Presumably a slip of the  pen.—Ed. 

=====第693页=====
Karl Marx 
FROM THE NOTEBOOK 245 
The divine egoist as opposed to egoistical man. 
The delusion regarding the ancient state prevailing during 
the revolution. 
"Concept' and "substance". 
The revolution=history  of the origin of the modern state. 
Written presumably in April 1845 
First published in: German 
in Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, 
Abt. 1, Bd. 5, 1932 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第694页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第695页=====

=====第696页=====
1 
TO THE READERS OF AND CONTRIBUTORS 
TO THE GESELLSCHAFTSSPIEGEL 246 
The noble striving to hasten to the aid of suffering humanity, 
which, to the credit of the 19th century, manifests itself 
everywhere at the present time, has not yet in Germany a central 
press organ giving publicity on the one hand to the evils which 
must be remedied, and on the other to the proposed or already 
implemented measures for their redress, and casting light on their 
success or failure. We hereby submit to the public the first issue of 
such an organ, and hope that every friend of humanity will feel 
prompted to support the Gesellschaftsspiegel with appropriate 
reports. 
In order to discover and apply the means for the radical and 
permanent elimination of the various and moreover artificially 
concealed evils in our social life, it is necessary first of all to find 
out what these evils are. For this reason the  Gesellschaftsspiegel  will 
cite before its' forum all the maladies of the social body; it will 
publish general descriptions, monographs, statistical items, and 
individual typical cases serving to set the social relations of all the 
classes in their true light and to help the associations which are 
being formed to eliminate the social evils; it will stand exclusively 
on the ground of fact, and carry only facts and arguments based 
directly on facts, arguments the conclusions from which are also 
obvious facts. 
The condition of the working  classes  will be first and foremost the 
object of our attention, for their condition is the most glaring of 
all evils in present-day civilised society. Descriptions, statistical 
data, individual striking facts from all parts of Germany, especially 
from those in which unusual distress prevails, will be welcome. 
Also reports on the numerical relation of the needy classes, the 

=====第697页=====
672 Appendices 
propertyless classes in general, to the propertied; on the growth of 
pauperism, and so on. 
We shall include in the range of our survey the spiritual, 
intellectual and moral condition of the workers as well as their 
physical condition, and shall readily accept reports on the state of 
their health insofar as it is determined by the social conditions, 
and on the state of education and morality of the proletarians. 
Statistics on crime and prostitution, especially when accompanied 
by comparison of different periods of time, localities or living 
conditions, will also be given close attention. 
The most fruitful fields for the purposes of the Gesellschafts­
spiegel in this respect are: 
1) The large towns, which cannot exist without a numerous 
propertyless class crowded together in a small area. Besides the 
usual consequences which the absence of property entails 
everywhere, we shall have to consider here the effect which this 
centralisation of the population has on the physical, intellectual, 
and moral condition of the working classes. Descriptions, statisti­
cal, medical, and other reports along with individual facts casting 
light on the "disreputable areas", mostly shrouded in darkness, of 
our towns, large and small, will be welcome. 
2) The industrial and factory districts, whose existence also requires 
a numerous propertyless class. In this respect we wish to draw the 
attention of our contributors particularly to the following points: 
(a) The nature of work in  itself:  individual kinds of work which 
owing to their character or to the unsuitable way in which they are 
carried out or to the excessively long working hours are injurious 
to health; child and woman labour in factories and its conse­
quences; neglect of working and non-working children and wives of 
proletarians, breaking up of the family, supplanting of adult male 
labour by women and children, accidents caused by machinery, 
and so on. 
(b) Dependence of the workers on their employers. In respect of this 
point we shall make it our duty to represent the interests of the 
defenceless working class against the power and especially against 
the unfortunately too frequent encroachments of the capitalists. 
We shall pitilessly hold up for public censure every single case of 
oppression of workers and shall be particularly grateful to our 
correspondents for most accurate reports on this subject giving 
names, places and dates. If in factories working hours are too long 
or night work is resorted to, if workers are obliged to clean ma­
chines in their spare time, if factory-owners are brutal or 
tyrannical towards their workers, lay down tyrannical working 

=====第698页=====
Appendices 673 
regulations, pay wages in goods instead of money—we shall 
especially fight this infamous truck system3 wherever and in 
whatever forms or disguises it occurs—if workers are forced to 
work in unhealthy premises or to live in unsatisfactory lodgings 
belonging to the factory-owner—in a word, whenever any act of 
injustice is committed by the capitalists against the workers, we ask 
everybody who is in a position to do so to inform us on this score 
as soon and as exactly as possible. We want to make known to the 
public in the most exact and shameful details each and every 
violation of the laws that have been issued to protect the poor 
from the rich. Only in this way can the laws, which have so far 
existed mostly on paper, be made really effective. 
(c) Neglect of the  workers  by society in general when, as a result of 
competition, the introduction of more efficient machinery, the em­
ployment of women and children, the fluctuations of trade and 
foreign competition the workers are deprived of employment, or 
when due to illness, injury or old age they are unable to work, as 
well as all deteriorations in the workers' living conditions due to 
lowering of wages. 
Besides the  propertyless,  we shall also describe the propertied class 
in its outer and inner conditions. We shall have to prove with facts 
that free competition  between  private businessmen without organisation of 
labour and commerce impoverishes the middle class, concentrating 
property in the hands of a few and thus indirectly restoring 
the monopoly; that the parcelling out of landed property ruins the 
small landowner and indirectly restores big landed property; that 
the competitive struggle, in which we are all being involved, 
undermines the foundations of  society  and demoralises the whole of  society 
by brutal self-interest. 
The Gesellschaftsspiegel  will not confine itself to describing mate­
rial misery, or spiritual and moral misery only when it goes hand 
in hand with the former; on the contrary, it will describe misery in 
all its forms, and therefore also the misery of the higher classes; 
and in this description it will not confine itself to statistical articles 
and accounts of real facts taken from life; it will open its columns 
to fiction in prose and in verse, but only to such as depicts life 
truly. Descriptions based on life will be no less welcome than 
descriptions taken from life. 
Let those to whom such a pitiless exposure of the condition of our 
industrial as well as agricultural and other population—a condi­
tion which has so far been for the most part hypocritically glossed 
a The words "truck system" are in English in the original.— Ed. 

=====第699页=====
674 Appendices 
over or concealed—those to whom so frank a presentation of our 
entire social condition as the one the  Gesellschaftsspiegel  intends to 
give causes too great head and heartache for them to be 
favourably disposed to our undertaking, let them reflect that in 
the long run the courage required to look an evil in the face and 
the calm derived from a clear knowledge of things have a more 
beneficial effect on mind and heart than the cowardly idealising 
sentimentality which seeks consolation from disconsolate reality in 
the falsehood of its ideal, which neither exists nor can  exist  because it 
is based on illusions] Such idealising sentimentality indeed displays 
hypocritical sympathy for the sufferings of humanity when these 
eventually develop into a political scandal—as we saw all the 
newspapers and journals overflowing with so-called socialism in 
connection with the Silesian disturbances 247—but as soon as the 
disturbances are over, it quietly lets the poor go on starving. 
Finally, the Gesellschaftsspiegel will carry reports on the efforts 
being made to remedy the social evils and the disorders of society, 
that is, on the one hand, the work of the associations now being 
formed? 48 and on the other, the coercive measures which hold some 
evils in check, but only to produce others. These include the 
pernicious effects of the degrading sentences which place a criminal 
for ever outside the pale of society, of intercourse with hardened 
criminals in ordinary prisons and of solitary confinement in 
Pennsylvania-type prisons, the numerous murders resulting from 
the laws against poaching; the state and operation of the poor laws 
and the sanitary police; the typical crimes, and so on. 
In appealing to all who are in a position to send us reports on 
the above-mentioned and similar points to be laid before the 
forum of the Gesellschaftsspiegel, in particular to priests, school­
teachers, doctors and officials, for friendly co-operation in the 
interest of the cause, we guarantee that whenever it is desired 
names will be kept secret and we shall hold our correspondents 
responsible only for the  correctness  of the facts of which they inform us. 
The editorial board assumes the responsibility for publication. 
Written at the end of January 1845 Printed according to the journal 
Published in the annual  Gesellschaftsspiegel,  Published in English for the first 
Bd. 1, 1845 time 

=====第700页=====
Appendices 675 
2 
CONTRACT 
BETWEEN MARX AND THE LESKE PUBLISHERS 
IN DARMSTADT ON THE PUBLICATION 
OF KRITIK DER POLITIK UND NATIONALÖKONOMIE 249 
Between Herr Dr. Marx, at present residing in Paris, on the one 
hand, and the C.W. Leske Publishers in Darmstadt, on the other, 
the following Contract has been concluded today. 
§ 1. Herr Dr. Marx gives the C.W. Leske Publishers the exclusive 
right to publish his work entitled Kritik der Politik und National­
ökonomie, which will comprise two volumes in octavo, each of more 
than twenty printed sheets. 
§ 2. The Author, Dr. Marx, undertakes not to publish in 
another publishing house any work which could compete with the 
work named herein. 
§ 3. In return, the Leske Publishers will pay Herr Dr. Marx the 
sum of francs 3,000 (three thousand francs) as royalties for the entire 
work, the first half of this sum to be paid when the complete 
Manuscript is handed in, and the second half on completion of the 
printing. The Publishers also undertake to deliver twelve copies 
free of charge to the Author. 
§ 4. The Publishers will begin the printing of the work as soon 
as the Manuscript is handed in and will see to it that it appears in 
a suitable get-up. 
§ 5. The edition of the Kritik der Politik und Nationalökonomie is 
fixed at 2,000 copies. 
§ 6. This Contract is valid only for the first edition of the work. 
Should a second edition become necessary, a new contract will be 
concluded. It goes without saying, however, that in the event of a 
second edition the Leske Publishers retain a preferential right. 
This Contract has been drawn up in duplicate and is signed by 
both contracting parties. 
Paris,  February 1, 1845 Dr. Karl Marx 
C. Leske 
First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Printed according to the manu-
Works, First Russ. ed., Vol. XXV, 1934 script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第701页=====
676 Appendices 
3 
MARX TO LEOPOLD I, KING OF BELGIUM, 
IN BRUSSELS250 
Brussels, February 7, 1845 
24, Place du petit sablon 
Sire, 
The undersigned, Charles Marx, Doctor of Philosophy, aged 26, 
from Trier, in the Kingdom of Prussia, intending to settle with his 
wife and child in Your Majesty's domains, respectfully takes the 
liberty of requesting Your Majesty to grant him permission to 
establish his residence in Belgium. He has the honour to be, with 
deepest respect, 
Your Majesty's most humble and obedient servant, 
Dr. Charles Marx 
First published in L'Europe Nouvelle Printed according to the manu-
No. 346,1924 script 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第702页=====
Appendices 677 
4 
MARX'S UNDERTAKING NOT TO PUBLISH ANYTHING 
IN BELGIUM ON CURRENT POLITICS251 
To obtain permission to reside in Belgium I agree to pledge 
myself,  on my word of honour, not to publish in Belgium any 
work on current politics. 
March 22, 1845 Dr. Karl Marx 
First published in L'Europe Nouvelle Printed according to the manu-
No. 346, 1924 script 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第703页=====
678 Appendices 
MARX TO CHIEF BURGOMASTER GÖRTZ 
IN TRIER 252 
Brussels, October 17 [1845] 
Rue de l'Alliance 5, hors de la 
Porte du Louvain 
Your Excellency, 
I most respectfully request you kindly to obtain for me from the 
esteemed royal government administration in Trier a certificate 
for emigration to the United States of North America. My 
discharge papers from royal Prussian military service253 are to be 
found in the office of the Chief Burgomaster in Trier or of the 
royal government administration there. 
Your Excellency's most obedient servant, 
Dr. Karl Marx 
First published in the pamphlet: 
H. Schiel, Die Umwelt des jungen 
Karl Marx, Trier, 1954 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 

=====第704页=====
Appendices 679 
MARX TO CHIEF BURGOMASTER GORTZ 
IN TRIER 
To His Excellency Herr Görtz, Royal Prussian Landrat 
and Chief Burgomaster 
Your Excellency, 
In reply to your esteemed letter of the 8th of this month I 
hereby state that my request of the 17th of the previous month for 
release from citizenship of the Kingdom of Prussia for the purpose 
of emigration to the United States of North America related solely 
to my own person, but, if it should be  necessary  for granting  consent,  I 
request that the release should be extended to my family as well. 
Your Excellency's most obedient servant, 
Dr. Karl Marx 
Brussels, November 10, 1845 
First published in the pamphlet: 
H. Schiel, Die Umwelt des  jungen 
Karl Marx, Trier, 1954 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 

=====第705页=====

=====第706页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第707页=====

=====第708页=====
NOTES 
The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co. is the 
first joint work of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels. At the end of August 1844, 
Engels, on his way back from Manchester to Barmen, stopped over in Paris, where 
he had his second meeting with Marx, a meeting which marked the beginning of 
their collaboration as authors. 
During the ten days which Engels spent in Paris, he and Marx agreed to publish 
a criticism of the representatives of the Young Hegelian trend. They drew up the 
plan of a book which they at first called A Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno 
Bauer and Co., divided the sections between themselves and wrote the Foreword. 
Engels wrote his sections before leaving Paris. Marx, whose share comprised the 
bigger part of the book, continued to work on it till the end of November 1844, 
considerably increasing the size of the book and drawing on his "Economic and 
Philosophic Manuscripts", on which he had been working during the spring and 
summer of 1844, as well as on his studies of the history of the French Revolution 
and his notes and summaries. During the printing of the book, Marx, on the advice 
of the publisher Löwenthal, added to the title the words "The Holy Family". The 
book was published in February 1845 in Frankfurt am Main by the Literarische 
Anstalt (J. Rütten) publishers. The table of contents (see contents of this volume, pp. 
v-xi) showed which sections had been written by Marx and which by Engels. The fact 
that the book, though of small format, exceeded twenty printed sheets in volume, 
exempted it from preliminary censorship in accordance with the regulations 
operating at the time in a number of German states. 
"The Holy Family" is a sarcastic nickname for the Bauer brothers and their 
followers who supported the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung published in Charlotten-
burg from the end of 1843 to October 1844. While attacking the Bauers and other 
Young Hegelians, Marx and Engels at the same time critically analysed the idealist 
philosophy of Hegel  himself. 
Marx had shown his disagreement with the Young Hegelians already in the 
autumn of 1842 when, as an editor of the Rheinische Zeitung, he opposed the 
publication of superficial and pretentious articles submitted by the outwardly 
ultra-radical Berlin circle of "The Free" (Edgar Bauer, Max Stirner, Eduard Meyen 
and others). During the two years which had elapsed since Marx's clash with "The 
Free",  Marx's and Engels' disagreement with the Young Hegelians on questions of 

=====第709页=====
684 Notes 
theory and politics had deepened still more. This was accounted for not only by the 
transition of Marx and Engels to materialism and communism, but also by the 
evolution which had taken place during that time in the ideas of the Bauer brothers 
and their fellow-thinkers. In the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung Bauer and his group 
renounced the "radicalism of 1842" and, besides professing subjective idealist 
views,  and counterposing chosen personalities, the bearers of „pure Criticism", to 
the allegedly sluggish and inert masses, they began spreading the ideas of moderate 
liberal philanthropy. Marx's draft of the Preface of his "Economic and Philosophic 
Manuscripts" shows that already in the summer of 1844 he saw in the evolution of 
the Young Hegelians' views a degeneration of that initially progressive trend, a 
deepening of the features of mysticism and transcendentalism peculiar to Hegel's 
idealism, the disintegration of the Hegelian school (see present edition, Vol. 3, 
p. 233). 
It was to exposure of the Young Hegelians' views in the form which they had 
acquired in 1844 and to defence of their own new materialistic and communistic 
outlook that Marx and Engels decided to devote their first joint work. 
The appearance of The Holy Family evoked a lively response in the German 
press.  It was pointed out that this work was the most profound and the most forceful 
of all that Marx and Engels had recently written {Mannheimer Abend-Zeitung, March 
25, 1845), that it expressed socialist views, since it criticised the "inadequacy of any 
half-measures directed at eliminating the social ailments of our time" {Kölnische 
Zeitung, March 21, 1845). 
Reactionary circles immediately discerned the book's revolutionary trend. As 
early as December 1844, when the work was still printing, it was denounced in 
reports by Metternich's agents. The conservative Allgemeine Zeitung, polemising 
against the assessment of The Holy Family given by the Kölnische Zeitung, wrote with 
irritation on April 8, 1845, that in this book "every line preaches revolt... against the 
state,  the church, the family, legality, religion and property", that in it "prominence 
is given to the most radical and the most open communism, and this is all the more 
dangerous as Mr. Marx cannot be denied either extremely broad knowledge or the 
ability to make use of the polemical arsenal of Hegel's logic, what is customarily 
called 'iron logic'". A month and a half later, on May 23, 1845, the Allgemeine 
Zeitung again censured the Kölnische Zeitung for publishing a favourable opinion of 
The Holy Family. 
Bruno Bauer's attempt to refute the criticism publicly (in the article "Charak­
teristik Ludwig Feuerbachs", published in Wigand's Vierteljahrsschrift, Leipzig, 1845, 
Bd. Ill) boiled down essentially to asserting that he had not been correctly 
understood. Marx replied to this "anti-criticism" of Bauer's with an article 
published in the journal  Gesellschaftsspiegel,  Elberfeld, January 1846 (see present 
edition, Vol. 5), which partly coincided in content with the section "Der Heilige 
Bruno gegen die Autoren der 'Heiligen Familie'" in Chapter 2 ("Der Heilige 
Bruno") of the first volume of The German Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5). 
During the lifetimes of Marx and Engels The Holy Family was not published in 
English. Only part of subsection d), "Critical Battle Against French Materialism", of 
Chapter VI, was reproduced by Engels in the Introduction to the 1892 English 
edition of Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (the German version of this introduction 
was published in Die Neue Zeit in 1895 under the title "Über den französischen 
Materialismus des XVIII. Jahrhunderts"). 
In the English language The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism, was 
published for the first time in 1956 by the Foreign Languages Publishing House, 
now Progress Publishers, Moscow, in the translation by Richard Dixon. The literary 
features of the work include the broad use of citations from French authors (Eugène 

=====第710页=====
Notes 685 
Sue, Pierre Joseph Proudhon, and others) in the language of the original, alongside 
citations translated into German, as well as the use of individual expressions in 
foreign languages, especially French. This feature is preserved in the present 
edition, the translations of the citations being given in footnotes. Emphasis in the 
citations (printed in clear-face italics or bold-face italics in cases of special emphasis) 
mostly belongs to Marx and Engels, who often translated the citations with 
abridgments. Title-page 
The reference is to the review made by the bookbinder C.Reichardt of A. T 
Woeniger's Publicistische Abhandlungen, Berlin, 1843. The review was published in 
the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft I, December 1843 and Heft II, January 1844, 
under the general title "Schriften über den Pauperismus" and mentioned the 
author's profession. The short excerpts and individual expressions quoted by 
Engels below and at the end of Chapter I are taken from this review. p. 9 
3 Here and elsewhere Engels quotes Reichardt's reviews of C. Briiggemann's book, 
Preussens Beruf in der deutschen Staats-Entwickelung, und die nächsten Bedingungen zu 
seiner Erfüllung, Berlin, 1843 and A. Benda's Katechismus für  wahlberechtigte  Bürger in 
Preussen, Berlin, 1843. Both reviews were published in the Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844. p. 9 
The chapter contains a critical analysis of Julius Faucher's article, "Englische 
Tagesfragen", which was published in tjie Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VII, 
June 1844, Heft VIII, July 1844 (with the subtitle "Fortsetzung. Lord Ashley's 
Amendment") and Heft IX, August 1844 (with the subtitle "Fortsetzung. Ricardos 
Motion in Betreff der Einfuhrzölle"). The excerpts and expressions cited below 
were taken by Engels from this article. 
The word Mühleigner, a literal translation of the English "mill-owner", does not 
exist in German. Engels here ridicules J. Faucher's way of using in his articles words 
which he himself coins after the English manner (see p. 16 of this volume), p. 12 
The national Anti-Corn Law League was founded in 1838 by the Manchester 
manufacturers Cobden and Bright. The English Corn Laws, first adopted in the 
15th century, imposed high tariffs on agricultural imports in order to maintain high 
prices for them on the home market. In the first third of the 19th century, 1815, 
1822,  and later several laws were passed changing the conditions for corn imports, 
and in 1828 a sliding scale was introduced which raised import tariffs on corn when 
prices in the home market declined and, on the other hand, lowered tariffs when 
the home market prices rose. 
The League widely exploited the popular discontent over the raising of corn 
prices. In its efforts to obtain the repeal of the Corn Laws and the establishment of 
complete freedom of trade, it aimed at weakening the economic and political 
positions of the landed aristocracy and lowering the cost of living thus making 
possible a lowering of the workers' wages. 
The struggle between the industrial bourgeoisie and the landed aristocracy over 
the Corn Laws ended in 1846 with the repeal of these laws. p. 13 
6 The struggle for legislation limiting the working day to ten hours started in England 
as early as the late 18th century and spread by the 1830s to the mass of the industrial 
workers. The representatives of the landed aristocracy saw their chance to use this 
popular slogan against the industrial bourgeoisie and supported the Ten Hour Bill 
in Parliament; the "Tory philanthropist" Lord Ashley headed the supporters of the 
Bill in Parliament from 1833. The Ten Hour Bill, applicable only to youths and 
women, was not passed until 1847. p. 14 
23-762 

=====第711页=====
686 Notes 
9 
10 7 When an important question is being discussed, the House of Commons sits in 
"Committee of the Whole House", which is tantamount to a closed sitting; in this 
case the function of committee chairman is performed by one of the Members 
named in the list of committee chairmen and appointed by the speaker. p. 14 
8 The reference is to the speech made during the debate on the Ten Hour Bill in the 
House of Commons on March 15, 1844, by Sir James Graham, Home Secretary in 
Sir Robert Peel's Tory cabinet (Hansard's Parliamentary Debates. Third Series, Vol. 
LXXIII). p. 15 
It was with the letter "J", the first letter of "Jungnitz", that the article "Herr 
Nauwerck und die philosophische Fakultät", published in the Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844, was signed. The publication of this article was preceded 
by E. Jungnitz's review of Karl Nauwerck's book Über die Teilnahme am Staate, 
Leipzig, 1844 (Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft IV, March 1844). Engels took the 
short excerpts given below from this article. p. 17 
The reference is to the dismissal of Bruno Bauer, whom the Prussian Government 
deprived, temporarily in October 1841 and permanently in March 1842, of the 
right to lecture in Bonn University because of his works criticising the Bible. 
p. 17 
The excerpts cited in this paragraph are from the anonymous article "Proudhon" 
published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844. Its author was 
Edgar Bauer. Marx gives a detailed critical analysis of this article in section 4 of 
Chapter IV. E. Bauer's phrase "the tranquillity of knowledge" was ironically 
played up also in other sections of this chapter written by Marx and Engels. 
p. 18 
In this section Engels analyses and cites a review by Edgar Bauer in the Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844, of Flora Tristan's Union ouvrière, Paris, 1843. 
p. 19 
In this section Engels deals with Edgar Bauer's review of F. F. A. Béraud's  Les filles 
publiques de Paris et la police qui les régit, t. MI, Paris et Leipzig, 1839. This review 
was published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844, under the 
title "Be'raud über die Freudenmädchen". p. 20 
In this section Marx criticised and cited Edgar Bauer's article "Die Romane der 
Verfasserin von Godwie Castle", published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft 
II, January 1844, and devoted to an analysis of the works of the German novelist 
Henriette von Paalzow. • p. 21 
Marx compares with Edgar Bauer's article "Proudhon" (Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844), which he criticises and cites in this section, excerpts 
from the second, 1841, edition of Proudhon's Qu'est-ce que la  propriété?  ou Recherches 
sur le principe du droit  et du gouvernement. Premier mémoire (the first edition appeared 
in 1840 in Paris). Marx quotes Proudhon's book sometimes from the French 
original, sometimes in his own German translation. 
Marx later made a comprehensive critical appraisal of this work of Proudhon's 
in his article "Über Proudhon", which was published as a letter to Schweitzer, 
editor of the Social-Demokrat, in 1865. p. 23 
The "Reformists" were a party of radical opponents of the July monarchy. The 
party consisted of democratic republicans and petty-bourgeois Socialists grouped 13 
14 
15 

=====第712页=====
Notes 687 
22 round the Paris newspaper La Réforme. The leaders of the Réforme party included 
Ledru-Rollin and Louis Blanc. p. 25 
Digests or Pandects were part of a compendium of Roman civil law (Corpus iuris 
civilis) compiled in 528-34 by Emperor Justinian I of the Eastern Roman Empire. 
They contained extracts from the works of prominent Roman jurists on civil law. 
p. 30 
Here and to the end of the subsection "Characterising Translation No. 4" Marx 
compared citations from Bauer's article with excerpts from another work by 
Proudhon, Avertissement aux propriétaires, ou Lettre à M. Considérant, rédacteur de la 
Phalange, sur une défense de la propriété. In content this book was close to 
Proudhon's Qu'est-ce que la propriété?, the closing section of which, "Deuxième 
mémoire. Lettre à M. Blanqui, professeur d'économie politique au  conservatoire  des arts et 
métiers. Sur la propriété", is quoted above. p. 50 
The quotations are from an anonymous review of Thiers' book Geschichte der 
französischen Revolution which was published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, 
Heft VIII, July 1844. In "Critical Comment No. 5", Marx continues giving 
quotations from Edgar Bauer's article on Proudhon (Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, 
Heft V), comparing them with extracts from Proudhon's book Qu'est-ce que la 
propriété? p. 51 
This chapter deals with and quotes from the review written by the Young Hegelian 
Szeliga (the pen-name of F. Z. Zychlinski) on the French writer Eugène Sue's novel 
Les mystères de Paris, which was published in 1843 and became well known as a 
sample of sentimental social fantasy woven into an adventure plot. 
Szeliga's review was printed in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VII, June 
1844,  under the title: "Eugen Sue: Die Geheimnisse von Paris. Kritik von Szeliga". 
Marx continues the critical analysis of this article in Chapter VIII. 
The excerpts from Sue's novel in the two chapters are given by Marx either in 
French or in German translation. p. 55 
The reference is to the Charte constitutionnelle which was adopted in France after the 
bourgeois revolution of 1830 and was the basic law of the July monarchy. 
In its fundamental principles the Charte constitutionnelle reproduced the 
constitutional charter of 1814, but the preamble of the 1814 charter, which spoke 
of the constitution being granted ("octroyée") by the king, was omitted and the 
rights of the upper and lower chambers were extended at the expense of certain 
royal prerogatives. According to the new constitution the king was considered only 
as the head of the executive authority and was deprived of the right to abrogate or 
suspend laws. 
The expression "Charte vérité" is an ironical allusion to the concluding words of 
Louis Philippe's proclamation of July 31, 1830: "henceforth the charter shall be 
the truth." p. 56 
Here and elsewhere quotations are made from Bruno Bauer's anonymous article, 
"Neueste Schriften über die Judenfrage", which was published in the Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft I, December 1843. This article was Bruno Bauer's reply to 
criticism in the press of his book Die Judenfrage, Braunschweig, 1843, which was a 
reprint, with some additions, of his articles on the same subject published in the 
journal Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst in November 1842. 
Marx gave a critical analysis of this book in his article "On the Jewish Question", 
which was carried by the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher (see present edition, Vol. 

=====第713页=====
688 Notes 
3). Later Bauer replied to criticism of his book in an article he published in the 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung. In The Holy Family Marx ironically designates that 
article as "The Jewish Question No. 1", and the following articles  as "The Jewish 
Question No. 2" and "The Jewish Question No. 3". p. 79 
Ludwig Feuerbach's "Vorläufige Thesen zur Reformation der Philosophie" was 
written in January 1842 and prohibited by the censor in Germany. It was published 
in 1843 in Switzerland in the second volume of the collection, Anekdota zur neuesten 
deutschen Philosophie und Publicistik. This two-volume collection also contained 
articles by Karl Marx, Bruno Bauer, Friedrich Koppen, Arnold Rüge, and others. 
p. 83 
Doctrinaires—a group of French bourgeois politicians during the Restoration 
(1815-1830). They were constitutional monarchists, enemies of the democratic and 
revolutionary movement and wished to unite the bourgeoisie and the nobility. 
Their ideal was a political system after the English model, formalising these two 
privileged classes' monopoly of governmental power in opposition to the broad 
"uneducated" and propertyless sections. The best known Doctrinaires were the 
historian François Guizot and the philosopher Pierre Paul Royer-Collard. p. 85 
Concerning Reply No. L, Bruno Bauer's first article against critics of his Die 
Judenfrage, see Note 22. In this article Bauer polemises with the authors of a 
number of reviews on his book, as well as with the authors of books and pamphlets, 
including the following: Die Judenfrage von Bruno Bauer näher  beleuchtet,  by Dr. 
Gustav Philippson, Dessau, 1843; Briefe zur Beleuchtung der Judenfrage von Bruno 
Bauer, by Dr. Samuel Hirsch, Leipzig, 1843; Literaturblatt  des Orients, 1843, No. 25 
& ff. (Recension der Judenfrage von Bruno Bauer und der Briefe von Hirsch); Der 
Israelit des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, published by Dr. M. Hess, 1843, and others. 
p. 87 
This quotation is from Bruno Bauer's third article in reply to criticisms of his book 
Die Judenfrage. The article, a polemic against Marx and his work "Zur Judenfrage", 
published in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, was printed anonymously in the 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 1844, under the title: "Was ist jetzt der 
Gegenstand der Kritik?" Below Marx resumes his quotations from and criticism of 
Bruno Bauer's first article, "Neueste Schriften über die Judenfrage" published 
in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft I, December 1843. P- 88 
The allusion here is to the five Napoleonic codes. p. 90 
Here and elsewhere Marx criticises and quotes Bruno Bauer's review of the first 
volume of a course of lectures by the right Hegelian Hinrichs: Politische 
Vorlesungen, Bd. I-II, Halle, 1843. This review appeared anonymously in the 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft I, December 1843. Subsequently the same 
monthly (Heft V, April 1844) carried Bauer's reviews of the second volume of 
lectures, which is analysed in the same chapter of The Holy Family under the title: 
"Hinrichs No. 2. 'Criticism' and 'Feuerbach'. Condemnation of Philosophy." 
p. 90 
Here and elsewhere Engels quotes and analyses Bauer's anonymous review of the 
second volume of Hinrichs' lectures. The review was printed in the Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844. p. 92 
Here and elsewhere Marx quotes and analyses Bauer's second article in reply to 
criticism of his Die Judenfrage. It was printed anonymously under the same title as 
the first— "Neueste Schriften über die Judenfrage" — in the Allgemeine Literatur-

=====第714页=====
Notes 689 
31 
32 
33 
34 
35 
36 
37 
38 Zeitung, Heft IV, March 1844. The article analyses four polemical works, including 
Die Judenfrage. Gegen Bruno Bauer, by Dr. Gabriel Riesser in Hamburg, which 
appeared in Weil's Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher, 1843, Bd. 2 and 3. p. 94 
The reference is to the measures taken by the Convention against speculators in 
foodstuffs. In September 1793 the Convention decreed the establishment of a 
general maximum — fixed prices for the main food products and consumer 
articles; the death penalty was introduced for speculation in and concealment of 
products. p. 95 
"Was ist jetzt der Gegenstand der Kritik?" was the title of an article by Bruno 
Bauer printed anonymously in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 
1844.  It was the third polemical article against critics of his Die Judenfrage, in this 
case primarily against Marx's article "Zur Judenfrage" in the Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher. This article of Bauer's is quoted and analysed by Marx not only under 
the title "Absolute Criticism's Self-Apology. Its 'Political' Past" but also under 
the other titles in the section "Absolute Criticism's Third Campaign", p. 99 
In January 1843 the Young Hegelians'journal  Deutsche  Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft 
und Kunst, then appearing in Leipzig (up to July 1841 it had been published in the 
Prussian town of Halle under the title Hallische Jahrbücher für  Deutsche  Wissenschaft 
und Kunst), was closed down by the government of Saxony and prohibited 
throughout Germany by a decree of the Federal Diet. On January 19 of the same 
year the Prussian Government decided to forbid as of April 1, 1843, the publication 
of the Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und  Gewerbe,  which had been appearing 
in Cologne since January 1, 1842, and which, under the editorship of Marx (from 
October 1842), had acquired a revolutionary-democratic trend. Marx's resignation 
from the editorship on March 18, 1843, did not cause the government to rescind its 
decision, and the last issue appeared on March 31, 1843. p. 100 
Concerning Bruno Bauer's dismissal from the chair of theology, see Note 10. 
Bauer replied to the Government's repressive measures by the publication 'in 
Zurich and Winterthur in 1842 of the pamphlet: Die gute Sache der Freiheit und 
meine eigene Angelegenheit. p. 103 
The reference is to the review by Karl Christian Planck of Bauer's Kritik der 
evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker, Bd. 1-2, Leipzig, 1841, Bd. 3, Braunschweig, 
1842.  ("Synoptics" is the name given in the history of religion to the compilers of 
the first three Gospels.) The review was published in the Jahrbücher für 
wissenschaftliche Kritik, Berlin, June 1842, Nos. 107-114. Planck disputed Bauer's 
Young Hegelian theory on the origin of Christianity from the positions of the more 
moderate criticism of the Gospel sources given by Strauss. p. 103 
Marx has in mind the section of Hegel's book Phänomenologie des Geistes entitled 
"Die Kampf der Aufklärung mit dem Aberglauben". p. 103 
The article in question is Bruno Bauer's "Die Fähigkeit der heutigen Juden und 
Christen, frei zu werden", which was published in the collection Einundzwanzig 
Bogen aus der Schweiz, Zurich and Winterthur, 1843; along with the book Die 
Judenfrage (an enlarged edition of Bauer's articles on this subject first published in 
1842),  this article was subjected to a critical analysis by Marx in his article "Zur 
Judenfrage" in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher. p. 107 
The reference is to the attempt to unite the various Lutheran trends by means of 
the forced Union of 1817, when the Lutherans were united with the Reformed 

=====第715页=====
690 Notes 
(Calvinist) Church to form the Evangelical Church. The Old Lutherans, who 
opposed this union, seceded to form their own trend defending the "true" 
Lutheran Church. p. 112 
39 The reference is to the policy of de-christianisation pursued in France by Hebert 
and his supporters in the autumn of 1793. Outwardly it was expressed in the 
closing of churches and the renunciation of Catholic rites. The forcible methods 
used to implement these measures outraged believers, especially among the 
peasants. p. 114 
40 In their efforts to consolidate the Jacobin dictatorship, Robespierre and his 
supporters opposed the policy of de-christianisation. A decree of the Convention 
on December 6, 1793, prohibited "all violence or threats directed against the 
freedom of worship". p. 114 
41 Cercle  social— an organisation established by democratic intellectuals in Paris in the 
first years of the French Revolution. Its chief spokesman, Claude Fauchet, 
demanded an equalitarian division of the land, restrictions on large fortunes and 
employment for all able-bodied citizens. The criticism to which Fauchet and his 
supporters subjected the formal equality proclaimed in the documents of the 
French Revolution prepared the ground for bolder action in defence of the 
destitute by Jacques Roux, Théophile Leclerc and other members of the 
radical-plebeian "Enragés". p. 119 
Marx has in mind the Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française, t. 1-40, Paris, 
1834-38,  published by the French historian and publicist Ph. J. Bûchez jointly with 
P. C. Roux-Lavergne. It consisted of numerous documents. The introductory 
articles by Bûchez, a former Republican and pupil of Saint-Simon, who adopted 
the views of Christian Socialism in the 1830s, praised the Jacobins' activity and their 
revolutionary traditions but censured the steps taken by them against the Catholic 
clergy. p. 119 
Robespierre's speech, "Rapport sur les principes de morale politique qui doivent 
guider la Convention nationale dans l'administration intérieure de la République, 
fait au nom du comité de salut public, à la séance du 5 février (17 Pluviôse) 1794", 
is quoted according to the German translation of the Histoire parlementaire de la 
Révolution française, by Bûchez and Roux-Lavergne, t. 31, Paris, 1837. ' p. 121 
The report made by Saint-Just in the name of the Committees of Public Safety and 
of General Security at the Convention's sitting of March 31(11 Germinal), 1794, is 
quoted according to the German translation of the Histoire parlementaire de la 
Révolution française, by Bûchez and Roux-Lavergne, t. 32, Paris, 1837. p. 121 
True text of the report made by Saint-Just on the police at the Convention's sitting 
of April 15 (26 Germinal), 1794, was published in the Histoire parlementaire de la 
Révolution française, by Bûchez and Roux-Lavergne, t. 32, Paris, 1837. p. 121 
The Directory— the regime established in France as a result of the overthrow of the 
Jacobin government on July 27 (9 Thermidor), 1794, and the introduction on 
November 4, 1795, by the Thermidor Convention, of a new anti-democratic 
constitution. Supreme executive power was concentrated in the hands of five 
Directors. The Directory, whose rule was marked by the flowering of enterprise 
and speculation, remained in existence until the coup d'état of November 9 (18 
Brumaire), 1799, which completed the bourgeois counter-revolution and led to the 
personal rule of General Napoleon Bonaparte. p. 122 45 
46 

=====第716页=====
Notes 691 
48 
49 
50 The reference is apparently to the relevant articles in the Staats-Lexikon, oder 
Encyklopädie der Staatswissenschaften, Bd. 1-15, 1834-48, published by the German 
liberal historian C. Rotteck and the German liberal jwrist C. Welcker. Rotteck was 
also the author of the four-volume Allgemeine  Weltgeschichte  für alle Stände, von den 
frühesten Zeiten bis zum Jahre 1831, Stuttgart, 1833. p. 123 
The first complete edition of the work of P.J.G. Cabanis appeared in Paris in 1802. 
But a considerable part had been published in 1798 and 1799 in the Transactions 
of the French Academy, under the title: Traité du physique et du moral de l'homme. 
p. 126 
The Jansenists —named after the Dutch theologian Cornelius Jansen — were an 
opposition trend among French Catholics in the 17th and early 18th centuries. 
Their views were vigorously resisted by official Catholicism. p. 126 
A large excerpt from this subsection of The Holy Family, beginning with this 
sentence and ending with the words: "... deism is but an easy-going way of getting 
rid of religion"'(see p. 129 of this volume), was subsequently included with a few 
changes by Engels in his Introduction to the 1892 English edition of his Socialism: 
Utopian and Scientific. Accordingly the passage is here given in Engels' translation 
except for the changes which he made. p. 127 
The Nominalists were adherents of a trend in medieval scholasticism, generally 
considered heretical and dangerous, which maintained that only individual things 
exist and that generality belongs only to words. They criticised the traditional 
"realist" doctrine, derived from Plato, that universals or "ideas" have real 
existence above and independent of individual things, and likewise the "concep-
tualist" view that while universals do not exist outside the mind they do exist in the 
mind as general conceptions. The doctrine of Nominalism was later forcefully 
taken up and developed by the English materialist philosopher Thomas Hobbes. 
p. 127 
Homoeomeriae, according to the teaching of the ancient Greek philosopher 
Anaxagoras, are tiny qualitatively determined material particles which are 
infinite in number and variety and form the primary basis of all that exists; their 
combinations constitute all the variety of things. p. 128 
52 In his Introduction to the 1892 English edition of his Socialism: Utopian and 
Scientific, Engels gives the following explanation of this term: "'Qual' is a 
philosophical  • play upon words. Qual literally means torture, a pain which 
drives to action of some kind; at the same time the mystic Böhme puts into the 
German word something of the meaning of the Latin qualitas; his 'qual' was 
the activating principle arising from, and promoting in its turn, the spontaneous 
development of the thing, relation, or person subject to it, in contradistinction 
to a pain inflicted from without." p. 128 
53 Claude Adrien Helvétius, De l'homme, de  ses facultés intellectuelles et de son éducation, 
London, 1773. The first edition of this work, published after the author's death, 
appeared in London due to the efforts of the Russian ambassador in Holland, D.A. 
Golitsyn. p. 130 
54 Many of the works by the philosophers mentioned were vigorously denounced by 
the Church and the Government authorities. La Mettrie's book, L'homme machine, 
published anonymously in Leyden in 1748, was burned and its author was banished 

=====第717页=====
692 Notes 
55 
56 
57 
58 
59 
60 from Holland, where he had emigrated from France in 1745. When the first 
edition of Holbach's Système de la Nature, ou des Loix du Monde physique et du Monde 
moral was put out in 1770, the name of the author was given as J. B. Mirabeau, 
secretary of the French Academy who had died in 1760. p. 130 
The first edition of Helvétius' book De l'esprit was published anonymously in Pans 
in 1758 and was burned by the public executioner in 1759. p. 132 
The first edition of Holbach's Système  social,  ou principes naturels de la morale et de la 
politique was published anonymously in three volumes in 1773. p. 133 
This is an allusion to the hostile campaign conducted, for a number of years by the 
conservative Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung against socialism and communism. In 
October 1842, this paper accused the Rheinische Zeitung, whose editor was Marx, of 
spreading communist views. In reply Marx published his article "Communism 
and the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung" (see present edition, Vol. 1). p. 134 
The reference is to members of a political grouping which formed in France 
around the newspaper La Réforme (see Note 16). One of the leaders of this 
grouping, the petty-bourgeois Socialist Louis Blanc, put out in 1839-40 a pamphlet 
entitled L'organisation du travail, which became widely known. p. 135 
This is an ironic allusion to the ancient Roman tradition about the geese whose 
cackling saved Rome in 390 B.C. by waking the guards at the approach of the Gauls 
who had laid siege to the Capitol. p. 135 
The quotation is taken from Bruno Bauer's review of the book Leben und Wirken 
Friedrich von Sallet's, nebst Mittheilungen aus dem literarischen Nachlasse Desselben, 
Breslau, 1844. The review was published anonymously in the Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 1844. p. 138 
Below Marx gives excerpts from the following reports: Zerrleder, "Correspondenz 
aus Bern" (Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft III, February 1844, Heft VI, May 
1844);  E. Fleischhammer, "Correspondenz aus Breslau" (ibid., Heft IV, March 
1844);  Hirzel, "Correspondenz aus Zürich" (ibid., Heft IV, March 1844, Heft V, 
April 1844); "Correspondenz aus der Provinz" (ibid.,Heft VI, May 1844). p. 145 
Bruno Bauer's reply (on behalf of the paper's editorial board) to the Tübingen 
correspondent was published in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 
1844,  under the heading "Correspondenz aus der Provinz". Excerpts from the 
reports published under this heading in the same issue are given below, p. 146 
Berlin Couleur was the name by which the correspondent of the Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung mentioned above designated the Berlin Young Hegelians who did 
not belong to Bruno Bauer's group and criticised the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung 
on a number of petty points. Max Stirner was one of them. 
The excerpts quoted in this and the concluding subsection of the chapter are 
from the anonymous letters published under the heading "Correspondenz aus der 
Provinz" in the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844, as are also the 
editors' replies to these letters. p. 149 
By the "philosophy of identity" is meant Schelling's early philosophical views which 
he expounded at the beginning of the 19th century. These views were based on the 
idea of the absolute identity of thinking and being, consciousness and matter as the 
root of everything which exists. These views represented a transitional stage in the 

=====第718页=====
Notes 693 
66 
67 
68 
69 
70 
71 development of German classical philosophy, from the subjective idealism of Fichte 
to the absolute idealism of Hegel. But Schelling"  himself,  in whose philosophical 
outlook religiosity and mysticism later came to dominate, not only condemned 
Hegel's philosophy in his subsequent pronouncements, and particularly in his 
lectures on the "Philosophy of Revelation" in Berlin University in 1841-42 (which 
were critically analysed by the young Engels in his pamphlet Schelling and 
Revelation); he even renounced the rational elements of his own "philosophy of 
identity" (see present edition, Vol. 2). P- 154 
The reference is to F. Gruppe's pamphlet Bruno Bauer und die akademische 
Lehrfreiheit, Berlin, 1842, directed against Bruno Bauer and the Young Hegelians. 
Marx had criticised this polemical pamphlet, which was written from a conservative 
standpoint (see present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 211-14). p. 157 
The reference is to the article "Emigranten und Märtyrer. Ein Beitrag zur 
Charakteristik der  Deutsch-Französischen  Jahrbüchef , by H. L. Egidius, published in 
the Journal Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher, 1844, Bd. II. p. 162 
The quotations from Fourier's works Le nouveau monde industriel  et sociétaire,  Théorie 
des quatre mouvements et des destinées, générales (the first edition was published in 
1808) are given by Marx in his own translation and the quotation from Théorie de 
l'unité universelle is in French. p. 196 
Marx had in mind Théodore* Dézamy, Jules Gay and their supporters, whose 
materialistic outlook he characterised in Chapter VI of The Holy Family (see p. 131 
of this volume). The revolutionary and materialistic trend of French Utopian 
communism included also the secret Babouvist societies of the 1840s influenced by 
Dézamy: the "travailleurs égalitaires" , which consisted mainly of workers and 
published the journal I'Egalitaire, and the "humanitaires", supporters of the 
journal l'Humanitaire. In 1843 Engels wrote about the criticism of bourgeois 
marriage and family relations by representatives of these societies in his article 
"Progress of Social Reform on the Continent" (see present edition, Vol. 3, p. 392) 
p. 196 
This is an allusion to the leading role played by K. H. Sack, a professor of Bonn 
University, in the campaign waged by reactionary theological circles against the 
Young Hegelians, which began in connection with Bruno Bauer's transfer as a 
privat-dozent from Berlin to Bonn in 1839. Especially sharp attacks were made 
against Bauer's criticism of the Gospel sources and the atheistic conclusions 
following from his views on the origin of Christianity. In March 1842, Bauer was 
dismissed from Bonn University. The theological opponents of the Young 
Hegelians were ridiculed in Engels' satirical poem "The Insolently Threatened Yet 
Miraculously Rescued Bible", in which Sack figures under the ironical name of 
Beutel (in German, Sack means sack, Beutel —pouch) (see present edition, Vol. 2, 
pp. 313-51). p. 203 
The reference is to the petty German princes who lost their power and saw their 
possessions annexed by larger German states as a result of the reshaping of the 
political map of Germany during the Napoleonic wars and at the Vienna Congress 
(1814-15). p. 203 
"Young England" was a group of conservative writers and politicians, including 
Disraeli and Lord John Manners, who were close to the Tory philanthropists and 
formed a separate group in the House of Commons in 1841. Voicing the landed 

=====第719页=====
694 Notes 
72 
73 
74 
75 aristocracy's dissatisfaction at the political and economic strengthening of the 
bourgeoisie, they criticised the capitalist system and supported half-hearted 
philanthropic measures for improving the condition of the workers. "Young 
England" disintegrated as a political group in 1845 and ceased to exist as a literary 
trend in 1848. In the Manifesto of the Communist Party Marx and Engels 
characterised the views of "Young England" as "feudal socialism" (see present 
edition, Vol. 6). See Engels' characterisation of it in the footnote on p. 578 of this 
volume. p. 205 
Engels' article on "Continental Socialism" was written in the form of a private 
letter, which the addressee forwarded to the editorial office of the weekly The New 
Moral  World,  preceded and followed by accompanying texts (it appeared in 
this form in the paper). However, there are grounds for assuming that the intro­
ductory and concluding texts, written in the third person, were also written by 
Engels, who had his reasons for resorting to this indirect way of publishing his 
writings. This assumption is supported by the fact that the accompanying text 
is signed with the pen-name "Anglo-German", most probably pointing to 
Engels, who had lived some two years in England and had a good knowl­
edge of conditions there. Apparently the note to the text of the letter was also 
by Engels. p. 212 
Ham Common folks—a group of English Utopian Socialists who organised the 
Concordium Colony at Ham Common, near London, in 1842; followers of the 
English mystic James Pierrepont Greaves (1777-1842), the Ham Common 
Socialists preached moral perfection and an ascetic way of life; the colony broke up 
after only a short existence. p. 212 
The reference is to the attempt made by France during her conquest of Algeria to 
bring neighbouring Morocco also under her control. In August 1844, accusing the 
Sultan of Morocco of helping Abd-el-Kader, the chief of the Algerian tribes who 
were resisting French rule, the French started hostilities against Morocco. The 
Sultan was defeated and forced to cease his assistance to Abd-el-Kader and in 1845 
sign a treaty advantageous to France. p. 212 
The "Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still in Existence" was 
compiled by Engels on the basis of materials published in The New Moral  World,  The 
Northern Star and other publications. The main source was a series of 29 letters 
written by the Owenite Jonn Finch and published in The New Moral World between 
January 13 and October 19, 1844, under the title "Notes of Travel in the United 
States". Engels gives some excerpts from Finch's letters in his own, rather free, 
German translation and italicises certain words and passages (the features of his 
method of quoting are taken into account in the present edition). In describing 
the communist colony of Harmony Hall in Hampshire, which was founded by 
Owen's followers in 1841 and existed until the beginning of 1846, Engels drew 
on Somerville's essay A Journey to Harmony Hall, in Hampshire; with some 
particulars of the Socialist Community, to which the attention of the Nobility, Gentry 
and Clergy is earnestly requested. This essay was published in The Morning Chronicle 
on December 13, 1842, and signed "One who has whistled at the Plough". 
Engels' "Description" was published in the annual  Deutsches  Bürgerbuch für 1845 
without any signature. Engels' authorship is confirmed by his own reference to 
this material in a series of articles on the progress of communism in Germany 
published in the spring of 1845 in The New Moral World (see p. 240 of this 
volume). p. 214 

=====第720页=====
Notes 695 
83 The quotation is taken from the correspondence of Lawrence Pitkeithly of 
Huddersfield, "Where to, and how to proceed. Description of the Shaker Villages" 
(The Northern Star No. 286, May 6, 1843). p. 217 
The Unitarians (or Anti-Trinitarians) reject the dogma of the "Holy Trinity". The 
Unitarian Church first arose in England and America in the 17th century, and its 
teachings emphasise the moral and ethical side of the Christian religion in contrast 
to its external ritualist aspect. p. 223 
The series of articles "Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany" was Engels' last 
contribution to the London Owenite weekly The New Moral  World.  The series was 
written in the form of three letters to the editors, and printed in that form in 
the newspaper, only the first of them bearing a title. The numbering of the articles 
in the present edition is by the editors. p. 229 
A. 
The riot of the Silesian weavers took place on June 2-4, 1844, and was described by 
Marx in his article, "Critical Marginal Notes on the Article 'The King of Prussia 
and Social Reform. By a Prussian"', and by Engels in his reports "News from 
Prussia", and "Further Particulars of the Silesian Riots" (see present edkion, 
Vol. 3). Soon after the Silesian events, in the second half of June 1844, there w£s a 
rising of textile workers in Prague, which led to workers' uprisings in a number of 
other Bohemian industrial areas, including Reichenberg (now called Libérée) and 
Böhmisch Leipa (now called Ceska Lipa). The workers' movement, which was 
accompanied by the wrecking of factories and the destruction of machinery, was 
suppressed by government troops. p. 230 
The reference is to the article "Ein 'socialistischer' Spuk", which was published 
unsigned in a supplement to the Kölnische Zeitung No. 314, November 9, 1844. 
p. 231 
The translation was made by Engels after the earlier version of Heine's poem "Die 
Schlesischen Weber". Unlike the text first published in the newspaper Vorwärts! 
No. 55, July 10, 1844, the first stanza of this translation has an additional line, the 
third. A later version, edited by the author, with the additional, fifth stanza, was 
published in 1847. p. 232 
In The New Moral World the letter was dated February 22. But Engels reports on 
events which he witnessed or took part in between February 2 and 22, in particular 
the communist meeting at Elberfeld on February 8, not in this, but in the lollowing 
article of the series (see pp. 237-38 of this volume). Hence either the dating is a 
misprint, or else was deliberately changed by the editors in order to disguise the 
time lag between the writing of the article and its publication. p. 234 
The reference is to the " Associations for  the Benefit of  the Working  Classes"  which were 
formed in a number of Prussian towns in 1844-45 on the initiative of the German 
liberal bourgeoisie, which had been alarmed by the rising of the Silesian  weavers,  in 
the summer of 1844 (see Note 79). They hoped by this means to divert the German 
workers from militant forms of struggle. But despite the efforts of the bourgeoisie 
and the governmental authorities to give these associations an innocent and 
philanthropical appearance, their establishment only gave fresh impetus to the 
urban masses' political activity and drew the attention of broad sections of German 
society to the social question. The scope of the movement to establish such 
associations was especially great in the towns of the industrial Rhine province, 
where the antagonisms between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat were acute and 
Prussian absolutism was faced with a radical-democratic opposition. The révolu-

=====第721页=====
696 Notes 
tionary-democratic intelligentsia used meetings called to set up associations and 
discuss their statutes for the purpose of popularising radical ideas and 
counteracting the influence of the clergy and the liberal bourgeoisie. Seeing that 
the associations had taken so unlooked for a direction, the Prussian Government 
hastily cut short their activity in the spring of 1845 by refusing to approve their 
statutes and forbidding them to continue their work. 
In Elberfeld in November 1844 an Educational Society was founded. From 
the very beginning its' organisers had to fight attempts by the local clergy to 
bring it under their influence and give its activity a religious colouring. Engels and 
his friends wished to use the society's meetings and its committee to spread 
communist views. The statute of the society was not approved by the authorities 
and the society itself ceased to exist in the spring of 1845. p. 234 
The reference is to the annual Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1845, established in 
Darmstadt by the radical publicist H. Püttmann in December 1844. Besides several 
articles of the German or "true" socialist trend which was then emerging, the 
journal carried works by such révolu tionary-democratic writers as W. Wolff and 
the poet G. Weerth- It also contained Engels' essay "Description of Recently Found­
ed Communist Colonies Still in Existence" (see pp. 214-28 of this volume and 
Note 75). The next issue of the  Deutsches  Bürgerbuch, which appeared in Mannheim 
in the summer of 1846, contained Engels' translation of "A Fragment of Fourier's 
on Trade", which he made in summer and autumn 1845, with an introduction 
and a conclusion censuring for the first time the tendencies inherent in "true social­
ism" (see pp. 613, 642-43 of this volume). The "true Socialists" and the publica­
tions spreading their views, among them the Deutsches Bürgerbuch, were later 
criticised in detail by Marx and Engels in The German Ideology and other works 
(see present edition, Vol. 5). p. 235 
What is meant is the prospectus of H. Püttmann's projected journal Rheinische 
Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform. Only two issues appeared, the first in 
Darmstadt in August 1845, the second in the small town of Bellevue, on the 
German-Swiss border, at the end of 1846. Marx and Engels used them to spread 
their communist views in Germany. The first issue carried the texts of Engels' 
speeches at meetings in Elberfeld on February 8 and 15, 1845 (see pp. 243-64 of 
this volume), and the second contained his article "Festival of Nations in London" 
(see present edition, Vol. 6). It was for this journal that Marx prepared in the 
spring of 1845 a long article on the German economist List (see pp. 265-93 of this 
volume). However, the journal was dominated by the "true Socialists", and Marx 
and Engels afterwards severely criticised it in The German Ideology (see present 
edition, Vol. 5). p. 235 
The reference is to the monthly"  Gesellschaftsspiegel.  Engels helped to organise this 
publication and compile its prospectus (see pp. 671-74 of this volume), but 
did not become one of its editors. The journal, which began to appear in 1845 in 
Elberfeld, edited by M. Hess, carried in January 1846 Marx's article "Peuchet: 
On Suicide" (see pp. 597-612 of this volume). But articles by "true Socialists" 
predominated. p. 235 
On January 16, 1845, the French authorities decided to banish from France Marx, 
Heine, Bürgers, Bakunin and other contributors to Vorwärts! The Prussian 
Government had already made repeated attempts to persuade the Guizot cabinet 
to close down the paper, and had launched a campaign against it in the reactionary 
press.  Under pressure from public opinion the French Government was forced to 

=====第722页=====
Notes 697 
annul its decision to expel Heine. But, on February 3, Marx was obliged to leave 
Paris and settle in Brussels. 
Before his departure, on February 1, 1845, Marx concluded a contract with the 
Darmstadt publisher K.F.J. Leske for the publication of his two-volume work Kritik 
der Politik und Nationalökonomie (see the Appendices to this volume). p. 235 
The reference is to the collection Neue Anekdota, which was published in Darmstadt 
in May 1845. It contained newspaper articles by M. Hess, K. Grün, O. Lüning and 
others, written mainly in the first half of 1844, which had been banned by the 
censor. Soon after the publication of the collection, Marx and Engels made a 
number of severely critical remarks about its contents, as can be seen from Griin's 
letters to Hess. p. 241 
The reference is to the projected publication in German of the "Library of the 
Best Foreign Socialist Writers", which, as we learn from Engels' letters to Marx 
from Barmen in February and March 1845, was repeatedly discussed by the two 
friends. 
A list, written by Marx, of authors whose works he proposed for inclusion in the 
"Library" is still extant (see p. 667 of this volume). But the project was not 
realised. The only work completed was "A Fragment of Fourier's on Trade" 
compiled by Engels with an introduction and a conclusion by him (see pp. 613-44 of 
this volume). p. 241 
"Secret offices" or "black offices" were establishments under the postal departments 
in France, Prussia, Austria and a number of other countries to deal with the 
inspection of correspondence. They had been in existence since the time of the 
absolute monarchies in Europe. p. 241 
On February 8, 15 and 22, 1845, meetings to discuss communism were held in 
Elberfeld and aroused considerable public interest. The second and third meetings 
attracted especially large attendances — from 130 to 200. Discussion of lectures and 
of readings from socialist literature, including poetry by Shelley and other authors, 
lasted many hours. As well as socialist-minded intellectuals, the audiences consisted 
largely of bourgeois from Barmen and Elberfeld with a sprinkling of visitors from 
other towns in the Rhine province of Prussia (Cologne and Düsseldorf). "All of 
Elberfeld and Barmen, from the monied aristocracy to small shopkeepers, were 
represented, the proletariat being the only exception," Engels wrote to Marx on 
February 22 about the third meeting, which had just taken place. He also described 
the two preceding ones. The meetings upset the local authorities, who took steps to 
put an end to public discussions on the subject. 
Engels spoke on February 8 and 15. On February 22 excerpts were read from 
the essay on Communist Colonies which he had compiled and published about that 
time (see pp. 214-28 of this volume). An account of the meetirtgs is included in the 
third report in his series on the progress of communism in Germany, published in 
The New Moral World (see pp. 237-39 of this volume). 
The texts of Engels' speeches, prepared for publication by the author, were 
published together with excerpts from other speakers (M. Hess, G. A. Kottgen) in 
August 1845 in the first issue of Rheinische Jahrbücher zur  gesellschaftlichen  Reform 
(pp. 45-62 and 71-86). The title "Speeches in Elberfeld" has been taken from 
Engels' letter to Marx on March 17, 1845, in which he himself uses it. p. 243 
In 1892 Engels returned, in the Preface to the English edition of The Condition of 
the Working-Class in England, to the problem of the cyclical character of economic 
crises in the early 19th century. "The recurring period of the great industrial crises 

=====第723页=====
698 Notes 
is stated in the text as five years," he wrote. "This was the period apparently 
indicated by the course of events from 1825 to 1842. Rut the industrial history 
from 1842 to 1868 has shown that the real period is one of ten years; that the 
intermediate revulsions were secondary, and tended more and more to disappear." 
p. 245 
See Note 79. p. 254 
The Customs Union (Zollverein) of the German states (initially they numbered 18), 
which established a common customs frontier, was founded in 1834 and headed by 
Prussia. By the 1840s the Union embraced most of the German states, with the 
exception of Austria, the Hansa cities (Bremen, Lübeck, Hamburg) and a few small 
states.  Brought into being by the demand for an all-German market, the Customs 
Union contributed to Germany's eventual political unification. p. 258 
In 1842, as a result of the so-called first Opium War, which Britain had been 
waging against China since 1839, the unequal Nanking Treaty was imposed; one of 
the clauses envisaged the ppening to English trade of five Chinese cities: Canton, 
Shanghai, Amoy, Ninbo and Fuchou. p. 261 
This work—a draft of an article against the German economist Friedrich 
List—was recently discovered among Marx's manuscripts which remained for a 
long time in the keeping of the grandchildren of his eldest daughter, Jenny 
Longuet. Marx and Engels had reacted critically to List's book (published in 1841) 
as early as February 1844 in the  Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher  (see present edition, 
Vol. 3, 178, 421). Later they concluded that a full-scale criticism should be 
published of his views as typifying the attitudes of the German bourgeoisie — its 
striving for complete freedom of action to exploit the German workers without 
prejudice to the privileges of the nobility and its support of the feudal-monarchical 
political system while seeking to force the government to protect bourgeois 
interests against foreign competition. In a letter to Marx on November 19, 1844, 
Engels mentioned that he intended writing a pamphlet on List, and in another 
letter, on March 17, 1845, he greatly approved of Marx's own plans to publish in 
the journal Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform, projected by 
Püttmann, a critical analysis of List's views. In his pamphlet Engels proposed to 
expand the critical remarks on List's practical suggestions (introduction of a 
protective system) which he had made in the second pf his "Speeches in Elberfeld" 
(see pp. 258-62 of this volume). However, Engels did not write that pamphlet. 
Neither did Marx's article on List appear in print. The extant drafts of the 
manuscript, abounding in abbreviations, erasures, corrections and insertions, are 
incomplete. The first sheet, apparently containing the author's title of the article 
and of the first chapter, is missing. Sheets 10-21 and 22 have also not been found. 
The extant part consists of large-size sheets numbered by Marx  himself.  Of these, 
numbers 2-5, containing four pages of text each, and sheet 6, containing text on the 
first three pages, belong to the first chapter. Following them is a small fragment on 
a separate unnumbered sheet. The second chapter, with the author's title, has 
reached us more complete and comprises sheets 7-9, containing four pages each. 
Of the third chapter only sheet 22 (two fragments filling two pages) and sheet 24 
(four pages of text) are extant. The fourth chapter has the author's title and fills 
one unnumbered sheet (four pages). 
In his manuscript Marx analyses and quotes the first volume of List's book 
according to the 1841 edition— Friedrich List, Das nationale System der politischen 
Oekonomie. Erster  Band.  Der internationale Handel, die Handelspolitik und der  deutsche 

=====第724页=====
Notes 699 
98 
99 
100 
101 
102 
103 Zollverein, Stuttgart and Tübingen, 1841. At the beginning of 1845 Marx made 
numerous excerpts from this edition which he used in his work. He quotes French 
sources in his own German translation, with the exception of one excerpt, from a 
work by Louis Say, which he purposely quotes in French to show List's deliberately 
inaccurate way of quoting. The emphasis in the quotations belongs for the 
most part to Marx. 
In publishing the work in this edition, obvious slips of the pen in the manuscript 
have been corrected, editorial insertions have been made (in square brackets) 
where meaning might otherwise be obscure and some passages have been divided 
into paragraphs additional to those given by the author. Where the author's titles to 
chapters are missing, titles (in square brackets) have been supplied by the editors. 
The numbers of the sheets in the manuscript are given in Arab figures in square 
brackets. Words and phrases crossed out in the manuscript are not reproduced, 
although some of them have been taken into account in deciphering illegible 
passages. In the second chapter a number of paragraphs were crossed out by the 
author with a vertical line. Marx usually did that when he was using the crossed out 
passage in another place or in another variant of the work. Since the pages of the 
manuscript to which these passages could have been transferred are missing, the 
passages crossed out are reproduced in the context in question in angle brackets. 
p. 265 
The word "obstacle" is written in the manuscript over the word "inconvenience". 
And later in the text Marx repeatedly uses this method of proposing variants. In 
the translation such words are given in brackets after the word over which the 
variant is written. p. 265 
A Molossus  in ancient prosody was a foot of three long syllables ( ). Marx uses 
the term ironically to describe List's heavy style. p. 266 
In numbering this point 3 Marx probably made a slip, since the preceding point 
is also numbered 3. The next point in the manuscript is numbered 4 (see below, 
p. 273). p. 267 
The Tribunate was one of the four legislative institutions introduced in France by 
the Constitution of 1799 after the coup d'état of 18-19 Brumaire (9-10 November), 
1799,  which established the dictatorship of Napoleon Bonaparte. The Tribunate 
was abolished in 1807. p. 270 
The Notice historique sur la vie et  les ouvrages deJ.-B. Say was prefaced to the seventh, 
supplementary, volume of Say's course in Political Economy, which was published 
soon after the author's death under the title: Cours complet d'économie politique 
pratique. Volume complémentaire. Mélanges et correspondance d'économie politique; 
ouvrage posthume  de J.-B. Say, publié par Charles Comte, son  gendre,  Paris, 1833. Marx 
quotes with abridgments separate passages from pp. iii-xii of the "Notice 
historique" by Charles Comte. p. 270 
The Anti-Corn Law League—see Note 5. 
The movement for land reform, free allotment of plots to every worker and 
other democratic reforms arose in the 1840s in the United States of America and 
was headed by the National Reform Association. p. 272 
Ironical allusions to List's arguments and use of words. The words enclosed in 
inverted commas by Marx— "freie, mächtige und reiche Bürger" — allude to 
List's expression "das Aufkommen eines freien, industriellen und reichen 

=====第725页=====
700 Notes 
Bürgertums" (the rise of a free, industrial and rich bourgeoisie) on page lxvi of 
his book. On page lxiv List claims credit for having shown the German gentry 
how profitable for them was the existence of an industrial bourgeoisie "zealously" 
working to increase the rents of their estates. p. 272 
104 "Confederation" is one of List's favourite words. He speaks of "the confederation 
of various activities", "the confederation of various knowledge", "the confedera­
tion of various forces" (see List, op. cit., p. 223). p. 275 
105 On page 208 of his book, List illustrates his teaching on productive forces and 
exchange values by the example of two fathers, each of whom has five sons and 
owns an estate bringing 1,000 talers net annual income in excess of what he 
expends to support his family. One of them places his 1,000 talers in a bank at 
interest and forces his sons to perform hard unskilled labour; the other uses his 
1,000 talers to give his sons a higher education, so that they become highly skilled 
agronomists or engineers. According to List, the first father shows concern for the 
increase of exchange values, the second for the increase of productive forces. On 
page 209 List speaks of the Christian religion and monogamy as "rich sources of 
productive force". p. 277 
106 List says: "Workshops and factories are the mothers and children of civic 
freedom, education, the arts and sciences...." p. 277 
Below Marx makes clear that he understands "the abolition of labour" to mean 
the elimination of the existing forms of exploitation of labour, the enslavement 
and alienation of the working man, and emphasises the need to create social 
conditions under which industrial labour and industry would cease to be an object 
and instrument of oppression but would serve as a means for man to use his 
capacities and to master the forces of nature (see pp. 280-82 of this volume). 
p. 279 
108 An allusion to the expression "industrial education", which is frequently used by 
List. p. 282 
By manufacturing force ("die Manufakturkraft") List understands the productive 
power of factory industry. But he often uses this expression simply in the sense of 
factory industry. p. 284 
110 An allusion to List's statement that his "theory of the productive forces" should be 
worked out scientifically ("wissenschaftlich auszubilden sei") side by side with "the 
theory of exchange values" developed by the "Smith-Say school" (List, op. cit., 
p. 187). p. 284 
The reference is to List's argument, in Chapter 24 of his book, about the 
importance of "continuity" and "uninlerruptedness of production" in the 
development of factory industry, the preservation and perfection of its technical 
means and the production skills of the workers. In comparing these arguments 
with those of J. F. Bray, Marx had in mind the latter's book, Labour's Wrongs and 
Labour's Remedy; or the Age of Might and  the Age of Right, Leeds, 1839, which proved 
the injustice of the hereditary property of capitalists and landowners as 
non-productive and parasitic classes. In The Poverty of Philosophy (1847) Marx 
characterised Bray's views as communist (see present edition, Vol. 6). p. 288 
The term costs of production ("Produktionskosten") is used by Marx in the sense 
of value of the product. p. 288 

=====第726页=====
Notes 701 
113 See Note 5. p. 289 
114 The Methuen Treaty was a trade treaty concluded on December 27, 1703, between 
England and Portugal (by Lord Methuen for the English)  — allies in the War of 
Spanish Succession (fought by the Anglo-Austro-Dutch coalition against France 
and Spain). The treaty opened wide access in Portugal for English woollens, in 
return for which Portugal received the right to export its wines to England on 
privileged terms. In his book List emphasised that this treaty was unfavourable to 
Portugal. p. 293 
Engels' plans to produce a big work on the social history of England were formed 
while he was still living in that country (from November 1842 to August 1844). 
Initially he intended to implement them in the form of a series of articles in the 
Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher under the general title of The Condition of England. 
The February 1844 issue of the journal carried the first article in this series, and 
the other articles were published later in the Paris Vorwärts! (August-October, 
1844—see present edition, Vol. 3) since the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher had 
ceased to be published. The series, however, remained incomplete. In the articles 
he wrote Engels was able merely to touch upon his main theme — the condition of 
the working class in England. He intended to amplify it later in one of the central 
chapters of his intended book on the social history of England, but in the end his 
realisation of the proletariat's special role in bourgeois society prompted him to 
make the condition of the English working class the object of a special study. 
Upon his return to Barmen early in Septemberl844, Engels at once set about 
the accomplishment of his revised plan, using material he had collected while in 
England. "I am buried up to the neck in English newspapers and books from 
which I am compiling my book on the condition of English proletarians", he 
informed Marx on November 19, 1844. In January 1845 the work was appreciably 
advanced and, informing Marx of this on January 20, Engels told him of his 
intention to start, once it was finished, on a new work: On the Historical 
Development of England and English Socialism. In mid-March 1845 the manuscript 
was completed and sent to the Leipzig publisher Wigand. It appeared at the 
beginning of June 1845, when Engels had already moved to Brussels, where 
Marx, banished from France, had been since February of that year. 
The response in the German press was lively. Many newspapers and journals, 
in particular the Allgemeine Preussische Zeitung, the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, 
the Janus. Jahrbücher deutscher Gesinnung, Bildung und That, 1845, the Gesell­
schaftsspiegel, Jg. 1845, and a number of others carried reviews of the book. 
And in socialist circles it was received with great approval. Weydemeyer wrote that 
Engels' book was "without doubt one of the most important phenomena in our 
recent literature" ("Dies Buch gehört dem Volke", 1845). O. Lüning noted that 
the book instilled not only "hatred of and wrath against the oppressors", but also 
"a feeling of hope and faith in the final victory of reason and justice, in the eternal 
reason of mankind, which, despite all dangers and storms, will secure a beautiful 
future" (Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1846). Revolutionary workers were educated on 
Engels' book. F. Lessner, a German worker who subsequently became an active 
member of the Communist League, recalled, for example, that it "was the first 
book I acquired and from which I first obtained an idea of the working-class 
movement". 
Bourgeois critics, while acknowledging the accurate observation and the 
literary merit of the book, nevertheless deplored its revolutionary conclusions. 
Thus,  in a review of recent literature published in the Berlin journal Janus. 

=====第727页=====
702 Notes 
Jahrbücher deutscher Gesinnung, in 1845 (Bd. 2, Heft 18), Professor F. A. H. Huber 
accused the author of making his work "a call for murder and arson written with 
bile, blood and passion". The polemic over Engels' book continued in the 
following years. For instance, the prominent German economist B. Hildebrand 
devoted to its analysis a considerable part of his work Die Nationalökonomie oder 
Gegenwart und Zukunft, Frankfurt am Main, 1848. Acknowledging the author's 
talent and the originality of his research, this critic took great exception to his 
communist ideas and declared his characterisation of English bourgeois society to 
be true in detail but incorrect as a whole. 
Engels' book became well known also outside Germany. As early as July 1845, a 
few weeks after it was published, reviews appeared in Russia (Literaturnaya Gazeta 
No. 25, July 5, 1845). Engels' work was highly rated by revolutionary democrats. 
N. V. Shelgunov, in an article published in the journal Sovremennik in 1861, 
demonstrated the groundlessness of Hildebrand's attacks on Engels, whom he 
called "one of the best and noblest of Germans". The article summarised with 
approval the main content of Engels' work (Sovremennik, LXXXV, Sec. 1). 
Marx, in his own economic researches, based himself in many respects on the 
material and conclusions of his friend's work, which he quoted in many passages 
of Capital. But later, Engels himself was very critical of his book. Acknowledging 
that it was written with genuinely youthful inspiration, "freshly and passionately, 
with bold anticipation" (see his letter to Marx of April 9, 1863), he at the same 
time found in it certain weaknesses typical of the initial stage in the development 
of scientific communism. 
In later editions he took steps to warn the reader of its shortcomings. Thus, in 
the Appendix to the American edition (1887), which was included in the Preface 
to the English and German editions of 1892, Engels wrote: "... This book exhibits 
everywhere the traces of the descent of modern Socialism from one of its 
ancestors—the German philosophy. Thus great stress is laid on the dictum that 
Communism is not a mere party doctrine of the working class, but a theory 
compassing the emancipation of society at large, including the capitalist class, 
from its present narrow conditions. This is true enough in the abstract, but 
absolutely useless, and sometimes worse, in practice. So long as the wealthy classes 
not only do not feel the want of any emancipation, but strenuously oppose the 
self-emancipation of the working class, so long the social revolution will have to be 
prepared and fought out by the working class alone." Engels went on to explain 
why his assumption in 1845 that the social revolution in England was imminent 
had not been borne out. Among the causes for this he emphasised the decline of 
Chartism after 1848 and the temporary preponderance of reformist tendencies in 
the English working-class movement—bred out of England's industrial monopoly 
on the world market, which had turned out to be much more lasting than he had 
assumed. 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England had several editions during the 
author's lifetime. As early as 1848, Wigand's publishing house in Leipzig put out a 
new impression of the work, marked "Second Edition" on the title page, although 
it was merely a reprint of the first. 
The book was published in English for the first time in New York in 1887 in a 
translation made by the American Socialist Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky. The 
American edition is the authorised one. Engels edited the translation, made a 
number of changes in the text, omitted the address "To the Working-Classes of 
Great-Britain" and the Preface to the first German edition of 1845, and provided 
the book with the new Preface of 1887 addressed to the American reader together 
with an Afterword (the Appendix written in 1886) dealing with changes that 

=====第728页=====
Notes 703 
had since taken place in the condition of the English working class. He included 
in this Afterword the text of the article "England in 1845 and in 1885", which 
he had written in 1885. The title of the book was altered to The Condition of 
the Working-Class in England in 1844; in the table of contents only the titles 
of the chapters were preserved, without the enumeration of the questions dis­
cussed in them which had appeared in the German edition of 1845 (at the same 
time a short subject index was added); some drawings and the plan of Manchester 
were omitted, a number of references to sources in the text were given as 
footnotes, etc. 
The text of the American edition was reproduced almost without change in the 
authorised English edition which was published in London in 1892. Engels wrote 
another special Preface, including in it almost without change the Afterword to 
the American edition of 1887, while the Preface for American readers was 
omitted. In the same year the Dietz publishing house in Stuttgart published the 
authorised second German edition, the text of which reproduced in the main that 
of 1845. Engels wrote for it a new Preface, identical on the whole with that of the 
1892 English edition, but with additions in the concluding part and a number of 
new footnotes. 
The present edition reproduces the English translation made by Florence 
Kelley-Wischnewetzky and edited by Engels  himself.  This text has also been 
collated with the original German edition and the major different readings 
affecting the meaning are given as footnotes. Some parts of the text which were 
omitted by Engels when he edited the English translation (for instance, the 
address to the English reader, the Preface to the first edition, the poem "The 
Steam King" by Edward Mead, the enumeration of subjects in the table of 
contents, etc.) have been restored according to the German edition, the relevant 
indications being given in footnotes or Notes at the end of the volume. The title of 
the book has also been given according to the first edition. Slips and omissions 
made by Florence Wischnewetzky have been corrected; in particular, she did not 
have at her disposal a number of English sources used by Engels and she gave 
quotations from them in retranslation from the German (in the American and 
English editions of 1887 and 1892 this was specially mentioned in the Translator's 
Note).  In the present edition the texts of English sources quoted by Engels have 
been given according to the original, taking into account the author's method of 
quoting (abridgments, re-arrangement of the text, and so on). Errors in dates and 
in names of persons and places have been corrected, account being taken of the 
corrections introduced in the book: Engels, The Condition of the Working Class 
in England. Translated and edited by W. O. Henderson and W. H. Chaloner, 
New York, 1958. Use has been made of some original texts from rare sources 
quoted in the above-mentioned edition. 
The author's prefaces to subsequent editions and the Afterword to the 
American edition of 1887 will be included in the relevant volumes of the present 
edition according to the dates of their writing. p. 295 
The address "To the Working-Classes of Great-Britain" was written by Engels in 
English with the intention, as he informed Marx in his letter of November 19, 
1844,  of having it printed separately and sent to "English party leaders, literary 
men and Members of Parliament". In the 1845 and 1892 German editions 
of The Condition of the Working-Class in England the address was reproduced 
in English; it was not included in the American (1887) and English 
(1892) editions. In the present volume it is reproduced according to the 
German edition of 1892. p. 297 

=====第729页=====
704 Notes 
117 
118 
119 
120 
123 
124 Engels' Preface to the first German edition of his book was not reproduced in the 
American (1887) or the English (1892) edition. However, it was included in the 
1892 German edition. In the present volume it is given in translation from the 
German editions published in the author's lifetime. p. 302 
This intention was not carried out, although in the ensuing years, up to the 
beginning of the 1848 Revolution, Engels several times returned to it. During his 
stay in Brussels from April 1845 to August 1846, and in the following months, 
which he spent in Paris, Engels continued collecting material on England in 
addition to what he had collected in the preceding years. In July and August 1845, 
during trips to London and Manchester with Marx, he researched on this subject 
in the libraries of those cities. Three notebooks are extant, full of bibliographical 
notes and excerpts from originals (G. R. Porter, The  Progress  of the Nation, Vol. Ill, 
London, 1843; N. Godwin, History of  the Commonwealth of England, Vol. I, London, 
1824;  T. Tooke, A History of Prices,  Vol. II, London, 1838; F. M. Eden, The State  of 
the Poor, Vols. I-III, London, 1797; [J. Aikin], A Description of  the Country from thirty 
to forty Miles round Manchester, London, 1795; J. Butterworth, The Antiquities of 
the Town, and a Complete History of the Trade of Manchester, Manchester, 1822; 
J. W. Gilbart, The History and Principles of Banking, London, 1834, etc. For greater 
detail see Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 4, S. 503-15). By the end 
of 1847 Engels' work had apparently made considerable headway; a short article 
printed on November 14 that year in the Deutsche Brüsseler Zeitung, with which 
Engels and Marx collaborated, mentioned his intention to put out a book under 
the title On the History of the English Bourgeoise. But this plan was not 
carried out. Nevertheless, in his articles and reports of those years Engels 
constantly touched upon various aspects of the social and political history of 
England. p. 302 
See Note 83. p 303 
See Note 79. p. 304 
Actually, the first iron bridge in England was built in 1779 in Shropshire, over the 
Severn at Coalbrookdale. The bridge constructed according to Thomas Paine's 
design was cast near Rotherham in Yorkshire, but never erected by Paine. Its 
components, however, were used to build the second great iron bridge, over the 
river Wear (1796). p. 317 
This figure, taken from G. R. Porter's book The Progress of the Nation, Vol. I, 
London, 1836 (p. 345), applies to the mid-1830s. In Vol. Ill of his book, published 
in 1843 (op. cit., Vol. Ill, p. 86), Porter gives a higher figure 4,877,000 tons for the 
use of coal in iron-smelting in England in the forties. p. 318 
The Reform Act passed by the British Parliament in June 1832 was directed against 
the political monopoly of the landed and finance aristocracy, and reformed the 
basis of Parliamentary representation in favour of the industrial bourgeoisie and 
"middle classes". The proletariat and sections of the petty bourgeoisie, who had 
provided the main support in the preceding campaigns for reform, received no 
electoral rights. p. 322 
The data given were taken by Engels from the Journal of the Statistical Society of 
London; in particular, the description of working-class districts in Westminster is 
based on the "Report of the Committee of the Statistical Society of London, on 
the State of the Working Classes in the Parishes of St. Margaret and St. John" 

=====第730页=====
Notes 705 
125 
126 
128 
129 (Vol. Ill, 1840) and the description of the district around Hanover Square on 
C. R. Weld's article: "On the condition of the wprking classes in the Inner Ward of 
St. George's Parish, Hanover Square" (Vol. VI, 1843). The number of inmates in 
the working-class houses in the parishes of St. John and St. Margaret is given 
according to the report by G. Alston quoted below. The Journal of the Statistical 
Society of London, Vol. Ill gives another figure—16,176 persons. p. 333 
The report by the Rev. G. Alston, initially published in the radical paper The Weekly 
Dispatch, was reprinted in the Chartist newspaper The Northern Star No. 338, 
May 4, 1844. Engels quotes from this paper. p. 334 
The description was given in The Times, November 17, 1843, and in The Northern 
Star No. 315, November 25, 1843. p. 334 
The facts described in this and the preceding paragraph were apparently taken 
from a report published in The Times, January 16 and February 12, 1844. 
p. 335 
The data quoted were apparently taken from materials published in The Times, 
November 24 and December 22, 1843, February 5, 9, and 12, 1844, and The 
Northern Star, December 23 and 30, 1843. p. 337 
The figures were apparently taken from C. B. Fripp's "Report of an Inquiry into 
the Condition of the Working Classes of the City of Bristol" published in the 
Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. II (1839). They are somewhat 
inaccurately quoted: the 2,800 families constitute 46 per cent of the Bristol 
working-class families investigated who occupied only one room or part of one (the 
total number investigated was 5,981). p. 340 
The quotation is from another work by J. C. Symons, namely the "Report from 
Assistant Hand-Loom Weavers' Commissioners", which he compiled and which 
was published in Parliamentary  Papers,  1839, Vol. XLII, No. 159, p.  51. The follow­
ing quotation is from the book quoted by Engels in his footnote: J. C. Symons, 
Arts and Artisans at Home and  Abroad,  the pages being those given in the footnote. 
p. 341 
3 The report, quoted by Engels, of the committee elected at Huddersfield on July 19, 
1844,  to investigate the town's sanitary conditions was printed in The Northern Star 
No. 352, August 10, 1844. p. 344 
Engels gives this name to Kersall-moor—a hill near Manchester where the 
workers held meetings—by analogy with the Mons Sacer in ancient Rome, to 
which, tradition has it, the plebeians withdrew in 494 B.C. when they rose 
against the patricians. p. 347 
133 The data given here were taken from the article "Wild beasts and rational beings", 
published in The Weekly Dispatch, May 5, 1844. p. 366 
The case against the eleven butchers in Manchester was tried somewhat 
earlier than Engels reports from memory. A report on it was published in 
The Manchester Guardian, May 10, 1843. The session of the Court Leet 
(in the 1845 and 1892 German editions Engels calls it the "market court"), which 
heard cases of this kind, took place twice a year. p. 369 
135 The Liverpool Mercury of February 9, 1844, is quoted with considerable 
abridgments, and in the 1845 and 1892 German editions in free translation. 130 

=====第731页=====
706 Notes 
137 In the present edition here, as in other cases, the abridgments have been pre­
served, p. 370 
On the changes in the length of the crisis cycles see Note 92. p. 382 
The report by the Rev. W. Champneys, quoted by Engels, on the condition 
of the East End poor employed by the day in the London docks, was first pub­
lished in The Weekly Dispatch and then reprinted in The Northern Star No. 338,. 
May 4, 1844. p. 385 
138 The author presumably has in mind the Report On the Sanitary Condition of the 
Labouring Population of Great Britain (1842) by E. Chadwick or Dr. T. Southwood 
Smith's two reports to the Poor Law Commissioners on sanitary conditions 
in the East End of London in 1838 (see, for instance, p. 339). p. 397 
The facts adduced here and below were apparently taken from the article 
"Frightful spread of Fever from Destitution", published in The Northern Star 
No. 328, February 24, 1844. p. 397 
4 The information following is taken from the article "Quarterly Table of Mortality" 
(The Manchester Guardian, July 31, 1844), containing tables on the number of 
inhabitants (in 1841) and deaths (in 1843) in several towns. p. 403 
R. Cowan's article "Vital Statistics of Glasgow" was published in the Journal of  the 
Statistical Society of London, Vol. Ill, 1840. p. 404 
The Metropolitan Buildings Act, a special law regulating building in London, was 
passed by Parliament in 1844. p. 407 
143 Engels refers to the almost complete absence in the report under consideration 
of information on the textile industrial districts of Lancashire, Cheshire and the 
West Riding of Yorkshire. p. 409 
144 The figures on crime quoted here and below were taken by Engels from 
G. R. Porter's book, The  Progress  of the Nation, Vol. Ill, London, 1843, Section VII, 
Chapter II, and from the Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. VI, 1843 
(J. Fletcher, "Progress of Crime in the United Kingdom"). p. 425 
The information was taken from materials submitted by a "Deputation of Master 
Manufacturers and Millowners in the County of Lancaster" and published in The 
Manchester Guardian, May 1, 1844. The figures concern 412 firms in the 
industrial county of Lancaster employing 116,281 workers. p. 435 
Lord Ashley's speech was apparently quoted from The Times No. 18559, 
March 16, 1844, p. 4. p. 437 
The letter quoted was printed in The Fleet  Papers,  a journal published by R. Oastler, 
Vol. IV, No. 35, August 31, 1844. Engels quotes an excerpt in German. This was 
re-translated from the German in the American (1887) and the English (1892) 
editions, and the beginning of the quotation was abridged and paraphrased. The 
beginning of the original excerpt reads as follows: "A shot time since a friend of 
mine that was out of work and who ust to work with me, at a former pearead, but 
who had being out of Wark for a Long time wor Compeld to go, on what we 
Labouring men Call, the tramp and having got to a place Calld Sant Hellins 
(I think it is in Lonckshire) and meeting with no sucsess, he thought that he 
would, bend is way towards Monchester, and just as he was Leaving the place, 

=====第732页=====
Notes 707 
he herd of one of his old matey s Leaving Close on the way — so he resolved 
that he would make him out if poseble — for he wishd to see him, thinking 
that he might perhaps help him to a job, and if not, he might give him a 
mouthful of something to Eat, and a nights Lodgings, has he said he was very 
heard-up." p. 439 
148 See Note 145. p. 439 
The Health and Morals of Apprentices ' Act (1802) limited the working time of 
child-apprentices to twelve hours and prohibited their employment at night. This 
law applied only to the cotton and wool industries; it made no provision for control 
by factory inspectors and was practically disregarded by the mill-owners, p. 442 
R. H. Greg's words were apparently reproduced by Engels from Lord Ashley's 
speech in the House of Commons on March 15, 1844, in support of the Ten Hour 
Bill. (See The Times No. 18559, March 16, 1844, p. 4.) p. 450 
The article mentioned, J. Roberton's "An inquiry respecting the period of puberty 
in women", was printed in the North of England Medical and Surgical Journal, Vol. I 
(August 1830-May 1831). Engels possibly used the account of this article in 
P. Gaskell's book, The Manufacturing Population of England, London, 1833. p. 453 
152 The Factory  Act of 1819 forbade the employment of children under nine years of 
age in cotton spinning and weaving mills and also night work of children up to 
sixteen; for this category the working day was limited to twelve hours, not 
counting breaks for meals; since these were arranged by mill-owners as they 
thought fit, the working day often lasted fourteen hours or more. 
The Factory Act of 1825 ruled that breaks for meals were not to total more 
than 1  1% hours a day so that the working day would not come to more than 
13 /g hours. Like the Act of 1819, that of 1825 did not provide for any control 
by the factory inspectors and was ignored by the mill-owners. p. 459 
What is meant is the "Report from the Select Committee on the 'Bill to regulate 
the Labour of Children in the Mills and Factories of the United Kingdom'", 8th 
August, 1832 (Parliamentary Papers, Vol. XV, 1831-32). p. 460 
154 The reference is to "Reports of the Inspectors of Factories for the half-year ending 
31st December,  1843."  p. 463 
155 Dissenters were members of Protestant religious sects and trends in England who 
rejected to any extent the dogmas and rituals of the official Anglican Church. 
p. 464 
The reference here is to the proposal made by the Peel cabinet to lower the customs 
duty on sugar imported from the West Indies in order to open the market for sugar 
imports from India and other countries. p. 465 
Engels' prediction came true. On June 8, 1847, the Ten Hour Bill applicable to 
women and youths working in factories was passed by Parliament. p. 465 
What is meant is the article entitled "The Truck System Extraordinary", which 
was published in the Halifax Guardian, November 4, 1843. It was reprinted in 
The Sun, from which it was reproduced in The Northern Star No. 315, Novem­
ber 25, 1843. p. 472 156 
159 The poem by Edward P. Mead, "The Steam King" was printed in The Northern 
Star No. 274, February 11, 1843. The German translation of the poem was made 

=====第733页=====
708 Notes 
161 
162 by Engels  himself.  The poem ends with the following two stanzas, which Engels 
omitted: 
The cheap bread crew will murder you 
By bludgeon, ball or brand; 
Then your Charter gain and the power will be vain 
Of the Steam King's bloody band. 
Then down with the King, the Moloch King 
And the satraps of his might: 
Let right prevail, then Freedom hail 
When might shall stoop to right. p. 474 
The first letter, published in The Morning Chronicle, December 1, 1843, under the 
title "Distress at Hinckley", was reprinted in The Northern Star No. 317, Decem­
ber 9, 1843. Below Engels quotes also the second letter ("Letters to the Editor"), 
which was published in The Morning Chronicle, December 9, 1843. p. 481 
The author refers to the series of articles by Léon Faucher published under 
various titles from October 1843 to July 1844, in the journal Revue  des deux Mondes. 
Later they were published by the author in a collection under the title  -Etudes  sur 
l'Angleterre, Vols. 1-2, Paris, 1845. The term "démocratie industrielle" quoted below 
occurs in Vol. 2, p. 147. p. 488 
The quotation given above is from the article by A. Knight, "On the grinders' 
asthma", which was published in the North of England Medical and Surgical Journal, 
Vol. I, August 1830-May  1831.  The second half of the preceding quotation is from 
the same source; the first half is from Knight's testimony to the Children's 
Employment Commission (Appendix to 2nd Report, Part I, 1842). The same 
publication contains extracts from his earlier mentioned article, which were 
possibly used by Engels. p. 493 
163 See Note 118. p. 502 
See Note 79. p. 503 
The description of this event was taken by Engels from P. Gaskell's book, The 
Manufacturing Population of England, which appeared in 1833. The author pointed 
out that the murderers had not been found. But soon after the book's publication, 
the murderers of mill-owner Ashton's son — Joseph and William Mosley and 
William Garside — were apprehended, and in 1834 two of them were hanged in 
London. 
The account of the following facts is based mainly on newspaper material 
(published in The Northern Star, The Manchester Guardian, The Times, and other 
papers). p. 508 
16 Tradition has it that the Roman patrician Menenius Agrippa persuaded the 
plebeians who had rebelled and withdrawn to the Mons Sacer in 494 B.C. to submit 
by telling them the fable about the other parts of the human body revolting against 
the stomach because, they said, it consumed food and did no work, but afterwards 
becoming convinced that they could not exist without it. p. 510 
The reference is to the rising of the Welsh miners organised by the Chartists in 
Newport and its environs in November 1839. The rising was caused by the miners' 
hard condition and the growing discontent among them over Parliament's rejection 164 
165 

=====第734页=====
Notes 709 
168 
169 of the Chartists' petition and the arrest of Chartist agitators. The Newport Rising, 
possibly intended to be the signal for a general armed struggle for the People's 
Charter, was put down by troops and used as a pretext for severe repressions. 
Later Engels again returned to this rising (see p. 519 of this volume). 
The events of 1843 in Manchester were reported by Engels in his article "An 
English Turnout" (see pp. 584-96 of this volume). p. 513 
A detailed account of the strike at Birley's mill was given in The Northern Star No. 
248, August 13, 1842, p. 5. p. 514 
This body, better known as the London Working-men's Association, the first Chartist 
organisation, was formally established on June 16,1836. A project of parliamentary 
reform which became known as the People's Charter was published at the 
beginning of May 1838. (In all the editions of Engels' book which appeared during 
his lifetime, 1835 is given as the year when this document was drawn up; this was 
probably the result of a slip, and is corrected in the present edition.) At the Chartist 
meeting in Birmingham in August 1838 it was decided to fight for the People's 
Charter to be given the force of law. This demand was set forth in a petition to 
Parliament. p. 517 
Under a law of 1710 candidates to Parliament in borough seats had to own landed 
property yielding an income of at least £300 annually and in county seats Ü500 
annually. p. 518 
The speech made by Stephens at the Chartist meeting of September 24, 1838, at 
Kersall-moor, near Manchester, was published in The Northern Star No. 46, 
September 29. Engels reproduced the relevant passage with abridgments.p. 519 
The author refers to the clashes between the Chartists and the police in 
Sheffield, Bradford and other towns. They were said to have been caused by 
' provocateurs. p. 519 
The reference is to the National Charter Association, founded in July 1840, the first 
mass workers' party in the history of the working-class movement. In the years of 
upsurge it counted up to 50,000 members. The work of the Association was 
hindered by the absence of unity in ideas and tactics among its members 
and by the petty-bourgeois ideology of* most of its leaders. After the defeat 
of the Chartists in 1848 the Association fell into decline and it ceased its activity 
in the fifties. p. 523 
174 Engels refers here to the agrarian plans of F. O'Connor and other Chartist leaders 
who shared the Utopian view that the workers could be freed from exploitation and 
other social evils by returning them to the land. In 1845 the Chartist Land 
Co-operative Society was formed for this purpose on the initiative of F. O'Connor 
(later it operated under the name of National Land Company). It tried to buy up 
land with the contributions of workmen-shareholders and to rent it out to its 
members in small plots on easy terms. The scheme was not successful, p. 524 
175 Home  colonies  was the name given by Robert Owen and his supporters to their model 
communist colonies. For details about them see Engels' article "Description of 
Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still in Existence" (pp. 214-28 of this 
volume). p. 525 
Mechanics' Institutes were evening schools in which workers were taught general 
and technical subjects; such schools first appeared in Britain in 1823, in Lon­
don and Glasgow. In the early 1840s there were over 200 of them, mainly in 

=====第735页=====
710 Notes 
180 
181 
182 the factory towns of Lancashire and Yorkshire. The bourgeoisie used these insti­
tutions to train skilled workers for industry and to bring them under the in­
fluence of bourgeois ideas, though initially this was resisted by the working-class 
activists. p. 527 
The following books were published in English: [Holbach], Système de la nature 
in 1817, Helvétius' De l'esprit in 1807, and De l'homme in 1777. Announcements 
of popular and inexpensive editions of the classics of French philosophy were 
carried by the Owenites' weekly The New Moral  World.  p. 528 
The English edition of Strauss' book Das Leben Jesu was published by Henry 
Hetherington in 1842 in a series of weekly instalments. p. 528 
It was apparently a question of Engels' intention to give a characterisation of 
English bourgeois political and economic writings in his planned work on the 
social history of England. (Concerning this intention see Note 118.) p. 528 
These data were given in The Mining Journal, Vol. 13, No. 420, September 9, 
1843.  p. 538 
The law forbidding the employment underground of women and of children 
under ten years of age was passed by Parliament on August  10,. 1842, and came into 
force in March 1843. p. 539 
The Court of Queen's Bench is one of the oldest courts in England; in the 19th 
century (up to 1873) it was an independent supreme court for criminal and 
civil cases, competent to review the decisions of lower judicial bodies. 
A Writ of Habeas Corpus is the name given in English judicial procedure to a 
document enjoining the relevant authorities to present an arrested person 
before a court on the demand of persons interested to check the legitimacy of 
the arrest. Having considered the reasons for the arrest, the court either frees 
the person arrested, sends him back to prison or releases him on bail or guar­
antee. This procedure, laid down by an Act of Parliament of 1679, does not 
apply to persons accused of high treason and can be suspended by decision of 
Parliament. p» 542 
The speech in question was made by Thomas Duncombe in the House of Com­
mons on June 4, 1844. The report on it was first published in The Times, June 5, 
1844,  p. 2, and later reprinted in the Chartist Northern Star No. 343, June 8, 
1844,  p. 8. p. 546 
The reference is to the wars of the coalitions of European states against France 
under the Revolution and under Napoleon, wars which lasted from 1792 to 1815 
with a short interruption in 1802-1803. Britain was an active member of thèse 
coalitions. p. 548 
The facts adduced are quoted from The Times, June 7, 10, and 21, 1844. 
p. 552 
The quotations are from an essay by A. Somerville published in The Morning 
Chronicle, July 6, 1843. p. 556 
Before the Commutation Act of 1838 Irish peasants renting land paid tithes 
to the Established Church of Ireland. Under the Act of 1838 the tithe was 

=====第736页=====
Notes 711 
192 
193 
194 reduced by 25 per cent and commuted into a tax exacted from landlords and 
landowners. The latter in turn transferred this tax to the tenants, thus raising 
the rent. p. 559 
The Union of Ireland with Great Britain was imposed on Ireland by the British 
Government after the suppression of the Irish rising of 1798. The Union, which 
entered into force on January 1, 1801, abolished the autonomy of the Irish 
Parliament and made the country still more dependent on England. The demand 
for the repeal of the Union became the most popular slogan in Ireland from the 
1820s. Its leader, Daniel O'Connell, founder of the Repeal Association (1840), 
tried to steer the movement toward compromise with the British ruling classes. 
The agitation revived in the early 1840s. p. 560 
The reference is to the trial of O'Connell and eight other leaders of the Repeal 
movement in 1844. The Tory government intended by this trial to deal it a decisive 
blow. O'Connell and his supporters were sentenced to up to twelve months 
imprisonment in February 1844, but the sentence was soon quashed by the House 
of Lords. p. 561 
"Laissez-faire, laissez-aller" was the formula of the advocates of free trade and 
non-intervention of the state in economic relations. p. 564 
See Note 71. p. 570 
A considerable number of the facts adduced here were taken from The Northern 
Star. Engels made use, in particular, of the following articles and reports: 
"Brutality at a Workhouse", No. 295, July 8, 1843; "Inhuman Conduct of the 
Master of a Union Workhouse", No. 334, April 6, 1844; "Murder! Hellish 
Treatment of the Poor in the Coventry Bastille", No. 315, November 25, 1843; 
"Atrocities at the Birmingham Workhouse", No. 317, December 9, 1843; "Secrets 
of the Union Workhouse", No. 326, February 10, 1844; "St. Paneras Scoundrel-
ism Again!", No. 328, February 24, 1844; "Infamous Treatment of an English­
man and his Family in Bethnal-Green Workhouse", No. 333, March 30, 1844; 
"Infernal Workhouse Cruelties", No. 359, September 28, 1844; "The Poor 
Laws.—Disgusting Treatment of the Poor", No. 328, February 24, 1844; 
"Horrible Profligacy in the West London Union Workhouse", No. 334, April 6, 
1844.  p. 574 
The reference is to the article by Douglas Jerrold "The Two Windows", published 
in The Illuminated Magazine, Vol. Ill, May-October, 1844. p. 574 
The Gilbert Act of 1782 was one of the Poor Laws. It authorised the formation, on 
the demand of the rate-payers paying two-thirds of the value of rates, in any 
parish or group of parishes, of a Board of Guardians to control poor  relief. 
However, unlike the workhouses of the New Poor Law of 1834, which were also 
administered by Boards of Guardians, the workhouses in "Gilbert Unions" 
contained only the impotent poor and pauper children. The Gilbert Act was not 
finally repealed until the early 1870s. p. 576 
Barmecide feast—an expression taken from "The Arabian Nights". One of the 
Barmaks, a noble Persian family, derided a hungry beggar by telling him of an 
imaginary banquet. The expression was used by T. Carlyle in his Chartism, the first 
edition of which appeared in 1840, which is what Engels here alludes to. p. 579 

=====第737页=====
712 Notes 
Quoted from The Northern Star No. 344, June 15, 1844. In an article headlined 
"Horrible Condition of the Agricultural Labourers" it reproduced with a 
commentary material on the occurrence which was published in The Times, June 
7, 1844, under the title "Effect of the New Poor Law upon Wages". p. 579 
This article was written by Engels in the spring and summer of 1845 after he had 
completed The Condition of the Working-Class in England and moved to Brussels. 
Judging by the title and subtitle, which is numbered I, and by the first paragraph, 
it was intended as the beginning of a series to supplement The Condition of the 
Working-Class in England with concrete illustrations. The article was published in 
the January and February issues of the journal Das Westphälische Dampfboot in 
1846.  However, the continuation did not follow and the article was not included 
by Engels in any of the editions of The Condition of the Working-Class in England 
published during his lifetime. It was first published in English in 1958 as an 
Appendix to the book: Engels, The Condition of the Working Class in England. 
Translated and edited by W. O. Henderson and W. H. Chaloner, New York, 1958. 
Engels wrote this article basing himself mainly on material published in The 
Northern Star Nos. 362-369, 371, 372, 375 from November 1844 to January 1845, 
which carried detailed reports on the strike described. p. 584 
Van Diemen's Land—the name initially given by Europeans to the island of 
Tasmania, which was a British penal colony up to 1853. p. 585 
These words were taken from a resolution passed by a meeting of workers at 
Ashton-under-Lyne on August 9, 1842, which decided on the action at Man­
chester, p. 587 
According to a report published by The Manchester Guardian on December 24, 
1844,  the strike of the Pauling and Henfrey building workers ended the day 
before. The report admitted that the firm was forced to promise to observe the 
same working conditions as operated on the other building sites of the city. 
p. 596 
This work was written by Marx to expose certain repulsive aspects of bourgeois 
society, its morals and customs, using documentary evidence provided by one of 
its representatives, the French jurist and economist, custodian of the Paris police 
archives, Jacques Peuchet. Marx carried out his intention by translating into 
German and publishing excerpts from Mémoires tirés des archives de la police de 
Paris, pour servir à l'histoire de la morale et de la police, depuis Louis XIV jusqu'à nos 
jours. Par J. Peuchet, Archiviste de la Police. T. I-IV, Paris, 1838, giving his own 
comments in an introductory section and occasional digressions. The excerpts 
were taken from Chapter LVIII "Du suicide et de ses causes" (t. IV, pp. 116-82). 
Marx gives the text with abridgments and sometimes in free rendering, without 
indicating by suspension periods the passages omitted. He left out altogether the 
material on pages 143-68, taking only a few phrases (see pp. 159 and 164), which 
he joined according to the sense to the excerpts from the beginning of the section. 
Some passages from Peuchet were given by Marx in his own formulation, 
emphasising their critical trend. The information on the author given by Marx in 
the introductory section was taken from the Introduction by A. Levasseur, the 
editor of the Mémoires (t. I, Introduction, pp. i-xx). 
In the present edition Marx's own text (introductory and closing sections and 
the digressions in which, he sums up) are printed in larger type and the excerpts 

=====第738页=====
Notes 713 
from Peuchet's book in small type. Cases of substantial paraphrasing and other 
digressions from the original as well as re-arrangements made by Marx in quoting 
are pointed out in footnotes. The emphasis in the quotations is Marx's in all cases. 
p. 597 
The Hundred Days is the second period of Napoleon's rule, from his restoration to 
the imperial throne on March 20 (after his return from the island of Elba) to his 
second abdication on June 22, 1815, four days after his defeat at Waterloo. 
p. 598 
See Note 100. p. 598 
The translation of the fragment from the manuscript of Charles Fourier was 
made by Engels as a first contribution to the plan which he and Marx had formed 
at the beginning of 1845 to publish in Germany a "Library of the Best Foreign 
Socialist Writers" with a general introduction and commentaries to each issue (see 
Engels' letters to Marx of February 22-26, March 7 and 17, 1845). The draft plan 
of this publication, drawn up by Marx (see p. 667 of this-volume), shows that it was 
conceived as a representative series of works of French and English authors. But 
the plan was not carried out because of publishing difficulties. The translation of a 
few chapters of Fourier's Des trois unités  externes  was the only one carried out in the 
framework of the plan. It was begun by Engels evidently after he had moved from 
Barmen to Brussels in April 1845. The introduction and the conclusion were most 
probably written not before August, since they were a reply to the works of some 
of the "true Socialists" published at that time. Engels' translation and commentary 
were not printed until the middle of 1846 (in the annual  Deutsches  Bürgerbuch für 
1846). 
The fragment selected by Engels comprises the first seven chapters of 
Fourier's unfinished manuscript Des trois unités externes (written, apparently, 
between 1807 and 1821), most of which was published for the first time after the 
author's death in the Fourierist journal La Phalange, in the first two issues 
(January-February and March-April) of 1845. Some passages in the manuscript 
coincide with passages in the first, anonymous, publication (1808) of Fourier's 
work Théorie des quatre mouvements et  des destinées  générales.  In the 1845 publication 
of Des trois unités  externes  they were replaced by suspension periods and references 
to pages of that work. In his translation Engels restored these passages according 
to the edition of the Théorie  des quatre mouvements of 1841 (in the present edition all 
these cases are pointed out in the Notes). 
The text of the seven chapters is given by Engels with abridgments, omissions 
not always being indicated by suspension periods, and in some cases fragments 
translated are joined by Engels' insertions. Some passages are translated with 
abridgments or in the form of a paraphrase, and sometimes the content is given in 
Engels' own words. 
In the present edition the translation of Fourier's manuscript is reproduced in 
the form in which it was produced for publication by Engels. All his digressions 
from the original have been preserved. The whole of the translation — as distinct 
from Engels' introduction and conclusion —  is printed in small type. The 
insertions made by Engels and the passages given in his rendering are printed 
without quotes. The most important cases of paraphrasing are pointed out in 
footnotes. The italics in the quoted text are mostly by Engels. p. 613 
By "German theory of the very worst sort" Engels means "true socialism", which 
in 1844-45 was spreading among German intellectuals and craftsmen. It was a 

=====第739页=====
714 ' Notes 
206 
207 mixture of the idealistic aspects of Feuerbachianism with French Utopian socialism 
in an emasculated form. As a result, socialist teaching was turned into abstract 
sentimental moralising divorced from real needs. The vulgarisation of the French 
Utopian Socialists' views by "true socialism", combined with an arrogant and 
deprecatory attitude towards them, was especially marked in Grün's book Die 
soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien published in Darmstadt in August 1845. 
This work of Engels reflects the intention which by then had matured in his 
and Marx's minds to dissociate themselves publicly from "true socialism" and to 
criticise its representatives. Marx and Engels gave a detailed criticism of "true 
socialism" in The German Ideology. p. 613 
Here the author has in mind Fourier's fantastic descriptions of the changes which 
according to his vision of the future were destined to take place in nature: a 
change in the unpleasant taste of sea water, which would turn into lemonade, the 
appearance of heat-radiating coronas over the North and South Poles, the 
transformation of beasts of prey into animals useful to man, and so on. 
The method of  series  is a method of classification typical of Fourier and applied 
by him in analysing various natural and social phenomena. By means of this 
method Fourier tried to develop a new social science according to which the social 
and psychological factor — the attraction and repulsion of passions — would be 
demonstrated as the main principle of social development (the passions, in turn, 
were divided into groups or series). In this method and its application by Fourier, 
unscientific and fantastic elements were combined with rational observations and 
spontaneous manifestations of dialectics. p. 614 
Engels included in the first section material from the introduction ("Setting of the 
Question") and from the first chapter of Fourier's manuscript, to which the 
author gave the title "Successive Series of Trade Methods". 
The beginning of the fragments from the words "We now touch on civilisa­
tion's most sensitive spot" to "the mainsprings of circulation" is taken from the 
Theorie des quatre mouvements, Paris, 1841, pp. 331-32. However, unlike the other 
passages which coincide textually with passages in Théorie des quatre mouvements 
and which were omitted in the journal La Phalange, the text of this passage was 
reproduced in the journal too. p. 616 
By "ideology" and "ideologists" Fourier means a group of imitators of the French 
philosophy of the 18th century which was headed by the liberal thinker, economist 
and politician Antoine L. C. Destutt de Tracy (1754-1836), author of the 
five-volume Eléments d'idéologie, published in 1804. p. 616 
At the Aachen Congress (1818) of the states of the Holy Alliance (Britain, Austria, 
Prussia and Russia) the heads of the biggest banking houses in Europe were 
enlisted to help work out the terms of France's payment of the contribution 
imposed on her after the defeat of Napoleon. It was decided to carry out the credit 
operations for the payment of this contribution through the English Baring Bank 
and the Anglo-Dutch Hope Bank. Apparently it was these two bankers that 
Fourier had in mind in this passage. p. 619 
The Federates  of 1815 were volunteers who supported Napoleon during his short 
period of rule in 1815, from his return from Elba till his defeat at Waterloo (the 
Hundred Days). p. 619 
The author has in mind the bank-notes issued in France in 1716 with the 
Government's permission by a special bank founded by the adventurer John Law, 

=====第740页=====
Notes 715 
who had decamped from England in 1720 after becoming bankrupt. As he had 
transferred his bank to the state beforehand, its ruin was a concealed form of state 
bankruptcy. 
Assignats were paper money issued during the French Revolution from Decem­
ber 1789 and backed by the revenue from the sale of property confiscated from 
the feudal aristocracy and the church (national estates). As a result of emissions 
and speculation, which were particularly intensified after the counter-revolution­
ary coup in July 1794 (9 Thermidor), they quickly depreciated. In December 
1796 their issue was stopped. p. 624 
Fourier mistakenly attributes this operation to the Convention. It was carried out 
on September 30, 1797, by the Directory — the highest government body of the 
regime which replaced the Convention. The Directory reduced the value of all 
state bonds by two-thirds and recognised as payable only one-third, which 
received the name of Consolidated Third. p. 624 
The text from the words "when a crime becomes very frequent, one gets 
accustomed to it and witnesses it with indifference" to "in which the speculator 
steals only  half"  was taken from the Théorie des quatre mouvements, pp. 341-43. 
Subsequently, Engels follows the text published in La Phalange. p. 624 
By the new French code Fourier means the Code civile of Napoleon, which was 
introduced in 1804. p. 625 
In the list of varieties of bankruptcy in Fourier's manuscript the names of 
bankrupt businessmen were given. But the publishers of the work in La Phalange 
omitted these, leaving in the subsequent description of each variety only names 
which were imaginary or borrowed from literary works. Engels himself points this 
out in a footnote (see p. 638 of this volume). p. 625 
An allusion to the Disputationes de sancto matrimonii sacramento, by Tomas 
Sanchez, a Spanish Jesuit and theologian at the end of the 16th and the beginning 
of the 17th century. The book was notable for its refined casuistry and, at the same 
time,  its freedom verging on pornography. p. 629 
217 The text from the words "Banker Dorante has two million" to the end of point 13 
("for people who steal several millions at one go") was taken from the Théorie des 
quatre mouvements, pp. 343-46. p- 630 
The text from the words "Judas Iscariot arrives in France" to "everybody avidly 
seizes the opportunity to commit a theft if it remains unpunished" was taken from 
the Théorie des quatre mouvements, pp.  348-51.  p. 633 
During certain Catholic services the Blessed Sacrament is solemnly carried under a 
portable canopy. p. 637 
The small town of Beaucaire in the south of France became famous for its big 
annual fair. p. 638 
The text from the words "Scapin, a petty crook" to the end of point 34 ("after the 
happy issue of the first bankruptcy, he starts to think of a new one") was taken 
from the Théorie des quatre mouvements, pp. 346-47. p. 639 
The March-April issue of La Phalange carried, besides the three chapters of Des 
trois unités externes (Chapters VIII-X) mentioned by Engels, also Chapters 220 
222 

=====第741页=====
716 Notes 
XI-XVIII ("Conclusions from What Has Been Proved About Trade", "The 
Tendency of the Trade System to Seven Monopolies", "On Sea Monopoly of 
Coarse or Destructive Hoisting", "On the Navigation Monopoly of a Simple 
United Structure", "On the Navigation Monopoly of a Complex United 
Structure", "Conclusion on Fraudulent Trade", "On the Trade Unity of People 
of Harmonic Structure", "On the Administrative Unity of People of Har­
monic Structure"). The text coinciding with passages from the Théorie des 
quatre mouvements was omitted. p. 641 
223 Engels ironically compares the picture of historic development given by Hegel in 
his Philosophie der Geschichte with the medieval Christian-feudal periodisation of 
world history according to the four empires: Assyrio-Babylonian, Medo-Persian, 
Greco-Macedonian, and Roman (the "Roman", in its various forms, including the 
Germanic Holy Roman Empire, was supposedly to last till the end of time). 
According to Hegel's conception, world history, the basis of which is the process of 
self-knowledge of the Absolute Idea or the world spirit, has gone through three 
main stages, namely, the history of Asia Minor and Ancient Egypt, the history of 
the Greco-Roman world, and the history of the German peoples. The nations 
whose history did not fit into this three-stage system were called "non-historical" 
by Hegel. p. 642 
224 See Note 83. p. 643 
225 
226 
227 The reference is to the project of a "Library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers" 
(see Note 89). For this purpose Marx and Engels intended to enlist other members 
of the socialist movement, including M. Hess. But the fact that the latter had 
meanwhile embraced "true socialism" and become one of its spokesmen, made it 
practically impossible to collaborate with him, as also with a number of other 
editors and publishers of various German journals, and was one of the reasons 
why the "Library" did not materialise. p. 644 
Engels' contributions to The Northern Starbegan late in 1843 and became regular 
from May 1844 (see present edition, Vol. 3). However, as a result of his departure 
from England in August 1844 and of his work on The Condition of the 
Working-Class in England, he discontinued his reports temporarily in the late 
summer of 1844. In July 1845, Marx and Engels left Brussels for England, where 
they spent about a month and a half (from July 12 to August 21) in Manchester 
and in London; they acquainted themselves with English social and political 
literature and expanded their contacts with the working-class movement. In 
London, on his way back from Manchester, Engels agreed with G. J. Harney, the 
editor of The Northern Star, to resume his work with the paper. From September 
1845 up to the revolution of 1848 he regularly contributed articles and reports on 
the various Continental countries and the growth of the revolutionary, and above 
all, the working-class movement there. The article "The Late Butchery at 
Leipzig.— The German Working Men's Movement" was the first in this new series 
of reports. p. 645 
The massacre at Leipzig was the shooting down of a popular demonstration by 
Saxon troops in Leipzig on August 12, 1845. The demonstration, on the occasion 
of a military parade welcoming the arrival of Crown Prince Johann, was in protest 
against the Saxon Government's persecution of the "German Catholics" 
movement and one of its leaders, the priest J. Ronge. The "German Catholics" 
movement, which arose in a number of German states in 1844, embraced a 

=====第742页=====
Notes 717 
considerable section of the middle and petty bourgeoisie; rejecting the supremacy 
of the Pope and many of the dogmas and rites of the Catholic Church, the 
"German Catholics" sought to adapt Catholicism to the needs of the developing 
German bourgeoisie. 
The Northern Star took notice several times of the events in Leipzig. It carried 
information on them in Nos. 404 and 406, August 9 and 23, 1845, and in the 
report "Germany. The New Reformation", published in No. 408, September 6, 
1845 (Engels refers to it at the beginning and the end of his article). The shooting 
in Leipzig was interpreted as a sign of the ripening of revolution in Germany. 
p. 645 
Peterloo was the name given, by analogy with the battle of Waterloo, to the 
massacre by troops on August 16, 1819, of unarmed participants in a mass 
meeting in support of electoral reform at St. Peter's Fields, near Manchester. 
p. 645 
229 See Note 79. p. 646 
The reference is to the revolution of 1688 (the overthrow of the Stuart dynasty 
and the enthronement of William III of Orange), after which constitutional 
monarchy was consolidated in England on the basis of a compromise between 
the landed aristocracy and the bourgeoisie. p. 647 
231 
232 This theme was not developed in detail at the time in Engels' reports. He merely 
touched upon it in his article '"Young Germany' in Switzerland", which 
was published in The Northern Star two weeks later, on September 27, 1845 
(see pp. 651-53 of this volume). Nevertheless Engels did not abandon his intention 
of describing the development of the German working-class movement in 
the 1840s in the columns of the Chartist newspaper, as is borne out by the 
series of articles on "The State of Germany" which he began in October 
1845 but did not complete and carried only to the beginning of-the 1840s 
(see present edition, Vol. 6). p. 648 
" Young Germany" was a revolutionary conspiratorial organisation of German 
émigrés in Switzerland in the 1830s and 1840s. Initially it comprised mainly 
petty-bourgeois intellectuals, whose object was to set up a democratic republic in 
Germany, but soon it came more under the influence of the trade unions and 
socialist clubs. In the mid-1830s, the Swiss Government, under pressure from 
Austria and Prussia, deported the German revolutionaries; the craftsmen's unions 
were closed. "Young Germany" virtually ceased to exist, though several groups of 
its followers still remained in the cantons of Geneva and Vaud. In the 1840s 
"Young Germany" was revived, when its members, under the influence of 
Ludwig Feuerbach's ideas, carried on mainly atheistic propaganda among the 
German émigrés, sharply opposing the communist trends, especially that of 
Weitling, although some ot the members of "Young Germany" were more 
and more attracted by social questions. In 1845 "Young Germany" was again 
crushed. 
The report "On the 'Discovery of the Conspiracy' of 'Young Germany'" which 
is quoted by Engels in abridged form in English was published in the 
Constitutionnel Neuchâtelois No. 109, September 11, 1845. The emphasis in the text 
is by Engels; in the newspaper only the words "Regicide not excepted" were 
stressed, and they were reproduced in italics by Engels. p. 651 
24-762 

=====第743页=====
718 Notes 
235 
236 The reference is to the armed clash between clerical-patriarchal elements opposed 
to bourgeois reforms and the democratic forces of the Valais canton in March 
1844.  With the support of conservative circles in Lucerne and other cantons, the 
clericals temporarily gained the upper hand. Concerning these events see Engels' 
article "The Civil War in the Valais" (present edition, Vol. 3, p. 525). p. 651 
On the "German Catholics" see Note 227. 
"Friends of Light" was a religious trend directed against the pietism which, 
supported by Junker circles, was predominant in the official church and was 
distinguished by its extreme reactionary and hypocritical character. The "Friends 
of Light" movement was an expression of German bourgeois discontent with the 
reactionary order in Germany in the 1840s. p. 653 
Weitling and his supporters were arrested in June 1843 by the Zurich authorities 
and put on trial for communist activity considered dangerous to the state and 
public order. The trial took place in September, and the public prosecutor failed 
to secure conviction on the charge of high treason and conspiracy. Weitling was, 
however, condemned to six months imprisonment for inciting to crimes against 
property and insulting religion (the court of appeal, on the demand of the public 
prosecutor, increased the term to ten months) and to deportation from 
Switzerland; his followers were banished from the canton of Zurich. Weitling's 
trial was described by Engels in his article "Progress of Social Reform on the 
Continent" (see present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 392-408). p. 654 
The article was sent to the Hamburg journal Telegraph für Deutschland through 
Reichardt's Newspaper-Correspondence Bureau in Brussels, which provided the 
progressive German press with reports by German émigrés. Engels himself 
contributed to this paper only in his younger years, from 1839 to 1841 (see 
present edition, Vol. 2); he discontinued his collaboration because he was 
dissatisfied with the ideological and political stand and especially the liberal 
half-measures of the literary group of "Young Germany", whose press organ this 
journal was. In publishing the article the editors accompanied it with a note 
revealing its source. "As the author of this interesting article," the note said, "we 
can name the well-known Engels." In content the article coincides in part with the 
corresponding passages in the chapter on the labour movements in The Condition 
of the Working-Class in England (characterisation of the workers' unrest in 
Lancashire in summer 1842, see pp. 520-21 of thié volume), and in part supple­
ments some other sections of that book. p. 656 
What is meant is the Reform Act of 1832, see Note 123. p. 657 
The Bill introducing the sliding scale was drafted by Canning's Tory cabinet in 
1827 and carried through Parliament the following year in a somewhat revised 
form by the Tory cabinet under Wellington. p. 657 
The People's Charter, containing the demands of the Chartists, was published on 
May 8, 1838, as a Bill to be submitted to Parliament. It consisted of six points: 
universal suffrage (for men on reaching the age of 21), annual elections to 
Parliament, secret ballot, equal electoral areas, abolition of the property 
qualification for Parliamentary candidates, a salary for Members of Parliament. 
p. 659 
Marx's note entitled "Hegel's Construction of the Phenomenology" is at the 
beginning of his Notebook for 1844-1847 (the first of his surviving Notebooks). 237 
239 

=====第744页=====
Notes 719 
241 
244 
245 The basic ideas contained in the four points were developed in The Holy 
Family, in particular in the sections where, criticising the Young Hegelians' 
tendency to replace the revolutionary transformation of existing reality by abstract 
theoretical criticism of what exists, Marx showed that this tendency was based on 
Hegel's idealist conception developed in his Phänomenologie des Geistes (see 
pp. 85-86, 195-97 of this volume). p. 665 
This draft has no author's title and is near the beginning of Marx's Notebook for 
1844-1847. The main points of the draft coincide with the points of the subject 
indexes compiled by Marx as early as the summer of 1843 for his "Kreuznach 
Notebooks" on world history, including the history of the French Revolution. In 
resuming his study of these problems after his arrival in Paris in the autumn of 
that year, Marx intended to write a History of the Convention. For this purpose he 
compiled a summary of the memoirs of the Jacobin Levasseur (see present edition, 
Vol. 3). The materials he collected, most of which have not come down to us, were 
used in part in The Holy Family. It was probably in connection with his plan to 
write a work on the French Revolution (he did not abandon this idea even in 1845 
after his expulsion from Paris to Belgium, as is borne out by a report in the 
Trier'sche Zeitung of February 6, 1845) that he compiled this draft. In it Marx did 
not merely reproduce the text of the subject indexes to the "Kreuznach 
Notebooks", he made a substantial addition to point 9, adding the words "the 
fight for the abolition [Aufhebung] of the state and of bourgeois society", i.e., the 
fight to abolish the exploiter state and the whole existing system of social-
economic relations. p. 666 
The Plan of the "Library of the Best Foreign Socialist Writers" is in Marx's 
Notebook for 1844-1847, among the notes relating to March 1845. (Concerning 
Marx and Engels' intention to put out such a publication and the causes which 
prevented its realisation see Note 89.) As is seen from further entries in his 
Notebook, Marx returned to this plan in the following months, recording the 
names of authors whose works should be added to the "Library" (in particular 
the names of Thompson, Campanella, Lamennais), and also the persons to be 
enlisted in the proposed publication (M. Hess was to translate the works of 
Buonarroti, Dézamy and others). 
In listing the names of the Socialists Marx also mentions Lalande. This is 
probably a slip of the pen. He might have meant de Labord. True, further on in 
his Notebook Marx mentions Lalande's De L'Association, but in Capital, Vol. 1, he 
quotes Labord's book De l'esprit d'association dans tous  les intérêts  de la Communauté, 
Paris,  1818. p. 667 
See Note 41. p. 667 
The reference is to the travailleurs égalitaires and the humanitaires, see Note 68. 
p. 667 
These entries in Marx's Notebook for 1844-1847 immediately precede the famous 
"Theses on Feuerbaçh", written in April 1845 (see present edition, Vol. 5). In 
content the notes correspond to the first point of the "Draft Plan for a Work on 
the Modern State" given above—evidence that in the first months of his stay in 
Brussels Marx had not abandoned the plan of writing a work on the French 
Revolution, but still could not carry it out at that stage. The ideas briefly recorded 
in his notes have much in common with a number of those developed in The Holy 
Family (see pp. 122-28, 140-47 of this volume). p. 668 

=====第745页=====
720 Notes 
This address to the readers of and contributors to the Elberfeld journal 
Gesellschaftsspiegel was written by Engels and Hess. Engels took a part in 
preparing the publication of the journal, in drawing up its programme, and, as is 
seen from his letter to Marx of January 20, 1845, in compiling the prospectus 
published in the first issue in the form of this editorial address. As Engels wrote 
in one of his reports, "Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany", published in 
The New Moral World (see p. 234 of this volume), it was initially proposed that he 
should be one of the editors. The prospectus reflected Engels' intention that the 
journal would expose the evils of the capitalist system and defend the interests of 
the workers by criticising half-measures and advocating a radical transformation 
of the social system. Indeed, the concrete plan worked out by Engels for 
investigating the condition of the workers corresponded in many respects with the 
tasks he had set himself in writing The Condition of the Working-Class in England. 
But at the same time, not a few abstract philanthropic sentiments in the spirit of 
"true socialism", coming from Hess, had found a place in the prospectus. 
Dissatisfaction with the position adopted by Hess was apparently one of the causes 
of Engels' refusal to become one of the editors. In the third of the mentioned 
reports in The  N,ew  Moral  World,  written in early April 1845, he named Hess alone 
as the publisher of the  Gesellschaftsspiegel  (see p. 240 of this volume). Under the 
editorship of Hess the journal very sopn departed from the line envisaged by 
Engels in the prospectus and became a mouthpiece of the reformist and 
sentimental ideas of "true socialism". p. 671 
The reference is to the riot of the Silesian weavers. See Note 79. p. 674 
The reference is to the Associations for the Benefit of the Working Classes in 
Germany (see Note 83). These associations are characterised in Engels' article 
"Rapid Progress of Communism in Germany" (pp. 234, 237 of this volume). 
p. 674 
Marx studied political economy from the end of 1843, and by the spring of 1844 
had set himself the task of writing a criticism of bourgeois political economy from 
the standpoint of materialism and communism; the draft "Economic and 
Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844" (see present edition, Vol. 3) written at this 
time have reached us incomplete. Work on The Holy Family in the autumn of 1844 
forced Marx temporarily to interrupt his study of political economy; he returned 
to it only in December 1844; in February 1845, just before his expulsion from 
Paris,  he concluded the publication contract with Leske. In Brussels Marx 
continued to study English, French, German, Italian and other economists and 
added to his Paris notebooks of quotations several more notebooks. In the autumn 
of 1845 he again turned to other work: he had concluded that a criticism of 
political economy should be preceded by an exposition of his new principles of 
general methodology and a critical review of current philosophical doctrines, and 
therefore concentrated on writing, jointly with Engels, The German  Ideology.  On 
the other hand, he firmly rejected (see his letter to Leske of August 1, 1846) the 
publisher's attempts to get him to adapt the projected work to the conditions of 
the reactionary censorship. On September 9, 1846, Leske informed Marx that, in 
view of rigorous censorship and police persecution, he would not be able to 
publish his work. In February 1847 the contract was cancelled. p. 675 
This request was written four days after Marx's arrival in Brussels upon his 
expulsion from France by the French Government for taking part in editing 
Vorwärts! (see Note 87). Shortly after his arrival his wife joined him, with their 
eldest daughter, Jenny, who had been born in Paris. 

=====第746页=====
Notes 721 
251 
252 Marx received no reply to his request. The Royal Belgian Government was 
reluctant to grant political asylum to revolutionary émigrés. Marx was 
immediately placed under secret surveillance as a "dangerous democrat and 
Communist". p. 676 
On March 22, 1845, Marx was summoned to the police administration in Brussels 
and asked to sign an undertaking as a condition for being allowed to stay in 
Brussels. Marx himself informed Heinrich Heine of this in a letter of March 24, 
1845.  p. 677 
Marx's two letters (October 17 and November 10, 1845) to Görtz, the Chief 
Burgomaster of Trier, were connected with his attempts to obtain the official 
documents required for emigration to the United States of America. As is clear 
from the second document, the request was motivated by the fact that after 
Marx's arrival in Brussels the Prussian Government, on whose insistence the 
French authorities had expelled him from Paris, began to try to get him deported 
from Belgium too. It was apparently in order to deprive the Prussian authorities 
of a formal pretext for interfering in his affairs, that Marx went to the trouble 
of requesting permission to emigrate to the U.S.A., the receipt of which would 
have been equivalent to release from his obligations as a Prussian citizen. There 
are no other documents to indicate that he had any intention at the time to 
emigrate with his family to North America. Regardless of the outcome of these 
steps,  which most probably failed, Marx officially renounced Prussian citizen­
ship in December 1845. p. 678 
In 1838 Marx was excused reporting for military service in Berlin because of 
a lung disease, and in 1841 he was pronounced unfit for military service. 
p. 678 

=====第747页=====

=====第748页=====
NAME INDEX 
A 
Ainsworth and Crompton—textile manu­
facturers in Bolton—508 
Albert, Prince Consort of Queen Victoria of 
Great Britain (1819-1861)—650 
Alexander I (1777-1825)—Emperor of 
Russia (1801-25)—205 
Alison, Sir Archibald (1792-1867)— 
Scottish historian and economist, 
Tory—14, 338, 389, 398, 412, 416, 
417, 421, 424, 426, 558, 560 
Alison, William Pulteney (1790-1859)— 
professor of medicine at Edinburgh 
University, Tory—338, 389, 398 
Alston,  G.—preacher  of St. Philip's 
Church, Bethnal Green (London)— 
334 
Anaxagoras (c. 500-428 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher—128 
Angles, Jules Jean Baptiste (1778-1828)— 
police prefect in Paris—611 
Angoulême, Marie Thérèse Charlotte, duch­
esse d' (1778-1851)—daughter of Louis 
XVI—611 
Antonius, Marcus (83-30 B.C.)—Roman 
politician and general, supporter of 
Julius Caesar—122 
Arch,  Joseph—founder of the National 
Agricultural Labourers' Union—555 
Aristides (c. 540-467 B.C.)—Athenian 
statesman and general during the 
Greco-Persian wars—121 Arkwright, Sir Richard (1732-1792)— 
English manufacturer, inventor of the 
spinning throstle, the carding engine 
and other spinning machines named 
after him—12, 312, 503 
Arnauld,  Antoine (1612-1694)—French 
philosopher, adherent of Descartes' 
theory of cognition—127 
Ashley (Cooper Anthony Ashley, 7th Earl 
of Shaftesbury) (1801-1885)—English 
politician, Tory philanthropist—14, 
423, 435, 437, 440, 451, 463, 464, 
539, 578 
Ashton, Thomas—manufacturer in Hyde 
(near Manchester)—477 
Ashton, Thomas—son of Thomas Ashton, 
killed in 1831 during workers' dis­
turbances in Hyde—508 
Ashworth, Edmund (1801-1881)—English 
manufacturer, liberal—451, 477, 511 
Attila (d. 453)—King of the Huns (433-
453)—626, 635 
B 
Babeuf,  François Noel (Gracchus) (1760-
1797)—French revolutionary, advocate 
of Utopian egalitarian communism, 
organiser of the "conspiracy of equals" 
—47,  119, 131, 667 
liacon, Francis, Baron Veruiam, Viscount 
St. Albans (1561-1626)—English philos-

=====第749页=====
724 Name Index 
opher, naturalist and historian—128-
29 
Bailey, William—manufacturer in Staly-
bridge—520 
Baines, Sir Edward (1800-1890)—English 
economist, liberal—429 
Bakunin, Mikhail (1814-1876)—Russian 
revolutionary and writer, one of the 
ideologists of the Narodnik trend and 
of anarchism—212 
Bardsley, Samuel Argent (1764-1851) — 
physician in Manchester (1790-1823), 
author of several works on medicine— 
420 
Barham, Charles Foster (1804-1884)— 
English physician, member of the 
Children's Employment Commission 
in 1841—531 
Barmecides—a noble Persian family which 
attained great power under the Abba-
sid caliphs—579 
Barry, Sir David (1780-1835)—English 
physician and physiologist—445-48, 
453-54 
Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882)—German 
philosopher, Young Hegelian—7, 16, 
39, 40, 78, 79, 81, 85-89, 91, 92, 94, 
95, 99-104, 106-13, 115, 117-18, 131, 
132, 134-44, 146-47, 149, 151, 152, 
153-58,  166, 191-93, 211, 240 
Bauer, Edgar (1820-1886)—German phi­
losopher and writer, Young Hegelian, 
brother and fellow-thinker of Bruno 
Bauer—19-24, 33, 34,  37-43,  48, 50-
53, 78, 87, 146, 147, 156-57, 188, 
211, 213 
Bäumler (Bimeler), Joseph Michael (c. 1778-
1853)—German pastor, separatist; 
emigrated to America in 1817 and 
founded a communist colony at Zoar 
(Ohio)—220, 221 
Bayle, Pierre (1647-1706)—French sceptic 
philosopher, critic of religious dogma­
tism—127 
Beaumont de la Bonninière, Gustave 
Auguste de (1802-1866)—French liberal 
writer and politician, author of several 
works on slavery in the United States— 
186 Beaumont, Thomas B. (d. 1859)—English 
surgeon—445, 449 
Becker, August (1814-1871)—German 
journalist, Utopian Communist; in the 
1840s one of the leaders of the 
Weitling communities in Switzer­
land—242, 655 
Benda, Daniel Alexander (1786-1870)— 
German liberal journalist—10 
Benedix, Roderick (1811-1873)—German 
author and playwright, manager of 
a theatre in Elberfeld (1845)—238 
Bentham, Jeremy (1748-1832)—English 
sociologist, theoretician of utilitarian­
ism—131-34, 178, 188, 194, 528, 667 
Bentley and White—owners of a sawmill 
at Bury (Lancashire)—509 
Béraud,  F.F.A. —police commissioner in 
Paris—20, 156 
Birley, Hugh Hornby—Manchester man­
ufacturer, Tory—514, 521 
Bishop, Theresa—London working wom­
an—335 
Blackstone, Sir William (1723-1780)— 
English lawyer, advocate of constitu­
tional monarchy—:195 
Blyth—manufacturer in Holmfirth (York­
shire)—471 
Böhme, Jakob (1575-1624)—German 
handicraftsman, pantheist philosopher 
—128 
Borthwick, Peter (1804-1852)—English 
politician, Tory, editor of the Morning 
Post—578 
Bourbons—French royal dynasty (1589-
1792,  1814-15 and 1815-30)—81, 124, 
598, 607 
Bouverie, William Pleydell, 3rd Earl of 
Radnor (1779-1869)—English politi­
cian, Whig—555 
Bowers—manufacturer at Holmfirth 
(Yorkshire)—471 
Boz—see Dickens, Charles 
Bray, John Francis (1809-1897)—English 
economist, Utopian Socialist, follower 
of Robert Owen, advocated the theory 
of "labour money"—288 
Bridgewater, Francis Egerton, Duke of 
(1736-1803)—big English landowner, 

=====第750页=====
Name Index 725 
known as the "father of British inland 
navigation"—319 
Brindley, James (1716-1772)—English en­
gineer—319 
Brocklehurst, John (1788-1870)—English 
manufacturer and financier, Member 
of Parliament for Macclesfield (1832-
66), liberal—486-87 
Brougham and Vaux, Henry  Peter,  1st Baron 
(1778-1868)—English statesman, law­
yer and writer, Whig—471 
Brüggemann, Karl Heinrich (1810-1887)— 
German liberal journalist—10 
Bruno—see Bauer, Bruno 
Brutus, Marcus Junius (c. 85-42 B.C.)— 
Roman politician, republican, one of 
the initiators of the conspiracy against 
Julius Caesar—121-22 
Bûchez, Philippe Joseph Benjamin (1796-
1865)—French politician, historian, 
Christian Socialist—119, 211 
Buckingham, James Silk (1786-1855)— 
English writer and traveller, Member 
of Parliament for Sheffield (1832-
37); in 1837-40 lived in America—222 
Buonarroti, Filippo Michèle (1761-1837)— 
Italian revolutionary, Utopian Com­
munist; a leader of the French revolu­
tionary movement in the late 18th 
and early 19th century, Babeufs 
comrade-in-arms—119, 667 
Bürgers, Heinrich (1820-1878)—German 
radical journalist—240 
Burns, Major J. A.—member of the Chil­
dren's Employment Commission in 
1841—484 
Bussey, Peter—delegate to the Chartist 
Convention of 1839; abandoned the 
Chartist movement after an unsuccess­
ful attempt to raise a revolt in 
Yorkshire in 1839—519 
Byron, George Gordon Noel, Lord (1788-
1824)—English romantic poet—528 
C 
Cabanis,  Pierre  Jean  Georges  (1757-1808)— 
French physician and philosopher— 
125-26 Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856)—French 
writer, Utopian Communist, author 
of the book Voyage en Icarie—131, 
667 
Caesar, Gaius Julius (c. 100-44 B.C.)— 
Roman general and statesman—121-22 
Canning, George (1770-1827)—English 
statesman, diplomat, Tory; Foreign 
Secretary (1807-09; 1822-27), Prime 
Minister (1827)—667 
Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881)—British 
writer, historian and philosopher, 
supported the Tories; preached views 
bordering on feudal socialism up to 
1848;  later a relentless opponent of 
the working-class movement—14, 368, 
389, 390, 392, 414, 510, 560, 562, 
563, 578-79 
Carter—coroner for Surrey (London)— 
334 
Cartwright, Edmund (1743-1823)—Eng­
lish parson, inventor of the power-
loom—312 
Cassius Longinus, Gaius (d. 42 B.C.)—Ro­
man politician, republican, one of the 
organisers of the conspiracy against 
Julius Caesar—122 
Catilina, Lucius Sergius (c. 108-62 B.C.)— 
Roman politician, organiser of the con­
spiracy against the aristocratic republic 
— 121-22 
Cato,  Marcus Porcius (95-46 B.C.)—Ro­
man statesman and philosopher, leader 
of the republicans—122 
Chadwick, Sir Edwin (1800-1890)— 
English official, member of Parliamen­
tary Factories Inquiry Commissions— 
339 
Champneys, William Weldon (1807-
1875)—English parson, philanthro­
pist—385 
Chaptal, Jean Antoine Claude (1756-1832) 
—French statesman and chemist— 
200 
Charles I (1600-1649)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1625-49), execut­
ed during the English revolution of 
the 17th century—262 
Charles II (1630-1685)—King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1660-85)—576 

=====第751页=====
726 Name Index 
Cherbuliez, Antoine Elisée (1797-1869)— 
Swiss economist, wanted to combine 
Sismondi's doctrine with elements of 
the Ricardian theory—271, 287 
Chevalier, Michel (1806-1879)—French 
engineer, economist and journalist, 
Saint-Simonist in the 1830s, later a 
free trader—283 
Clavière, Etienne (1735-1793)—Swiss 
financier; during the French Revolu­
tion was a member of the Legislative 
Assembly, Minister for Finance in the 
Girondist Government—270 
Clodius, Publius (c. 93-52 B.C.)—sur-
named Pulcher—Roman politician, sup­
porter of Julius Caesar—121 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865)—English 
manufacturer and politician, a leader 
of the free traders and founder of the 
Anti-Corn Law League—588 
Collins, Anthony (1676-1729)—English 
philosopher— 129 
Collins, John Anderson (c. 1810-1879)— 
English Socialist; after his emigration 
to America became a follower of 
Fourier and an abolitionist, founded 
a communist colony in the state of 
New York (1813)—223 
Comte, François Charles Louis (1782-1837) 
—French liberal writer and economist 
—24,  44-46, 270 
Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de (1715-1780) 
—French philosopher, follower of 
Locke—127, 129 
Considérant, Victor Prosper (1808-1893)— 
French writer, Utopian Socialist, di­
sciple and follower of Fourier—667 
Cowan, Robert—English physician, author 
of Vital Statistics of Glasgow—404 
Coward, William (c. 1656-1725)—English 
physician and philosopher—129 
Cowell, John  W.—member  of the Facto­
ries Inquiry Commission in  1833— 
441, 445, 450, 453, 454 
Crémieux, Isaac Moïse, dit Adolphe (1796-
1880)—French lawyer and politician, 
in the 1840s was a liberal—115 
Croker, John Wilson (1780-1857)—British 
politician and writer—560 Crompton, Samuel (1753-1827)—English 
engineer, inventor of the spinning 
mule—12, 312 
D 
Dante, Alighieri (1265-1321)—Italian 
poet—645 
Danton, Georges Jacques (1759-1794)— 
leading figure in the French Revolu­
tion; leader of the Right wing of the 
Jacobins—121 
Davy, Sir Humphry (1778-1829)—English 
chemist and physicist—318, 537 
Democritus (c. 460-c. 370 B.C.)—Greek 
philosopher, one of the founders of 
the atomistic theory—126, 128 
Demosthenes (384-322 B.C.)—Greek ora­
tor and politician—121 
Descartes (Cartesius), René (1596-1650)— 
French philosopher, mathematician 
and naturalist—125-26, 129, 130, 132 
Destutt de Tracy, Antoine Louis Claude, 
Comte de (1754-1836)—French econo­
mist, philosopher, advocate of con­
stitutional monarchy—33 
Dézamy, Théodore (1803-1850)—French 
writer, advocate of Utopian commu­
nism—131,  667 
Dickens,  Charles  John Huffam (1812-1870) 
—English novelist—9, 327 
Diderot, Denis (1713-1784)—French phi­
losopher in the period of Enlighten­
ment; atheist, leader of the Encyclo­
paedists—130, 528 
Disraeli, Benjamin, Earl of Beaconsfield 
(1804-1881)—British author and 
statesman; in the 1840s adhered to 
the "Young England" group, sub­
sequently became a Tory leader; Prime 
Minister (1868 and 1874-80)—420, 
578 
Dodwell, Henry, the younger (d. 1784)— 
English philosopher—129 
Doleke, Hermann—teacher of German, 
one of the leaders of the "Young 
Germany" secret society in Switzer­
land—651 

=====第752页=====
Name Index 727 
Douglas—manufacturer in Pendleton 
(Manchester)—446 
Drinkwater J. E.—member of the Facto­
ries Inquiry Commission in  1833— 
445, 447, 469 
Duncombe, Thomas Slingsby,( 1796-1861)— 
English radical politician, took part 
in the Chartist movement in the 
1840s—322, 545, 569, 570 
Dunoyer, Barthélémy Charles Pierre 
Joseph (1786-1862)—French economist 
and politician—283 
Duns Scotus, John (c. 1265-1308)— 
medieval scholastic philosopher, 
Nominalist—127 
Dupuis, Charles François (1742-1809)— 
French philosopher in the period of 
Enlightenment— 130 
Duveyrier, Charles (1803-1866)—French 
man of letters and lawyer, follower of 
Saint-Simon—283 
E 
Edgar—see Bauer, Edgar 
Egidius, H. L.—see Weil, Carl 
Elizabeth I (1533-1603)—Queen of 
England (1558-1603)-571 
Elisabeth-Louise (1801-1873)—Queen of 
Prussia, wife of Frederick William IV 
—650 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895)—2, 4, 32, 
212, 214, 229, 232, 235,  238-41,  295, 
299, 304, 584, 613, 645, 651, 654, 656 
Epicurus (c. 341-c. 270 B.C.)—Greek 
atomistic philosopher—126, 169 
Estwood—manufacturer at Holmfirth 
(Yorkshire)—471 
F 
Faraday, Michael (1791-1867)—English 
physicist and chemist—546 
Faucher, Julius (Jules) (1820-1878)—Ger­
man writer, Young Hegelian; advocate 
of free trade—7, 12, 14, 38, 40, 78, 
81, 87 Faucher, Léon (1803-1854)—French writ­
er and politician of moderate liberal 
views—488 
Fein,  Georg (1803-1869)—took part in the 
democratic movement in Germany in 
the thirties and forties of the 19th 
century, member of the "Young Ger­
many" secret society in Switzerland— 
651 
Ferrand,  William Bushfield—English land­
owner, Tory, member of the "Young 
England" group—569, 578 
Ferrier, François Louis Auguste (1777-
1861)—French economist and official, 
advocate of mercantilism—268, 269, 
290-93 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas von (1804-
1872)—German philosopher—39, 56, 
83, 92-94, 125, 127, 139, 141, 147, 
212, 235, 236, 613, 653, 665 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814)—Ger­
man philosopher—120, 139 
Fielden, John (1784-1849)—English 
manufacturer, philanthropist, propo­
nent of factory legislation—578 
Finch,  John—English journalist, traveller, 
follower of Robert Owen, contributor 
to the newspaper The New Moral World 
—216,  217,  219-21,  240 
Fleischhammer, Emil —correspondent of 
the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung in Bre­
slau— 145, 146 
Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837)—French Utopian Socialist—31, 
50, 81, 84, 88, 131, 152, 194, 196, 201, 
232, 263, 597, 613-16, 617, 618, 619, 
620, 622, 641-43, 667 
Foy, Maximilien Sébastien (1775-1825)— 
French general; liberal politician—74 
François de Neufchâteau, Nicolas Louis, 
Comte (1750-1828)—French writer and 
politician, Minister for the Interior in 
the period of the Directory—598 
Franks, R. H.—reporter in the Children's 
Employment Commission in England 
in 1841—497 
Frederick Augustus II (1797-1854)—King 
of Saxony (1836-54)—646 
Frederick William IV (1795-1861)—King 
of Prussia (1840-61)—649-50 

=====第753页=====
728 Name Index 
Friedrich Ferdinand Leopold (1821-1847) 
—Archduke of Austria—650 
Froment, M. —police official in Paris 
during the Restoration—74 
Frost, John (1784-1877)—English radical, 
joined the Chartist movement in 1838; 
was sentenced to transportation to 
Australia for organising the miners' 
insurrection in Wales (1839); returned 
to England in 1856 after an amnesty— 
519 
G 
Galway, Ann—London working woman— 
334 
Gans,  Eduard (c. 1798-1839)—German 
philosopher, professor of law at Berlin 
University, follower of Hegel—179 
Gamier, Germain, Marquis (1754-1821)— 
French economist and politician, mon­
archist; follower of the Physiocrats, 
translator and critic of Adam Smith— 
291 
Gaskell, Peter—English physician and 
liberal journalist—14, 366, 401, 422, 
426, 579 
Gassendi, Pierre (1592-1655)—French 
philosopher, adherent of the atomistic 
theory propounded by Epicurus; phys­
icist and mathematician—126 
Gay, Jules (1807-after 1876)—French 
Utopian Communist—131, 667 
Gibson—Scottish building worker—591 
Gilbert, Thomas (1720-1798)—English 
lawyer and politician, one of the 
sponsors of the Poor Laws—576 
Ginal—German pastor in Philadelphia, 
founder of a communist colony in 
Pennsylvania—222 
Girard,  Philippe Henri de (1775-1845)— 
French engineer, inventor of a flax-
spinning machine—315 
Godwin, William (1756-1836)—English 
writer and journalist, one of the 
founders of anarchism—528, 667 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-1832) 
—German poet—63, 142, 175 Goldsmith, Oliver (1728-1774)—Anglo-
Irish poet—552 
Görtz —Prussian official, Chief Burgo­
master of Trier in the 1840s—678, 
679 
Graham—Glasgow worker, strikebreaker 
—509 
Graham, George—English official, Regis­
trar-General of Births, Deaths, and 
Marriages—403 
Graham, Sir James Robert George (1792-
1861)—English statesman; a Whig 
at the beginning of his political career, 
later an adherent of Robert Peel; 
Home Secretary in Peel's Cabinet 
(1841-46); Tory—14, 16, 464-65 
Grainger, Richard Dugard (1801-1865)— 
English physician and physiologist, 
member of the Children's Employment 
Commission in 1841—357, 402, 409, 
480, 482, 483, 491 
Greg, Robert Hyde (1795-1875)—big En­
glish manufacturer, liberal—450, 477 
Grotius, Hugo (1583-1645)—Dutch 
scientist, lawyer, one of the founders 
of the theory of natural law—48 
Grün,  Karl Theodor Ferdinand (pen-name: 
Ernst von der Haide) (1817-1887)— 
German writer, in the mid-1840s a 
"true Socialist"—232 
Gruppe, Otto Friedrich (1804-1876)— 
German writer and philosopher, 
opponent of the Young Hegelians; 
attacked Bruno Bauer in 1842—157 
H 
Hamilton, Alexander, Duke of (1767-1852) 
—big Scottish landowner, Whig—539 
Hargreaves, James (d. 1778)—English 
spinner and weaver, inventor of the 
power-loom known as the jenny—12, 
310 
Hartley, David (1705-1757)—English 
physician and philosopher—129 
Harun al-Rashid (763-809)—Caliph of 
Baghdad of the Abbasid dynasty (786-
809)—179 

=====第754页=====
Name Index 729 
Haslam, Messrs.—owners of the collieries 
in Belper—543 
Hawkins, Francis Bisset (1796-1894)— 
English physician and journalist; 
member of the Factories Inquiry Com­
mission in 1833—405, 436, 440, 441, 
445,  446, 450, 451-53, 461, 466 
Heathcoat, John (1783-1861)—English 
engineer, inventor of the bobbin-net 
machine—314 
Hébert, Jacques René (1757-1794)—prom­
inent figure in the French Revolu­
tion, leader of the Left wing of the 
Jacobins—114, 667 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831)—German philosopher—12, 18, 
20, 22, 23-. 36, 40, 57,  60-61,  78, 79, 
82, 85-87, 90-92, 103, 107, 114, 125, 
130-31,  137-39, 141-42, 149, 167, 179, 
192-93,  201, 613, 614, 641, 665 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856)—German 
revolutionary poet—157, 232 
Helvétius, Claude Adrien (1715-1771)— 
French philosopher, atheist, Enlighten-
er—127,  129-33, 528, 667 
Henfrey—manufacturer in Manchester— 
513, 585-86, 589-96 
Hennen, John (1779-1828)—English 
army physician, author of several 
works on military medicine—339 
Hess, Moses (1812-1875)—German radi­
cal journalist, one of the main expo­
nents of "true socialism" in the mid-
1840s—232, 235, 238-40 
Hey, William (1772-1844)—English physi­
cian, member of the Factories Inquiry 
Commission in 1833—445, 446, 449 
Higby (Hizby), E. L.—ironmaster in Pitts­
burg (Ohio), founder of a communist 
colony—223 
Hilditch, Richard—English economist 
in the middle of the 19th century— 
287 
Hindley, Charles—English manufacturer, 
philanthropist, supported Factory leg­
islation—578 
Hinrichs, Hermann Friedrich Wilhelm 
(1794-1861)—German professor of 
philosophy, Right-wing Hegelian— 90-93,  97, 103, 108, 137, 138, 140, 
141 
Hirsch, Samuel (1809-1889)—Rabbi in 
Dessau, philosopher and writer of 
religious leanings—88, 89 
Hirzel, Konrad Melchior (1793-1843)— 
Swiss politician and journalist, Zurich 
correspondent of the Allgemeine Litera­
tur-Zeitung—  145-47,  210 
Hizby—see Higby 
Hobbes,, Thomas (1588-1679)—English 
philosopher—126, 129 
Hobhousè, John Cam, Baron Broughton de 
Gyfford (1786-1869)—EngKsh liberal 
politician—459, 462 
Hoffmann, Max—apothecary, one of the 
leaders of the "Young Germany" se­
cret society in Switzerland—651 
Holbach. Paul Henri Dietrich, Baron d' 
(1723-1789)—French philosopher, 
atheist, Enlightener—130, 132, 133, 
528, 667 
Holland,  P. H.—physician in Manchester 
—404 
Homer—epic poet of Ancient Greece, 
author of Iliad and Odyssey—47, 190 
Hood,  Thomas (1799-1845)—English 
realist poet, democrat—500 
Home, Richard Henry (1803-1884)— 
English writer, member of the Chil­
dren's Employment Commission in 
1841—409, 410, 492 
Horner, Leonard (1785-1864)—English 
geologist and public figure; factory 
inspector (1833-56), member of the 
Factories Inquiry Commission in 1833 
and of the Children's Employment 
Commission in 1841; took the side of 
the workers—435, 463 
Hübner, Karl Wilhelm (1814-1879)—Ger­
man realist artist of a democratic 
orientation—230 
Hunt, Thomas—English Socialist, founder 
of the communist colony Equality in 
Wisconsin—223 
Huntsman, Benjamin (1704-1776)—En­
glish inventor—317 
Huskisson, William (1770-1830)— 
English statesman, Tory, Secretary of 
the Board of Trade (1823-27)—657 

=====第755页=====
730 Name Index 
I 
Ibbetson—manufacturer in Sheffield— 
508 
J 
Jerrold,  Douglas William (1803-1857)— 
English journalist, correspondent of 
The Illuminated Magazine in the 1840s 
—574 
Johann Nepomuk Marie Joseph  (1801-
1873)—Prince of Saxony; King of 
Saxony from 1854—645, 646 
Johns, William—English physician, Reg­
istrar in Chief for Manchester—437 
Johnson—worker at the factory of Pauling 
and Henfrey in Manchester—593 
Jungnitz, Ernst (d. 1848)—German jour­
nalist, Young Hegelian, contributor 
to the Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung— 17 
K 
Kaiser, Heinrich Wilhelm —German writ­
er of the 1840s, author of a work on 
French socialism and communism— 
642 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804)—German 
philosopher—179 
Kay-Shuttleworth, Sir James Phillips (1804-
1877)—English physician and public 
figure—351,  362, 364-66, 390, 467 
Kennedy, John (1769-1855)—textile manu­
facturer in Manchester—468 
Kitchen—manufacturer in Sheffield— 
508 
Knight, Arnold—physician in Manchester 
—493 
Köchlin —manufacturer in Württemberg 
—288 
Köttgen (Koettgen), Gustav Adolf (1805-
1882)—German artist and poet; took 
part in the working-class movement 
in the 1840s; his views were close to 
those of the "true Socialists"—238, 
239 Krug, Wilhelm Traugott (1770-1842)— 
German philosopher—150 
Kuhlmann, Georg —secret informer of the 
Austrian Government; in the 1840s 
preached the ideas of "true socialism" 
among the German artisans, followers 
of Weitling in Switzerland, using 
religious phraseology to pose as a 
prophet—655 
L 
Lamettrie (La Mettrie), Julien Offray de 
(1709-1751)—French physician and 
philosopher—125-26, 130 
Law, John (1671-1729)—Scottish econo­
mist and financier, Director-General 
of Finance in France (1719-20)— 
126, 624 
Leach, James—a spinner by profession, 
took an active part in the English 
labour movement, one of the leaders 
of Chartist organisations in Lancashire 
in the 1840s—429, 430, 469, 470, 485, 
486, 488, 588 
Leclerc, Théophile (b. 1771)—prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, one 
of the leaders of the revolutionary 
plebeian trend (Enragés)— 119, 667 
Lee, John (1779-1859)—Scottish pastor, 
rector of Edinburgh University from 
1840—338 
Lehon—Paris notary—70 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm (1646-1716)— 
German philosopher and mathemati­
cian—99,  125, 126, 129, 130 
Leifchild, John Roby—member of the 
Children's Employment Commission 
in 1841—497 
Leon,  Graf (Bernhard Müller) —German 
colonist in America, founder of the 
New Jerusalem communist colony in 
Philipsburgh—219 
Leopold I (1790-1865)—King of Belgium 
(1831-65)—676 
Leroux, Pierre (1797-1871)—French writ­
er, Utopian Socialist—667 

=====第756页=====
Name Index 731 
Le Roy (in Dutch— De Roy, in Latin, 
Regius),  Henry (1598-1679)—Dutch 
physician and philosopher—125, 
126 
Leske, Karl Friedrich Julius (1821-1886)— 
German publisher; in the 1840s and 
1850s was head of the publishing firm 
founded in 1821 in Darmstadt by his 
father Karl Wilhelm Leske, whose 
name he used to sign papers—654, 
675, 676 
Lessing, Karl Friedrich (1808-1880)—Ger­
man artist of democratic tendencies— 
231 
Lindley, John—inventor of the point-net 
machine—314 
List, Friedrich (1789-1846)—German 
economist, advocated protectionism— 
258, 259, 265-78, 283-92 
Locke, John (1632-1704)—English philos­
opher and economist—125, 127, 129-
30, 131, 132 
Londonderry, Charles William Stewart 
(Vane),  3rd Marquess of (1778-1854)— 
big English landowner, served in the 
army and in diplomacy—544 
Loudon, Charles (1801-1844)—English 
physician, member of the Factories 
Inquiry Commission in 1833—445-
46, 449, 452-54 
Louü XIV (1638-1715)—King of France 
(1643-1715)—56 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850)—Duke 
of Orleans, King of France (1830-
48)—213 
Loustalot, Elisée (1762-1790)—French 
journalist, democrat, took part in the 
French Revolution, a Jacobin—82 
Lovett, William (1800-1877)—English 
radical, participant in the Chartist 
movement; adherent of "moral force" 
and collaboration with the bourgeoisie 
—517-18 
Urning, Otto (1818-1868)—German 
physician and journalist, "true Social­
ist" in the mid-1840s—232, 240 
Lyell, Charles (1797-1875)—British chem­
ist and geologist—546 M 
Mably, Gabriel Bonnot de (1709-1785)— 
French sociologist, proponent of 
Utopian egalitarian communism—667 
Mackellar—physician in Pencaitland 
(Scotland)—536 
Mackintosh, Robert—member of the 
Factories Inquiry Commission in 
1833—446, 451, 454, 461 
Malebranche, Nicolas de (1638-1715)— 
French philosopher—125, 127, 129, 
130 
Mallet du Pan, Jacques (1749-1800)— 
Swiss journalist, monarchist, was 
connected with French counter-revo­
lutionary émigrés, author of memoirs 
—598 
Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834)— 
English clergyman and economist, 
founder of the misanthropic theory 
of population—379, 380, 432, 570, 
572 
Mandeville, Bernard de (1670-1733)— 
English democratic writer, moralist 
and economist—131 
Manners, John James Robert,  Lord— 
see Rutland,  John 
Marat, Jean Paul (1743-1793)—leading 
figure in the French Revolution, 
prominent Jacobin—81 
Marbach, Oswald (1810-1890)—German 
writer and poet, author of adaptations 
of German medieval epics and pub­
lisher of German Volksbücher (popular 
books)—163 
Marmontel, Jean François (1723-1799)— 
French writer, representative of the 
moderate wing of the Enlighteners, 
member of the Paris Academy of Sci­
ences from 1763—144 
Marr, Wilhelm (1819-1904)—German 
journalist, one of the leaders of the 
"Young Germany" secret society in 
Switzerland, and editor of its paper 
Blätter der Gegenwart für  soziales  Leben — 
651, 652, 654 
Martin du  Nord,  Nicolas Ferdinand Marie 
Louis Joseph (1790-1847)—French 
lawyer and politician, Minister of 

=====第757页=====
732 Name Index 
Justice and Cults during the July 
monarchy (since 1840)—115, 117 
Martineau, Harriet (1802-1876)—English 
writer, supporter of moderate social 
reforms—222 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881)—Karl Marx's wife—676 
Marx, Jenny (1844-1883)—Karl Marx's 
daughter—676 
Marx, Karl (1818-1883)—2, 4, 8, 87, 
106, 115, 117, 210, 232, 235-36, 240, 
241, 256, 260, 287, 290, 597, 665, 
666, 667, 668, 675-79 
Mathew, Theobald (1790-1856)—Irish 
Catholic clergyman—423 
Maude, Daniel—Justice of the Peace in 
Manchester—587-93, 595, 596 
McAdam, John Loudon (1756-1836)—Scot­
tish inventor, expert in highroad 
building—319 
McCulloch, John Ramsay (1789-1864)— 
British economist who vulgarised 
David Ricardo's theories—269, 271, 
287, 313, 380, 415, 580 
McDurt, Thomas—worker at a cotton mill 
in Glasgow—453 
Mead,  Edward P.—English workers' poet; 
contributed to the Chartist newspaper 
The Northern Star— 474 
Melish, John (1771-1822)—English writer, 
geographer and traveller; he de­
scribed communist colonies in Amer­
ica—222 
Mellor—worker at the Pauling and Hen-
frey brick firm in Manchester—591 
Menenius, Agrippa (d. 493 B.C.)—Roman 
patrician—510 
Menzel, Wolfgang (1798-1873)—German 
conservative writer and literary critic 
— 153 
Miles, William (1797-1878)-TEnglish 
financier, Member of Parliament—569 
Mill, James (1773-1836)—English philos­
opher and economist, adherent of 
Ricardo's theory—271, 287 
Miller—Police Superintendent in Glas­
gow, Captain—342 Miltiades (c. 550 or 540-489 B.C.)— 
Athenian general and statesman dur­
ing the Greco-Persian wars—121 
Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Victor Riqueti, 
Comte de (1749-1791)—prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, 
constitutional monarchist—270 
Mitchell, James (c. 1786-1844)—English 
public figure, author of several popu­
lar science works, member of the 
Children's Employment Commission in 
1841—531,  532 
Molière (real name: Jean Baptiste Poquelin) 
(1622-1673)—French dramatist—55, 
627, 628 
Monier de la Sizeranne, Paul Jean Ange 
Henri, Comte (1797-1878)—French 
journalist and dramatist—75 
Monk—London barrister—591-93 
Monteil (Montheil), Amans Alexis 
(1769-1850)—French historian—71 
Montyon, Antoine Jean Baptiste Robert 
Auget, Baron de (1733-1820)—French 
philanthropist, one of the sponsors 
of "Virtue Prize"—190 
Morellet, André (1727-1819)—French 
philosopher and economist, contribu­
ted to the Encyclopaedia—598 
Morelly (18th cent.)—representative of 
Utopian egalitarian communism in 
France—667 
M'Quarry—Glasgow worker, strikebreak­
er—509 
Müller, Wilhelm (literary pseudonym: 
Wolfgang Müller von Königswinter) 
(1816-1873)—German poet, physician 
in Düsseldorf (1845)—239 
N 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821)—Em­
peror of the French (1804-14 and 
1815)—10, 81, 123-24, 269, 270, 289, 
290, 409, 598 
Nauwerck, Karl Ludwig Theodor (1810-
1891)—German journalist, Young 
Hegelian—16-18 

=====第758页=====
Name Index 733 
Nelson, Horatio Nelson, Viscount (1758-
1805)—English admiral—409 
Newton, Sir Isaac (1642-1727)—English 
physicist, astronomer and mathemati­
cian—125 
O 
Oastler, Richard (1789-1861)—English 
politician, Tory philanthropist—438, 
463, 464, 519 
O'Connell, Daniel (1775-1847)—Irish 
lawyer and politician, leader of the 
liberal wing in the national liberation 
movement—561 
O'Connor, Feargus Edward (1794-1855)—a 
leader of the Chartist Left, editor-in-
chief of The Northern Star—367 
Origen (Latin: Origenes) (c. 185-c. 254)— 
Christian theologian, one of the Fa­
thers of the Church—158, L78 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858)—British Uto­
pian .Socialist—84, 131, 188, 219, 
223-24, 232, 252, 459, 525, 597, 614, 
667 
P 
Paalzow, Henriette von (1788-1847)—Ger­
man writer—21 
Padgin—manufacturer in Sheffield—508 
Paine, Thomas (1737-1809)—English 
writer, Republican, took part in the 
American War of Independence and in 
the French Revolution—317 
Parkinson, Richard (1797-1858)—English 
clergyman, and journalist, philan­
thropist—420, 565 
Parny, Evariste Desire de Forges, Vicomte 
de (1753-1814)—French poet—69 
Patteson, Sir John (1790-1861)—English 
jurist, member of the Queen's Bench 
(1830-52)—542 
Pauling—manufacturer in Manchester— 
513, 585-86, 589-96 
Pecchio, Giuseppe (1785-1835)—Italian 
man of letters and economist—269 Peel, Sir Robert (1750-1830)—English 
cotton manufacturer, Member of Par­
liament, Tory—442, 459 
Peel, Sir Robert (1788-1850)—English 
statesman, Tory, Prime Minister 
(1841-46), repealed the Corn Laws in 
1846—442, 465, 546, 578, 588, 657, 
658, 660 
Percival, Thomas (1740-1804)—English 
physician, philanthropist—442 
Peuchet, Jacques (1758-1830)—French 
writer, economist, monarchist—597-
98, 604, 609-12 
Philippson, Gustav (1814-1880)—German 
pedagogue and writer—88 
Pilling, Richard (b. 1800) —Chartist, 
cotton-mill worker, one of the lead­
ers of a strike in Ashton and Staly-
bridge (1842)—587 
Pindar (c. 522-443 B.C.)—Greek lyric 
poet, author of solemn odes—285 
Piso,  Lucius Calpurnius Carsoninus (b. 101 
B.C.)—Roman consul in 58 B.C., 
supporter of Julius Caesar— 122 
Pitkeithly, Lawrence—English traveller, 
Chartist, visited and described the com­
munist colony of Shakers in New Le­
banon (New York state)—217 
Planck, Karl Christian (1819-1880)— 
German Protestant theologian, philo­
sopher—103 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C.)—Greek phi­
losopher—179 
Porter, George Richardson (1792-1852)— 
English economist and statistician— 
313 
Pounder, Robert—Leeds worker—438 
Power A.—member of the Factories In­
quiry Commission in England in 
1833—437, 441, 445, 448, 454, 480 
Priestley, Joseph (1733-1804)— English 
chemist and philosopher, public fig­
ure—129 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865)— 
French writer, economist and sociolo­
gist, one of the founders of anarchism 
—23-35,  38-53,  156, 528, 642, 667 
Püttmann, Hermann (1811-1894)—Ger­
man radical poet and journalist, in the 

=====第759页=====
734 Name Index 
mid-1840s representative of "true 
socialism"—232, 235, 240, 654, 655 
R 
Radnor, Earl of—see Bouverie, William 
Pleydell 
Rapp, George (1757-1847)—German 
Socialist, founder of the sect of 
Christian Communists in the state of 
Ohio,  North America—218-20 
Rashleigh, William—English politician, 
Member of Parliament, publisher of 
the book Stubborn Facts from the 
Factories by a Manchester Operative— 
429 
Rauschenplatt, Johann Ernst Hermann 
von (1807-1868)—German politician, 
emigrated to Switzerland, a member of 
the "Young Germany" secret society— 
651 
Read—worker at the Pauling and Hen-
frey brick firm in Manchester—595 
Reichardt, Carl Ernst—bookbinder in 
Berlin, follower of Bruno Bauer, 
contributor to the Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung— 9, 10, 38, 78 
Ricardo, David (1772-1823)—English 
economist—31,  33, 271, 286, 290 
Riesser, Gabriel (1806-1863)—German 
journalist of Jewish descent, advocate 
of equality for the Jews—95-98, 113 
Ripley, George (1802-1880)—American 
Unitarian clergyman, in 1842 founded 
a communist colony in Brook Farm 
(Massachusetts)—223 
Roberton, John (1797-1876)-English 
physician—405, 453 
Roberts—owner of the machine-works in 
Manchester—511 
Roberts, William Prowling (1806-1871)— 
English jurist connected with the 
Chartist and trade union movements— 
541-42,  544, 546, 547, 568, 569, 590-96 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794)—leading figure 
in the French Revolution, leader of 
the Jacobins, head of the revolutionary 
government (1793-94)—119, 121, 122 Robinet, Jean Baptiste René (1735-1820)— 
French philosopher—130 
Robson, George—inmate of the work­
house in Coventry, died in  1843— 
574 
Rohmer, Friedrich (1814-1856)—German 
philosopher—211 
Rohmer, Theodor (1820-1856)—German 
journalist, F. Rohmer's brother—211 
Ronge, Johannes (1813-1887)—German 
clergyman, one of the initiators of the 
"German Catholics" movement—645, 
653 
Rotteck, Carl Wenzeslaus Redecker von 
(1775-1840)—German historian and 
liberal politician—123 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques (1712-1778)— 
French philosopher and writer of the 
Enlightenment—604 
Roux, Jacques (1752-1794)—prominent 
figure in the French Revolution. One 
of the leaders of the revolutionary 
plebeian trend (Enragés) —119, 667 
Roux-Lavergne, Pierre Célestin (1802-1874) 
—French historian and philosopher— 
211 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880)—German 
radical journalist and philosopher, 
Young Hegelian—155 
Russell, John Russell, 1st Earl of (1792-
1878)—English statesman, Whig 
leader, Prime Minister (1846-52 and 
1865-66), Foreign Secretary (1852-53 
and 1859-65)—15 
Rutland, John James Robert Manners, 7th 
Duke of (1818-1906)—English aristo­
crat, Tory, author of pamphlets on the 
condition of factory workers, member 
of the "Young England" group—578 
Rymarkiewicz, Leon (born c. 1825)—par­
ticipant in the revolutionary conspiracy 
of the Polish patriots in Posnan in 
1844-45—241 
Rymarkiewicz, Maximilian (born c. 1832) 
—participant in the revolutionary con­
spiracy of the Polish patriots in Posnan 
in 1844-45, brother of L. Rymarkie-
wicz—241 

=====第760页=====
Name Index 735 
s 
Sack,  Karl Heinrich (1789-1875)—Ger­
man Protestant theologian, professor 
in Bonn, advocate of religious ortho­
doxy—203 
Sadler, Michael Thomas (1780-1835)— 
English economist and politician, 
philanthropic Tory—460-61, 463 
Saint-Just, Antoine Louis Léon de Riche-
bourg de (1767-1794)—prominent 
figure in the French Revolution, a 
Jacobin leader—121-22 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
Comte de (1760-1825)—French Utopian 
Socialist—31,  50, 282, 283, 614, 
667 
Salmon—worker at the Pauling and Hen-
frey brick firm in Manchester—589-91 
Sanchez (Tomas) (1550-1610)—Spanish 
theologian—629 
Saunders,  Robert  John—English factory in­
spector in the 1840s—463 
Say, Jean Baptiste (1767-1832)—French 
economist, one of the founders of the 
"three production factors" theory (an 
apology of capitalist exploitation)— 
32, 43, 269, 270, 273 
Say, Louis Auguste (1774-1840)—French 
economist, brother and follower of 
J.-B.  Say—270, 291 
Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von 
(1775-1854)—German philosopher— 
95, 154 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805)—German poet, dramatist, 
historian and philosopher—23, 202 
Schlöffet, Friedrich Wilhelm (1800-1870)— 
Silesian manufacturer, democrat—242 
Schmidt, Simon—German tanner, one of 
the organisers of the League of the 
Just in Switzerland, follower of Weit­
ling—655 
Scott—worker at the Pauling and Hen-
frey brick firm in Manchester—591 
Scriven, Samuel S.—member of the Chil­
dren's Employment Commission in 
England in 1841—496 Senior, Nassau William (1790-1864)— 
English economist, vulgarised Ricar-
do's theory, opposed shortening the 
working day—364 
Serra, Antonio (16th-l7th cent.)—Italian 
economist, one of the first representa­
tives of mercantilism—269 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616)—En­
glish poet and dramatist—71, 542, 552 
Sharp, Francis—member of the Royal 
Society of English Surgeons, physician 
in Leeds—445, 449 
Sharp—owner of the machine-works 
in Manchester—511 
Sharps—shareholder of the Pauling and 
Henfrey firm in Manchester—594-95 
Shelley, Percy Bysshe (1792-1822)—En­
glish poet, revolutionary romantic  — 
528 
Sheppard,  John (Jack) (1702-1724)— 
English  thief,  known for his escapes 
from prison, executed in London in 
1724—409 
Sieyès, Emmanuel Joseph (1748-1836)— 
leading figure in the French Revolu­
tion; abbot, deputy to the Conven­
tion, moderate constitutionalist (Feuil­
lant)— 32 
Sismondi, Jean Charles Léonard Simonde de 
(1773-1842)—Swiss economist, repre­
sentative of economic romanticism— 
33, 271-73 
Smellie, James—Glasgow surgeon—451 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790)—British eco­
nomist—31,  33, 49, 267-69, 271, 273, 
277, 287, 291-93, 380, 415 
Smith,  John—Glasgow worker, strike­
breaker—509 
Smith,  Thomas Southwood (1788-1861)— 
English physician, member of the 
Children's Employment Commission in 
1841—373,  397, 536 
Solomon—King of the Hebrews (c. 974-
c. 937 B.C.)—409, 588, 589 
Somerville, Alexander (1811-1885)— 
English radical journalist, wrote under 
the pen-name of "One who has 
whistled at the Plough"—224, 240, 
556 

=====第761页=====
736 Name Index 
Spinoza (Baruch or Benedictus) de (1632-
1677)—Dutch philosopher—124-25, 
127, 129-32, 136-37, 139 
Staël, Madame de (Anne Louise Germaine, 
born Nècker, Baronne de Staël-Holstein) 
(1766-1817)—French romantic writer 
—603 
Standau, Julius—teacher of German, took 
part in the democratic movement in 
Germany in the 1830s-1840s, one of 
the leaders of. the "Young Germany" 
secret society in Switzerland—651 
Stein,  Heinrich Friedrich Karl, Baron vom 
und zum (1757-1831)—Prussian states­
man, held various responsible posts 
in the government (1804-08), initiator 
of moderate reforms—10 
Stein,  Lorenz von (1815-1890)—German 
lawyer and historian, author of works 
on the socialist movement, supporter 
of "social monarchy"—134, 613, 614, 
642 
Stephens, Joseph Rayner (1805-1879)— 
English clergyman, took an active part 
in the Chartist movement in Lanca­
shire (1837-39)—519, 524, 581 
Stewart, Dugald (1753-1828)—Scottish 
philosopher, representative of what is 
known as "philosophy of common 
sense"—268 
Stirner, Max (real name: Johann Caspar 
Schmidt) (1806-1856)—German philos­
opher, Young Hegelian, one of the 
ideologists of individualism and 
anarchism—240, 241, 329, 564 
Strauss, David Friedrich (1808-1874)— 
German philosopher and writer, 
Young Hegelian—87, 103, 137-39, 
142, 528 
Stuart, James (1775-1849)—English physi­
cian and writer, Whig, factory inspec­
tor in 1833—444, 446, 451, 454, 457 
Stumm-Halberg, Karl Ferdinand, Freiherr 
von (1836-1901)—German manufac­
turer and conservative politician—544 
Sturge, Joseph (1793-1859)—English 
politician, free trader; joined the Char­
tists with a view to bringing the work­ing class under the influence of the 
radical bourgeoisie—523 
Sue, Eugene Marie Joseph (1804-1857)— 
French writer, author of sentimental 
social novels—55-57, 62, 66-68, 70, 73-
76, 162, 166, 168, 170, 171, 180-82, 
185-88,  190-91.  197, 202-03 
Symons, Jßlinger Cookson (1809-1860)— 
English liberal journalist, member of 
the Children's Employment Commis­
sion in 1841—341-42, 410, 412, 432, 
494, 503, 534 
Szeliga—see Zychlinski, Franz 
T 
Tancred, Thomas—member of the Chil­
dren's Employment Commission in 
England in 1841—497 
Taylor, John (1804-1841)-English physi­
cian, member of the Left wing of the 
Chartist movement—519 
Thomson, Charles Edward Poulett, Baron 
Sydenham (1799-1841)—English states­
man, Whig—364 
Thornhül, Thomas—English landowner, 
Whig—463 
Tocqueville, Alexis Charles Henri Maurice 
Clérel de (1805-1859)—French liberal 
historian and politician—186 
Tristan, Flora Célestine Thérèse Henriette 
(1803-1844)—French authoress, pro­
ponent of Utopian socialism—19, 188 
Tufnell, Edward Carlton—member of the 
Factories Inquiry Commission in 
England in 1833—437, 440, 444, 445, 
450, 451 
Turpin, Richard (Dick) (1706-1739)— 
English robber, executed in 1739— 
409 
U 
Vre, Andrew (1778-1857)—English chem­
ist and economist, free trader—285, 
310, 417, 429, 434, 457-59, 461, 462, 
478, 510, 511 

=====第762页=====
Name Index 737 
V 
Vaughan, Robert (1795-1868)—English 
clergyman, historian and journalist— 
416 
Victoria (1819-1901)—Queen of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1837-1901)— 
336, 518, 649, 650 
Vidocq, François Eugène (1775-1857)— 
French secret police agent, presumed 
author of Memoirs; his name was used 
to denote a cunning sleuth and rogue 
—73,  163 
Vincent—leader of a carpenters' strike 
in Paris (September 1845)—650 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19 
B.C.)—Roman poet—618, 628 
Virgil, Polydore (c. 1470-1555)—English 
historian of Italian descent—71 
Volney, Constantin François  Chasseboeuf, 
Comte de (1757-1820)—French philos­
opher of the Enlightenment—130 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de (1694-
1778)—French philosopher, writer and 
historian of the Enlightenment—126, 
268, 619 
Voss, Johann Heinrich (1751-1826)— 
German poet, translator of works by 
Homer, Virgil and other ancient 
poets—190 
W 
Wade, John (1788-1875)—English writer, 
economist and historian—405 
Wakefield,  Edward Gibbon (1796-1862)— 
English writer, statesman, and econo­
mist; author of a colonisation theory— 
551 
Watt, James (1736-1819)—Scottish engi­
neer, inventor of the steam-engine— 
149, 312 
Wedgwood,  Josiah (1730-1795)—English 
pottery manufacturer, who devised 
improved pottery techniques—318 
Weil, Carl (1806-1878)—German liberal 
journalist, editor of the Konstitutionelle 
Jahrbücher (1842-46); from 1851 offi­
cial in Austria—162 Weill, Alexander (1811-1899)—German 
democratic journalist, in the 1840s 
emigrated to France, contributed to 
German and French newspapers—147 
Weitling, Wilhelm Christian  ( 1808-1871)— 
one of the early leaders of the working-
class movement in Germany, tailor 
by trade, one of the theoreticians of 
Utopian egalitarian communism— 
236, 614, 615, 654 
Welcker, Carl Theodor (1790-1869)— 
German lawyer, liberal journalist, 
Landtag deputy in Baden—123 
Wellington, Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of 
(1769-1852)—British general and 
statesman, Tory, Prime Minister 
(1828-30)—409 
Wesley, John (1703-1791)—English 
clergyman, founder of Methodism— 
410 
Wightman, Sir William (1784-1863)— 
English jurist, from 1841 member of 
the'Queen's Bench—542 
Wilhelm I (1781-1864)—King of Würt­
temberg (1816-64)—288 
Williams, Sir John (1777-1846)—English 
jurist, from 1834 member of the 
King's (later Queen's) Bench, liberal— 
542 
Wolff,  Christian, Freiherr von (1679-1754) 
—German philosopher, naturalist, 
economist and jurist—67 
Wood,  James and Francis—manufacturers 
in Bradford—449, 509-10 
Wright, John—factory overseer in 
Macclesfield—446 
Z 
Zerrleder —presumed pseudonym of 
Bruno Bauer—145, 146 
Zychlinski, Franz Zychlin von (1816-1900) 
—Prussian officer, Young Hegelian, 
contributed to periodicals published 
by B. Bauer under the pseudonym 
of Szeliga—7, 53-57, 60-67, 68, 69, 
70, 71-77, 86, 162, 163, 165-68, 176-
78, 180, 185, 190, 191, 194, 195-96, 
202, 208, 209 

=====第763页=====
738 Name Index 
INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 
Aaron—the first high priest mentioned 
in the Bible.—410 
Abraham (Bib.)—10, 101, 105, 107 
Adam (Bib.)—410, 574 
Badinot—character in Eugène Sue's novel 
Les Mystères de Paris.—203 
Bradamanti. See Polidori 
Bras rouge—character in Eugène Sue's 
novel Les Mystères de Paris.—73, 181 
Cabrion—character in Eugène Sue's novel 
Les Mystères de Paris.—75, 76 
Cecily—character in Eugène Sue's novel 
Les Mystères de Paris.—68-69 
Châtelain —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris. —200 
Chouette —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.— 180-85, 187 
Chourineur —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères  de Paris.— 163-65, 168, 169, 
180, 182, 206, 207 
Christ, Jesus (Bib.)—65, 104, 154, 161, 
410 
Codrus —according to legend, the 
King of Athens, who lived in the 11th 
century B.C.—122 
David—character in Eugène Sue's Les 
Mystères de Paris.— 68, 164, 176-77, 
205, 207 
Don Quixote—hero of Cervantes' novel 
by the same name.—209 
Dorante —character in Molière's play Le 
bourgeois gentilhomme. —630, 631 Fleur de Marie—character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—163, 166-
76, 180-82, 186, 187, 204, 205, 208, 
209 
Fortunatus—hero of a German folk tale, 
who possessed a miraculous inexhaust­
ible purse and a magic cap.—200 
George, Madame—character in Eugène 
Sue's novel Les Mystères  de Paris.  —171-
73, 205 
Germain—character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paru.— 165, 198, 205 
Graun —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.— 202, 203, 205 
Guillaume —character in the medieval 
French comedy LAvocat Patelin.— 
640 
Hahnemann—character in the German 
comic folk tale Sieben Schwaben.— 163 
Harpagon —a character in Molière's 
comedy l'Avare. —627 
Harville, Clémence, Marquise d'—character 
in Eugène Sue's Les Mystères  de Paris.— 
63, 64, 193-95, 205 
Heracles (Hercules)—the most popular 
hero in Greek and Roman mythology, 
son of Zeus, celebrated for his great 
strength and valour.—135, 161, 176, 
179, 201, 511 
Jehovah (Bib.)—112 
Jeremiah—biblical character, one of 
the Hebrew prophets, who wrote the 
Lamentations of Jeremiah on the oc­
casion of the destruction of Jerusalem. 
—658 
Eleonore —character 
erotiques. —69 in Parny's Poésies 
Ferrand,  Jacques—character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—69-71, 
206, 209 Jocrisse —the name of the simpleton in 
the French popular theatre, a character 
in Molière's comedy Sganarelle.—628 
John,  Saint, the Apostle—one of the 
twelve apostles to whom Christian 
tradition ascribes the authorship of the 
Book of Revelation, the Fourth Gospel 

=====第764页=====
Name Index 739 
and three Epistles actually written by 
different persons.—410 
Judas Iscariot (Bib.)—one of the twelve 
apostles, the betrayer of Christ.— 
633-34 
Laporte—character from Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.— 171-73, 187 
Lot—a character in the Old Testament 
(Genesis), who was rescued by God 
from the burning city of Sodom.—10 
Zucenay, Duchesse de —character from 
Eugène Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—64 
Lycurgus—legendary Spartan legislator 
of the 9th-8th cent. B.C.—121-22 
MacGregor, Sarah—character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—63-66, 
206, 209 
Maître d'école —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris. —163, 165, 176-
87, 202, 205-07 
Mary (Bib.)—107 
Micawber —character in Dickens' novel 
David Copperfield.— 327 
Minerva (Rom. Myth.)—the goddess of 
wisdom.—511 
Minotaur (Gr. Myth.)—fabulous monster 
living on Crete, devouring youths and 
maidens sacrificed to it.—623 
Moloch—the Sun-God in Carthage and 
Phoenicia, whose worship was accom­
panied by human sacrifices.—21, 266, 
474 
Morel—character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.—56 
Morel, Louise—character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—195 
Moses (Bib.)—410 
Murph—character in Eugène Sue's Les 
Mystères de Paris.— 76, 165, 201-07 
Paul, the Apostle (Bib.)—410 
Peter, the Apostle (Bib.)—410 
Pipelet, Alfred—character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—72, 74-77 Pipelet, Anastasia —character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—63, 72, 74, 
75, 77 
Polidori—character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.— 71, 73, 201 
Prometheus (Gr. Myth.)—a titan who stole 
fire from the gods and gave it to men. 
—511 
Rigolette—character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.—74-76 
Roland,  Madame—character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—71 
Rudolph, Prince of Geroldstein (Gerol­
stein) —main character in Eugène 
Sue's Les Mystères de Paris.—62, 63, 74, 
77, 162-88, 190, 193-98, 200-10 
Samson—a biblical hero famous for his 
great physical strength and courage.— 
410 
Sarah.  See MacGregor, Sarah 
Sarah (Sarai) (Bib.)—wife of Abraham.— 
101 
Scapin—main character in Molière's 
comedy Les Fourberies de Scapin.—639 
Schurimann. See Chourineur 
Sisyphus (Gr. Myth.)—King of Corinth 
whom the gods condemned to eternal 
and exhausting labour.—467 
Squelette —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.—165 
Swing—fictitious name used by farm­
workers in the disturbances of 1830-
31, a character in Wakefield's pamph­
let Swing Unmasked: or, the Causes of 
Rural Incendiarism.—551, 554 
Tortillard —character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.— 180, 181, 187 
Vishnu—in Hindu mythology the second 
god in the trinity (Brahma, Vishnu 
and Shiva), called the Preserver, the 
embodiment of eternally living 
nature.—54, 55 
Willis—character in Eugène Sue's 
Les Mystères de Paris.—69, 205 

=====第765页=====

=====第766页=====
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl. Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction 
(present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Zur Kritik der Hegeischen Rechtsphilosophie. Einleitung. In: Deutsch-
Französische Jahrbücher, hg. von Arnold Rüge und Karl Marx, 1-ste und 2-te 
Lieferung, Paris, 1844.—236 
Justification of the Correspondent from the Mosel (present edition, Vol. 1) 
— Rechtfertigung des ft Korrespondenten von der Mosel. In: Rheinische 
Zeitung No. 15, January 15, 1843.—256 
On the Jewish Question (present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Zur Judenfrage. In: Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, hg. von Arnold Rüge 
und Karl Marx, 1-ste und 2-te Lieferung, Paris, 1844.—87, 88, 106, 108-10, 
112-115,  117 
Engels, Frederick. The Condition of England. Past and Present by Thomas Carlyle, 
London, 1843 (present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Die Lage Englands. Past and Present by Thomas Carlyle, London, 1843. In: 
Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher, hg. von Arnold Rüge und Karl Marx, 1-ste and 
2-te Lieferung, Paris, 1844.—562 
The Condition of the Working-Class in England. From Personal Observation and Authentic 
Sources (this volume) 
— Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England. Nach eigner Anschauung und 
authentischen Quellen. Leipzig, 1845.—241, 584, 585 
— (anon.) Continental Movements (present edition, Vol. 3). In: The New Moral 
World No. 32, February 3, 1844.—238 
— (anon.) Description of Recently Founded Communist Colonies Still in Existence 
(this volume) 
— Beschreibung der in neuerer Zeit entstandenen und noch bestehenden 
kommunistischen Ansiedlungen. In: Deutsches Bürgerbuch für 1845, Darm­
stadt, 1845.—239, 240 
— The Late Butchery at Leipzig. —The German Working Men's Movement (this 
volume). In: The Northern Star No. 409, September 13, 1845.—653 
— Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 3) 

=====第767页=====
742 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie. In: Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher, hg. von Arnold Rüge und Karl Marx, 1-ste und 2-te Lieferung, 
Paris,  1844.—32, 325 
— (anon.) Progress of Social Reform on the Continent (present edition, Vol. 3). 
In: The New Moral World No. 19, November 4, 1843 and No. 21, November 18, 
1843.—238 
— (anon.) Speeches in Elberfeld (this volume) 
— [Zwei Reden in Elberfeld.] In: Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Re­
form,  Erster Band, Darmstadt, 1845.—238 
— "Young Germany" in Switzerland. Conspiracy Against Church and State (this 
volume). In: The Northern Star No. 411, September 27, 1845.—654 
Marx, K. and Engels, F. 
The Holy Family, or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Company 
(this volume) 
— Die heilige Familie oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik. Gegen Bruno Bauer 
und Konsorten, Frankfurt a. M., 1845.—240 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Alison, A. The Principles of Population, and their Connection with Human Happiness, 
Vols.  MI, London, 1840.—389, 398, 412, 416, 417, 422, 424, 558, 560 
Alison, W. P. Notes on the Report of the Royal Commissioners on the Operation of the 
Poor Laws in Scotland, 1844. In: Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. VII, 
London, 1844.—398 
— Observations on the Management of the Poor in Scotland, and its Effects on the 
Health of the Great Towns, Edinburgh, 1840.—338, 398 
Baines, E. History of the Cotton Manufacture in Great Britain..., London [1835].— 
312, 313, 429, 434, 446-47 
Barry, D. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Bauer, B. Das entdeckte Christenthum. Eine Erinnerung an das achtzehnte Jahrhundert 
und ein Beitrag zur Krisis des neunzehnten, Zürich und Winterthur, 1843.—101, 
106, 107, 136, 139, 140, 152 
— Die evangelische Landeskirche  Preussens  und die Wissenschaft, Leipzig, 1840.—112 
— Die Fähigkeit der heutigen Juden und Christen, frei zu werden. In: Einundzwanzig 
Bogen aus der Schweiz, hg. von Georg Herwegh. Erster Theil, Zürich und 
Winterthur, 1843.—88, 107, 108, 110 
— Die gute Sache der Freiheit und meine eigene Angelegenheit, Zürich und Win­
terthur, 1842.—16, 79, 93, 103, 112, 136 
— (anon.) Hinrichs, politische Vorlesungen, Band I, p. 332. Halle, 1843. Bei 
Schwetzschke und Sohn. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft I, December 
1843.—90-92 
— (anon.) Hinrichs, politische Vorlesungen, Zweiter  Band,  Halle, 1843. 489 S. 
In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844.—92-94 
— Die Judenfrage, Braunschweig, 1843.—79, 87, 89, 90, 94, 95, 106-07, 111, 112, 
115, 117, 118, 136 
— Kritik der evangelischen Geschichte der Synoptiker, Bd. 1-2, Leipzig, 1841; 
Bd. 3, Braunschweig, 1842.—104, 107, 136-39, 166, 187 
— (anon.) Leben und Wirken Friedrich von Sallet's nebst Mittheilungen aus dem 
literarischen Nachlasse Desselben. Herausgegeben von einigen Freunden des 

=====第768页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 743 
Dichters. Mit Sallet's Bildniss. Breslau, 1844. Verlag von A. Schulz. P. 384. 
In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 1844.—138 
— Leiden und Freuden des theologischen Bewusstseins. In: Anekdota zur neuesten 
deutschen Philosophie und Publicistik, hg. von A. Rüge, Bd. 2, Zürich und 
Winterthur, 1843.—152, 191-92 
— (anon.) Neueste Schriften über die Judenfrage. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, 
Heft I, December 1843; Heft IV, March 1844.—79-81, 82, 84, 87, 90, 95, 
99 
— Staat, Religion und Parthei, Leipzig,  1843.—91,  107, 112, 136 
— (anon.) Was ist jetzt der Gegenstand der Kritik? In: Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 1844.—26-27, 88, 99-102, 104-09, 111, 114, 117-22, 
124, 133-37 
Bauer, E. Es leben feste Grundsätze! In: Berliner Novellen, von A. Weill und Edgar 
Bauer, Berlin, 1843.—147 
— (anon.) Béraud über die Freudenmädchen. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, 
Heft V, April 1844.—20, 156-57 
— (anon.) Die drei Biedermänner. In drei Capiteln. In: Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft III-V, February-April 1844.—156 
— (anon.) Proudhon. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844.— 
18, 23-31,  33, 34, 37-42, 43-48, 49-54 
— (anon.) Die Romane der Verfasserin von Godwie Castle. In: Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft II, January 1844.—21-23 
— Der Streit der Kritik mit Kirche und Staat. Bern, 1844.—213 
— (anon.) Union ouvrière. Par Mme Flora Tristan. Edition Populaire. Paris 1843. 
In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft V, April 1844.—19-21, 157, 188 
Becker, A. Was wollen die Kommunisten? Lausanne, 1844.—242 
Benda, D. A. Katechismus für wahlberechtigte Bürger Preussens, oder Geist und Bedeu­
tung der Städte-Ordnung vom 19. November 1808. Berlin, 1843.—10 
Bentham, J. Théorie des peines et des récompenses..., 3ième éd., T. II, Paris, 1826.— 
134, 178, 188 
Béraud, F. F. A. Les filles publiques de Paris et la police qui les régit, T. I-II, Paris et 
Leipzig, 1839.—20, 156 
Bible 
The Old Testament 
Lamentations of Jeremiah.—658 
The New Testament 
Matthew.— 178, 203 
Romans.—203 
Bischoff,  J. A Comprehensive History of the Woollen and Worsted Manufactures, Vols. 1-2, 
London, 1842.—314 
"A boire, à boir, à boir!" (A French drinking song).—211 
Bray, J. Fr. Labour's wrongs and labour's remedy; or, the age of might and the age of 
right, Leeds, 1839.—288 
Bruyes. LAvocat Patelin, Paris, 1725.—640 
Bûchez, P. J. B., et P.C. Roux. Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française, ou 
Journal des Assemblées Nationales, depuis 1789 jusqu'en 1815, ..., 40 vols. 
Paris,  1834-1838. (See Robespierre, M. and Saint-Just, L.) 

=====第769页=====
744 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Burns. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Cabanis, P.-J.-G. Rapports du physique et du moral de l'homme, T. I-II, Paris, 1843.—126 
Carlyle, T. Chartism, London, 1840.—368, 389, 390, 414, 510, 579 
— Past and Present, London, 1843.—386, 511-12, 562, 564, 579 
Chaptal, J.-A.-C. De l'industrie française, T. I-II, Paris, 1819.—200 
Comte, Ch. Traité de la propriété, T. I-II. Paris, 1834.—44-46 
Condillac, E.-B. Essai sur l'origine des  connaissances  humaines, Amsterdam, 1746.—129 
Cowan, R. Vital Statistics of Glasgow, Illustrating the Sanatory Condition of the Popu­
lation. In: Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. Ill, London, 1840.—404 
Cowell, S. W. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Croker, J. W. Anti-Corn Law Agitation. In: The Quarterly Review, Vol. 71, No. 141, 
London, 1843.—519-22, 588 
— (anon.) A Sketch of the State of  Ireland,  Past and 'Present, 2-d ed., London, 
1808.—560 
Dante Alighieri's goettliche Comoedie. Metrisch übertragen und mit kritischen und histo­
rischen Erläuterungen versehen von Philalethes [Prinz Johann von Sachsen], Dresden, 
1833;  zweite Auflage, Dresden und Leipzig, 1839.—645 
Dickens, Ch. David Copperfield.— 327 
Dies irae... (Requiem aeternam dona est). —211 
Disraeli, B. Sybil; or, the Two Nations, Vols. 1-3, London, 1845.—420 
Drinkwater. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Egidius, H. L. Emigranten und Märtyrer. Ein Beitrag zur Charakteristik der 'Deutsch-
Französischen Jahrbücher'. In: Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher, hg. von Dr. Karl Weil, 
Jahrgang 1844, Bd. II, Stuttgart, 1844.—162 
Erlach, F. K. Freiherr von. Die Volkslieder der Deutschen, 5 Bände, Mannheim, 1834-
1836;  Bd. 4, 1835.—161 
Faucher, J. Englische Tagesfragen. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VII, June 
1844.—12-14, 16, 81 
— Englische Tagesfragen. (Fortsetzung.) Lord Ashley's Amendment. In: Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VIII, July 1844.—12, 14, 15, 16, 81 
— Englische Tagesfragen. (Fortsetzung.) Ricardos Motion in Betreff der Einfuhrzölle. 
In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft IX, August 1844.—12 
Faucher, L. Etudes sur l'Angleterre. In: Revue des deux Mondes, T. 4, October 1, 1843 
(White-Chapel); November 1, 1843 (Saint-Giles); December 1, 1843 (Liverpool. 
Première partie); December 15, 1843 (Liverpool. Dernière partie); T. 5, March 15, 
1844 (Manchester. Première partie); T. 6, April 1, 1844 (Manchester. Dernière 
partie);  May 15, 1844 (La Ville de Leeds. Première partie); June 15, 1844 (La Ville 
de Leeds. Dernière partie); T. 7, July 15, 1844 (Birmingham).— 12-14, 16, 81, 488 
Felkin, W. Statistics of the Labouring Classes and Paupers in Nottingham. In: Journal 
of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. II, London, 1839.—340 

=====第770页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 745 
Ferrier, F. L. A. Du gouvernement considéré dans ses rapports avec le commerce, Paris, 
1805.—268,  269, 290-292 
Feuerbach, L. Grundsätze der Philosophie der Zukunft, Zürich und Winterthur,  1843.— 
92, 141 
— Vorläufige Thesen zur Reformation der Philosophie, January 1842. In: Anekdota 
zur neuesten deutschen Philosophie und Publicistik, hg. von Arnold Rüge, Bd. 2, 
Zürich und Winterthur, 1843.—83 
Finch, J. Notes of Travel in the United States. In: The New Moral  World,  January 13-
October 19, 1844.—216-17, 219-22, 240 
Fleischhammer, E. Correspondenz aus Breslau. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft IV, 
March 1844.—145, 146 
Fletcher, J. Progress of Crime in the United Kingdom: Abstracted from the Criminal 
Returns for 1842 ... In: Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. VI, London, 
1843.—425,  426 
Fourier, Ch. Crime du commerce. In: La Phalange. Revue de la science sociale, XIV e 
année, lre  Série, Tome II, Paris, 1845.—641 
— Le nouveau monde industriel et sociétaire..., Paris, 1829.—196 
— Théorie des quatre mouvements et des destinées générales. In: Oeuvres complètes, 
T. I, 2de éd., Paris, 1841—196, 201, 615, 624-25,  630-31,  632-34, 639-42 
— Théorie de l'unité universelle. In: Oeuvres  complètes,  T. IV, Vol. III, Paris,  1841.— 
66, 196, 618 
— Des trois unités externes. In: La Phalange. Revue de la science sociale, XIV e année, 
lre Série, Tome 1er , Paris, 1845.—615-24, 625-29, 631-33,  634-41,  642 
Franks. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of Children 
and Young  Persons  in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second Report, 1843 
Fripp,  C. B. Report of an Inquiry into the Condition of the Working  Classes  of the City 
of Bristol. In: Journal of  the Statistical  Society  of London, Vol. II, London, 1839.—340 
Froment, M. La police dévoilée, depuis la restauration et notamment sous . messieurs 
Franchet et Delavau, T. I-III, Paris, 1829.—74 
Gaskell, P. The Manufacturing Population of England, its Moral, Social, and Physical 
Conditions, and the Changes which have Arisen from the Use of Steam Machinery; with 
an Examination of Infant Labour, London, 1833.—307-10, 365, 366, 368, 369, 401, 
422, 425, 426, 508, 579 
Geschichte von den sieben Schwaben. In: Volksbücher, hrsg. v. G. O. Marbach, Leipzig, 
1838.—163 
Goethe, J. W. von. Faust. Der Tragödie erster Teil.—63, 142 
— Zahme Xenien, IX.—175 
Goldsmith, O. The Deserted Village.—552 
Graham, G. See Documents: Fifth Annual Report of the Registrar General of Births... 
Grainger, R. D. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Empbyment 
of Children and Young  Persons  in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Gruppe, O. F. Bruno Bauer und die akademische Lehrfreiheit, Berlin, 1842.—157 
— (anon.) Die Winde oder ganz absolute Konstruktion der neuern Weltgeschichte 
durch Obérons Horn gedichtet von Absolutus von Hegelingen, Leipzig, 1831.—157 

=====第771页=====
746 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Hawkins, F. B. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Hegel, G. W. F. Encyclopädie der philosophischen Wissenschaften im Grundrisse, Dritte 
Ausgabe, Heidelberg, 1830.—78 
— Grundlinien der Philosophie des Rechts, oder Naturrecht und Staatswissenschaft 
im Grundrisse, Bd. VIII, Berlin, 1833.—40, 87 
— (anon.) Phänomenologie des Geistes, hg. von Johann Schulze. Zweite unverän­
derte Aufl., Berlin, 1841.—22, 23, 82, 103, 131, 138, 141, 192-93 
— Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der  Philosophie,  Bd. XIII-XV, Berlin, 1833-1836. 
—131,  167-68 
— Werke, Berlin, 1831-1845: 
— Wissenschaft der Logik, 2-te Auflage, Bd. V, Berlin, 1841.—138 
Heine, H. Die Nordsee, zweiter Zyklus, Gedicht Fragen. —157 
— Die schlesischen  Weber, Gedicht. —232 
Helvétius, C. A. De l'esprit, T. Ill, Paris, 1822.—132, 133 
— De l'homme, de ses facultés intellectuelles et de son éducation, T. I-II, Londres, 
1775.—129 
Hennen, J. An account of the eruptive  diseases  which have lately appeared in the Military-
Hospitals of Edinburgh. In  : The Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal: Exhibiting 
a concise view of the latest and most Important Discoveries in Medicine, Surgery, and 
Pharmacy, Vol. 14, Edinburgh, 1818.—339 
Hess,  M. Die letzten Philosophen, Darmstadt, 1845.—240 
— Ueber die Noth in unserer Gesellschaft und deren Abhülfe. In: Deutsches Bürger­
buch für 1845, Darmstadt, 1845.—240 
Hinrichs, H. F. W. Hinrichs' politische Vorlesungen, Bd. I-II, Halle, 1843.—90, 91 
Hirzel, K. M. Correspondent aus Zürich. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft IV, 
March 1844; Heft V, April 1844.—145-48, 210 
d'Holbach, P.-H.-D. Système social, ou principes naturels de la morale et de la politique..:, 
T. MI, Paris, 1822.—133 
— (anon.) Système de la nature, ou des loix du monde physique et du monde moral, 
par M. Mirabaud, Partie 1-2, Londres, 1770.—130, 133 
Homer. Iliad.—47 
[Hood, Thomas] The Song of the Shirt. In: Punch, or the London Charivari, Vol. V. 
London, 1843.—500 
Hörne, R. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Horner, L. See Documents: Reports of the Inspectors of Factories... 
Jerrold, D. The Two Windows. In: The Illuminated Magazine, Vol. 3, May to October, 
London, 1844.—574 
Johns,  W. Report upon the Working of the Registration and Marriage Acts, during the two 
years 1837-38 and 1838-39, in the registration district of  Manchester.  In: Journal of the 
Statistical Society of London, Vol. Ill, London, 1840.—437 
J[ungnitz, Ernst] Herr Nauwerk und die  philosophische  Fakultät. In: Allgemeine Literatur-
Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844.—17 

=====第772页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 747 
Kaiser, H. W. Die Persönlichkeit des Eigenthums in Bezug auf den Socialismus und 
Communismus im heutigen Frankreich, Bremen, 1843.—642 
Kay [Shuttleworth], J. Ph. The Moral and Physical Condition of the Working Classes 
Employed in the Cotton Manufacture in Manchester, Second Edition enlarged and 
containing an introductory Letter to the Rev. Thomas Chalmers, London, 1832.— 
351, 352, 362-66, 467 
Knight, A. On the grinders' asthma. In: North of England Medical and Surgical 
Journal, August 1830-May 1831, Vol. I.—493, 494 
La Mettrie, J. O. de. L'homme machine, London, 1751.—130 
Leach, J. Stubborn Facts from the Factories by a Manchester Operative. Published and 
dedicated to the working classes by Wm. Rashleigh, M. P., London, 1844.—429, 
430, 432, 468, 470, 485-88 
Leif child, J. R. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment 
of Children and Young  Persons  in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
List, F. Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie. Erster Band: Der internationale 
Handel, die Handelspolitik und der deutsche Zollverein, Stuttgart und Tübingen, 
1841.—258,  259, 265, 268, 273, 277, 278, 284-88, 290 
Livre (Le) noir de m-rs Delavau et Franchet, ou répertoire alphabétique de la police po­
litique sous le ministère déplorable; ouvrage imprimé d'après les registres de l'admini­
stration, précédé d'une introduct. par M. Année, 2 éd, T. 1-4, Paris, 1829.—73 
Locke, J. An Essay Concerning Humane Understanding, London, 1690.—127, 129 
Loudon, Ch. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Mackintosh. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Malthus, Th. R. An Essay on the Principle of Population; as it affects the Future Improve­
ment of  Society,  with Remarks on the Speculations of W. Godwin, M.  Condorcet  and other 
Writers, 1st ed., London, 1798.—380, 570-73 
Mandeville, B. de. The Fable of the Bees: or, Private Vices, Publick Benefits, London, 
1714.—131 
Marmontel, J.-F. Lucile. In: Oeuvres complètes, T. IX, Paris, 1819.—144 
McCulloch, J. R. A Dictionary practical, theoretical and historical of commerce and com­
mercial navigation. A new ed., London, 1844.—313 
— A Statistical Account of the British Empire, exhibiting its Extent, Physical Capacities, 
Population, Industry and civil and religious Institutions, 2 vols., London, 1837.— 
580 
Mead, E. P. "The Steam-King". In: The Northern Star No. 274, February 11th,  1843.— 
474-77 
Mirabaud, J. B. Système de la nature.... See d'Holbach, P. H. D. 
Mitchell, J. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Molière, J. B. L'Avare.— 627 
— Le bourgeois gentilhomme.— 55 
— Sganarelle, ou Le cocu imaginaire. —628 

=====第773页=====
748 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Monteil, A.-A. Histoire des Français des divers états aux cinq derniers siècles, T. I-X, 
Paris,  1828-1844.—71 
Neue Anekdota. Hrsg. von Karl Grün, Darmstadt, 1845.—241 
Oastler, R. The Fleet  Papers;  being  letters  to Thomas Thornhill Esq. of Riddlesworth in the 
county of Norfolk, from Richard Oastler, his prisoner in the Fleet. With occasional 
communications from Friends, 4 vols., London 1841-1844.—438, 439, 463 
Owen, R. Manifesto of Robert Owen, the Discoverer, Founder, and Promulgator of the 
Rational System of Society, and of the Rational Religion. Sixth Edition. To which 
are added a Preface and also an Appendix..., London, 1840.—459 
— Observations on the Effect of the Manufacturing System: with hints for the improve­
ment of  those  parts of it which are most injurious to health and morals, 2nd ed., London, 
1817.—459 
Parkinson, R. On the Present Condition of the Labouring Poor in Manchester..., 3rd ed., 
London and Manchester, 1841.—420, 565 
Parny, E. D. Poésies erotiques.— 69 
Pecchio, J. Histoire de l'économie politique en Italie, ou Abrégé critique des économistes 
italiens;  précédée  d'une introduction. Traduite de l'italien par L. Gallois, Paris, 1830.— 
269 
Peuchet, J. Dictionnaire universel de la géographie commerçante, T. 1-5, Paris, 1799-
1800.—598 
— Mémoires tirés des Archives de la Police de Paris, pour servir à l'histoire de la 
morale et de la police, depuis Louis XIV jusqu'à nos jours, T. IV, Paris, 1838.— 
597, 598, 612 
— Statistique élémentaire de la France, Paris, 1807.—598 
Pitkeithly, L. Emigration. Where to, and how to proceed. Description of the Shaker Vil­
lages. In: The Northern Star, No. 286, May 6, 1843.—217 
Polidori Vergilii Urbinatis, De rerum inventoribus, Lugduni Batavorum, 1644.—71 
Porter, G. R. The Progress  of the Nation, in its various Social and Economical Relations 
from the Beginning of the Nineteenth Century to the Present Time, 3 vols., London, 
1836-1843.—313-19, 320, 425-27, 530 
Power. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Proudhon, P.-J. Avertissement aux propriétaires, ou Lettre à M. Considérant, rédacteur de 
la Phalange, sur une défense de la propriété, Paris, 1841.—50 
— Qu'est-ce que la propriété? Ou  recherches  sur le principe du droit et du gouvernement, 
Premier mémoire, Paris, 1841.—23-32, 33-34, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43-49, 52, 528 
— Qu'est-ce que la propriété? Deuxième mémoire. Lettre à M. Blanqui, professeur 
d'économie politique au conservatoire des arts et métiers. Sur la propriété, Paris, 
1841—50, 135-36 
Rfeichardt],  C[arl]. Katechismus für  wahlberechtigte  Bürger in  Preussen.  Von Dr. A. Benda. 
Berlin, 1843 bei Springer. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844.—9 
— Preussens Beruf in der.deutschen Staats-Entwickelung, und die nächsten Bedingungen 
zu seiner Erfüllung. Von C. Brüggemann, Berlin, 1843, bei Besser. In: Allge­
meine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft VI, May 1844.—9, 10 
— Schriften über den Pauperismus. Publicistische Abhandlungen: von Weniger, Doctor 
beider Rechte und der Philosophie, 1843. Berlin bei Hermes. In: Allgemeine 
Literatur-Zeitung, Heft I, December 1843.—9 

=====第774页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 74' 
— Schriften über den Pauperismus. Die Gründe des wachsenden Pauperismus vor. 
A. T. Wöniger. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft II, January 1844.—9 
Ricardo, D. Des principes de l'économie politique et de l'impôt. Traduit de l'anglais par 
Constancio avec des notes explicatives et critiques par  J.-B.  Say, Seconde édition, Tome 
premier, Paris, 1835.—271, 387 
Riesser, G. Die Judenfrage. Gegen Bruno Bauer von Dr. Gabriel Riesser in Hamburg. 
In: Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher, hg. von Dr. Karl Weil, Bd. 2-3, Stuttgart,  1843.— 
94-97,  113 
Roberton, J. An inquiry respecting the period of puberty in women. In: North of England 
Medical and Surgical Journal, Vol. I, (August 1830-May 1831).—453 
Robespierre, M. Rapport sur les principes de morale politique qui doivent guider la Con­
vention nationale dans l'administration intérieure de la République, fait au nom du 
comité de salut public, à la séance du 5 février (17 pluviôse) 1794. In: P. J. B. Bûchez 
et P. C. Roux, Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française, ou Journal des 
Assemblées Nationales depuis 1789 jusqu'en 1815..., Tome 31, Paris, 1837.—119, 121 
Robinet, J. B. De la nature, Nouv. éd., T. I-IV, Amsterdam, 1763-1766.—130 
Rotteck, C. und Welcker, C. Staats-Lexikon oder Encyklopädie der Staatswissenschaften, 
Bd. 1-15; Supplemente Bd. 1-4, Altona, 1834-1848.—123 
Sadler's Report. See Documents: Report from the Select Committee on the 'Bill to regulate 
the Labour of Children in the Mills and  Factories  of the United Kingdom', 8th August, 
1832 
Saint-Just, L. Au nom des  comités  de salut public et de  sûreté  générale.  Convention nationale. 
Séance du 31 mars (11 germinal) 1794. In: P. J. B. Bûchez et P. C. Roux, Histoire 
parlementaire de la Révolution française..., Tome 32, Paris, 1837.—120, 121 
— Rapport sur la police générale. —Du 26 germinal an 2 (15 avril 1794). In: 
P. J. B. Bûchez et P. C. Roux, Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française..., 
Tome 32, Paris, 1837.—120, 121 
Saunders, R. J. See Documents: Reports of the Inspectors of Factories... 
Say, J.-B. Cours complet d'économie politique pratique. Volume complémentaire. Mélanges 
et correspondance d'économie politique; ouvrage posthume de J.-B. Say, publié par 
Charles Comte, son gendre, Paris, 1833.—270 
— Traité d'économie politique, ou simple exposition de la manière dont se forment, se 
distribuent et se consomment les  richesses,  T. I-II, Paris, 1803.—32, 43, 270 
Say, L. A. Études sur la richesse des nations et réfutation des principales erreurs en 
économie politique, Paris, 1836.—271 
Schiller, F. von. Das Mädchen aus der Fremde, Gedicht. —23 
— Die Räuber.— 202 
Scriven, S. S. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Senior, N. W. Letters on the Factory Act, as it affects the Cotton Manufacture,  addressed 
to the Right Honourable the President of the Board of Trade, to which are appended, a 
Letter to Mr. Senior from Leonard Horner, Esq., and Minutes of  a Conversation  between 
Mr. Edmund Ashworth, Mr. Thomson and Mr. Senior, London, 1837.—364 
25-762 

=====第775页=====
750 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Serra, A. Breve trattato delle cause, che possono far abbondare li regni, d'oro e d'argento, 
dove non sono miniere. In: Scrittori classici italiani di economia politica, Ed. Pietro 
Custodi, Parte antica, T. I., Milano, 1803.—269 
Shakespeare, W. All's Well that Ends Well.—71 
— Much Ado about Nothing.—542 
Sieyès, E. J. Qu'est-ce que le tiers-état?, Bordeaux, 1789.—32 
Sismondi, J. C. L. Simonde de. Études sur  l'économie  politique, T. I-II, Bruxelles, 1837-
1838.—273 
— Nouveaux principes d'économie politique ou de la richesse dans ses rapports avec la 
population, Seconde édition, T. II, Paris, 1827.—272, 273 
Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vols. 1-2, Lon­
don, 1776.—49 
— An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. With a Life of the 
Author, an introductory Discourse, Notes, and supplemental Dissertations. 
By J. R. McCulloch, 4 vols., Edinburgh, 1828.—49, 380, 415 
Smith, T. S. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
[Somerville, A.] (One who has whistled at the Plough.) Notes from  the Farming Districts, 
No. XVII.  A journey to Harmony Hall, in Hampshire; with some particulars of the 
Socialist Community, to which the attention of the Nobility, Gentry and Clergy is 
earnestly  requested.  In: The Morning Chronicle, December 13, 1842.—224-26, 240 
— The Farm Labourer. What is to be done?—More Churches or more Employment? 
(being a second notice of the Reports on the Employment of Women and Children in 
Agriculture, lately presented to Parliament by Command of Her Majesty). In: The 
Morning Chronicle, July 6, 1843.—556 
Southwood. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
The State of  Ireland.  See [Croker, J. W.] A sketch of the State of  Ireland,  Past and 
Present. 
Stein, L. Der Socialismus und Communismus des heutigen Frankreichs. Ein Beitrag 
zur Zeitgeschichte, Leipzig, 1842.—134, 613, 642 
Stirner, M. Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum, Leipzig, 1845.—329, 564 
Stockinger, A. Distress at Hinckley. In: The Morning Chronicle, December 1st,  1843.— 
480 
— "To the editor of the Morning Chronicle." In: The Morning  Chronicle,  December 
9th, 1843.—480, 481 
Strauss, D. F. Das Leben Jesu, 4. Aufl., Bd. 1-2., Tübingen, 1840.—528 
Stuart, J. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Stubborn Facts from the Factories. See Leach, J. Stubborn Facts from the Factories by a 
Manchester Operative 
Sue, E. Atar-Gull.—bl 
— Le Juif errant, T. I-X, Paris, 1844-1845.—190 
— Les Mystères de Paris. T I-XIV, Bruxelles, 1843.—55-57, 61-64, 66, 67, 69, 70, 
73-75,  76, 77, 162-66, 168-76, 177, 179-88, 190, 194, 195, 201-09 

=====第776页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 751 
— Plick et Plock.—57 
— La Salamandre. Roman maritime, Bruxelles, 1832.—57 
Symons, J. C. Arts and Artisans at Home and  Abroad:  with Sketches of the Progress of 
Foreign Manufactures, Edinburgh, 1839.—341, 412, 432, 503, 504 
Symons, J. C. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Szeliga. Eugen Sue: Die Geheimnisse von Paris, Kritik. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, 
Heft VII, June 1844.—54-57, 61-77, 162, 163, 166-68, 175, 176, 180, 186, 187, 
190, 191, 194, 196, 197, 200-03, 209 
Tancred, Th. See Documents: Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of 
Children and Young Persons in Mines and Collieries..., First Report, 1842; Second 
Report, 1843 
Thiers, Geschichte der französischen Revolution. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft 
VIII, July 1844.—52 
Tufnell. See Documents: Factory Inquiry Commission, Second Report, 1833 
Ure,  A. The Cotton Manufacture of Great Britain. Systematically investigated, and illus­
trated...,  2 vols., London, 1836.—308, 310, 312, 429 
— The Philosophy of Manufactures: or, an Exposition of the Scientific, Moral and 
Commercial Economy of the  Factory  System of Great Britain, Second Ed., London, 
1835.—417, 434, 457-59, 461, 462, 477-78, 510 
— Philosophie des manufactures, ou Economie industrielle. Traduit sous les yeux de 
l'auteur, Tome I, Bruxelles, 1836.—281 
Vaughan, R. The Age of Great Cities: or, Modern Society Viewed in its Relation to 
Intelligence, Morals, and Religion, London, 1843.—416 
Vidocq, F. E. Mémoires de Vidocq, Chef de la Police de Sûreté, jusqu'en 1827, aujourd'hui 
propriétaire et fabricant de papiers à Saint-Mandé, T. 1-2, Paris, 1828.—73 
Virgil,  Aeneid,  Book III.—618, 628 
Voltaire, F. M. Zaïre. —619 
Wade, J. History of the Middle and Working Classes; with a Popular Exposition of the 
Economical and Political Principles..., Third Edition, London, 1835.—405, 406 
Wakefield, E. G. Swing Unmasked: or, the Causes of Rural Incendiarism, London, 
1831—551 
Weitling, W. Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit, Vivis, 1842.—235-36 
Weld, C. R. On the Condition of the Working  Classes  in the Inner Ward of St. George's 
Parish, Hanover Square. In: Journal of the Statistical Society of London, 
Vol. VI, London, 1843.—333 
Zerrleder, Correspondenz aus Bern. In: Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung, Heft III, February 
1844;  Heft VI, May 1844.—145, 146 
25* 

=====第777页=====
752 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
DOCUMENTS 
An Act for the further Amendment of the Laws relating to the Poor in England (7 & 8 
Vict. cap. 101), 1844.—578 
An Act for Regulating the Construction and the Use of Buildings in the Metropolis and 
its Neighbourhood (7 & 8 Vict. cap. 84), 1844.—407 
An Act for the Reliefs of the Poor (43rd Elizabeth, Cap. 2), 1601.—571 
Children's Employment Commission's Report. See Report of Commission of Inquiry into the 
Employment of Children and Young Persons..., First Report, 1842; Second Report, 
1843 
Code Napoléon, Paris und Leipzig, 1808.—90 
Code pénal, ou code des délits et des peines, Cologne, 1810.—190 
Corpus iuris civilis. Hrsg. von C. Otto, Bd. I, Leipzig, 1830.—30 
Extracts from the Information received by His Majesty's Commissioners, as to the Admin­
istration and Operation of the Poor-Laws, Published by Authority, London,  1833.— 
571 
Factories Inquiry Commission. First Report of the Central Board of His Majesty's Commis­
sioners appointed to  collect  Information in the Manufacturing Districts, as to the Employ­
ment of Children in Factories, and as to the Propriety and Means of Curtailing the 
Hours of their Labour: with Minutes of Evidence, and Reports by the District commis­
sioners, June 28, 1833 (No. 450).—366, 430, 431, 437, 441, 442, 443, 444, 446, 
448-57,  469, 511 
Factory Inquiry Commission. Second Report of the Central Board of His Majesty's 
Commissioners appointed to  collect  Information in the Manufacturing Districts, as to the 
Employment of Children in  Factories,  and as to the Propriety and Means of Curtailing 
the Hours of their Labour: with Minutes of Evidence, and Reports by the Medical 
Commissioners, 15th July, 1833 (No. 519).—366, 401, 405, 430, 431, 435-37, 
439-41,  443-55, 457, 460-62, 466, 469, 480-83 
Factories Inquiry Commission's Report. See Factory Inquiry Commission. Second 
Report, 1833 
Fifth Annual Report of the Registrar General of Births, Deaths and Marriages in England, 
2nd ed., London, 1843.—404 
First Report of the Commissioners for inquiring into the State of Large Towns and 
Populous Districts, 2 vols., London, 1844.—404, 405 
Gilbert's Act. An Act for the Better Relief and Employment of the Poor (22. George III. 
cap. 83), 1782.—576 
Hansard's Parliamentary  Debates:  Third Series; Commencing with  the Accession of William 
IV. Vol.  LXVII.  Comprising the Period from the twenty-eighth Day of  February,  to the 
twenty-fourth Day of March, 1843, London, 1843.—423, 465 
— ...Vol. LXX. Comprising the Period from the sixteenth Day of June, to the twenty-
eighth Day of July, 1843.—463, 464 
— ... Vol. LXXII.  Comprising the Period from the first Day of  February,  to the twenty-
first Day of February, 1844, London, 1844.—464 
— ...Vol.  LXXIII.  Comprising the Period from the  twenty-second  Day of  February,  to 
the second Day of April, 1844, London, 1844.—433, 435-37, 440, 450, 451 

=====第778页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 753 
— ...Vol.  LXXV.  Comprising the Period from the thirtieth Day of May, to the twenty-
sixth Day of June, 1844, London, 1844.—540, 541, 545-46 
Miles' Bill for Enlarging the powers of justices in determining complaints between masters, 
servants and artificers. Bill No. 58 of 1844. In: Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, 
Vols.  LXXIII and LXXIV.—322, 569 
Pauperism and Poor-Rates in the Parochial Year 1842;  abstracted  from the Ninth Annual 
Report of the Poor Law Commissioners, 1843. In: Journal of the Statistical Society of 
London, Vol. VI, London, 1843.—386 
The People's  Charter; being the Outline of an Act to provide for the Just Representation of 
the People of Great Britain in the Commons' House of Parliament. Embracing the 
principles of Universal Suffrage, No Property Qualification, Annual Parliaments, 
Equal Representation, Payment of  Members,  and Vote by Ballot. Prepared  by a committee 
of twelve persons, six members of Parliament and six members of the London Working 
Men's Association, and  addressed  to the  People  of the United Kingdom, London, 1838.— 
517-18 
Report from Assistant Hand-Loom Weavers' Commissioners. By J. C. Symons. In: Par­
liamentary Papers, Vol. XLII, 1839.—341 
Report from the Select Committee on the 'Bill to regulate the Labour of Children in the 
Mills and Factories of the United Kingdom', 8th August 1832. In: Parliamentary 
Papers, Vol. XV, 1831-1832.—460 
Report of Commission of Inquiry into the Employment of Children and Young Persons 
in Mines and Collieries and in the Trades and Manufactures in which Numbers of 
them work together, not being included under the terms of the Factories' Regulation 
Act, First Report, 1842; Second Report, 1843.—356, 402, 408-10, 445, 479, 480, 
482-85,  489-99, 531-36, 538, 539, 545 
Report of a Committee of the Manchester Statistical Society on the Condition of the Work­
ing Classes in an extensive manufacturing district in 1834, 1835 and 1836 (1838).— 
338 
Report of the Committee of the Statistical Society of London, on the State of the Working 
Classes in the Parishes of St. Margaret and St. John, Westminster. In: Journal of the 
Statistical Society of London, Vol. Ill, London, 1840.—333 
Reports of the Inspectors of Factories to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the 
Half-Year ending 31st December 1843. Presented to both Houses of Parliament by 
Command of Her Majesty, London, 1844.—435, 463 
Report of the Poor Law Commissioners for  Ireland.  Parliamentary session of 1837. See 
Third Report of the Commissioners appointed 'to inquire into the condition of the  poorer 
classes  in Ireland...' 
Report to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State for the Home Department, from the 
Poor Law Commissioners on an Inquiry into the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring 
Population of Great Britain; with Appendices. Presented to both Houses of Parlia­
ment, by Command of Her Majesty, July 1842, London, 1842.—339, 343, 
365, 397, 405 
Report to the Home Secretary... See Report to Her Majesty's Principal Secretary of State 
for the Home Department. 

=====第779页=====
754 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Report upon the Condition of the Town of Leeds and of its Inhabitants. By a Statistical 
Committee of the Town Council, October 1839. In Journal of the Statistical Society of 
London, Vol. II, London, 1840.—343, 396 
Third Report of the Commissioners appointed 'to inquire into the condition of the poorer 
classes in  Ireland,  and into the various institutions at present established by law for 
their relief...'  In: Parliamentary Papers, Vol. 34, 1836.—558 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS 
PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung Heft VI, May 1844: Correspondent aus der Provinz. —146-
54, 156-61 
— Heft VIII, July 1844: 1842.— m 
The Annual Register, or, a View of the history, politics and literature of the year 1838, 
London, 1839: Chronicle.—509 
— Evidence of James Moat.—509 
— Evidence of James Murdoch.—509 
The Artizan. A Monthly Journal of the Operative Arts, London, 1844, Vol. 1, No. 10, 
October 31st, 1843: On the Health of the Working  Classes  in Large Towns.—339-43, 
396, 405 
Constitutionnel Neuchâtelois No. 109, September 11, 1845: Neuchâtel. —651-53 
Daily Advocate and Advertiser, July 17th, 1843: [Description of Bäumler's colony in Zoar, 
Ohio].—221 
Durham Chronicle No. 1286, June 28th, 1844: The Coal Trade, Monopoly.—318 
Halifax Guardian No. 571, November 4th, 1843: The Truck System Extraordinary.— 
472 
The Illuminated Magazine, Vol. 3, May-October, 1844: The Dwellings of the Poor. 
From the  note-book  of an M. D. —332 
Kölnische Zeitung No. 314, November 9, 1844: Ein 'socialistischer'  Spuk. —231 
The Liverpool Mercury, and Lancashire General Advertiser, Supplement, February 9th, 
1844:  Liverpool, Friday, February 9th, 1844.—370 
The Manchester Guardian 
— February 4th, 1843: Meetings of Deputies to receive reports of the Committees.— 
387 
— May 10th, 1843: Manchester Court Leet.—369 
— December 20th, 1843: Street Beggars. To the Editor of The Manchester 
Guardian.—564, 565 
— May 1st, 1844: Statement of Facts, ... submitted by the Deputation of Master 
Manufacturers and Millowners in the County of Lancaster.—435, 439 
— June 15th, June 29th, July 24th, July 27th and August 3rd, 1844: [Reports of 
serious accidents in factories].—455 
— July 3rd, July 31st, and August 10th, 1844: [Reports of the cases of selling 
tainted meat to workers].—369 
— July 31st, 1844: "Quarterly Table of Mortality" in 115 registrars' districts for the 
quarter ending, June 30th, 1844.—403 
— October 30th, 1844: Turnout at Messrs. Kennedy's factory.—468 
[Information on different incidents in factory towns].—426 

=====第780页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 755 
— November 2nd, 1844: Messrs. Pauling and Co. and their Workmen.—589 
— November 27th, December 28th, 1844, and January 4th, 1845: [Details about 
the strike of the Pauling and Henfrey workers].—595, 596 
The Mining Journal No. 420, T. 13, September 9th, 1843: 
[Statistics on accidents in mines].—538 
The Northern Star No. 46, September 29th, 1838: Meeting at Kersal Moor, on Monday, 
Sept. 24th.—519 
— No. 295, July 8th, 1843: Brutality at a Workhouse.—51A 
— No. 315, November 25th, 1843: Murder! Hellish treatment of the poor in the 
Coventry Bastille.—574-75 
— No. 317, December 9th, 1843: Atrocities at the Birmingham Workhouse.—575 
— No. 318, December 16th, 1843: The Important Investigation at the Birmingham 
Workhouse.—575 
— No. 319, December 23rd, 1843: Continuation of the enquiry at the Birmingham 
Workhouse.—575 
— No. 326, February 10th, 1844: Secrets of the Union Workhouse.—575, 576 
— No. 328, February 24th, 1844: The Poor Laws.—Disgusting Treatment of the 
Poor.—575, 576, 577 
Record of Destitution. Frightful Spread of Fever from Destitution.—397 
— No. 333, March 30th, 1844: Infamous Treatment of an Englishman and his 
Family in Bethnal-Green Workhouse.—576 
— No. 334, April 6th, 1844: Inhuman conduct of the master of a Union Work­
house.—574 
Horrible Profligacy in the West London Union Workhouse.—576 
— No. 336, April 20th, 1844: The Miner's Monthly Magazine. Edited by W. P. 
Roberts Esq. Nos. I and II. London: Cleave, Shoe-lane.—541 
Mr. Roberts.—Belper.—Messrs. Haslam. To prevent any mistake.—543 
— No. 337, April 27th, 1844: Truckism.—471 
— No. 338, May 4th, 1844: Metropolitan Misery.—Religious Robbery.—334, 385 
More Liberations of Miners.—542 
— No. 344, June 15th, 1844: Horrible Condition of the Agricultural Labourers.—579 
— No. 350, July 27th, 1844: The Mad Marquis again. The Labour Struggle.— 
544-45 
— No. 352, August 10th, 1844: Sanatory Condition of the town! Important pro­
ceedings.—344 
— No. 359, September 28th, 1844: Infernal Workhouse Cruelties.—576 
— No. 362, October 19th, 1844: Great Meeting of the Carpenters of Manchester and 
Salford.—586 
— No. 363, October 26th, 1844: Manchester.—The Strike of Messrs. Pauling and 
Co.'s Carpenters and Joiners.—586 
— No. 365, November 9th, 1844: Henfrey v. Salmon—Assault.—589-91 
The Carpenters' and Joiners' Strike.—592-94 
— No. 366, November 16th, 1844: Another of Labour's Victories.—The Carpenters 
and Joiners of Manchester.—592-94 
— No. 367, November 23rd, 1844: Manchester.—Great Aggregate Meeting of the 
Building Trades.—595 
— No. 368, November 30th, 1844: Extension of the Strike.—595 
More of Labour's Triumphs at Manchester and Wigan.—595-96 
— No. 369, December 7th, 1844: Another Victory for Labour. Manchester, Friday, 
Nov. 29th.—595-96 

=====第781页=====
756 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— No. 375, January 18th, 1845: Aggregate Meeting of the Manchester Building 
Trades.—596 
Sheffield and Rotherham Independent, February 3rd, 1844: 
[Note on the fire in the Soho Wheel Works in Sheffield]-— 509 
The Times, October 12th, 1843: London, Thursday, October 12, 7843.-336-37 
— November 17th, 1843: Appalling Destitution.— SM 
— December 22nd, 1843: The Houseless poor.—337 
— January 16th, 1844: Police. Worship-street.—334 
— February 12th, 1844: Police. Marlborough-street.—334, 335 
To the editor of "The Times" .—336-37 
— June 7th, 1844: The Incendiary Fires in Suffolk and Norfolk. (From our own 
correspondent).—551,  552 
— June 10th, 1844: Incendiarism in Suffolk and Norfolk. (From our own cor­
respondent).—551,  552 
— June 21st, 1844: The Incendiary Fires in Suffolk and Norfolk. (From our own 
correspondent).—551,  552 
The Weekly Dispatch, No. 2212, March 17th, 1844: Horrifying Conditions of the Stay-
makers and Stock-makers.—449 
- No. 2219, May 5th, 1844: Wild  beasts  and rational beings.—366, 372-73 
— No. 2232, August 4th, 1844: The Railway Bill.—More  Oppression  for the  Poor.— 
569 
— No. 2251, December 15th, 1844: Mortality in the Metropolis.—406 

=====第782页=====
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung —German monthly published in Charlottenburg from 
December 1843 to October 1844; organ of the Young Hegelians edited by Bruno 
Bauer—7,  12, 14, 20, 51, 77, 91, 99, 107, 117, 136, 138, 143, 147-48, 151, 153, 
156-57,  210, 211 
Allgemeine Zeitung —German conservative daily founded in 1798; from 1810 to 
1882 was published in Augsburg—134 
Allgemeines Volksblatt. Populärer Monatsbericht über die wichtigsten Zeitfragen —German 
democratic monthly published in Cologne from January 1845 to the beginning 
of 1846—240 
Anekdota zur neuesten deutschen Philosophie und Publicistik —collection published in 
1843 in Switzerland (Zurich and Winterthur) under the editorship of Arnold 
Ruge; Volumes I and II were printed; Marx's articles appeared in this collection 
— 152,  192 
The Anti-Bread-Tax-Circular—biweekly organ of the Anti-Corn Law League; ini­
tially its name was The Anti-Corn-Law Circular, published in Manchester from 
1839 to 1843-658 
The Artizan. A Monthly Journal of the Operative Arts—English monthly, organ of 
building engineers published in London from 1843 to 1873—339, 340, 342, 
396, 405 
Blätter der Gegenwart für soziales Leben —newspaper of German émigrés in Switzer­
land, founded by Wilhelm Marr and published in Lausanne from 1844 to 
1845 as an organ of the radical secret society "Young Germany"—651, 652 
Bürgerbuch. See Deutsches Bürgerbuch 
Constitutionnel Neuchâtelois —Swiss newspaper of a conservative monarchist orien­
tation, published in Neuchâtel three times a week from 1831 to February 
1848-651 
Le Courrier de Provence—French daily founded by H. G. Mirabeau, published in 
Paris from 1789 to 1791 with contributions by J.-B. Say—270 

=====第783页=====
758 Index of Periodicals 
Daily Advocate and Advertiser—American daily originally founded under the name 
of Pennsylvania Advocate, but soon renamed; published in Pittsburgh (Ohio) from 
1832 to 1843—221 
Le Débat Social, organe de la démocratie —Belgian weekly, organ of radical-republican 
circles, published in Brussels from 1844 to 1849—213 
La Décade philosophique, littéraire et politique —French republican newspaper published 
in Paris three times a month from 1794 to 1807 under the editorship of Jean 
Baptiste Say—270 
La Démocratie pacifique —French daily published in Paris from 1843 to 1851 under 
the editorship of Victor Considérant; organ of the Fourierists—152, 213 
Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher —German annual journal published in Paris under 
the editorship of Karl Marx and Arnold Ruge. The only issue of the journal— 
a double number—appeared in February 1844—32, 87, 88, 106-09, 111, 113, 
229, 325, 562 
Deutsche Jahrbücher für Wissenschaft und Kunst —literary and philosophical journal of 
the Left Hegelians published in Leipzig under the editorship of Arnold Ruge 
from July 1841 to January 1843. It was closed down by the government of 
Saxony and forbidden all over Germany by decision of the Federal Diet—100, 107 
Deutsches Bürgerbuch —German annual journal, organ of the "true Socialists"; 
altogether two volumes appeared: the first (for 1845) was published by Hermann 
Püttmann in Darmstadt in December 1844; the second (for 1846) was published 
in Mannheim in the summer of 1846. The Deutsches Bürgerbuch carried two ar­
ticles by Frederick Engels— 228, 235, 240, 644 
Durham Chronicle—English liberal weekly published in Durham from 1820—318 
The Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal—Scottish medical monthly, published 
in Edinburgh from 1805 to 1855-339 
L'Egalitaire, Journal de l'organisation sociale —French monthly founded by Théodore 
Dézamy and published in Paris in 1840; expounded the ideas of Utopian 
communism—667 
The Examiner—English annual journal, organ of the liberal circles, published 
in London from 1808 to 1881—523 
The Fleet Papers — weekly edition of letters and pamphlets published by Richard 
Oastler from 1841 to 1844 during his stay in the Fleet prison—464 
La Fraternité de 1845. Organe du communisme— workers' monthly of the Babouvist 
trend, published in Paris from January 1845 to February 1848—667 
La Gazette de France—French royalist daily published under this title in Paris from 
1762 to 1792 and from 1797 to 1848-598 
Gesellschaftsspiegel. Organ zur Vertretung der besitzlosen Volksklassen und zur Beleuch­
tung der gesellschaftlichen Zustände der Gegenwart— German monthly, organ of 
the "true Socialists", published under the editorship of Moses Hess in Elberfeld in 
1845-46; altogether twelve issues appeared; Frederick Engels was one of its 
founders-235, 240, 601, 612, 671-74 
Le Globe—French daily paper founded by Pierre Leroux and published in Paris 
from 1824 to 1832; in January 1831 it became the organ of the Saint-Simonists — 
667 

=====第784页=====
Index of Periodicals 759 
Halifax Guardian—English conservative weekly published in Halifax from 1832—472 
Hallische Jahrbücher für deutsche Wissenschaft und Kunst — German literary and philo­
sophical journal of the Young Hegelians, published in Halle from 1838 to 1841, 
edited by Arnold Ruge— 132 
The Illuminated Magazine—English liberal literary magazine published in London 
from 1843 to 1845—332, 574 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires — French daily newspaper founded in Paris 
in 1789; during the July monarchy it was published by the government— 190 
Journal of the Statistical Society of London—English monthly statistical journal pub­
lished in London from 1838—333, 343 
Kölnische Zeitung —German daily published under this title from 1802 to 1945; 
organ of the liberal bourgeoisie—231 
Konstitutionelle Jahrbücher —German liberal journal published three times a year in 
Stuttgart from 1843 to 1847—162 
The Leeds Mercury—English weekly (until 1861) founded in Leeds in 1718; in the 
1840s became the organ of the Radicals—471 
Literatur-Zeitung. See Allgemeine Literatur-Zeitung 
Liverpool  Mercury—  English liberal daily published in Liverpool from 1811—370 
The Manchester Guardian—English daily, organ of the free traders, from the 
middle of the 19th century organ of the Liberal Party; founded in Manchester 
in 1821—369-72, 403, 426, 436, 455, 468, 471, 538, 539, 564 
Mercure de France—French monthly published in Paris in 1672-1820; from 1793 it 
was edited by Jacques Peuchet —598 
The Miner's Advocate—English monthly, organ of the Miners' Union of Great 
Britain, published in Newcastle in the 1840s —541 
The Mining Journal—English weekly journal dealing with commercial and technical 
problems, founded in London in 1835—538 
The Morning Chronicle—English daily published in London from 1770 to 1862; in 
the 1840s became the organ of the Whigs—224, 480, 556 
The New Moral  World:  and Gazette of the Rational Society—English weekly founded by 
Robert Owen; organ of Utopian Socialists; published from 1834 to 1846, first 
in Leeds, then in London; Engels contributed to it from November 1843 to 
May 1845-212, 213, 217, 220, 221, 229, 234, 237, 242 
The Northern Star—English weekly newspaper, central organ of the Chartists; 
published from 1837 to 1852, first in Leeds, then in London. Its founder and 
editor was Feargus O'Connor, George Harney being one of its co-editors. Engels 
contributed to the paper from 1843 to 1850  —471,  512, 554, 593, 647, 648, 650, 
653, 655 
North of England Medical and Surgical Journal—English journal published in London 
and Manchester from 1830 to 1831—453 
Petites Affiches de Paris—French periodical founded in Paris in 1612; an information 
bulletin carrying various announcements and notices— 190 

=====第785页=====
760 Index of Periodicals 
Das Pfennig-Magazin —German educational weekly of liberal tendencies published 
in Leipzig from 1833 to 1855—221 
La Phalange. Revue de la science sociale —organ of the Fourierists, published in 
Paris from 1832 to 1849; it repeatedly changed its title, frequency of publication 
and size—615, 641 
Pittsburg Daily Advocate and Advertiser. See Daily Advocate and Advertiser 
Le Producteur, Journal philosophique de l'Industrie,  des Sciences  et des Beaux-Arts —French 
weekly published in Paris from 1825 to 1826; first printed organ of the Saint-
Simonists—667 
Punch, or the London Charivari—English comic weekly paper of a liberal trend, 
founded in London in 1841—500 
Révolutions de Paris—French revolutionary and democratic weekly published in Paris 
from July 1789 to February 1794; till September 1790 the paper was edited by 
Elisée Loustalot —82 
Revue des deux Mondes —French biweekly literary and politic?! journal published in 
Paris since 1829-488 
Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform —German magazine, organ of the 
"true Socialists", published by Hermann Püttmann; altogether two issues ap­
peared: the first in Darmstadt in August 1845, and the second in Bellevue, a 
place on the German-Swiss border, at the end of 1846; the magazine carried 
Engels' Elberfeld speeches—235, 240, 241, 264, 654, 655 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe— German daily paper founded 
on January 1, 1842, as an organ of the oppositional circles of the Rhenish 
bourgeoisie, and published in Cologne till March 31, 1843; Marx was its editor 
from October 15, 1842, to March 17, 1843; under his influence the paper 
assumed a pronounced revolutionary and democratic character, which led to 
its suppression by the government—100, 107, 256 
Le Satan—French satirical weekly of liberal tendencies, published in Paris from 
1842 to 1844—191 
Le Siècle —French daily published in Paris from 1836 to 1939. In the 1840s it 
was an oppositional organ which demanded electoral and other reforms—190 
Der Sprecher oder: Rheinisch-Westphälischer Anzeiger —German democratic newspaper 
founded in Dortmund in 1798 and appearing until 1863; in the 1840s it was 
published in Wesel; Karl Grün, who later became a "true Socialist", was one of 
its editors from 1842 to November 1844—229-30 
Statistical Journal. See Journal of the Statistical Society of London 
The Sun—English liberal daily published in London from 1798 to 1876—472 
Telegraph für Deutschland —German literary magazine founded by Karl Gutzkow; 
in 1837 it appeared in Frankfort on the Main, and from 1838 to 1848 in 
Hamburg. In the late thirties and early forties of the 19th century the magazine 
was the mouthpiece of the "Young Germany" group. Engels contributed to it 
from March 1839 to 1841-656, 658, 661 
The Times— English daily founded in London in 1785—336, 337, 427, 552, 579 
Trier'sche Zeitung —German daily founded in 1757 and published under this title 
until 1815; in the early forties of the 19th century it became a radical organ and 
later was influenced by the ideas of "true socialism"—229 

=====第786页=====
Index of Periodicals 761 
Volksblatt. See Allgemeines Volksblatt 
Vorwärts! Pariser deutsche Zeitschrift —German newspaper published in Paris twice 
a week from January to December 1844; organ of the moderate and from 
May 1844 of radical-democratic elements among German émigrés. Marx and 
Engels contributed to it, thus intensifying its revolutionary tendencies—212-
13, 230 
The Weekly Chronicle—English radical weekly published in London from 1836 to 
1865—523 
The Weekly Dispatch—English radical weekly published under this title in London 
from 1801 to 1928 — 366, 373, 406, 499, 523 
Das Westphälische Dampfboot —German monthly, organ of the "true Socialists", 
published under the editorship of Otto Luning in Bielefeld from January 
1845 to December 1846 and in Paderborn from January 1847 to March 1848. 
Some of Marx and Engels' works were published in it—240, 596 
Zeitschrift für spekulative Theologie —German theoretical journal of Hegelian tenden­
cies, published in Berlin from 1836 to 1838 under the editorship of Bruno 
Bauer-143 

=====第787页=====

=====第788页=====
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Absolute—see Relative and absolute 
Abstraction—19, 20, 22, 23, 24, 35, 39, 
40, 41, 53, 57-60, 66-67, 71, 72, 83, 
97, 99, 110, 120, 128, 137, 141-42, 153, 
155, 169, 178-80, 193, 205 
— abstract and concrete—23, 40, 52, 
53, 85, 166-67, 193 
Aesthetics—  55, 161, 167 
Agitation—  237,  525, 653 
Agricultural proletariat—see Working class 
Aim—  37, 93-94, 123 
— means to achieve it—93 
— as an end in itself—123 
Alchemy—27 
Alienation—41,  50, 82, 116, 140, 141, 
143, 160 
— self-alienation—9, 21, 53, 82, 140 
See also Estrangement 
America—see United States of America 
Analogy—10, 161, 166, 201, 206 
Analysis and synthesis—114, 128 
Anarchy—117, 122 
Anti-Corn Law League, the—13, 15-16, 
272, 289, 387, 417, 519, 520, 555, 
566-67,  588, 657-60 
See also Corn Laws 
Antithesis—35-36 
— between classes—35-37, 56, 244, 
329, 411-12, 414, 418, 466, 497, 503, 528, 529, 556, 577-78, 581-82, 
583 
See also Class struggle, Contradictions, 
Opposites, Working class 
Aristocracy—304, 520 
See also England—landed aristocracy, 
landlords 
Army—249-50 
Artisans, handicraftsmen—116, 321, 325, 
326, 488-89, 497 
Asceticism—99, 128 
Ashton—313,  345, 587 
Astrology—27 
Atheism, atheists—82, 89, 110, 127, 212-
13, 412 
— workers' atheism—421, 526, 538, 
653 
Atom—120-21,  128 
B 
Babouvism—47, 119 
Barnsley—344 
Basis and superstructure—109, 112 
Being,  existence 
— and consciousness—36-38, 43, 53, 
58, 59, 85-86, 125, 129, 141-42, 
144, 191-93 
See also Consciousness 
Belfast—  315 
Belgium—213,  676, 677 

=====第789页=====
764 Subject Index 
Birmingham—318, 329, 340, 341, 488, 
489, 491, 517, 529 
Bohemia 
— insurrection of cotton printers in 
1844—230, 303-04, 503, 647 
Bolton—12, 313, 345, 508 
Bourgeoisie 
— general characteristics—280-81, 
285, 286, 325,  330-31,  375-80, 393, 
409, 412-13, 416, 420, 421, 423, 
424, 425, 427, 430, 431, 433, 434, 
508, 525, 546-47, 673 
— industrial (manufacturers)—409, 
432, 435, 444, 457, 469, 473, 486, 
509-10, 563 
— liberal—416-17, 460, 517, 562, 570 
— as a ruling class—298, 393 
— and feudal monarchy—649-50 
See also Middle class 
Bourgeoisie in England 
— general characteristics—212, 230, 
267, 304, 323,  410-11,  413-14, 416-
17, 419-21,  426, 458, 512, 555, 
657, 660 
— big—321, 325, 348, 497, 556-57 
— petty—244, 321, 326, 371, 375, 
488-89,  498, 520, 528, 548, 556, 
580-81 
— industrial (manufacturers)—322, 
325, 326, 383, 409, 428, 430, 
447, 456, 458, 459, 460, 461, 462, 
469, 470, 486, 488-89, 510, 520, 
538, 544, 555, 566, 587, 657, 658, 
660 
— commercial—660 
— liberal—322, 416, 459, 460, 517, 
520, 523, 528, 562, 570, 579 
— as a ruling class—298, 393, 407, 
409, 410, 412 
— in Parliament—322, 323, 517 
— its cultural level—528 
— and working class (interrelations, 
exploitation)—349-50, 385-86, 413, 
416, 418, 419, 423, 424, 425, 428, 
434, 506-10,  520-21,  522, 523, 528, 
538-40, 562-83, 585 
Bourgeoisie in France—50, 56, 122-24, 
212, 262-63, 267, 304 
See also French bourgeois revolution of 
the end of the 18th century Bourgeoisie in Germany—230, 237, 265-
68, 274, 275, 292, 302-04, 393, 544, 
563, 647-50, 652-53 
Bourgeoisie, Prussian—649 
Bourgeois political economy—31-32, 34, 
42, 49-50, 198, 265-68, 271-72, 276, 
284, 287, 290, 293, 598 
See also Malthusianism 
Bourgeois society—37', 69-70, 76, 123, 135, 
267-68,  275-76,  280-81,  283, 303, 
597, 671 
— its organisation—275, 276 
See also Capitalist mode of production 
Bradford—315, 343, 519 
Brain—22, 59, 66, 140 
Bristol—340, 389 
Bureaucracy—267 
Bury—345 
Byzantium—178 
C 
Capitalist mode of production—244, 245, 
246, 247, 263-64, 330, 378, 456-58, 
473, 479, 497-98, 508, 554-55, 564, 
572 
Cartesianism—126, 127 
— Cartesian materialism—125, 130, 
132 
Casuistry 
— moral—182, 185 
Category—22, 30, 41, 42, 44, 53, 54, 57, 
60, 67, 72, 73, 83, 93, 148, 153, 159-
60, 191, 193 
— abstract—67, 159-60 
— logical—90 
— philosophical—137 
Catholicism—81,  346 
Causality, cause and effect—13, 16, 46, 73, 
134, 280, 285-86 
Censorship—229 
Charity, bourgeois—564-65, 570 
See also Humaneness, Philanthropy 
Chartism 
— general characteristics—418, 477-
78, 517-21,  577 
— as an independent political move­
ment of the working class—15, 517, 
528-29,  545, 555 

=====第790页=====
Subject Index 765 
— People's Charter, political pro­
gramme of Chartism—465, 517-
19, 522, 566-67 
— need for combining it with social­
ist theory—524-27 
— and bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
radicals—518, 522-23, 524, 528-29, 
578 
— General Working-men's Association 
of London (Lovett)—517-18 
— National Charter Association— 
522-23 
— and movement for the repeal of the 
Corn Laws (free traders)—13, 519-
21 
— and struggle for shorter working 
hours—13-15,  519, 523 
— and Trade Unions—540-41 
— and the agrarian question—523-24 
— and the 1842 strike—512-17, 520-
22, 566, 587, 588, 658-59 
Chemistry—546 
— chemical properties of substances— 
27 
Cheshire—  316,  403, 554 
Children 
— in England—399-401, 402, 405, 
435-38,  440, 442-43, 496-97 
See also Child labour, Family, Mortality 
among children 
Child labour 
— in factories—384, 408, 411, 441-
44, 446-47, 450, 455-60, 463-64, 
466, 468, 477-83, 485, 489-92, 494-
97, 672, 673 
— in mines and collieries—533, 534, 
538-39 
— in agriculture—550 
China—261,  580 
Christianity—56, 59, 85, 88-89, 94, 95, 
109, 110,  169-81,  184 
— and the state—88 
— and the individual—178 
Church—117, 653 
— Anglican—409, 556 
— in England—464, 477, 559, 564 
See also Religion 
Civilisation—251 
Classes, the—197 
— and their interrelations—584, 597, 
671 — class prejudices—427 
— propertied—13, 15, 16, 36, 526-27 
— non-propertied—14, 36, 135 
See also Antithesis—between classes, 
Bourgeoisie, Class struggle, Peasantry, 
Working class 
Class contradictions—see Antithesis—be­
tween  classes 
Class solidarity—see Working class—class 
solidarity 
Class struggle, the—24$, 248, 329-30, 
331, 375, 427, 429, 502, 508-09, 511, 
512, 513, 554, 555, 580-83, 585 
— between the proletariat and the 
bourgeoisie—323, 386, 413-14, 416, 
427, 501, 506-08, 510, 511, 528-
29, 561, 570, 582-83 
— and social revolution—418 
— and class-consciousness—417-18, 
528-29 
See also Antithesis—between classes, 
Working class 
Clergy, the 
— English—421 
— German—235, 268 
— French—213 
— and secular education—408 
See also Church 
Communism (theory)—36-37,  52-53, 
94-95,  130, 131, 136, 241, 263 
— workers' communism (German, 
French, English)—124, 125, 302 
Communism (economic formation)—246-
52, 253, 254, 282 
— public ownership of the means of 
production—254, 263 
— productive forces—250-52 
— abolition of class contradictions and 
class distinctions—246, 281-83 
— ways of transition—253-55 
— peaceful transition—253-54, 263, 
465, 581-82 
— and the state—248 
— and labour—250-52 
— policy of peace—249-50 
Communist movement, Communists 
— in England—242 
— in Belgium—213 
— in France—131, 152-53, 196, 
212, 213, 242, 253, 526, 527, 582, 
613, 614 

=====第791页=====
766 Subject Index 
— in Germany—213, 229-42, 256, 
613, 644 
— in Switzerland—242, 652-53, 655 
Communist colonies—214-28 
— in England—214, 215, 223-27, 235 
— in the U.S.A.—214, 215, 217-18, 
220-24, 232, 235, 238, 239 
See also Harmony, Rappites, Shakers 
Competition 
— general characteristics—49, 122, 
243-45,  251, 257-58, 261-62, 267, 
275, 279, 280, 308, 326, 375-76, 
379, 382, 427, 524, 555, 564, 566 
— over land—556-59 
— and monopoly—261-62 
— between states—14,  259-61,  466, 
480, 579-80, 657 
— among workers—16, 251, 307-08, 
372, 375-88, 433-34, 507-08 
See also Unempbyment 
Concept, notion—70, 72, 78, 92, 93, 128, 
132, 137, 138, 145, 668 
Conception, idea—32, 33, 57, 60, 62, 81, 
128, 137-39 
Connection—120, 130 
— interconnection—19 
Consciousness—19, 31, 33, 39, 41, 53, 
79,85,86,104,109, 119, 133,141, 171, 
174, 177, 178, 192, 665 
— unconsciousness—33, 36, 39, 85, 
113 
See also Reason, Self-consciousness, 
Thinking 
Contemplation—see Perception 
Content—see Form and content 
Contradictions—32, 33, 34, 36, 39, 41, 
49, 58, 93, 99, 105, 107, 111, 114, 
115, 116, 121, 128, 133, 139, 161, 
166, 167, 168, 183 
See also Antithesis, Opposites 
Corn Laws—288, 289, 519-20, 522, 523, 
549, 566, 588, 656-61 
— repeal  of—13,  15, 322, 411, 519-
20, 521, 522, 555, 566, 579, 581, 
588, 657-61 
See also Anti-Corn Law League 
Cost of production—16, 32, 49, 657 
Court and legal procedure—467-68, 487, 
541-42,  567-69, 587, 589-93, 650 Crime—234, 248, 249, 386, 412, 413, 
422, 425-27, 494, 502, 508-09, 551, 
553 
— in England—412-13, 425-27, 
508-09,  551 
Crises, social—419 
See also Revolution 
Critical Criticism—see Young Hegelianism 
Customs Union—259 
D 
Deduction—see Induction and deduction 
Definitions—84, 95, 96, 97 
Definition, determination—25, 28, 32, 45, 
49-50,  52, 58, 60, 61, 84, 95, 97 
Deism—129, 421 
Derby—314, 340, 479, 481, 554 
Development—  23, 36, 76, 95, 96, 105, 
128, 131, 138 
— concrete—52 
— spiritual—135 
Dialectics—11,  23, 42, 61, 64, 73, 75, 
78, 80, 93 
— dialectical process of thinking— 
53, 78 
— speculative dialectics—54, 103 
Diseases, epidemics (engendered by the 
development of capitalism)—13, 364-
65, 397-400 
Dissenters—112, 464 
Division of labour—  325,  344-45, 381, 
415-16 
Dogmatism, dogma—20, 34, 83, 95, 96, 
107, 158 
Dublin—337, 338 
Dundee—315 
E 
Economic crisü— 382-84, 386-87, 388, 
518 
— development in cycles—383, 386 
— commercial—245, 353, 381-83, 399, 
429, 580-81,  658 
— agrarian—548-49 

=====第792页=====
Subject Index 767 
— in 1837-39—245, 518 
— in 1842—245, 386-88, 508, 520 
— in 1847—386 
Economic relationships—33, 53, 122, 197 
Edinburgh— 338, 339, 340, 341, 389, 
397, 404 
Education—235 
— general education in communist so­
ciety—253-54 
— in England—407-12, 459, 462, 464, 
477, 490-92, 494, .496, 527, 528 
See also Schools in England 
Egoism—120, 668 
Elberfeld—237 
Emancipation, political—see Revolution, 
bourgeois, Revolution, proletarian 
Emigration 
— political—229, 652-53 
— Irish immigration to England— 
321, 337, 355, 376-77, 389-92, 419-
20, 560 
Empiricism—39, 72, 80, 82, 85, 109, 
155, 178 
Energy—141 
England 
— general characteristics—307, 320, 
328 
— before the 19th cent.—307, 309, 
312, 320 
— as the leading capitalist country 
of the 19th cent.—245, 261, 318-
19, 320, 328, 419, 465-66 
— history of—309, 644 
— population of—320, 321, 325, 326, 
381, 416-18, 432-33, 548, 656 
— agriculture, agrarian relations in— 
289, 311, 318-19, 324, 358-60, 548-
49, 550, 553, 554, 555-58, 568, 
660, 661 
— livestock breeding in—317, 557 
— peasants, tenant farmers—288, 
308, 311, 375, 548-52, 553-58, 559, 
562, 657, 660 
— landed aristocracy, landlords—288, 
520, 548, 552, 553, 554, 555, 559, 
562, 656-57, 660-61 
— trade  of—13,  245, 288-89, 312, 
313, 317, 326, 381, 385, 480 
— commercial crises—245, 360, 381-
83, 398, 580-81 — communications—317-20, 569 
— poor rates—386, 388, 549 
— peasant movement in the 1830s and 
1840s—553,  554, 557 
— Constitution—14, 518, 661 
— Parliament—14, 322, 503, 517-18, 
546, 549, 569-70, 572, 578, 658, 
660 
— electoral system, Reform Bill of 
1832—322, 503, 517-18, 571, 657, 
660 
— legislation of—322, 503, 514, 
517-18,  567, 568, 569, 570, 660-61 
— Poor Laws—322, 463, 464, 519, 
523, 550, 553, 557, 568, 569, 570, 
574, 577-78, 660-61 
— laws against tramps and vagabonds 
—567-68 
— Game Laws—552-53 
— Factory Acts—13-14, 322, 428, 
443, 459-66, 539, 569-70 
— political parties  in—13,  15, 304, 
322, 381, 416, 517-18, 520, 555, 
570, 646 
— church of—464, 477, 559, 564 
— prospects of proletarian revolution 
—260-61,  262, 546-47, 579-83 
— and Ireland—560, 561 
— temperance societies—423 
— English, the—419, 560 
See also Bourgeoisie in  England,  En­
glish bourgeois revolution of the 17th cen­
tury, Industry in  England,  Industrial 
revolution in  England,  Ireland,  Tories, 
Whigs, Workers' movement in  England, 
Working class in England 
English bourgeois revolution of the 17th 
century—262 
English materialist philosophy—125, 126, 
127-31 
Enlighteners 
— German—134-35 
— French—124-25, 126 
— and religion—124-25 
Epicureanism—169 
Epidemics—see Diseases, epidemics 
Equality—38-39, 40, 41 
— bourgeois—38-39 
— and private property as its negation 
—41 

=====第793页=====
768 Subject Index 
Essence and phenomenon—21, 22, 27, 28, 
33, 35, 41, 42, 52,  57-61,  64, 68, 
72, 73, 84, 89, 93, 96, 97, 106, 107, 
109-10, 114, 121, 123, 128, 138, 152, 
174 
Estrangement—41-43, 120, 192, 665 
— self-estrangement—36, 41, 42 
Ethics—see Morality 
Europe (political characteristics)—652-53 
Exchange value—266, 275-83, 284 
See also Value 
Existence—see Being 
Experience—23, 79, 128, 129, 130 
Exploitation 
— of labour by capital—418-19, 461, 
467, 469, 506-07 
See also Labour, Working class 
F 
Factory legislation in England—13-14, 15, 
322, 428, 443, 460, 462-66 
— Apprentices' Act of 1802—459 
— Factory Act of 1819—459 
— Factory Act of 1825—459 
— Factory Act of 1831—459-60 
— 1833 (1834) Act—459, 461-62 
— Lord Ashley's Act (1842) banning 
the employment of women and 
limiting the employment of chil­
dren in mines and collieries—539 
— Masters' and Servants' Act (1844)— 
322, 569-70 
— Ten Hours' Bill (1844)—435, 460-
61, 465-66 
Factory legislation in Germany—672-73 
Factory system—14, 284-85, 311-12, 434, 
439, 445, 457-60, 466, 467, 472-73, 
474-79,  485, 489, 497 
See also Child labour, Female labour, 
Labour 
Family 
— of the worker—424-25, 437-38, 
439-40, 497 
— patriarchal—309 
Fatherland—250 
Female labour—406, 464 
— female labour replacing male 
labour—384, 431, 434-36, 477, 672 — in factories—434-38, 440-42, 451-
55, 464, 469, 481-82, 489, 497, 
672, 673 
— dress-makers, sewing-women—497-
500 
— in mines and collieries—533-35 
— in agriculture—550 
See also Family, Women's question 
Feuerbach's  philosophy—92-94, 139 
Fichte's philosophy—139 
Form and content—97, 107 
Fourier's socialism—50, 84, 152, 263, 
302, 613-15, 641-43 
France—261,  309, 320, 644 
— Directory—122 
— during Consulate and Empire— 
74, 81, 123, 124, 270, 598 
— restoration of the Bourbons— 
74, 81, 85, 124, 598 
— the 100 days—598 
— during the revolution of July 1830 
—124 
— agriculture, agrarian relations— 
199, 200, 560 
— home policy of—281 
— police—598 
— monarchist party—598 
— radicals—135 
— French, the—419, 512, 560 
See also Bourgeoisie in France, French 
bourgeois revolution of the end of the 
18th century, Revolution of 1848-49 in 
France, Workers' movement in France, 
Working class in France 
Freedom—32, 33, 50, 94, 98, 111-16, 
122, 129, 169, 170 
French bourgeois revolution of the end of 
the 18th century—30-31, 81-82, 118-
20, 122-24, 262, 320, 323, 517, 597, 
598, 644, 666 
— Declaration of the Rights of Man— 
113, 114, 122 
— Cercle social—119 
— Enragés —119 
— Hébert's party—114 
— Constituent Assembly—598 
— Convention—598 
— Thermidor— 323 
— revolutionary army, revolutionary 
wars—250 

=====第794页=====
Subject Index 769 
— Terror, revolutionary—74, 81, 95, 
123-24 
— constitutions—597 
— and religion—111, 113-14 
See also Babouvism, Girondists, Jaco­
bins 
French philosophy of the 18th cent.—124, 
125, 126, 129-32, 139, 140 
G 
General—see Individual, particular and 
general 
Geology—546 
Geometry—  128 
Germany—256, 309, 320, 518, 549, 552, 
645, 646 
— agriculture, agrarian relations— 
549, 560 
— trade, home and foreign—258, 
259, 261-62, 275 
— home policy and internal situation 
—229-42 
— classes—671-72 
— peasantry—413 
— political system—111 
— civil life—113, 120, 121 
— court and law—672, 674 
— poor laws—674 
— army—249-50 
— prospects of the revolution—238-
39, 257, 259-62, 646-47 
See also Bourgeoisie in Germany, 
Customs Union, Industry in Germany, 
Socialism in Germany, Workers' move­
ment in Germany, Working class in Ger­
many 
German philosophy of the 18th and 19th 
cent.—7, 8, 17, 40, 41, 125, 153, 653 
See also Feuerbach's philosophy, Fichte's 
philosophy, Hegel's philosophy 
Girondists, the—581 
Glasgow—314, 341, 489, 397, 421, 
509 
Grain 
— prices of grain—286-87, 656 
— export of grain—289 
See also Corn Laws 
Greece, ancient—120 Greek philosophy—126, 128 
Guilds—116 
H 
Halifax—315, 344 
Harmony (socialist colony)—223-27, 232, 
235, 238 
Hegel's philosophy—12, 20, 57,  60-61,  89, 
100-01,  103, 131-32, 137-39, 141, 148-
49, 167, 178, 192-93, 665 
See also Old Hegelianism, Young He-
gelianism 
Heywood—345 
History—12, 13, 32, 79-82, 86, 109, 114, 
122, 124, 135, 150, 267, 671 
— as activity of man pursuing his 
aims—93,  281 
— Hegel's conception of history—85, 
86, 114 
— development of history—84 
— historic progress—474 
— role of masses in history—81, 82, 
85, 94 
"Holy Family"—see Young Hegelianism 
Homoeomeriae—128 
Housing question, the 
— in capitalist society—331-66, 395-
96, 470-72, 532, 539, 543-44 
— in England—331-66, 373-74, 396-
98, 434, 470-72, 491-92, 532, 539, 
552, 559 
See also Lodging-houses 
Huddersfield—315, 344 
Hull—13 
Humanism, real—7, 125, 131 
Humaneness—179 
— bourgeois—462, 565, 571 
— proletarian—420 
I 
Idea, thought—40-41, 49-50, 81-82, 94, 
119, 125-26, 128, 129, 138, 168, 179, 
184, 186, 203 
Ideal—19, 82, 88, 140, 142, 170, 188 
Idealism—16, 53, 80, 123, 137, 140, 153 
Ideology—see World outlook 
Idolatry—127 

=====第795页=====
770 Subject Index 
Individual, personality, the—22, 79, 85, 
86, 113, 120, 122, 160 
Individualism—276 
Individual, particular and general—19, 
52, 61, 62, 78, 85, 100, 114, 115, 
124, 128-29, 142, 193 
Induction and deduction—31, 128 
Industry—116, 122, 130, 150, 244, 256, 
260-61,  265,  280-81,  324-27, 354-56, 
375, 381, 419, 433, 502, 659-60 
See also Industry in America, Industry 
in England,  Industry in Germany 
Industry in America—579-80 
Industry in England 
— general characteristics—245, 259, 
260-61,  275, 281, 283, 289, 324, 
325-27,  344, 355-57, 379, 383-84, 
389, 393, 419, 426, 433, 465-66, 
497, 530, 548, 566, 579-80, 644, 
656, 657-58, 660 
— history from the middle of the 18th 
century to the beginning of the 19th 
century—311-21 
— cotton—12, 313-14, 414, 428-29, 
433-34, 580 
— linen—315-16 
— woollen—289, 314-15, 342 
— silk—316 
— lace—314, 481, 482-83 
— textile—428-32, 479, 484 
— iron and steel, machine-building, 
coal-mining, metal-working—316-
18, 488-89, 491, 494, 532 
— potteries—318, 495 
— glass—496-97 
Industry in Germany—245, 256,  258-61, 
275 
Industrial revolution in England—307, 309, 
313, 320, 324, 325, 503 
Infinity—129 
Intellect, understanding—58, 128, 129 
See also Reason 
Intemperance (as a social category)— 
400, 401, 421-23, 444, 466, 467 
.Interdependence—113, 117 
Interest, interests—41, 42, 81, 82, 120, 
124, 126, 143, 174, 175 
— material—123 
— historic—41 — political—91, 123 
— private, personal—113, 130-32,206 
— general, common—130, 132, 133, 
134, 144 
Internal and external—22, 23, 82, 83, 
101, 108, 137-38, 174, 178 
Internationalism, proletarian—298, 301 
Inventions—12, 71, 289, 307, 310-13, 
317, 344, 428, 429, 511, 656 
See also Industrial revolution in Eng­
land 
Investigations—32, 83, 110, 112 
Ireland—558, 559, 560 
— population—321, 391 
— history—321 
— agrarian relations (tenant farmers) 
—391,  557-61 
— English agrarian legislation for 
Ireland—559 
— Poor Law of 1838, workhouses— 
577-78 
— impoverishment and diseases of 
popular masses engendered by co­
lonial oppression—397, 399, 533, 
558-59,  649 
— pauperism—558-59, 577-78 
— Irish workers in England—322, 
324, 376-77, 384, 390, 391, 392, 
397, 399, 421, 577-78 
— agricultural proletariat—558 
— Irish, the—391-92, 421, 559, 560 
See also Working class in  England— 
Irish workers, Repealers 
Italy—408 
Italians—559 
J 
Jacobins—121-23 
Jesuits, Jesuitism—126, 190 
Jews, Jewish question—87, 88, 90, 95, 96, 
98, 106-12, 113-14 
See also Judaism 
Judaism—90, 99, 110 
See also Jews 
K 
Knowledge—53,  125, 129 
See also Conception, Senses 

=====第796页=====
Subject Index 771 
L 
Labour, work—278, 279 280, 672 
— social—278, 279 
— human—50 
— conditions of labour under capita­
lism—414-16, 443-48, 450-52, 453-
55, 462, 466-67, 468-69, 479-89, 
530-39 
— coerciveness of labour—415, 466, 
468-69 
— night work—444 
— organisation of labour—19 
— manual labour, its replacement by 
machines—312-13, 428-29, 433-35 
— merging of industrial and agricul­
tural labour—548 
— system of fines—469-70, 486, 487, 
488, 539-40 
See also Child labour, Division of 
labour, Female labour, Working day 
Labour time—48, 49 
Lancashire—M2, 313, 314, 315, 342, 
344, 403, 410, 425, 445, 488, 494, 
528, 554, 587 
Landlords, landlordism—see  England— 
landed aristocracy, landlords 
Landed property—45-46, 116, 286-90, 318, 
559, 673 
See also England—agriculture, agrarian 
relations in 
Language—  319,  438 
Law,  right—SI,  97, 116, 117 
— Roman law—44 
Law (juridical)—28, 29, 116, 117, 129, 
179 
Lease, tenant farmers—311, 319, 359-
60, 548-49, 556-59 
Leeds—315,  316, 329, 342, 343 
Legislation, bourgeois—514-15, 567, 568 
See also Bourgeois society, Court and 
legal procedure 
Legislative acts regulating the working day 
in England—see Factory legislation in 
England 
Leicester—314, 340, 470, 479, 480, 481 
Leipzig butchery (1845)—see Workers' 
movement in Germany 
Literature 
— communist, Utopian—235, 240 — socialist—56, 597, 644 
— English—135, 289, 416-17, 420, 
528 
— German—229 
— French—135 
Liverpool—13,  313, 326, 340, 389, 403, 
405, 593 
Lodging-houses—336, 532 
Logic—17, 24, 31, 45, 46-47, 62, 76, 
90, 131, 137, 167 
— Hegelian—18 
— speculative—62, 157 
See also Analogy, Definition, Subject and 
object, Tautology 
London—320, 326-29, 331-37, 372, 389, 
396, 397, 424, 498, 499, 517 
Love—20-23,  439 
Luddism—433,  503 
See also Industrial revolution in England 
Lumpenproletariat —see Working class in 
England—lumpenproletariat 
Lyons—53 
— revolt of Lyons weavers in 1834— 
512 
M 
Machine, machinery—13, 14, 308, 311, 
317, 321, 325, 344, 482 
— and appearance of the proletariat— 
321 
— replacing manual labour—429-35, 
482, 489, 548, 553 
See also Inventions 
Macclesfield—59 3 
Malthusianism—379-80, 432, 570-73 
Man,  human being—7, 20, 22, 23, 27, 39, 
40, 42, 43, 46, 49, 54, 65-66,  70-71, 
82, 85, 87-88, 92, 93, 98-99, 107, 109, 
111, 113, 114, 116,  120-21,  125, 127-
34, 138, 139, 141-43, 150, 160, 165, 
166, 167, 168, 169, 171-75, 178, 179, 
181, 184, 185, 191-93, 201, 665 
— his essence—21, 22, 39, 41, 106, 
114, 115, 141-42, 174, 177, 194 
— his activity—49, 50, 53, 54, 153, 
176, 188 
— his freedom and rights—87-88, 
98-99,  111, 113, 114, 130-31 

=====第797页=====
772 Subject Index 
— his relationships—32, 42, 43 
— his feelings—21, 22, 23, 35, 67, 
84, 161, 174-75, 180-81 
— needs of—52-53 
— humanity, mankind—22, 26, 83, 84, 
85, 88, 136, 139, 142, 144, 167, 
177, 281, 671 
— human and inhuman—33, 76, 110, 
111, 113, 116, 195 
See also Alienation, Estrangement 
Manchester—12-13, 53, 313, 316, 326, 
329, 344, 345, 347-66, 387-89, 396, 
397, 403, 405, 406, 422, 423, 426, 
455, 457, 464, 477, 478, 495, 512, 513, 
517, 520, 521, 522, 564, 565, 587, 
588, 592, 593, 657-60 
Manifestation, sign—34-35, 123, 177 
Masses—9, 11, 12, 78, 80, 81, 84, 85, 
133-34, 135, 136, 154-56, 193, 244, 
249-50, 514, 521-22 
— their role in history—80-81, 84-
85, 103 
Materialism, material—22, 49, 80, 82, 85, 
95, 113, 124-25,  126-31,  132, 136, 
139-41,  150, 192, 196, 265-66 
— material production—49, 150 
— material conditions—95 
— mechanical materialism—125 
Mathematics—48 
— mathematical motion—128 
Matter—  46, 83, 85, 93, 125, 128, 129, 
132, 135, 136, 140-44, 194 
— its forms—129, 140 
Medicine—564 
Metaphysics—17, 37, 62, 75, 79, 125, 
126, 127, 130,  137-41,  166, 180 
— Cartesian—126-27, 130 
— of the 17th cent.—126, 127, 129, 
132 
— speculative—130 
Middle class, the—244, 245, 321, 325, 
349, 375, 388 
See also Bourgeoisie in  England,  Bour­
geoisie in France, Bourgeoisie in Ger­
many 
Middleton—345 
Mind—60, 61 
Mineralogy—58 
Mode of production— 150 
See also Social formation Monarchy—114, 115 
Money, money system—53, 109 
— as a form of private property—32 
— power of money—412, 456-57, 
562-64 
Morality—130, 169-70, 180-85, 201, 308-
09, 407, 411, 423-24, 483, 492, 496, 
528, 643 
— of the worker—343, 392, 408, 
411, 412, 417, 419-20, 441, 442, 
466-67,  483-84, 538, 539 
See also Crime, Family, Love 
Mortality—403,  404, 405-06, 532 
— among children—405-06 
Movement, motion—35, 125, 128, 140, 
141, 142 
Mysticism—11,  30, 39, 58, 60, 138, 167, 
193 
N 
Napoleonic wars—289, 548, 656 
Nation—153,  276, 281, 381 
— national prejudices—298 
Nationalism— 120 
Nature—129, 138,  139-41,  150, 167, 170, 
172 
Natural philosophy—22, 150 
Natural science—57, 125, 128, 130, 149-
50, 155 
Necessity and chance—23, 25, 37, 61, 113, 
130-31,  139 
Needs, requirements—19, 38, 52, 113, 
120, 278 
Negation of the negation (law of)—22, 33-
34, 160 
Newcastle—543 
Nobility—266 
— the squire—656 
Nominalism—127, 128 
Norfolk—554 
Nottingham—314, 340, 479, 481, 483 
O 
Oldham—313,  345 
Old and new—103, 104, 106, 124 
Old Hegelianism—142 

=====第798页=====
Subject Index 773 
Opium war (1842)—261 
Opposites, opposition—14, 16, 34-48, 45, 
54, 56, 58, 84, 85, 86, 94, 96, 98, 103, 
105, 110, 112, 117, 130, 139, 141, 
144, 148, 151, 154, 155, 158, 167, 
168, 179, 193, 201, 203 
See also Antithesis, Contradictions 
Organisations and associations of  work­
ers—  378,  418, 420, 459-60, 503-08, 
509-10, 517, 540, 568 
See also Trade unions in England 
Orthography, English—409 
Owen's socialism—84, 223-24, 232, 252-
53, 459, 525-26, 614 
P 
Papism—268 
Panellation—116, 257 
Paris—57, 597-612 
Patriarchal relations—418, 550 
Patriotic War of 1812 in Russia—124 
Pauperism—  12 
— in England—549-50, 551, 571, 
573 
— in Ireland—558-59, 577 
— in Germany—234, 671-72 
See also Charity, bourgeois, Humaneness, 
bourgeois, Philanthropy, Workhouses in 
England 
Peasantry—289, 375, 548, 550, 553 
See also Lease, tenant farmers 
Penalty 
— penal theory—176-79, 186 
Perception—58, 61, 129, 158 
— sensory perception—58, 61 
Person, individual—23, 79, 248, 253, 
426, 514 
Phenomenology—665 
Philanthropy—237, 384-85, 459, 460, 
474, 525-26, 578, 597, 649 
See also Charity, bourgeois, Humane­
ness, bourgeois 
Philistines 
— German—267, 268, 280, 282, 283 
Philosophy--7', 24, 39, 76-77,  85-93,  125, 
129 See also English materialist philosophy, 
German philosophy of the 18th and 19th 
cent., Scholasticism, Speculation 
Philosophers—17, 29, 59, 60, 146-47 
Phraseology—266, 291 
Physics—125, 126, 128, 130 
Physiocrats—see Bourgeois political  economy 
Poaching—551-53 
Police—  73, 598 
Political economy—see Bourgeois political 
economy 
Poor relief—see Philanthropy 
Population 
— centralisation of; towns—325, 326, 
394, 416-18, 441, 548 
— in England—321, 326, 381, 432, 
548 
Practice—see Theory and practice 
Pragmatism—41 
Predicate—21 
Premises, preconditions—31, 32, 35, 42, 
45, 101 
See also Logic 
Press 
— bourgeois—480, 523, 543 
— socialist and communist—212-13, 
654-55,  674 
— in Germany—229, 231, 671 
— in France—212-13 
Preston—12, 313, 345, 522 
Price—  32, 50 
Principles—7, 12, 14, 16, 17, 27, 28, 31, 
39-41,  82, 89, 93, 105, 115, 121, 129, 
130-31,  584 
— basic—121, 129, 131-32 
Private property—35, 36,  42-43,  49, 278 
— its forms—32, 33, 53 
— proletariat as its creation—35-36 
— "drives itself to its own dissolu­
tion"—36 
— its essence—33 
— historical justification of its exis­
tence—41 
Privileges—115-16 
Production—49 
Productive forces—266, 276, 277, 284-88 
Profit 
— on capital—32 

=====第799页=====
774 Subject Index 
Progress—29, 82-85 
— historic—474 
— social—26 
— scientific and technical—32,  259-61, 
480 
See also Industrial revolution in  England-
Proof—25, 28, 45, 67, 79, 80, 81 
Property-289, 325, 421, 497 
— as the negation of equality (accord­
ing to Proudhon) — 40-41 
— centralisation of property—14 
— the right of property (according to 
Proudhon)—45 
See also Landed property, Private prop­
erty 
Prostitution—251, 332, 422, 424, 441-42, 
469, 494, 672 
Protectionism—258-60, 261-62, 266-67, 
274, 275, 282, 290, 656, 657 
See also Trade 
Protestantism—346-47 
Proudhonism—23-35, 38, 39, 40-54, 156-
57, 528, 642-43 
Prussia—646, 649, 676 
— internal policy—112, 234 
— government—230, 234 
— socialist movement—237, 238 
Psychology  -31,  99 
R 
Rappites—218-20 
Rationalism—128 
Reading-rooms (at factories) in  England— 
477 
— proletarian—527 
See also Education in England 
Reality—53 
— objective reality—193 
— as a criterion of truth—27-28 
— abstraction from reality—19, 58, 
59, 60, 141-42, 180 
— real man—22, 39, 53, 85-86, 108-
09, 120-21,  139, 153, 160, 175, 
177, 192, 248 
— Hegel's conception  of—60-61,  79, 
85-86,  90, 139, 191-92 
— Young Hegelians' idealist concep­
tion of reality—7,  12-13,  19, 23, 24-25,  27-28, 53,  58-61,  77, 79, 
83-84,  90, 95-96, 108-09, 125, 
140-42,  145, 155, 157-60, 180 
— and semblance—33, 58, 83, 101-02, 
248 
— and ideas, concepts, notions—19, 
49-50,  53,  58-61,  77, 79, 82, 120-
21, 145 
— and thinking, consciousness—54, 
58, 140-41,  190-93 
— and its reflection in philosophy— 
7, 126-27 
— and religion—108-09, 175, 177 
— and possibility—126, 127 
— and bourgeois political economy— 
32-33,  42, 54 
Reason—32, 41,  58-61,  65, 85, 90, 128, 
129, 141, 142, 143, 179 
— abstract reason—59-60, 66-67 
— common sense, common human 
reason—143,  147, 151 
"Rebecca" (peasant revolt in 1843)—557 
Reflection—110 
Relative and absolute—114, 121 
Religion—89, 97, 108, 109, 116, 166, 
408-11,  421, 464, 526, 527, 564 
— Christianity—59, 89, 109, 110 
— freedom of conscience—111-12 
— religious consciousness-^ 166 
— religious fanaticism—421 
— religious sects—215-18, 408, 409 
— and the state—111-12, 117 
— in England—408, 411,  419-21, 
464, 496, 526, 538 
See also Atheism, Catholicism, Chris­
tianity, Church, Judaism, Protestantism, 
Theology 
Repealers—560, 561 
Rent of land—271-72, 287, 288, 289-90, 
656 
— as an economic expression of land­
ed property—289 
Revolution 
— general characteristics (its essential 
features and  tasks)—81,  82, 118-19 
— and economic crises—580-81 
— revolution of the minority—81, 82 
See also Masses—their role in history, 
Revolution, bourgeois, Revolution, pro­
letarian 

=====第800页=====
Subject Index 775 
Revolution, bourgeois, the 
— general characteristics (its essential 
features and nature)—81, 82, 110-
11, 122-23 
— its limitations (incompleteness,  half-
heartedness)—81,  82, 261-62 
Revolution, proletarian, the 
— general characteristics (its essential 
features and tasks)—36, 37, 109-
10, 257, 258, 260, 261-64, 266-67, 
282, 283 
— prerequisites  for—261,  262 
— historical inevitability of—418, 580-
81 
— its international character (revolu­
tions breaking out simultaneously 
in a number of countries)—261 
— fundamental difference from the 
bourgeois revolution—87, 88, 94, 
95, 110-11,  261, 262 
— and the role of the proletarian par­
ty—581-82 
— and resort to revolutionary vio­
lence—546-47, 581-82 
— possibility of a peaceful develop­
ment and an objective necessity 
of transition to the armed struggle 
in the course of the revolution— 
263-64, 581-82 
See also Revolution —  general  character­
istics 
Revolution, technical—see Industrial revo­
lution in England, Progress—scientific 
and technical 
Revolution of 1848-49 in France—579 
Right—see Law 
Rochdale— SU, 315, 345, 430 
Rome—120, 268, 510 
— plebs—510 
Russia—289 
S 
Saint-Simon's socialism—50, 282-83, 614 
Salford—  363,  464 
Saxony—646, 647 
Scepticism—127, 201-02, 584 
Scholasticism—107, 127 
Schools in England—407, 408, 411, 412, 
459, 462, 464, 477, 490, 491, 494 — Sunday schools—408-09, 410, 492, 
496 
See also Education 
Science—24-27, 28, 30, 31, 32, 41, 58, 
89, 93, 127, 128, 129 
See also Mathematics, Natural science, 
Physics 
Scotland—319, 386, 404, 422, 484, 503, 
530, 533, 534, 535, 578, 591 
See also Working class in England— 
Scottish workers 
Sects, religious—see Religion 
Self-consciousness—7, 12,  39-41,  79, 80, 
82, 85-86, 93, 104 
See also Consciousness 
Semblance, appearance—33, 36, 37, 58, 
83, 84-85, 99-103, 108-09, 116, 138, 
140, 141, 145, 196 
Senses, sensuousness—19, 22, 58, 61, 65-
69, 82, 83, 120, 128, 129, 150, 178, 
181, 192 
— sensations—130 
— world of the senses—23, 58, 128, 
178, 184, 192 
— sensuous understanding—58 
— experience of the senses—23, 128 
See also Perception 
Sensationalism—127, 128, 129 
See also Senses 
Serfdom—413,  472 
Shakers and the foundation of communist 
colonies in the  U.S.A.—215-18 
Sheffield—317-18, 340, 488, 492-94, 
508, 509, 519 
Silesia 
— riot of the weavers in 1844—230, 
258, 303-04, 646, 674 
Slavery  —IIS,  122, 380, 413, 473, 474 
Social estates—88-89 
Social formation—150, 642 
Social relations—158 
Socialism (theory)—53, 94-95, 130, 136, 
302, 418 
— in England—14, 125, 153, 231, 302, 
418, 524-27 
— in Germany—229-31, 241, 303, 
614, 642-43 
— in France—125, 153, 614 
See also Communism (theory) 

=====第801页=====
776 Subject Index 
Socialism, petty-bourgeois—24-25, 53, 
94-95,  241 
Socialism, scientific—94-95, 232 
Socialism, Utopian—84, 152-53, 232, 
251-53,  263, 302, 459, 524-27, 613-14 
See also Fourier's socialism, Owen's so­
cialism, Saint-Simon's socialism 
Socialist movement, Socialists 
— in England—215, 524-27 
— in France—19, 24, 25, 212-13, 598 
See also Communist movement, Commu­
nists 
Society—49-50, 131, 160, 251-52 
— feudal—122-23, 243, 473, 550 
See also Bourgeois society 
Somersetshire—316 
Sophütry— 34, 61, 140, 174, 182, 185 
Spain—408,  548 
Speculation—  7, 13, 23, 57, 125, 139, 143, 
166, 167, 168, 178-79, 191 
— German—7 
— critical—35, 37 
Spinoza school—124, 131, 137, 139 
Spirit—7, 135, 141-42, 153 
— Hegel's conception of—15-16, 77, 
84-85,  139, 167 
— Young Hegelians' conception of— 
7, 40, 77, 82-86, 94, 97, 104-05, 
113, 134-36, 139-44, 145-46, 177-
78, 186, 206 
Spiritualism—7, 42, 82, 84, 94, 122, 128, 
145, 150, 178 
Staffordshire—488, 491 
Stalybridge—  313,  345, 346, 587 
State—88,  95-96,  110-11,  115,  120-21, 
124 
— of antiquity—113, 122 
— bourgeois—112-14, 116, 117, 274, 
666, 668 
— democratic representative—114, 
115, 122, 123, 666 
— and the national question—111 
— and religion—111-12, 117 
Statistics—247 
Stockport—  345,  346, 430, 464, 521 
Stoicism—169 
Strikebreakers—544, 586-87 Strikes and strike movement in  England— 
458, 505, 506, 507, 508-12,  540-41, 
584, 585 
— in 1812—503 
— in 1818—503-04 
— in 1822—503 
— in 1842-43 (Manchester)—387, 
512-17,  521-23, 585, 587-96, 659, 
660 
— in 1844 (of coal-miners in the 
north of England)—426, 460, 541-
47, 569, 585 
See also Chartism, Workers' movement 
in England 
Strikes and strike movement in France— 
512, 650 
Subject and object—  21, 22, 59, 60, 61, 
71, 72, 75, 78, 79, 80, 82, 85, 129, 
137, 138, 141, 142, 144-45, 159, 160, 
167, 192, 193, 665 
Substance—58-60, 125, 129, 131, 132, 
137-41,  160, 668 
Suffolk—554 
Suicide—412, 597-612 
Summary—128 
Superstition—127 
Sweden—532 
Switzerland—242, 651, 652, 653 
T 
Tautology—20, 84, 153 
Taxes—254-55 
— general progressive tax—254 
Teism—110 
Teleology—79 
Terror—  74, 81, 95, 122-23, 124 
Theology—17, 89, 94, 102, 109, 110, 112, 
127, 143 
Theory and practice— 
— their dialectical correlation—53 
— their unity—153, 235-36, 263 
— discrepancy between them—613-
15, 641-44 
— their contradiction—115-16, 643-44 
— criticism of the idealist interpreta­
tion of the correlation between the­
ory and practice—39, 46, 82, 

=====第802页=====
Subject Index 777 
141-42,  192-93, 613-15, 641-44, 665 
— the role of practice in transforming 
reality—53,  82, 94-95, 506-07 
— revolutionary practice—12, 94-95, 
263 
— theory and practice of the working-
class movement—84 
Thermidor —see French bourgeois revolu­
tion of the end of the 18th century 
Thinking, thought—13, 39, 53, 54,  82-83, 
97, 126-29, 140-43, 151, 153, 158, 
191-93,  665 
— abstract—39-40 
— absolute—159 
— ability to think—21 
— speculative—58 
See also Being and  consciousness 
Time—48-49 
See also Labour time 
Tories—14, 15, 289, 381, 416, 463-64, 
465, 503, 519, 520, 521, 555-56, 578 
— philanthropic Tories—460, 473, 
578 
— Tory Cabinet of Robert Peel—660 
Towns—292-93,  325-30, 339, 340, 373, 
394-95,  416-19, 423, 441, 444, 460, 
467, 498, 532, 556 
— factory—12, 13, 325, 326, 327, 394-
95, 416-19, 441, 444, 460, 498, 
532 
— in England—313-14, 317, 318, 319-
21, 326, 328-74, 459, 660 
— in Germany—672 
See also Birmingham, London, Manches­
ter and other towns 
Trade—33, 116, 289, 292-93 
— as a form of private property—33 
— free trade—267 
See also Economic crisis, Protectionism 
Trade unions in England—13, 503-07, 
509, 510, 526, 540-43, 544-47, 586, 
591, 593 
See also Workers' movement in England 
Transcendentalism—7, 40 
Truth—26, 27, 28, 79, 80, 138, 139, 140 
U 
Unemployment—  250,  251, 261, 377, 381, 
382, 384-88, 396,  429-31,  433, 553-54, 
566 See also Competition, Working class 
United States of America—116, 247, 272, 
289 
— position of Negroes—468-69 
See also Communist  colonies  in the  U.S.A. 
Universe—140, 142 
Usury—423 
V 
Value—32-33,  46, 47, 49-50 
— exchange value—266, 275-83, 284 
W 
Wage-labour—36, 53 
Wages—16, 32, 52, 53, 278, 279, 286, 
287, 288, 307, 308, 330,  377-81,  387, 
431-32,  504, 505, 507, 594, 596, 658, 
659 
— dependence on the introduction of 
machines—431-32 
— in agriculture—549-51, 552 
— truck system—470, 471, 473, 539, 
542, 673 
— in England—13, 307, 308, 376-79, 
387, 426-27, 431, 432, 481, 505-07, 
508, 523, 549, 550, 552, 571 
Wars—249-50 
See also Napoleonic wars, Patriotic War 
of 1812 in Russia 
Weitling's communism—235-36, 614, 615 
Whigs—14, 460, 463, 578 
— German Whiggery—646 
Will—13,  95, 98 
Women's question—438-42 
See also Child labour, Family, Female 
labour 
Workers' associations—52-53, 503-04 
See also Trade unions in England 
Workers' movement—  227,  263, 302, 321, 
418, 419, 581-82, 653 
See also Class struggle, Communist move­
ment, Strikes and strike movement in 
England,  Strikes and strike movement in 
France 
Workers' movement in England 
— general characteristics—242, 321, 
324-25,  344, 418, 428, 433, 444, 

=====第803页=====
778 Subject Index 
488, 489, 494, 498, 501-22, 526, 
529, 541-47, 553, 561, 566, 582-
83, 645 
— movement for shorter working 
hours—15,  459, 460, 465, 519, 523, 
569 
— struggle for higher wages—426, 
505-07,  523, 586 
— and peasantry—555 
See also Chartism, Luddism, Strikes and 
strike movement in  England,  Trade 
unions in England 
Workers' movement in France—263, 512, 
650 
Workers' movement in Germany—227-28, 
230, 236, 253-54, 256-57, 646-48 
— "Leipzig butchery" (1845)—645-46 
Workhouses in England —521, 573-77 
Working class 
— general characteristics  — 36-37, 
265, 302-04,  330-31,  376, 379, 
419-20, 421 
— its rise and development — 257, 
259, 260, 261,  309-11, 320-21,  324-
27, 354-56, 375 
— its world-historic role — 36-37 257 
421 
— its condition in capitalist society — 
302-03,  322-23, 329-32, 373-74, 
423-25,  473-74, 671 
— antithesis and struggle between the 
proletariat and the bourgeoisie  — 
35, 323, 329-30, 375-76, 379, 
385-86,  413-16, 419-20, 427, 506-
08, 510, 529, 561-63, 570 
— need for its organisation — 376 
— its class-consciousness — 36-37, 53, 
253-54, 418, 419, 501, 529, 546-47 
— its internationalism — 212, 303-04 
— class solidarity  — 565 
— its living conditions—36, 37, 373-
74, 394-95 
— dwellings —331-42, 355-57, 395-96 
— food —368-74, 399-400, 434, 491 
— similar conditions of workers' life 
in various countries—302-04 
— conditions of labour—415-16, 
443-46,  447-48, 450-52, 453-56, 
462, 468-69, 479-89, 530-39 
— competition among workers—16, 
250-51,  307-08, 372, 375-88, 
433-34, 507-08 — humaneness — 420 
— agricultural proletariat — 257, 
310-11,  548-62 
See also Revolution, proletarian, Unem­
ployment, Workers' movement, Working 
class in  England,  Working class in 
France, Working class in Germany, 
Working class in Ireland 
Working class in England 
— general characteristics — 36-37, 
262-63,  297, 302-03, 321, 322, 326-
27, 354-56, 373-74, 413, 418-19, 
421, 428, 435, 436, 470, 473-74, 
500, 501-02, 584 
— its rise and development—307-08, 
310-11,  312, 317,  320-21,  324, 325, 
326, 344-45, 375, 548 
— world-historic role  — 36-37 
— workers doing their work at home, 
handicraftsmen —308, 310, 311, 
321, 488-89 
— antithesis between the proletariat 
and the bourgeoisie; class antagon­
ism and class struggle — 36, 323, 
375-76,  379-80, 413-14, 415-16, 
497-98,  501, 506-07, 512-13, 562-
83, 585, 660 
— labour aristocracy —  461,  477 
— class-consciousness of  — 36-37, 84, 
134-36,  418, 419, 529, 546-47 
— internationalism of—298-99 
— humaneness  — 420 
— class solidarity — 546-47, 565 
— its living conditions  —303,  331-32, 
348-49,  373-74, 392-95, 398, 400, 
403-04, 405-07, 658 
— dwellings-331-66, 373-74, 396-99, 
407, 434, 470-72, 491-92, 532, 
539, 543, 558 
— conditions of labour—415-16, 
443-48,  450, 451-52, 453-56, 462, 
468-69,  479-89, 530-39, 585-86 
— enmity towards Irish workers — 
376-77,  392 
— Irish workers —322, 324, 376-77, 
390, 392, 399, 421, 534, 544 
— Scottish workers —590, 591, 593 
— agricultural proletariat—13, 257, 
284-85,  310-11,  548-62 
— weavers —308, 310, 311 
— lumpenproletariat—251, 552 
— moral principles—308-09, 343, 392, 

=====第804页=====
Subject Index 779 
411, 412, 419, 420, 441, 442, 483, 
484, 496, 538 
— its atheism—412, 421, 526, 538 
— education and upbringing—407-12, 
421, 490-92, 494, 496, 526-28, 538 
See also Chartism, Factory  system,  Indu­
stry in  England,  Trade unions in En­
gland,  Wages, Workers' movement in 
England 
Working  class  in France—212, 213, 262-63 
— its theoretical consciousness—36-
37, 84 
— Proudhon's standpoint—41 
Working  class  in Germany—230, 236, 237, 
256, 257, 259, 260, 261, 303, 304, 
647, 652-53, 671-73 
See also Workers' movement in Germany 
Working class in Ireland—390, 392 
— agricultural proletariat—558-59 
Working day 
— in England—13, 14, 15, 382, 384, 
408, 428, 435-36, 443, 444, 461-
66, 479, 481-82, 491-92, 499-500, 
533, 592-93, 672 — movement for the Ten Hours' Bill 
—15,  459, 460, 461, 463, 464, 465, 
519, 569 
See also Factory legislation 
World outlook—170 
Writers 
— socialist and communist—36, 84 
— and censorship—82-83 
Y 
Yeomen—see England—peasants, tenant 
farmers 
Yorkshire—342, 403 
"Young England"—205, 570, 578 
"Young Germany"—651-53, 654 
Young Hegelianism—7-9,  10-11,  20, 39-
42, 47-51,  52-54, 78-79, 82, 94, 95, 
96, 97, 99-103, 105-15, 131-34, 136-
61, 191, 197-200, 211 
See also Reality—Young Hegelians'ideal­
ist conception of reality 

=====第805页=====
