MARX & ENGELS
COLLECTED WORKS
VOLUME 6
Marx and Engels 1845-48    
=====第1页=====
file:///G|/Temp/menewisbns/intros/meint_6.htm [31/08/2011 18:35:21]KARL MARX
FREDERICK ENGELS
Volume
6 
Marx and Engels 1845-48
2010
Lawrence & Wishart
Electric Book
=====第2页=====
file:///D|/Temp/menewisbns/me6.htm [09/12/2010 14:39:32]Editorial commissions:
GREAT BRITAIN: Jack Cohen, Maurice Cornforth, MauriceDobb, E. J. Hobsbawm, James Klugmann, Margaret Mynatt.USA: James S. Allen, Philip S. Foner, Dirk J. Struik, William W.Weinstone.USSR: N. P. Karmanova, V. N. Pavlov, M. K. Shcheglova, T. Y.
Solovyova, Y. V. Yeremin, P. N. Fedoseyev, L. I. Golman, A. I.
Malysh, A. G. Yegorov, V. Y. Zevin.
Digital Edition Copyright © Lawrence & Wishart 2010Digital production: Electric BookISBN 978-1-84327-950-1 All rights reserved. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of
private study, research, criticism or review, no part of thispublication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, ortransmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, electrical,
chemical, mechanical, optical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
=====第3页=====
Contents 
Preface XV 
KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
Autumn 1845-March 1848 
1. F. Engels.  The Festival of Nations in London 3 
2. F. Engeb. The State of Germany 15 
3. K. Marx. Statement  34 
4. K. Marx and F. Engels. Circular Against Kriege  35 
Section One. How Communism Became Love-Sick 36 
Section Two. The Volks-Tribuns Political Economy and Its Attitude 
Towards Young America  41 
Section  Three.  Metaphysical Trumpetings 44 
Section Four. Flirtations with Religion 46 
SectionFive. Kriege's Personal Stand 50 
5. F. Engels. Violation of the Prussian Constitution 52 
6. K. Marx and F. Engels. Letter from the Brussels Communist 
Correspondence Committee to G. A. Köttgen  54 
7. F. Engels.  The Prussian Bank Question 57 
8. K. Marx and F. Engels. Address of the German Democratic 
Communists of Brussels to Mr. Feargus O'Connor 58 
9. F. Engels. Government and Opposition in France 61 

=====第4页=====
VI Contents 
10. F. Engels. The Prussian Constitution  64 
11. K. Marx. Declaration Against Karl Grün  72 
12. F. Engels. The Constitutional Question in Germany 75 
1 75 
II. The Status Quo and the Bourgeoisie  78 
13. F. Engels. Protective Tariffs or Free Trade System 92 
14. F. Engels. Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith 96 
15. K. Marx. The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the Philosophy of 
Poverty by M. Proudhon 105 
Foreword 109 
Chapter I. A Scientific Discovery Ill 
§ 1. The Opposition Between Use Value and Exchange Value Ill 
§2. Constituted Value or Synthetic Value 120 
§ 3. Application of the Law of the Proportionality of Value 144 
A) Money 144 
B) Surplus Left by Labour 152 
Chapter II. The Metaphysics of Political Economy 161 
§ 1. The Method 161 
First Observation 162 
Second Observation 165 
Third Observation 166 
Fourth Observation 167 
Fifth Observation 169 
Sixth Observation 170 
Seventh and Last Observation 174 
§2. Division of Labour and Machinery 178 
§3. Competition and Monopoly 190 
§4. Property or Rent 197 
§5. Strikes and Combinations of Workers 206 
16. F. Engels. The Decline and Approaching Fall of Guizot.— Position 
of the French Bourgeoisie 213 
17. K. Marx. The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 220 
18. F. Engels. German Socialism in Verse and Prose 235 
1. Karl Beck. Lieder vom armen Mann, or the Poetry of True Socialism .... 235 
2. Karl Grün, Über Göthe vom menschlichen Standpunkte. Darm­
stadt, 1846 249 
19. F. Engels. The Economic Congress 274 
20. K. Marx. The Protectionists, the Free Traders and the Working 
Class 279 

=====第5页=====
Contents VII 
21. F. Engels. The Free Trade Congress at Brussels 282 
22. F. Engels. The Communists and Karl Heinzen 291 
First Article 291 
Second Article 298 
23. F. Engels. The Commercial Crisis in England.—The Chartist 
Movement.— Ireland 307 
24. F. Engels. The Masters and the Workers in England. To the Worker 
Editors of  L'A teller 310 
25. K. Marx. Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality. A Contri­
bution to German Cultural History. Contra Karl Heinzen 312 
26. F. Engels. Principles of Communism 341 
27. F. Engels. The Agrarian Programme of the Chartists 358 
28. F. Engels. The Chartist Banquet in Connection with the Elections 
of 1847 361 
29. F.Engels. TheManifestoofM.de Lamartine 364 
30. F. Engels. The Civil War in Switzerland 367 
31. F. Engels. The Reform Movement in France 375 
32. F. Engels. The Chartist Movement 383 
33. F. Engels. Split in the Camp.—The Réforme and the National.— 
March of Democracy 385 
34. K. Marx and F. Engels. On Poland. Speeches at the International 
Meeting Held in London on November 29, 1847 to Mark the 17th Anni­
versary of the Polish Uprising of 1830 388 
Marx's Speech 388 
Engels' Speech 389 
35. F. Engels. The Anniversary of the Polish Revolution of 1830 391 
36. F. Engels. Reform Banquet at Lille.—Speech of M. Ledru-
Rollin 393 
37. F. Engels. Reform Movement in France.— Banquet of Dijon 397 
38. K. Marx. Remarks on the Article by M.Adolphe Bartels 402 
39. K. Marx. Lamartine and Communism 404 
40. F. Engels. The Réforme and the National  406 
41. F. Engels. Louis Blanc's Speech at the Dijon Banquet  409 
42. F. Engels. Chartist Agitation  412 

=====第6页=====
VIII Contents 
43. K. Marx. Wages 415 
[A] 415 
[B] Additions  415 
I. Aktinson  415 
Il.Carlyle  416 
III. M'Culloch  416 
IV. John Wade  419 
V.Babbage  420 
VI. Andrew Ure  , 420 
VII.Rossi  421 
[VIII].Cherbuliez  421 
[lX].Bray. Savings Banks  421 
[C] ., 422 
I. How Does the Growth of the Productive Forces Affect Wages?... 422 
II. Competition Between Workers and Employers 423 
III. Competition Among the Workers Them selves 424 
IV. Fluctuations of Wages 424 
V. Minimum Wage 425 
VI. Suggestions for Remedies 426 
VII.  Workers' Associations 435 
VIII. Positive Aspect of Wage Labour 436 
44. F. Engels. The "Satisfied" Majority.—Guizot's Scheme of "Re­
form".—Queer Notions of M. Garnier-Pages.—Democratic Ban­
quet at Châlon. —Speech of M. Ledru-Rollin.—A Democratic 
Congress.—Speech of M. Flocon. —The Réforme and the National 438 
45. F. Engels. The Coercion Bill for Ireland and the Chartists 445 
46. F. Engels. Feargus O'Connor and the Irish People 448 
47. K. Marx. Speech on the Question of Free Trade Delivered to the 
Democratic Association of Brussels at Its Public Meeting of January 
9,1848 450 
48. F. Engels. The Chartist Movement. [The Fraternal Democrats to 
the Working Classes of Great Britain and Ireland] 466 
49. K. Marx. The Situation in France 468 
50. F. Engels. Extraordinary Revelations.— Abd-el-Kader.— Guizot's 
Foreign Policy 469 
51. F. Engels. The Chartist Movement. [Meeting in Support of the 
National Petition] 473 
52. K. Marx  andF.  Engels. Manifesto of the Communist Party 477 
I. Bourgeois and Proletarians 482 
II. Proletarians and Communists 497 

=====第7页=====
Contents IX 
III. Socialist and Communist Literature 507 
1. Reactionary Socialism 507 
a. Feudal Socialism 507 
b. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism 509 
c. German^or "True", Socialism 510 
2. Conservative, or Bourgeois, Socialism 513 
3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism 514 
IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing 
Opposition Parties 518 
53. F.Engels. The Movements of 1847 520 
54. F. Engels.  The Beginning of the End in Austria 530 
55. K. Marx. The Débat social of February 6 on die Democratic 
Association 537 
56. F. Engels. Three New Constitutions 540 
57. K. Marx and F. Engels. On die Polish Question 545 
Speech by  Mr. Karl Marx 545 
Speech  by Mr. Frederick Engels  549 
58. F. Engels. A Word to the Riforma 553 
59. F. Engels. Revolution in Paris 556 
60. F. Engels. To the Editor of The Northern Star 559 
61. K. Marx. To the Editor of La Réforme  564 
62. K. Marx. Persecution of Foreigners in Brussels 567 
63. F. Engels.  The Situation in Belgium 569 
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 
1. K. Marx. Protectionists 573 
2. K. Marx.Demand 574 
3. K. Marx. Draft Plan for Section III of the Manifesto of  the Communist 
Party 576 
4. K. Marx. Page from the Rough Draft of the Manifesto of the 
Communist  Party  577 
5. K. Marx. Notes on the Arrest, Maltreatment and Expulsion of 
Wilhelm Wolff by the Brussels Police 581 
APPENDICES 
1. Rulesof the Communist League (June 1847) 585 
2. A Circular of the First Congress of the Communist League to the 
League Members. June  9,1847  589 

=====第8页=====
X Contents 
3. Note by Marx on the Formation of the Brussels Community and 
Circleof the Communist League. August 5,1847 601 
4. The Central Authority to the League 602 
5. The Northern Star on the Meeting in London on November 29, 
1847 to Mark the 17th Anniversary of the Polish Insurrection of 
1830 616 
6. Address of the Democratic Association of Brussels to the Swiss 
People 624 
7. Minutes of Engels' Lecture to the London German Workers' 
Educational Society on November 30, 1847 627 
8. Minutes of Marx's Report to the London German Workers' 
Educational Society on November 30, 1847 630 
9. Minutes of Engels' Lecture to the London German Workers' 
Educational Society on December 7,1847 632 
10. Rulesof the Communist League (December 1847) 633 
11. From the Report of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung on the New 
Year's Eve Celebration of the German Workers' Society in Brussels. 
December 31,1847 639 
12. The Association Démocratique of Brussels to the Fraternal 
Democrats Assembling in London 640 
13. From the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung's Report on the Meeting of 
the Democratic Association of February 20, 1848 643 
14. From the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung's Report on the Brussels 
Celebration of the Second Anniversary of the 1846 Cracow 
Insurrection 644 
15. To the Citizens, Members of the Provisional Government of the 
French Republic 645 
16. To Mr. Julian Harney, Editor of The Northern Star, Secretary of 
the Fraternal Democrats Society, London 647 
17. Ferdinand Flocon to Marx in Brussels. March 1, 1848 649 
18. Order of Leopold I, King of the Belgians, for Marx's Expulsion 
from Belgium 650 
19. Decision of the Central Authority of the Communist League, 
March 3,1848 , 651 
20. Travel Document Issued to Marx on His Expulsion from 
Belgium 653 
21. Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Community of the 
Communist League, March 8, 1848 654 

=====第9页=====
Contents XI 
22. Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Circle of the Communist 
League. March  9,1848  656 
23. Announcement by the German Workers' Club in Paris 658 
24. Announcement of the Regular Meeting of the German Workers' 
Club in Paris 658 
NOTES AND INDEXES 
Notes 661 
Name Index 715 
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 737 
Index of Periodicals 751 
Subject Index 755 
ILLUSTRATIONS 
First page of the lithographed "Circular Against Kriege"  37 
Cartoon by Engels of Frederick William IV making the royal speech 
at the opening of the United Diet in Berlin, April 11, 
1847 67 
Beginning of Engels' manuscript, "Draft of a Communist Confes­
sion of Faith" 97 
Cover of the first edition of Marx's The  Poverty  of Philosophy 107 
A page of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung with Marx's "Communism 
of the Rheinischer Beobachter" and the beginning of Engels' essays 
"German Socialism in Verse and Prose" 223 
First page of Marx's manuscript "Wages" 417 
First page of a separate edition of Marx's "Speech on the Question of 
Free Trade" (Brussels, February 1848) 451 
Cover of the first German 23-page edition of the Manifesto of the 
Communist Party 479 
Cover of the 1848 30-page edition of the Manifesto of the Communist 
Party 483 
Cover of the pamphlet containing the speeches "On the Polish 
Question" by Marx and Engels  547 
Bottom of the page from Marx's manuscript, "Protectionists", with 
drawings by Engels  
578-79 
A page of the rough draft of the Manifesto of  the Communist  Party  579 

=====第10页=====

=====第11页=====
TRANSLATORS: 
JACK COHEN: Articles 1, 14, 30, 34, 41, 54 
MICHAEL HUDSON: Article 12 
CATHERINE JUDELSON: Appendix 4 
JONATHAN KEMP: Articles 27, 28, 35, 38, 42, 57, 61, 63 
FRIDA KNIGHT: Articles 48, 49, 51, 62, Appendices 6, 
15-18,  20, 23, 24 
HUGH RODWELL: Articles 6, 11, 13, 17, 19, 20, 39, 40, 
55, 56, 58, 59 
BARBARA RUHEMANN: Article 43, From the Prepara­
tory Materials 1-5, Appendices 1-3, 7-11, 13, 14, 
19, 21, 22 
CHRISTOPHER UPWARD: Articles 4, 18, 22, 25 

=====第12页=====

=====第13页=====
XV 
Preface 
Volume 6 of the Collected Works of Marx and Engels covers the 
period between the autumn of 1845 and March 1848, when the 
bourgeois-democratic revolutions in Europe were maturing, and the 
contents reflect the manifold theoretical studies and practical 
activities of Marx and Engels undertaken on the eve of the 
revolutions of 1848-49. In these activities Marx and Engels were 
mainly concerned with completing their working out of the general 
theoretical foundations of Marxism as the ideology of the working 
class,  with taking the first steps towards the creation of a proletarian 
party based on the principles of scientific communism and 
proletarian internationalism, and with drawing up the programme 
and tactical platform of the international working-class movement. It 
was in this period that Marx and Engels founded the first 
international proletarian organisation — the Communist League, 
and produced Marxism's first programmatic statement—the Mani­
festo of the Communist Party. 
The volume begins with an article by Engels, "The Festival of 
Nations in London", in which the principles of proletarian 
internationalism are set forth in print for the first time. Here 
Engels stressed that "the proletarians in all countries have one 
and the same interest, one and the same enemy", that "only the 
proletarians can destroy nationality, only the awakening proletariat 
can bring about fraternisation between the different nations" (see 
this volume, p. 6). 
The idea of international proletarian solidarity is also expressed in 
the "Address of the German Democratic Communists of Brussels to 
Mr. Feargus O'Connor", a declaration of the German Communists' 
support for the British working men who had joined forces in the 

=====第14页=====
XVI Preface 
Chartist Association which was effectively the first party of the 
working class. It was written for the Brussels Communist Correspon­
dence Committee, which Marx and Engels had initiated at the 
beginning of 1846 to promote unity of ideas and organisation among 
the leading figures of the proletarian and socialist movement. 
Of great importance among surviving papers of the Brussels 
Communist Correspondence Committee is the "Circular Against 
Kriege", a criticism of German "true socialism". Here Marx and 
Engels firmly opposed the views of the "true socialist" Kriege, 
who was at this time active in the United States. He was substituting a 
sentimental theory of universal love for communist ideas, and 
seeking at the same time to present the American democratic 
movement for agrarian reform, the progressive significance of which 
Marx and Engels fully recognised, as a struggle for the communist 
transformation of society. The "Circular" showed that there was no 
point in trying to give socialist doctrines a religious colouring and 
that the communist world outlook was incompatible with religion. 
On a more general plane, the "Circular Against Kriege" was also a 
blow against the views of Weitling and his supporters, who advocated 
egalitarian Utopian communism. Similar in many ways to the beliefs 
of the "true socialists", these views increased the ideological 
confusion among the working class and encouraged sectarian and 
dogmatic attitudes. 
Marx's "Declaration Against Karl Grün", Engels' unfinished "The 
Constitutional Question in Germany", his essays "German Socialism 
in Verse and Prose", and some other works, are also devoted to the 
criticism of "true socialism". In "The Constitutional Question in 
Germany" Engels takes issue with "true socialist" political views. He 
shows that, by ignoring the supremacy of the absolutist system in 
Germany and opposing progressive bourgeois reforms, the "true 
socialists" were playing into the hands of the absolutist feudal circles 
and acting in profound contradiction to the interests of the working 
people. After a searching analysis of the social and political situation 
in Germany Engels outlines the revolutionary tactics of the 
proletariat in the approaching bourgeois revolution, emphasising 
that the working class has an interest in the consistent realisation of 
the aims of such a revolution. 
In his essays "German Socialism in Verse and Prose" Engels then 
criticises the aesthetic ideals of "true socialism", as represented in the 
poetry and literary criticism of its supporters (the poet Karl Beck, the 
literary historian Karl Grün, and others). He censures their 
characteristically sentimental, merely philanthropic themes, their 
petty-bourgeois tastes and illusions and philistine moralising. 

=====第15页=====
Preface XVII 
Progressive writers and poets should, he declares, bring to their 
readers the advanced ideas of their time and acclaim not a "cow­
ardly petty-bourgeois wretchedness", but a "proud, threatening, 
and revolutionary proletarian" (see this volume, p. 235). Here En-
gels arrives, too, at important principles of Marxist aesthetics and 
criteria for the appreciation of works of art. In contrast to Grün's 
extremely naive and thoroughly petty-bourgeois attitude to the work 
of such a great writer as Goethe, Engels shows that the critic's task is 
always to reveal the link between the writer's social environment and 
his world outlook and thoroughly to investigate its contradictions. 
He must be able to distinguish between elements of genuine artistic 
and social value in the work and those which express only a nar­
rowness of outlook on the writer's part. 
One of the most important theoretical works of Marxism — Marx's 
The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of  Poverty "  by M. 
Proudhon—belongs to this period. Aimed against the growing trend 
of Proudhonism — a trend which was later to acquire considerable 
influence in the working-class movement and which Marx and his 
associates fought for decades — this book was compiled to meet the 
contemporary needs of the revolutionary struggle and to help make 
the proletariat theoretically and ideologically independent of the 
petty bourgeoisie. 
The Poverty of Philosophy was prompted by the publication of 
Proudhon 's Systeme des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la 
misère. Marx saw in Proudhon's ideas the embodiment of a 
petty-bourgeois mentality, the inconsistency and utopianism perme­
ating the outlook of a class which seeks at once to escape from the 
disastrous consequences of capitalist development and to preserve 
the economic foundation of the system — private ownership of the 
means of production and wage labour. Criticism of Proudhon's views 
was therefore fundamental for establishing among the workers a 
true understanding of the revolutionary aims of proletarian struggle 
and for exposing any attempts to replace these aims with the Utopian 
reformist idea of adapting the capitalist system to the interests of the 
working people. 
Marx's Poverty of Philosophy is one of the first works of mature 
Marxism. Besides criticising Proudhon, Marx expounds his own 
philosophical and economic views. Here, therefore, in print for the 
first time (though still in a somewhat polemical form) were 
formulated the scientific principles of historical materialism which 
Marx and Engels had worked out mainly in the process of writing 
The German  Ideology.  The Poverty  of Philosophy  was Marx's public début 

=====第16页=====
XVIII Preface 
as "an economist. It is the first published work to outline the 
fundamental propositions of Marx's economic theory which form 
the point of departure of Marxist political economy. Marx himself 
wrote in 1880: "...This book contains in embryo what after 
a labour of twenty years became the theory that was developed 
in Capital." The  Poverty  of Philosophy  also enunciates a number of basic 
propositions about the working-class movement and its tactics. 
Marx first of all shows the weakness of Proudhon's basic approach. 
He had attempted to apply Hegelian dialectics'to political economy 
with no understanding of what dialectics really means. In Proudhon, 
dialectics is reduced to the artificial construction of contradictions. 
He accepted basic facts of economic production and exchange as 
given and unalterable, and then put forward the Utopian idea that 
their "bad" side could be eliminated, while preserving their "good" 
side.  In this way, he thought, the capitalist system could be "puri­
fied" of all those consequences of its development that were inimical 
to the small producer—competition, concentration of production, 
the domination of big, particularly banking, capital, and so on. Marx 
stresses that Proudhon "has nothing of Hegel's dialectics but the lan­
guage" (see this volume, p. 168), and remains in practice a metaphysi­
cian. He shows that Proudhon adopts the idealist form of Hegel's 
theory of contradictions and deprives it.of its rational elements. 
Marx contrasts his own interpretation of the materialist character 
of dialectics to Hegel's idealist interpretation, drawing a clear line of 
distinction between his own scientific method and the Hegelian 
method. 
In The Poverty of Philosophy Marx expressed the essence of the 
materialist understanding of history in a clear and concise formula: 
"Social relations are closely bound up with productive forces. In 
acquiring new productive forces men change their mode of 
production; and in changing their mode of production, in changing 
the way of earning their living, they change all their social relations. 
The hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, 
society with the industrial capitalist" (see this volume, p. 166). 
Defining the meaning of the term "productive forces", Marx 
states that it embraces not only the instruments of production 
but also the workmen themselves, and he thus arrives at the 
important proposition that "... the greatest productive power is 
the revolutionary class  itself"  (see this volume, p. 211). 
In the course of his studies in political economy from 1845 to 1846 
Marx had demonstrated the utopianism of the attempts of the 
English Ricardian socialists — Bray, Thompson and others — to 
deduce a socialist system from the postulates of classical political 

=====第17页=====
Preface XIX 
economy, particularly, from the labour theory of value. In The 
Poverty of Philosophy he showed that Proudhon was repeating and 
aggravating this mistake by regarding the economic categories of 
bourgeois society as the foundation on which to build a new, "just" 
social order. Unlike the English socialists, however, whose goal was 
the radical transformation of society on socialist principles, Proud­
hon sought merely to save the small private producer. 
The Poverty of Philosophy describes English classical political 
economy in its most characteristic aspects and shows the important 
part it played in the development of economic thought. At the same 
time,  although the criticism of the classical economists is not com­
plete, it shows its weaknesses. Even in this work, however, Marx is 
already basing his study of economic life on entirely new premises, 
fundamentally different from those of the classical economists. In 
contrast to Smith, Ricardo and other bourgeois economists who 
assumed the eternal and immutable nature of the economic laws of 
capitalism, Marx argues that the laws of bourgeois production are 
transient in character, just as the laws of the pre-capitalist 
social-economic formations were transient. There will inevitably 
come a time, he wrote, when the laws of bourgeois production will be 
superseded because the very system of bourgeois relations will 
disappear from the face of the earth. 
In his polemic with Proudhon and the bourgeois economists Marx 
took a new standpoint in analysing such categories of political 
economy as value, money, rent, and such economic phenomena as 
the division of labour and application of machinery, competition 
and monopoly. Here he still employs as in other economic works 
of this period (specifically, in the manuscript published in this vo­
lume under the title of "Wages") concepts borrowed from the 
classical economists—"labour as a commodity", "value of labour" 
and "price of labour"—but he gives these concepts a new mean­
ing which discloses the underlying exploitation in the relations 
between capital and wage labour. In contrast to Ricardo, who 
regarded labour as a commodity the same as any other, Marx sees 
it as a commodity of a special kind, the purchase and use of which 
leads to the enrichment of the capitalist and a worsening in the 
position of the owner of this commodity—the worker. Marx 
formulates, as yet in a general, rudimentary form, the universal 
law of capitalist accumulation. Under capitalism, he writes, "in the 
selfsame relations in which wealth is produced, poverty is pro­
duced also" (see this volume, p. 176). In The Poverty of Philosophy 
Marx singles out the industrial proletariat that came into being in 
the process of the development of machine production as the real 

=====第18页=====
XX Preface 
social force destined to resolve the contradictions of bourgeois 
society by its revolutionary transformation. 
Marx refuted Proudhon's contention that strikes and trade union 
organisation are of no use to the workers. He showed that the 
economic struggle, strikes and workers' combinations were essential 
for the unity and revolutionary education of the proletarian masses. 
The Poverty of Philosophy expresses the profound idea that the 
awareness of the fundamental contradiction between its own 
interests and the continuation of the capitalist system, which the 
proletariat acquires as an organised movement develops, plays a 
decisive role in converting it from a mass that is "already a class as 
against capital, but not yet for  itself",  into "a class for  itself"  (see this 
volume, p. 211). Here Marx also formulates one of the most 
important tactical principles of the revolutionary proletarian move­
ment— the unity of economic and political struggle and the decisive 
role of the political struggle for the emancipation of the proletariat. 
In the period leading up to the revolutions of 1848 Marx and 
Engels were extremely active as proletarian journalists, reacting to all 
contemporary events, especially those of a revolutionary nature. 
This volume includes a large number of their articles and reports 
published in the working-class and democratic press of the time, 
particularly in the Deutsche-Brusseler-Zeitung, which under their 
influence became the unofficial organ of the Communist League. 
The chief aim of Marx and Engels' writing for the press in this 
period was to explain to the working class its role and tasks in the 
imminent bourgeois revolution, to prepare the proletarian party that 
was beginning to take shape for the forthcoming battles, to spread 
the new revolutionary proletarian world outlook and to defend 
scientific communism from the attacks of its enemies. 
Continuing his contributions to the Chartist Northern Star, which 
he had begun in 1843, Engels wrote regular articles about the 
maturing revolutionary situation in Germany ("The State of 
Germany", "Violation of the Prussian Constitution", etc.) and the 
imminent revolutionary crisis in France ("Government and Opposi­
tion in France", "The Decline and Approaching Fall of Guizot.— Po­
sition of the French Bourgeoisie", "The Reform Movement in 
France", etc.). In October 1847 he made contact with the French 
democrats and socialists associated with the newspaper La Réforme, 
and became an active contributor. He sent the paper a series of 
articles on the Chartist movement in England ("The Agrarian 
Programme of the Chartists", "The Chartist Banquet in Connection 
with the Elections of 1847", etc.), and translated and published with 

=====第19页=====
Preface XXI 
commentaries the major Chartist documents, reports of Chartist 
meetings, and so on. His contributions also included several articles 
on the national liberation movement in Ireland ("The Commercial 
Crisis in England.— The Chartist Movement.— Ireland", "The 
Coercion Bill for Ireland and the Chartists"). At the same time the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung published articles, mainly by Engels, on the 
revolutionary events in Switzerland, Italy, Germany, Austria and 
Denmark ("The Civil War in Switzerland", "The Movements of 
1847",  "Three New Constitutions", etc.), Engels' article "Revolution 
in Paris" was a response to the events of February 1848 in France. 
The publication of these articles and reports helped to strengthen 
the international ties between the proletarian and democratic circles 
of the European countries and to evolve a common platform for the 
revolutionary forces. The same purpose was served by Marx and 
Engels' work in the Brussels Democratic Association, their friendly 
contacts with the London society of Fraternal Democrats, their 
growing ties with the leaders of Chartism, and their speeches at 
international meetings and conferences — as a number of the articles 
included in this volume bear witness (e.g. Marx's article "The Débat 
social of February 6 on the Democratic Association" and Engels' 
report "The Anniversary of the Polish Revolution of 1830"), and 
likewise the documents published in the Appendices. 
Many of the articles in this volume announce important proposi­
tions of the theory of Marxism and the tactics of proletarian 
revolutionary struggle. Prominent among these is the article "The 
Communism of the Rheinischer  Beobachtef , which was aimed against 
the supporters of feudal socialism and their attempts to attribute a 
special social mission to the Prussian monarchy. This article gave the 
German working class a clear orientation in a situation of mounting 
revolution. 
To the moderate and conciliatory councils of the liberal opposition 
Marx counterposed the revolutionary overthrow of the absolute 
monarchy and drew up a programme of revolutionary-democratic 
reforms. The victory of the bourgeois revolution, he declared, 
would make it easier for the working class to achieve its own class 
aims.  "The rule of the bourgeoisie does not only place quite new 
weapons in the hands of the proletariat for the struggle against the 
bourgeoisie, hut ... it also secures for it a quite different status, the 
status of a recognised party" (see this volume, p. 222). 
The idea that the working class should take an active part in the 
bourgeois-democratic revolution was further developed in the 
polemic that Marx and Engels conducted with the German democrat 
Karl Heinzen, who expressed the hostility to communism of a whole 

=====第20页=====
XXII Preface 
group of German radical journalists. Engels' articles "The Commu­
nists and Karl Heinzen" and Marx's work "Moralising Criticism and 
Critical Morality" provide striking examples of how to answer 
anti-communism and expose its slanders of Communists. 
In reply to Heinzen's accusation that the Communists split the 
democratic camp, Marx and Engels demonstrate that, although their 
ultimate aims go far beyond establishing bourgeois-democratic 
freedoms, the Communists' immediate aim is to win democracy, 
and in this struggle they make common cause with the democrats. 
In what Marx and Engels wrote against Heinzen we find a draft of 
the proposition that the working class must lead the revolutionary 
movement. In contrast to Heinzen, who assigned the leading role in 
the impending revolution to the peasantry and urban petty 
bourgeoisie, Engels argued that not the peasantry but "the industrial 
proletariat of the towns has become the vanguard of all modern 
democracy; the urban petty bourgeoisie and still more the peasants 
depend on its initiative completely" (see this volume, p. 295). 
Marx and Engels regarded the bourgeois-democratic revolution as 
merely an intermediate stage in the proletariat's revolutionary 
struggle. The proletarians, Marx wrote, "can and must accept the 
bourgeois revolution as a precondition for the workers' revolution" (this 
volume, p. 333). With the victory of the democratic revolution the 
proletariat is confronted with the task of "becoming a power, in the 
first place a revolutionary power" in order to carry the struggle 
against the bourgeoisie itself to its ultimate conclusion (see this 
volume, p. 319). Thus in their polemic with Heinzen Marx and En-
gels approached the idea of uninterrupted revolution and regarded 
the working class' conquest of political power as its next stage. Here 
we have the first published formulation of the idea of the dictator­
ship of the proletariat as an instrument for the revolutionary 
reconstruction of society. 
In "Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality" Marx laid the 
groundwork for the theory of the dialectical interrelationship 
between the economic basis and the political superstructure. It is not 
political power, he stressed, that determines property relations, as 
the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats imagine, but, on the 
contrary, the character of political power itself depends on 
historically formed production relations (property relations) and the 
class structure of society thus created. At the same time, Marx points 
out that political power is an active factor in social life. In the hands 
of the rising class it accelerates progressive development; in the 
hands of the obsolete class it acts as a powerful brake on progress. 
The revolutionary supplanting of the old political superstructure is 

=====第21页=====
Preface XXIII 
therefore an essential condition for the victory of the new social 
system. 
Articles by Engels published in this volume—"The 'Satisfied' 
Majority...", "Louis Blanc's Speech at the Dijon Banquet", and 
Marx's "Remarks on the Article by M. Adolphe Bartels" —like the 
articles against Heinzen, show that while opposing sectarian isolation 
from the democratic movement and advocating an alliance with the 
democrats, Marx and Engels sought to build the relations between 
the proletarian party and the democratic organisations on a 
principled basis. They refused to condone democratic mistakes and 
illusions. Engels, in particular, spoke out against the Réforme party 
leaders on issues where their platform was unacceptable to the 
Communists—their notion of the special cosmopolitan role of 
France in world history and their nationalistic claims that French 
democracy should hold a leading position in the international 
democratic movement. "The union of the democrats of different 
nations does not exclude mutual criticism," Engels wrote. "It is 
impossible without such criticism. Without criticism there is no 
understanding and consequently no union" (this volume, p. 409). 
Marx and Engels' criticisms of the bourgeois free traders, for 
whom free trade was to become a blessing for the proletariat and a 
panacea for all social ills, provide a striking example of their struggle 
against ideology hostile to the working class. In the materials relating 
to the international congress of economists in Brussels, and in Marx's 
"Speech on the Question of Free Trade", the theory of free trade 
and its rival bourgeois economic system of protectionism are alike 
subjected to scientific criticism and given a specifically historical 
evaluation. In the conditions of the 1840s, Marx gave preference to 
the free-trade system as the more progressive of the two. "We are for 
Free Trade, because by Free Trade all economical laws, with their 
most astounding contradictions, will act upon a larger scale, upon 
a greater extent of territory, upon the territory of the whole earth; 
and because from the uniting of all these contradictions into a 
single group, where they stand face to face, will result the struggle 
which will itself eventuate in the emancipation of the proletarians" 
(see this volume, p. 290). 
Marx and Engels paid great attention to national liberation move­
ments. They realised the importance of the emancipation struggles 
of the oppressed peoples in the imminent bourgeois-democratic 
revolution, and in their articles "The Beginning of the End in 
Austria" and "A Word to the Riforma" and in their speeches 
at public meetings to mark the anniversaries of the Polish uprisings 
of 1830 and 1846, they sought to provide the working class with a 

=====第22页=====
XXIV Preface 
thoroughly argued position on the question of nationalities. Marx 
and Engels were emphatic that the proletariat must give full support 
to the national liberation movement of the oppressed peoples and 
urged proletarian groups to ally themselves with the revolutionary-
democratic wings of the national movements. They saw the 
guarantee of success for the latter in a combination of the struggle 
for national liberation with the demand for deep-going internal 
revolutionary-democratic changes. 
"A nation cannot become free," Engels wrote, "and at the same 
time continue to oppress other nations" (this volume, p. 389). He 
and Marx stressed that the nationalities question could be finally 
solved only after the proletariat's victory over the bourgeoisie, 
whose domination inevitably leads to the intensification of 
national antagonisms and colonial oppression. The proletarian 
revolution, they declared, is "the signal of liberation for all 
oppressed nations" (this volume, p. 388). 
Some of the judgments and conclusions reached by Marx and 
Engels in their articles and reports were still of a preliminary 
character and sometimes one-sided; they reflected the level of 
Marxist thought at the time and were later supplemented or clarified 
in the light of new historical experience and a more profound and 
comprehensive study of the subject. In their later works, for 
example, Marx and Engels gave a different, positive interpretation 
of the role of the peasant movements in the Middle Ages, as 
compared with what we find in the article "The Communists and 
Karl Heinzen". They also arrived at a rather different estimate of 
the struggle of the Swiss against Austrian domination in the 14th and 
15th centuries, and the character and results of the war waged by the 
USA against Mexico in 1846-48, and so on. 
The material in this volume shows the work of Marx and 
Engels as organisers and leaders of the Communist League and, 
above all, enables us to trace the stages in their working out of the 
programme and organisational principles of the League. 
This volume contains the "Draft of a Communist Confession of 
Faith", written by Engels for the First Congress of the Communist 
League (June 1847), Engels' manuscript of the Principles of 
Communism (October 1847) and the Manifesto of the Communist Par­
ty, written by Marx and Engels on the instructions of the Second 
Congress held at the end of November and beginning of December 
1847.  The Appendices to the volume contain two versions of the 
Rules of the Communist League, which Marx and Engels took part 

=====第23页=====
Preface XXV 
in compiling, and also other documents of the League, to which they 
contributed in some degree or other. 
The "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith" (the so-called 
"Credo") which was discovered only in 1968, is the first version of 
the Marxist programme for the working-class movement. It defines 
the aims of the Communists and describes the proletariat as the class 
destined to bring about the socialist revolution. Engels shows that the 
communist transformation of society depends on historical condi­
tions and the laws of history, maps its paths and indicates the tasks 
of the working class after its conquest of political power in the 
conditions of the transitional period from capitalism to the new 
communist system. This document expresses some profound 
thoughts concerning the elimination of national differences and the 
overcoming of religious prejudices in the society of the future. 
The programmatic document the Principles of Communism, 
which is written on a broader, more comprehensive theoretical basis, 
was in effect the original draft of the Communist Manifesto. Verifying 
the formulations and deepening the arguments, Engels introduces a 
number of points that were absent from the "Draft of a Communist 
Confession of Faith" and substantially revises many of its proposi­
tions (for example, the description of the transitional period). He 
also defines communism as the theory of the emancipation of the 
proletariat, reveals the historical preconditions for the rise and 
development of the working-class movement and formulates its 
goals.  The goal of the proletarian revolution, he writes, "absolutely 
necessitates a completely new organisation of society, in which 
industrial production is no longer directed by individual factory 
owners, competing one against the other, but by the whole of society 
according to a fixed plan and according to the needs of all" (see this 
volume, p. 347). 
In the Principles of Communism the answer to the question of the 
possible ways of abolishing capitalist private property is more clearly 
worded than in the "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith". In 
contrast to the advocates of peaceful reforms (Cabet, Proudhon and 
the "true socialists"), and also the Blanquists, who thought 
communism could be established by means of conspiratorial action 
on the part of a select group of revolutionaries, Engels argues the 
necessity for a deep-going proletarian revolution carried out by the 
masses of the working people — a revolution which in the historical 
conditions obtaining at the time could be carried out only by force. 
At the same time Engels stressed that if there arose anywhere or at 
any stage of development a real possibility of achieving the 
revolutionary abolition of private property by peaceful means, "the 

=====第24页=====
XXVI Preface 
Communists certainly would be the last to resist it" (this volume, 
p. 349). 
The Principles of Communism touches upon the possibility of 
the victory of a communist revolution in one country. In reply to 
this question Engels developed the conception of revolution already 
expounded in The German  Ideology.  He indicated that the proletarian 
revolution could not be victorious in one country alone, but must 
take place more or less simultaneously in the developed capitalist 
countries. "It is a worldwide revolution and will therefore be 
worldwide in scope" (see this volume, p. 352). These notions of 
the forthcoming revolutionary process corresponded to the level 
of capitalist development that had been reached in those days. In 
the ensuing historical period, however, the transition to impe­
rialism made the development of the capitalist countries far more 
uneven. Lenin, who shared the general basic conceptions of Marx 
and Engels in the theory of world communist revolution, reached 
the fundamentally different conclusion that socialism could be 
victorious at first in a few capitalist countries or even in one alone. 
The description of communist society figures prominently in the 
Principles of Communism. With considerable scientific prevision 
Engels threw light on many important aspects of the future system 
and the changes that would ensue in production and consumption, 
in social relations and social consciousness. 
The summit of Marx and Engels' creative work before the 1848 
revolution is the Manifesto of the Communist Party, the first 
programmatic document of the international proletarian movement. 
It was the first document to expound the fundamentals of the Marx­
ist outlook in a comprehensive and systematic form that reflected the 
essential unity of all the components of Marx's teaching. "With the 
clarity and brilliance of genius," Lenin wrote of the Manifesto, "this 
work outlines a new world-conception, consistent materialism, which 
also embraces the realm of social life; dialectics, as the most com­
prehensive and profound doctrine of development; the theory of the 
class struggle and of the world-historic revolutionary role of the 
proletariat—the creator of a new, communist society" (V. I. Lenin, 
Collected Works, Vol. 21, p. 48). 
The Manifesto of the Communist Party armed the proletariat by 
proclaiming the scientific proof of the inevitability of the collapse of 
capitalism and the triumph of the proletarian revolution. "But not 
only has the bourgeoisie," states the Manifesto, "forged the weapons 
that bring death to  itself;  it has also called into existence the men who 
are to wield those weapons — the modern working class — the 
proletarians" (this volume, p. 490). Having demonstrated the role 

=====第25页=====
Preface XXVII 
of the class struggle in history, Marx and Engels went on to argue 
that the proletariat was the most revolutionary of all classes known 
in history, the class whose world-historic role was to perform a 
mission of liberation in the interests of the whole of toiling huma­
nity by ridding society for ever of all oppression and exploitation. 
The cornerstone of the Manifesto is the idea of the dictatorship of 
the proletariat—of a proletarian government which is democratic by 
its very nature, expresses the interests of the great majority of the 
people and relies on their support. Although they do not as yet use 
the term "dictatorship of the proletariat", Marx and Engels show 
how the proletarian state is needed in order to eliminate the 
exploiting classes, abolish the conditions for the existence of classes 
in general and ensure the final victory of the social relations of a 
classless society. 
The Manifesto described and predicted more fully the features of 
the future communist system outlined in the Principles of Commu­
nism—the abolition of all exploitation of man by man, of war, of 
social and national oppression, and of colonial enslavement; the true 
burgeoning of material production, the powerful development of 
the productive forces for the full and all-round satisfaction of the 
material and spiritual needs of all members of society; the 
elimination of the antithesis between mental and physical work and 
between town and country; genuine freedom of the individual, 
equality of women, and unity of personal and social interests. Marx 
and Engels emphasise that communism cannot be established all at 
once.  It can be achieved only through the gradual transformation of 
the old society into the new, so that the proletarian state must carry 
out a number of measures that prepare the ground for this 
transformation. While presenting a programme of these measures, 
they do not treat them as self-sufficient; the specific conditions of the 
building of the new society would inevitably lead to their being 
amended. 
The Manifesto lays the foundations of the Marxist conception of 
the proletarian party as the organiser and leader of the working class 
and outlines the fundamentals of its tactics. The setting up of such a 
party, Marx and Engels stress, is absolutely essential if the proletariat 
is to win political power and bring about the socialist transformation 
of society. To perform its role as the vanguard of the proletariat, the 
party must be able to subordinate the immediate aims of the 
proletarian movement to its ultimate aims, maintain the unity of the 
national and international tasks of the proletariat, and support every 
revolutionary and progressive trend. 
Of fundamental importance is the section of the Communist 

=====第26页=====
XXVIII Preface 
Manifesto which examines would-be socialist trends alien to the 
scientific outlook of the working class — feudal, Christian, petty-
bourgeois and bourgeois socialism. Revealing the class roots of these 
trends in bourgeois society, Marx and Engels showed the working 
class and its party how to recognise the anti-revolutionary direction 
of socialist theories that could lead the working class off the right 
path and how to combat and overcome them. In their analysis of the 
teaching of the great Utopian socialists, however, they pointed to its 
rational as well as its weak, anti-scientific sides, and warned against 
sectarian and dogmatic interpretations of the socialist ideological 
legacy. 
The communist movement must always be international in 
character, the Manifesto declared, and emphasised the tremendous 
importance of achieving unity of views and actions among the 
proletarians of various countries, the importance of international 
proletarian solidarity. In their great slogan "Working Men of All 
Countries, Unite!" Marx and Engels expressed for their own time 
and for the times to come the community of the class interests and 
aims of the workers of the whole world, the idea of proletarian 
internationalism as the principle of the international communist 
movement. 
Trie publication of the Communist Manifesto (February 1848) signi­
fied that the process of the formation of Marxism as an integrated 
revolutionary world outlook was basically complete. 
In the section of the volume headed "From the Preparatory 
Materials" the reader will find, among other documents, the draft 
plan for Section III of the Manifesto and the only extant page 
of the rough manuscript of the Manifesto. Appearing in English 
for the first time, they serve as an illustration of how Marx 
worked on the structure and text of this work. 
Besides the already mentioned documents on Marx's and Engels' 
activities in the Communist League and the Brussels Democratic 
Association, the Appendices also contain reports of their speeches at 
international meetings and conferences in London and Brussels, and 
biographical documents, including papers that illustrate the police 
action taken against Marx and other German revolutionaries. 
* * * 
A substantial portion of the works published in this volume appear 
in English translation for the first time. These include the "Circular 
Against Kriege" by Marx and Engels, "The Constitutional Question 
in Germany" and "German Socialism in Verse and Prose" by Engels, 

=====第27页=====
Preface XXIX 
the text of an undelivered speech by Marx at the congress of 
economists in Brussels, the articles by Engels "The Communists 
and Karl Heinzen", a number of his articles about the Chartist 
movement in England published in La Réforme, documents in the 
section "From the Preparatory Materials" and the bulk of the 
material in the Appendices. Information concerning complete or 
partial publication in earlier English translations of the works 
included in this volume is provided in the notes. In the present 
volume these works are published in new or thoroughly revised 
and amended translations. The translations from the French are 
noted at the end of each work, where it is also indicated which 
texts were originally written in English. 
The present edition notes more fully than was done in previous 
publications discrepancies between the authorised translations of 
certain works ("Speech on the Question of Free Trade", Manifesto  of 
the Communist Party) and the texts of these works in the language of 
the original. 
The volume was compiled and the preface and notes written by 
Vera Morozova and edited by Lev Golman (CC CPSU Institute of 
Marxism-Leninism). The name index and the indices of quoted and 
mentioned literature and of periodicals were prepared by Irina 
Shikanyan (CC CPSU Institute of Marxism-Leninism), and the 
subject index by Marien Arzumanov and Boris Gusev. 
The translations were made by Jack Cohen, Michael Hudson, 
Catherine Judelson, Jonathan Kemp, Frida Knight, Hugh Rodwell, 
Barbara Ruhemann, Christopher Upward and edited by Robert 
Daglish, Richard Dixon, W. L. Guttsman, Frida Knight, Margaret 
Mynatt, and Alick West. 
The volume was prepared for the press by the editors Natalia 
Karmanova, Margarita Lopukhina and Galina Sandalneva for 
Progress Publishers, and Vladimir Mosolov, scientific editor for the 
Institute of Marxism-Leninism, Moscow. 

=====第28页=====

=====第29页=====
KARL MARX 
and 
FREDERICK ENGELS 
WORKS 
Autumn 1845-March 1848 

=====第30页=====

=====第31页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE FESTIVAL OF NATIONS IN LONDON 
(TO CELEBRATE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC, 
SEPTEMBER 22, 1792)' 
"What do the nations matter to us? What does the French 
Republic matter to us? Did we not long ago grasp the notion of 
nations and did we not determine the place of each of them; did we 
not assign to the Germans the sphere of theory, to the French that of 
politics, and to the English that of civil society? And the more so the 
French Republic! What is there to celebrate about a stage of 
development which has long been superseded, which has abolished 
itself as a result of its own consequences! If you want to give us some 
information about England it would be better if you described the 
latest phase that the socialist principle has reached there; tell us if 
one-sided English socialism still does not recognise how far it is below 
our principled heights and how it can claim to be only a phase [Ein 
Moment] and an obsolete one at that!" 
Keep calm, dear Germany. The nations and the French Republic 
matter a great deal to us. 
The fraternisation of nations, as it is now being carried out 
everywhere by the extreme proletarian party in contrast to the old 
instinctive national egoism and to the hypocritical private-egotistical 
cosmopolitanism of free trade, is worth more than all the German 
theories of true socialism put together. 
The fraternisation of nations under the banner of modern 
democracy, as it began from the French Revolution and developed 
into French communism and English Chartism, shows that the 
masses and their representatives know better than the German 
theoreticians how things stand. 
"But this has nothing whatever to do with what we are discussing. 
Who is talking about fraternisation, as  it...,  etc., about democracy, 
as it...,  etc.? We are talking about the fraternisation of nations in and 
2-1826 

=====第32页=====
4 Frederick Engels 
for itself,  about  the fraternisation of nations, about Democracy, about 
democracy pure and simple, about democracy as such. Have you 
completely forgotten your Hegel?" 
"We are not Romans, we smoke tobacco."3 We are not talking 
about the anti-nationalist movement now developing in the  world,  we 
are talking about the abrogation of nationalities through the medium 
of pure thought — assisted by fantasy in the absence of facts — hap­
pening in our  head.  We are not talking about real democracy which 
the whole of Europe is hastening to embrace and which is a quite 
special democracy, different from all previous democracies. We are 
talking about a quite different democracy which represents the mean 
between Greek, Roman, American and French democracy, in short 
about the  concept  of democracy. We are not talking about the things 
which belong to the nineteenth century, and which are bad and 
ephemeral, but about categories which are eternal and which existed 
before "the mountains were brought forth". Briefly, we are not 
discussing what is being talked about but something quite different. 
To sum up: when English people, French people and those 
Germans who take part in the practical movement but are not 
theoreticians nowadays talk about democracy and the fraternisation 
of nations, this should not be understood simply in a political sense. 
Such fantasies still exist only among the German theoreticians and a 
few foreigners who don't count. In reality these words now have a 
social meaning in which the political meaning is dissolved. The 
Revolution itself was something quite different from a struggle for 
this or that form of State, as people in Germany still quite frequently 
imagine that it was. The connection of most insurrections of that 
time with famine, the significance which the provisioning of the 
capital and the distribution of supplies assumed already from 1789 
onwards, the maximum, the laws against buying up food supplies, the 
battle cry of the revolutionary armies — " Guerre aux palais, paix aux 
chaumières" b— the testimony of the Carmagnole2  according to which 
Republicans must have du pain c as well as dufer d and du coeur e—and 
a hundred other obvious superficialities already prove, without any 
more detailed investigation of the facts, how greatly democracy 
differed at that time from a mere political organisation. As it is it is 
well known that the Constitution of 1793 and the terror 
a Heinrich Heine, "Zur Beruhigung". — Ed 
War to the palaces, peace to the cottages.— Ed. 
c Bread.— Ed 
d Arms.— Ed. 
e Heart (courage).— Ed. 

=====第33页=====
The Festival of Nations in London 5 
originated with the party which derived its support from the 
insurgent proletariat, that Robespierre's overthrow signified the 
victory of the bourgeoisie over the proletariat, that Babeufs 
conspiracy for equality revealed the final consequences of the 
democracy of '93—insofar as these were at all possible at that time. 3 
The French Revolution was a social movement from beginning to 
end, and after it a purely political democracy became a complete 
absurdity. 
Democracy nowadays is communism. Any other democracy can only 
still exist in the heads of theoretical visionaries who are not 
concerned with real events, in whose view it is not the men and the 
circumstances that develop the principles but the principles develop 
of themselves. Democracy has become the proletarian principle, the 
principle of the masses. The masses may be more or less clear about 
this, the only correct meaning of democracy, but all have at least an 
obscure feeling that social equality of rights is implicit in democracy. 
The democratic masses can be safely included in any calculation of 
the strength of the communist forces. And if the proletarian parties 
of the different nations unite they will be quite right to inscribe the 
word "Democracy" on their banners, since, except for those who do 
not count, all European democrats in 1846 are more or less 
Communists at heart. 
Despite the fact of the French Republic having been "supersed­
ed", the Communists of all countries are fully justified in celebrating 
it. Firstly, all the nations which were stupid enough to let themselves 
be used to fight against the Revolution have owed the French a 
public apology ever since they realised what a sottise 2 they committed 
out of loyalty; secondly, the whole European social movement today 
is only the second act of the revolution, only the preparation for the 
dénouement of the drama which began in Paris in 1789, and now has 
the whole of Europe for its stage; thirdly, it is time, in our cowardly, 
selfish, beggarly, bourgeois epoch, to remember those great years 
when a whole people all at once threw aside all cowardice, selfishness 
and beggarliness, when there were men courageous enough to defy 
the law, who shrank from nothing and whose iron energy ensured 
that from May 31, 1793 to July 26, 1794 4 not a single coward, petty 
shopkeeper or stockjobber, in short, not a single bourgeois dared 
show his face in the whole of France. It is really necessary at a time 
when European peace is held together by a Rothschild, when a 
cousin Köchlin screams about protective tariffs, and a Cobden 
a Stupidity.— Ed. 
l-

=====第34页=====
6 Frederick Engels 
about free trade, and when a Diergardt preaches the salvation of 
sinful humanity through associations for raising up the working 
classes5 —in truth it is necessary to remember Marat and Danton, 
Saint-Just and  Babeuf,  and the joy over victories at Jemappes and 
Fleurus. 6 If that mighty epoch, these iron characters, did not still 
tower over our mercenary world, then humanity must indeed 
despair and throw itself into the arms of a cousin Köchlin, a Cobden 
or a Diergardt. 
Finally, fraternisation between nations has today, more than ever, 
a purely social significance. The fantasies about a European 
Republic, perpetual peace under political organisation, have become 
just as ridiculous as the phrases about uniting the nations under the 
aegis of universal free trade, and while all such chimerical 
sentimentalities become completely irrelevant, the proletarians of all 
nations, without too much ceremony, are already  really  beginning to 
fraternise under the banner of communist democracy. And the 
proletarians are the only ones who are really able to do this; for the 
bourgeoisie in each country has its own special interests, and since 
these interests are the most important to it, it can never transcend 
nationality; and the few theoreticians achieve nothing with all their 
fine "principles" because they simply allow these contradictory 
interests — like everything else — to continue to exist and can do 
nothing but talk. But the proletarians in all countries have one and 
the same interest, one and the same enemy, and one and the same 
struggle. The great mass of proletarians are, by their very nature, 
free from national prejudices and their whole disposition and 
movement is essentially humanitarian, anti-nationalist. Only the 
proletarians can destroy nationality, only the awakening proletariat 
can bring about fraternisation between the different nations. 
The following facts will confirm everything I have just said. 
On August 10, 1845, a similar festival was held in London to 
celebrate a triple anniversary — that of the revolution of 1792, the 
proclamation of the Constitution of 1793, and the founding of the 
"Democratic Association" by the most radical wing of the English 
movement of 1838-39.7 
This most radical wing consisted of Chartists, proletarians as might 
be expected, but people who clearly grasped the aim of the Chartist 
movement and strove to speed it up. While the great mass of the 
Chartists was still concerned at that time only with the transfer of state 
power to the working class, and few had the time to reflect on the use 
of this power, the members of this Association, which played an 
important role in the agitation of that time, were unanimous in 
this:—they were first of all republicans, and moreover, republicans 

=====第35页=====
The Festival of Nations in London 7 
who put forward as their creed the Constitution of '93, rejected all 
ties with the bourgeoisie, even with the petty bourgeoisie, and 
defended the principle that the oppressed have the right to use the 
same means against their oppressors as the latter use against them. 
But this was not all; they were not only republicans but Communists, 
and irreligious Communists at that. The Association's collapse 
followed that of the revolutionary agitation of 1838-39; but its 
effectiveness was not wasted and it greatly contributed to stimulating 
the energy of the Chartist movement and to developing its latent 
communist elements. Communist as well as cosmopolitan8 principles 
were already voiced at this festival of August 10; social as well as 
political equality were demanded and a toast to the democrats of all 
nations was taken up with enthusiasm. 
Efforts to bring together the radicals of different nations had 
already been made earlier in London. These attempts failed, partly 
because of divisions among the English democrats and the foreign­
ers' ignorance of them, pardy because of differences of principle 
between the party leaders of different nations. The obstacle to all 
unification, due to difference of nationality, is so great that even 
foreigners who had lived in London for years, no matter how much 
they sympathised with English democracy, knew little or nothing 
about the movement going on before their eyes, or of the real state of 
affairs, confused the radical bourgeois with the radical proletarians 
and wished to bring the most confirmed enemies together at the 
same meeting. The English were led to similar mistakes, partly 
because of this and partly because of national mistrust, mistakes all 
the more easily made since the success of such a discussion inevitably 
depended on the greater or lesser agreement amongst a few top 
committee members who were rarely personally acquainted. These 
individuals had been most unfortunately selected on the previous 
occasions and consequendy the matter had soon lapsed again. But 
the need for such fraternisation was too pressing. Every attempt that 
failed acted as a spur to new efforts. When some of the democratic 
spokesmen in London grew weary of the matter others took their 
places. Last August new approaches were made, which this time were 
not fruitless,9 and a celebration on September 22, organised by other 
people, was used to proclaim publicly the alliance of democrats of all 
nations living in London. 
Englishmen, Frenchmen, Germans, Italians, Spaniards, Poles and 
Swiss came together at this meeting. Hungary and Turkey, too, were 
represented by one-man contingents. The three greatest nations of 
civilised Europe — the English, German and French — provided the 
speakers and were very worthily represented. The Chairman was, of 

=====第36页=====
8 Frederick Engels 
course, an Englishman, Thomas Cooper "the Chartist" who served 
nearly two years in prison for his part in the insurrection of 1842 10 
and while in gaol wrote an epic poema  in the style of Childe Harold 
which is highly praised by the English critics. The main English 
speaker of the evening was George Julian Harney, co-editor of The 
Northern Star for the past two years. The Northern Star is the Chartist 
paper established in 1837 by O'Connor, which has become in every 
way one of the best journals in Europe since it has been under the 
joint editorship of J. Hobson and Harney. I only know a few small 
Paris workers' papers such as the Union which can compare with it. 
Harney himself is a true proletarian who has been in the movement 
since his youth, one of the chief members of the Democratic 
Association of 1838-39 already mentioned (he presided at the 
Festival of August 10), and, with Hobson, undoubtedly one of the 
best English writers, a fact which I hope to demonstrate to the 
Germans some day. Harney is perfectly clear about the aim of the 
European movement and completely à la hauteur des principes* 
although he knows nothing about the German theories of true 
socialism. The main credit for the organisation of this cosmopolitan 
festival was his; he was tireless in bringing the various nationalities 
together, in removing misunderstandings and in overcoming 
personal differences. 
The toast proposed by Harney was: 
"The solemn memory of the honest and virtuous French Republicans of 1792: 
may that equality which they desired, and for which they lived, laboured, and died, 
have a speedy resurrection in France, and extend its reign throughout Europe." 
Harney, who was received with cheers, again and again 
renewed, said: 
"There was a time, [Mr. Chairman,] when the holding of such a celebration as 
this would have subjected the parties assembled not only to the scorn, the sneers, the 
abuse, and the persecution of the. privileged orders, but also to the violence of the 
ignorant and misguided people, who were led by their rulers and priests to regard the 
French Revolution as something terrible and hellish, to be looked back upon with 
. horror, and spoken of with execration. [Hear, hear.] Most present will remember that 
not long ago, whenever a demand was made in this country for the repeal of any bad 
law, or the enactment of any good one, forthwith the howl of 'Jacobinism!' was raised 
[by the opponents of all progress]. Whether it was proposed to reform the Parliament, 
reduce taxation, educate the people, or do anything else that at all savoured of 
progress, the 'French Revolution', 'Reign of Terror', and all the rest of the raw-head 
and bloody-bones phantasmagoria were sure to be brought out and duly exhibited to 
frighten the big babies in breeches, who as yet had not learned to think for themselves. 
a Th. Cooper, The Purgatory of Suicides.— Ed. 
b Abreast of principles.—Ed. 

=====第37页=====
The Festival of Nations in London 9 
(Laughter and cheers.) That time is past; still, I question whether we have yet learned 
to read aright the history of that great revolution. It would be very easy for me in 
responding to this toast to mouth a few clap-trap sentiments about liberty, equality, 
the rights of man, the coalition of the European kings, and the doings of Pitt and 
Brunswick. I might dilate on all these topics, and possibly might win applause for what 
would probably pass muster as an exceedingly liberal speech. I might do all this, and 
yet very conveniently for myself shirk the grand question. The grand question, it 
appears to me, the solution of which the French Revolution had for its mission, was 
the destruction of inequality, and the establishment of institutions which should 
guarantee to the French people that happiness which the masses are, and ever have 
been strangers to. [Cheers.] Now, tried by this test, we have comparatively little 
difficulty in arriving at a fair estimate of the men who figured on the stage of the 
revolution. Take Lafayette, for instance, as a specimen of the Constitutionalists; and 
he, perhaps, is the most honest and best man of the whole party. Few men have 
enjoyed more popularity than Lafayette. In his youth we find him leaving his country, 
and generously embarking in the American struggle against English tyranny. The 
great work of American liberation being accomplished, he returned to France, and 
shortly afterwards we find him one of the foremost men in the revolution which now 
commenced in his own country. Again, in his old age, we see him the most popular 
man in France, called, after the 'three days',11 to the veritable dictatorship, and 
unmaking and making kings with a single word. Lafayette enjoyed, throughout 
Europe and America, a greater popularity than perhaps any other man of his time; 
and that popularity he would have deserved, if his conduct had been consistent with 
his first acts in the revolution. But Lafayette was never the friend of equality. (Hear, 
hear.) True, at the outset, he gave up his feudal privileges, and renounced his 
title — and thus far he did well. Placed at the head of the popular force, the idol of the 
middle class, and commanding the affection of even the working class, he was for a 
time regarded as the champion of the revolution. But he halted when he should have 
advanced. The working men soon found out that all that the destruction of the Bastille 
and the abolition of feudal privileges had accomplished, was the curbing of the power 
of the kinga  and the aristocracy, and increasing the power of the middle class. But the 
people were not content with this — they demanded liberty and rights for themselves 
(cheers) —  they  wanted what we want—a veritable equality. (Loud cheers.) When 
Lafayette saw this, he turned Conservative, and was a revolutionist no longer. It was 
he who proposed the adoption of martial law, to authorise the shooting and sabring of 
the people, in the event of any tumult, at a time, too, when the people were suffering 
under absolute famine; and under this martial law, Lafayette himself superintended 
the butchery of the people when [they] assembled in the Champ de Mars, on the 17th 
of July, 1791, to petition the Assembly against the reinvestiture of the king with 
supreme power, after his shameful flight to Varennes. Subsequently Lafayette dared 
to menace Paris with his sword, and proposed to shut up the public clubs by armed 
violence. After the 10th of August he strove to excite the soldiers under his 
command to march against Paris, but they, better patriots than he was, refused, and he 
then fled, and renounced the revolution. Yet Lafayette was perhaps the best man of all 
the Constitutionalists, but neither he nor his party come within the compass of our 
toast, for they were not even republicans in name. They professed to recognise the 
sovereignty of the people, at the same time that they divided the citizens into active 
and inactive, confining to the payers of direct taxes, whom they called active citizens, 
the right of the suffrage. In short, Lafayette and the Constitutionalists were mere 
Whigs, but little, if anything, better than the men who humbugged us with the Reform 
a Louis XVI.— Ed. 

=====第38页=====
10 Frederick Engels 
Bill. (Cheers.) Next come the Girondists; and this is the party generally upheld as the 
'honest and virtuous republicans', but I must differ with those who hold that opinion. 
It is impossible to refuse them the tribute of our admiration for their talents; the 
eloquence which distinguished the leaders of this party, accompanied in some 
instances by stern integrity, as in the case of Roland; by heroic devotion, as in the case 
of Madame Roland; and by fiery enthusiasm, as in the case of Barbaroux  [....]  And we 
cannot, at least I speak for  myself—  I cannot read of the shocking and untimely end of 
a Madame Roland, or the philosopher Condorcet, without intense emotion. Still the 
Girondists were not the men to whom the people could look to rescue them from 
social slavery. That there were good men amongst the Girondists, cannot be 
doubted — that they were honest to their own convictions, may be admitted. That 
many of them were ignorant rather than guilty, may be charitably believed, though to 
believe this we must believe it only of those who perished; for were we to judge of the 
party by those who survived what is commonly called the 'reign of terror', we should 
be forced to the conclusion that a baser gang never existed. These survivors of that 
party aided in destroying the constitution of '93, established the aristocratical 
constitution of '95, conspired with the other aristocratic factions to exterminate the 
real Republicans, and finally helped to place France under the tyranny of the military 
usurper Napoleon. (Hear, hear.) The eloquence of the Girondists has been highly 
lauded; but we stern and uncompromising Democrats cannot consent to admire them 
simply because they were eloquent. Indeed, if we were to do so, we should award the 
highest honours to the corrupt and aristocratical Mirabeau. When the people, rising 
for liberty, bursting the shackles of fourteen hundred years' slavery, abandoned their 
homes to combat against the domestic conspirator, and the foreign invader, they 
required something more than the eloquent speeches and fine woven theories of the 
Girondists to sustain them. 'Bread, steel, and equality', was the demand of the people. 
(Cheers.) Bread for their famishing families, steel with which to beat back the cohorts 
of the surrounding despots, and equality as the end of their labours and the reward of 
their sacrifices. (Great cheering.) The Girondists, however, regarded the people, to 
quote the words of Thomas Carlyle, as mere 'explosive masses to blow up bastilles 
with' a— to be used as tools and treated as slaves. They hesitated between Royalism and 
Democracy, vainly hoping to cheat eternal justice by a compromise.... They 
fell, and their fall was merited. The men of energy trampled them down — the people 
swept them away. Of the several sections of the party of the Mountain, I shall only say 
that I find none of them but Robespierre and his friends worthy of any 
commendation. (Great cheering.) The greater number of the Mountainists were 
brigands, who, only anxious to obtain for themselves the spoils of the Revolution, 
cared nothing for the people by whose toil, suffering, and courage the revolution had 
been achieved. These desperadoes, using the language of the friends of equality, and 
for a time siding with them against the Constitutionalists and the Girondists, so soon as 
they had acquired power, exhibited themselves in their true characters, and 
henceforth stood the avowed and deadly enemies of equality. By this faction 
Robespierre was overthrown and assassinated, and Saint-Just, Couthon, and all the 
leading friends of that incorruptible legislator were doomed to death. Not content 
with destroying the friends of equality, the assassins loaded their names with the most 
infamous calumnies, hesitating not to charge upon their victims the very crimes which 
they themselves had committed. I know it is unfashionableb as yet to regard 
Robespierre in any other light than as a monster [hear,  hear]:  but I believe the day is 
coming when a very different view will be taken of the character of that extraordinary 
a Th. Carlyle, The French Revolution: a History. In three volumes, Vol. III.— Ed. 
b The word "unfashionable" is given in English in the original.—Ed. 

=====第39页=====
The Festival of Nations in London 11 
man. [Great cheering.] I would not deify Robespierre; I do not hold him up as having 
been all-perfect; but to me he appears to have been one of the very few leading charac­
ters of the Revolution who saw what were the means necessary to adopt to extirpate 
political and social wrong. I have no time to comment on the characters of the 
indomitable Marat, and that magnificent embodiment of republican chivalry St. Just. 
Nor have I time to speak of the excellent legislative measures that characterised the 
energetic rule of Robespierre. I have said the day will come when justice will be done 
to his name. (Cheers.) ... But, to me, the best proof of the real character of 
Robespierre, is to be found in the universal regret felt for his loss by the honest 
democrats who survived him — by those too amongst them, who, mistaking his 
intentions, had been seduced into favouring his destruction, but who, when too late, 
bitterly rued their folly. Babeuf was one of these, the originator of the famous 
conspiracy known by his name. That conspiracy had for its object the establishment of 
a veritable republic, in which the selfishness of individualism should be known no 
more—(cheers); in which, private property and money, the foundation and root of all wrong 
and evil, should  cease  to be—(cheers); and in which the happiness of all should be based 
upon the common labour and equal enjoyments of all. (Great cheering.) These glorious 
men pursued their glorious object to the death. Babeuf and Darthé sealed their belief 
with their blood, and Buonarroti, through years of imprisonment, penury and old 
age, persevered to the last in his advocacy of the great principles which we this night 
dare to vindicate. Nor should I omit mention of those heroic deputies Romme, 
Soubrany, Duroy, Duquesnoy and their compatriots, who, condemned to death by the 
traitor aristocrats of the Convention, heroically slew themselves in front of, and in 
contempt of their assassins, performing this self-tragedy with a single blade which they 
passed from hand to hand. So much for the first part of our toast. The second part 
demands but a few words from me, as it will be best spoken by the French patriots who 
are present. That the principles of equality will have a glorious resurrection, I cannot 
doubt; indeed, that resurrection they have already had, not merely in the shape of 
Republicanism, but Communism, for communist societies, I believe, cover France at 
the present day; but that I leave to my friend Dr. Fontaine and his fellow-countrymen 
to speak of. I rejoice much that those worthy patriots are here. They will witness 
tonight proofs of the absurdity of the tirades uttered against the English people by the 
war-party of France. 13 (Cheers.) We repudiate these national antipathies. We loathe 
and scorn those barbarous clap-traps, 'natural enemies', 'hereditary foe'a and 
'national glory'. (Loud cheers.) We denounce all wars, except those into which nations 
may be forced against domestic oppressors or hostile invaders. (Applause). More than 
that, we repudiate the word 'foreigner'— it shall exist not in our  democratic  vocabulary.  (Great 
cheering.) We may belong to the English, or French, or Italian, or German section 
of the European family, but Young Europe is our common designation, and under its 
banner we march against tyranny and inequality." (Long, enthusiastic applause.) 
After a German Communist  b had sung the Marseillaise, Wilhelm 
Weitling proposed the second toast: 
"Young Europe. Repudiating the jealousies and national antipathies of the past, 
may the Democrats of all nations unite in a fraternal phalanx for the destruction of 
tyranny, and the universal triumph of equality." 
Weitling, who was received with great enthusiasm, read the 
following speech, since he does not speak fluent English: 
a The words "hereditary foe" were added by Engels. — Ed. 
b Joseph Moll.— Ed. 

=====第40页=====
12 Frederick Engels 
"Friends! This meeting is a testimony of that common feeling which warms every 
man's breast, the feeling of universal brotherhood. Yes! Though we are educated to 
differ one from the other in the use of sounds as the natural means to express and 
communicate this inner feeling to each other, though the exchange of this feeling is 
hindered by the differences of language, though thousands of prejudices are united 
and directed by our common adversaries rather to oppose than to promote a better 
understanding, an universal brotherhood; yet, notwithstanding all these obstacles, 
that strong, charitable, and salutary feeling cannot be extinguished. (Cheers.) That 
feeling that attracts the sufferer to his fellow-sufferer, the struggler for a better state 
of things to his fellow-struggler. (Cheers.) Those also were our fellow-strugglers whose 
revolution we this night commemorate; they also were animated by the same 
sympathies which bring us together, and which possibly may lead us to a similar, and 
let me hope, a more successful struggle. (Loud cheers.) In times of movement, when 
the privileges of our native adversaries run great risk, they cunningly try to lead our 
prejudices over the frontiers of our national fatherland, representing to us that the 
people there are opposed to our common interest. What a trick! What a fraud! But, 
reflecting coolly on the matter, we know very well that our nearest enemies are 
amongst ourselves in the midst of us. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) It is not the exterior 
enemy we have to fear; that poor enemy is dealt with like us; like us he is compelled to 
work for thousands of good-for-nothing fellows; like us he takes up arms against any 
human society because he is forced to do so by hunger, by law, or excited by his 
passions, nourished by ignorance [...]. National rulers represent our brethren as cruel 
and rapacious; but who are more rapacious than they who govern us to be instructed 
in the art of war, who for their own privileges excite and conduct us to war? (Cheers.) 
Is it really our common interest that necessitates war? Is it the interest of sheep to be 
led by wolves to fight against sheep likewise led by wolves? (Loud cheers.) They are 
themselves our most rapacious enemies; they have taken from us all that is ours, to 
dissipate it in pleasures and debauchery. (Applause.) They take from us what is ours, 
since all they use is produced by us and ought to pertain to those who produce it, and 
to their wives and children, their aged and their sick. (Loud cheers.) But see how by 
their cunning manoeuvres all is stolen from us, and accumulated for a crew of idle 
consumers. (Cheers.) Is it possible then to be more robbed by a foreign enemy than by 
our own home enemies? Is it possible then that the people can be more murdered by 
them than by our cruel money-men, who rob us by their stock-jobbing, money dealing 
and speculating; by their currency and bankruptcy, by their monopolies, church and 
land rents, who by all these means rob us of the necessaries of life, and cause the death 
of millions of our working fellow brethren, to whom they leave not even potatoes 
enough to live upon. (Great cheering.) Is it not, therefore, clear enough that those 
who are all by money and nothing without it, are really the enemies of the working 
people in all countries, and that there are amongst men no other enemies of the 
human race than the enemies of the labouring and working people. (Cheers.) Is it 
possible then that we could be more stolen from, and murdered in a time of political 
war, than we are now, in a so-called state of peace? National prejudices, bloodshed, 
and robberies are then encouraged by us only for the sake of military glory! What has 
our interest to gain from such stupid glory? (Cheers.) What in fact have we to do with 
it, when our interest and our better feelings are opposed to it? (Cheers.) Must we not 
at all times pay the costs? (Applause.) Must we not work and bleed for it? (Renewed 
applause.) What interest can we have in all such bloodshed and land robberies, except 
profiting by such occasions for turning around against the robbery and mur­
der— breeding aristocracy in all nations? (Enthusiastic cheering.) It is only this 
aristocracy — always this aristocracy — that systematically robs and murders. The poor 
people, led by them, are but their forced and ignorant instruments chosen from 

=====第41页=====
The Festival of Nations in London 13 
amongst every nation — those the most filled with national prejudices, those wishing 
to see all nations overpowered by their own nation. But bring them here into this 
meeting, and they will understand each other, and shake hands with each other.... If 
before a battle the advocates of liberty and love were permitted to address the ranks of 
their brethren, there would be no slaughter; on the contrary, there would be a 
friendly meeting like ours. O! could we but have in a battle-field such a meeting, we 
should have soon done with all those blood and marrow sucking interests who now 
oppress and plunder us! (Great cheering.) Such, friends, are the sentiments of that 
universal feeling whose warmth, concentrated in the focus of universal brotherhood, 
kindles a fire of enthusiasm which will soon entirely melt away the hindering 
ice-mountains of prejudices which have too long kept brethren asunder." (Mr. 
Weitling resumed his seat amid long continued cheering.) 
Dr. Berrier-Fontaine, an old Republican who during the first 
years of bourgeois rule played a role in the  Société des  droits de l'homme 
in Paris, was involved in the trial of April 1834, 14 escaped with the rest 
of the accused from Sainte Pélagie in 1835 (see Louis Blanc's 
Geschichte der 10 Jahre 3), and later progressed with the further 
development of the revolutionary party in France and had friendly 
contact with Père Cabet, rose to speak after Weitling. He was greeted 
with stormy applause and said: 
"Citizens! My speech must be necessarily  brief,  as I cannot speak very good 
English. It gives me pleasure I cannot express to find the English Democrats meeting 
to commemorate the French Republic. I respond most heartily to the noble sentiments 
of Mr. Julian Harney. I assure you that the French people do not look upon the 
English people as their enemies. If some of the French journalists write against the 
English Government, they do not write against the English people. The Government 
of England is hateful throughout Europe, because it is the government of the English 
aristocracy, and not the English people. (Cheers.) The French Democrats, so far from 
being the enemies of the English people, really desire to fraternise with them. (Loud 
cheers.) The Republicans of France did not fight for France only, but for all mankind; 
they wished to establish equality, and extend its blessings throughout the world. (Great 
applause.) They regarded all mankind as brethren, and warred only against the 
aristocracies of other nations. (Cheers.) I can assure you, citizens, the principles of 
equality have sprung into renewed life. Communism is advancing with giant strides 
throughout France. Communist associations are extending all over that country, and I 
hope that we shall soon see a grand confederation of the Citizen Democrats of all 
nations, to make Republican Communism triumphant through the whole length and 
breadth of Europe." (Dr. Fontaine resumed his seat amidst long-protracted cheers.) 
After the toast to Young Europe had been taken with "three 
roof and rafter-ringing shouts" and "one cheer more", further 
toasts were proposed to Thomas Paine, to the fallen Democrats of all 
countries, and to those of England, Scotland and Ireland, to the 
deported Chartists Frost, Williams, Jones and Ellis, to O'Connor, 
Duncombe and the other propagandists of the Charter and finally 
three cheers for The Northern Star. Democratic songs in all languages 
a The reference is to the German translation of L. Blanc, Histoire de dix ans. 
1830-1840.— Ed. 

=====第42页=====
14 Frederick Engels 
were sung (I can only find no mention of German songs), and the 
Festival was brought to an end in the most fraternal atmosphere. 
Here was a meeting of more than a thousand democrats of nearly 
all the European nations who had united to celebrate an event 
seemingly completely alien to communism—the foundation of the 
French Republic. No special arrangements had been made to attract 
a particular kind of audience; there was nothing to indicate that 
anything would be expressed other than what the London Chartists 
understood by democracy. We can therefore certainly assume that 
the majority of the meeting represented the mass of the London 
Chartist proletarians fairly well. And this meeting accepted com­
munist principles, the word communism  itself,  with unanimous 
enthusiasm. The Chartist meeting was a communist festival and, as 
the English themselves admit, "the kind of enthusiasm which 
prevailed that evening has not been seen in London for years". 
Am I right when I say that democracy nowadays is communism? 
Written at the end of 1845 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the journal Rheinische Published in full in English for the 
Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform first time 
Bd. II, 1846 

=====第43页=====
AND NATIONAL TRADES' JOURNAL. 
VOL. VIII.NO. 415. LONDON, SATURDAY, OCTOBER 25,1845. ,««.»' 
Frederick Engels 
THE STATE  OF  GERMANY 
LETTER  I 
TO THE  EDITOR  OF THE  NORTHERN STAR 
[The Northern Star  No. 415,  October  25, 1845] 
Dear Sir,—  In compliance with your wish,  I commence  by this 
letter  a series  of articles  on the  present state  of my  native country.  In 
order  to make  my opinions  on the  subject plainly understood,  and to 
justify  the  same  as being well founded,  I shall have  to trace with  a few 
words  the  history  of Germany from  the  event which shook modern 
society  to its  very foundation —  I mean  to say,  from  the  French 
Revolution. 
Old Germany  was at  that time known  by the  name  of The  Holy 
Roman Empire,15  and  consisted  of God  knows  how  many little states, 
kingdoms, electorates, dukedoms, arch  and  grand dukedoms, 
principalities, counties, baronies,  and  free Imperial cities — every 
one independent  of the  other,  and  only subjected  to the  power  (if 
there  was any,  which however,  for hundreds  of years,  had not  been 
the case)  of the  Emperor  and  Diet.  The  independence  of these little 
states went  so far,  that  in every  war  with  "the  arch-enemy" (France, 
of course), there  was a  part  of them allied  to the  French king,  and in 
open  war  with their  own  Emperor.  The  Diet, consisting  of the 
deputations from  all these little states, under  the  presidency  of the 
Imperial  one,  being intended  to check  the  power  of the  Emperor, 
was always assembled without ever coming  to any,  even  the  most 
insignificant, results. They killed their time with  the  most futile 
questions  of ceremony, whether  the  embassy  of Baron so-and-so 
(consisting, perhaps,  of the  tutor  of his son and an old  livery-servant, 
or worn-out game-keeper) ought  to have precedency before  the 
embassy  of Baron so-and-so —  or whether  the  deputy from  one 
Imperial city ought  to salute  the  deputy  of another without waiting 
for his salute,  etc.  Then there were  so many hundreds  of thousands 
of little privileges, mostly burthensome  to the  privileged themselves, 
but which were considered  as points  of honour,  and,  therefore, 

=====第44页=====
16 Frederick Engels 
quarrelled about with the utmost obstinacy. This and similar 
important things took up so much of the time of the wise Diet, that 
this honourable assembly had not a minute to spare for discussing 
the weal of the empire. In consequence of this, the greatest possible 
disorder and confusion was the order of the day. The empire, 
divided within itself in time of war as well as peace, passed through a 
series of internal wars from the time of the Reformation down to 
1789,  in every one of which France was allied to the party opposed to 
the weak and easily vanquished party of the Emperor, and took, of 
course, its lion's share in the plunder — first, Burgundy; then the 
three bishoprics, Metz, Toul, and Verdun; then the rest of Lorraine; 
then parts of Flanders and Alsace — were in this manner separated 
from the Holy Roman Empire and united to France. Thus 
Switzerland was allowed to become independent from the empire; 
thus Belgium was made over to the Spaniards by legacy of Charles V; 
and all these countries fared better after their separation from 
Germany. To this progressive external ruin of the empire, was 
joined the greatest possible internal confusion. Every little prince 
was a blood-sucking, arbitrary despot to his subjects. The empire 
never cared about the internal concerns of any states except by 
forming a court of law (Imperial Court Chamber at Wetzlar 16) for 
attending to suits of subjects against their superiors, but that 
precious court attended so well to these actions, that not one of them 
has ever been heard of as having been settled. It is almost incredible 
what cruelties and arbitrary acts were committed by the haughty 
princes towards their subjects. These princes, living for pleasure and 
debauchery only, allowed every despotic power to their ministers 
and government officers, who were thus permitted, without any risk 
of punishment, to trample into the dust the unfortunate people, on 
this condition only, that they filled their master's treasury and 
procured him an inexhaustible supply of female beauty for his 
harem. The nobility, too, such as were not independent but under 
the dominion of some king, bishop, or prince, used to treat the 
people with greater contempt than they bestowed upon dogs, and 
squeezed as much money as they possibly could out of the labour of 
their serfs — for servitude was quite a common thing, then, in 
Germany. Nor was there any sign of liberty in those emphatically, 
so-called, free Imperial cities; for here a burgomaster and  self-
elected senate, offices which, in the course of centuries, had become 
as hereditary as the Imperial crown, ruled with greater tyranny still. 
Nothing can equal the infamous conduct of these petty-bourgeois 
aristocrats of the towns, and, indeed, it would not be believed that 
such was the state of Germany fifty years ago, if it was not in the 

=====第45页=====
The State of Germany 17 
memory still of many who remember that time, and if it was not 
confirmed by a hundred authorities. And the people! What did they 
say to this state of things? What did they do? Why, the middle classes, 
the money-loving bourgeois, found, in this continued confusion, a 
source of wealth; they knew that they could catch the most fish in the 
troubled waters; they suffered themselves to be oppressed and 
insulted because they could take a revenge upon their enemies 
worthy of themselves; they avenged their wrongs by cheating their 
oppressors.  United to the people, they might have overthrown the old 
dominions and refounded the empire, just as the English middle 
classes had partly done from 1640 to 1688, and as the French 
bourgeois were then about to do. But, no, the German middle classes 
had not that energy, never pretended to that courage; they knew 
Germany to be nothing but a dunghill, but they were comfortable in 
the dung because they were dung themselves, and were kept warm 
by the dung about them. And the working people were not worse off 
than they are now, except the peasantry, who were mostly serfs, and 
could do nothing without the assistance of the towns, hired armies 
being always quartered on them, who threatened to stifle in blood 
every attempt at revolt. 
Such was the state of Germany towards the end of the last century. 
It was all over one living mass of putrefaction and repulsive decay. 
Nobody felt himself at ease. The trade, commerce, industry, and 
agriculture of the country were reduced to almost nothing; 
peasantry, tradesmen and manufacturers felt the double pressure of 
a blood-sucking government and bad trade; the nobility and princes 
found that their incomes, in spite of the squeezing of their inferiors, 
could not be made to keep pace with their increasing expenditure; 
everything was wrong, and a general uneasiness prevailed through­
out the country. No education, no means of operating upon the 
minds of the masses, no free press, no public spirit, not even an 
extended commerce with other countries — nothing but meanness 
and selfishness — a mean, sneaking, miserable shopkeeping spirit 
pervading the whole people. Everything worn out, crumbling down, 
going fast to ruin, and not even the slightest hope of a beneficial 
change, not even so much strength in the nation as might have 
sufficed for carrying away the putrid corpses of dead institutions. 
The only hope for the better was seen in the country's literature. 
This shameful political and social age was at the same time the great 
age of German literature. About 1750 all the master-spirits of 
Germany were born, the poets Goethe and Schiller, the philosophers 
Kant and Fichte, and, hardly twenty years later, the last great 
German metaphysician, 17 Hegel. Every remarkable work of this time 

=====第46页=====
18 Frederick Engels 
breathes a spirit of defiance, and rebellion against the whole of 
German society as it then existed. Goethe wrote Goetz von 
Berlichingen, a dramatic homage to the memory of a rebel. Schiller, 
the Robbers, celebrating a generous young man, who declares open 
war against all society. But these were their juvenile productions; 
when they grew older they lost all hope; Goethe restrained himself to 
satire of the keenest order, and Schiller would have despaired if it 
had not been for the refuge which science, and particularly the great 
history of ancient Greece and Rome, afforded to him. These, too, 
may be taken as examples of the rest. Even the best and strongest 
minds of the nation gave up all hope as to the future of their country. 
All at once, like a thunderbolt, the French Revolution struck into 
this chaos, called Germany. The effect was tremendous. The people, 
too little instructed, too much absorbed in the ancient habit of being 
tyrannised over, remained unmoved. But all the middle classes, and 
the better part of the nobility, gave one shout of joyful assent to the 
national assembly and the people of France. Not one of all the 
hundreds of thousands of existing German poets failed to sing the 
glory of the French people. But this enthusiasm was of the German 
sort, it was merely metaphysical, it was only meant to apply to the 
theories of the French revolutionists. As soon as theories were 
shuffled into the background by the weight and bulk of facts; as soon 
as the French court and the French people could in practice no 
longer agree, notwithstanding their theoretical union, by the 
theoretical constitution of  1791 ;  as soon as the people asserted their 
sovereignty practically by the " 10th of August"  : and when, moreover, 
theory was entirely made silent on the 31st of May,  1793, 18 by the 
putting down of the Girondists — then this enthusiasm of Germany 
was converted into a fanatic hatred against the revolution. Of course 
this enthusiasm was meant to apply to such actions only as the night 
of the 4th of August, 1789, when the nobility resigned their 
privileges,19 but the good Germans never thought of such actions 
having consequences in practice widely differing from those 
inferences which benevolent theorists might draw. The Germans 
never meant to approve of these consequences, which were rather 
serious and unpleasant to many parties, as we all know well. So the 
whole mass, who in the beginning had been enthusiastic friends to 
the revolution, now became its greatest opponents, and getting, of 
course, the most distorted news from Paris by the servile German 
press,  preferred their old quiet holy Roman dunghill to the 
tremendous activity of a people who threw off vigorously the chains 
of slavery, and flung defiance to the faces of all despots, aristocrats, 
and priests. 

=====第47页=====
The State of Germany 19 
But the days of the Holy Roman Empire were numbered. The 
French revolutionary armies walked straight into the very heart of 
Germany, made the Rhine the frontier of France, and preached 
liberty and equality everywhere. They drove away by shoals 
noblemen, bishops, and abbots, and all those little princes that for so 
long a time had played in history the part of dolls. They effected a 
clearing, as if they were settlers advancing in the backwoods of the 
American Far West; the antediluvian forest of "Christian-Germanic" 
society disappeared before their victorious course, like clouds before 
the rising sun. And when the energetic Napoleon took the 
revolutionary work into his own hands, when he identified the 
revolution with  himself;  that same revolution which after the ninth 
Thermidor 1794 20 had been stifled by the money-loving middle 
classes, when he, the democracy with "a single head", as a French 
author termed him, poured his armies again and again over 
Germany, "Christian-Germanic" society was finally destroyed. 
Napoleon was not that arbitrary despot to Germany which he is said 
to have been by his enemies; Napoleon was in Germany the 
representative of the revolution, the propagator of its principles, the 
destroyer of old feudal society. Of course he proceeded despotically, 
but not even half as despotically as the deputies from the Convention 
would have done, and really did, wherever they came; not half so 
much so as the princes and nobles used to do whom he sent 
a-begging. Napoleon applied the reign of  terror,  which had done its 
work in France, to other countries, in the shape of war— and this "reign 
of terror" was sadly wanted in Germany. Napoleon dissolved the 
Holy Roman Empire, and reduced the number of little states in 
Germany by forming large ones. He brought his code of laws with 
himself into the conquered countries, a code infinitely superior to all 
existing ones, and recognising equality in principle. He forced the 
Germans, who had lived hitherto for private  interests  only, to work at 
the carrying out of a great idea of some overwhelming public 
interest. But that was just what aroused the Germans against him. He 
offended the peasantry by the very same measures that relieved 
them from the oppression of feudalism, because he struck at the 
roots of their prejudices and ancient habits. He offended the middle 
classes by the very means that laid the foundation of German 
manufacturing industry: the prohibition of all English goods and the 
war with England21 was the cause of their beginning to manufacture 
for themselves, but, at the same time, it made coffee and sugar, 
tobacco and  snuff,  very dear; and this, of course, was sufficient to 
arouse the indignation of the German patriotic shopkeepers. 
Besides, they were not the people to understand any of the great 

=====第48页=====
20 Frederick Engels 
plans of Napoleon. They cursed him because he led their children 
away into wars, got up by the money of the English aristocracy and 
middle classes; and hailed as friends those same classes of 
Englishmen who were the real cause of the wars, who profited by 
those wars, and who duped their German instruments not only 
during, but also after the war. They cursed him, because they 
desired to remain confined to their old, miserable sort of life, where 
they had nothing but their own little interest to attend to, because 
they desired to have nothing to do with great ideas and public 
interest. And at last, when Napoleon's army had been destroyed in 
Russia, they took that opportunity of shaking off the iron yoke of the 
great conqueror. 
The "glorious liberation war" of 1813-14 and 15, the "most 
glorious period of German history", etc., as it has been called, was a 
piece of insanity such as will drive the blood into the cheeks of every 
honest and intelligent German for some time to come.22 True, there 
was great enthusiasm then, but who were these enthusiasts? Firstly, 
the peasantry, the most stupid set of people in existence, who, 
clinging to feudal prejudices, burst forth in masses, ready to die 
rather than cease to obey those whom they, their fathers and 
grandfathers, had called their masters; and submitted to be trampled 
on and horse-whipped by. Then the students and young men 
generally, who considered this war as a war of principle, nay, as a war 
of religion; because not only they believed themselves called upon to 
fight for the principle of legitimacy, called their nationality, but also 
for the Holy Trinity and existence of God; in all poems, pamphlets, 
and addresses of that time, the French are held up as the 
representatives of atheism, infidelity, and wickedness, and the 
Germans as those of religion, piety, and righteousness. Thirdly, 
some more enlightened men, who mixed up with these ideas some 
notions about "liberty", "constitutions", and a "free press"; but 
these were by far the minority. And fourthly, the sons of tradesmen, 
merchants, speculators, etc., who fought for the right of buying in 
the cheapest market, and of drinking coffee without the admixture 
of chicory; of course, disguising their aims under the expressions of 
the enthusiasm of the day, "liberty", "great German people", 
"national independence", and so forth. These were the men, who, 
with the assistance of the Russians, English and Spaniards, beat 
Napoleon. 
In my next letter I shall proceed to the history of Germany since 
the fall of Napoleon. Let me only add, in qualification of the opinion 
above given of this extraordinary man, that the longer he reigned, 
the more he deserved his ultimate fate. His ascending the throne I 

=====第49页=====
The State of Germany 21 
will not reproach him with; the power of the middle classes in 
France, who never cared about public interests, provided their pri­
vate ones went on favourably, and the apathy of the people, who saw 
no ultimate benefit [for] themselves from the revolution, and were 
only to be roused to the enthusiasm of war, permitted no other 
course; but that he associated with the old anti-revolutionary 
dynasties by marrying the Austrian Emperor's daughter,3 that he, 
instead of destroying every vestige of Old Europe, rather sought to 
compromise with it — that he aimed at the honour of being the first 
among the European monarchs, and therefore assimilated his court 
as much as possible to theirs — that was his great fault. He descended 
to the level of other monarchs — he sought the honour of being their 
equal — he bowed to the principle of legitimacy — and it was a matter 
of course, then, that the legitimists kicked the usurper out of their 
company. 
I am, sir, yours respectfully, 
Your German Correspondent 
October 15th, 1845 
LETTER II 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE NORTHERN STAR 
[The Northern Star No. 417, November 8, 1845] 
Dear Sir,— Having in my first letter described the state of 
Germany before and during the French Revolution, as well as during 
the reign of Napoleon; having related how the great conqueror was 
overthrown, and by what parties, I now resume the thread of my 
narrative to show what Germany made of herself after this "glorious 
restoration" of national independence. 
The view I took of all these events was diametrically opposed to 
that in which they generally are represented; but my view is, to a 
letter, confirmed by the events of the following period of German 
history. Had the war against Napoleon really been a war of liberty 
against despotism, the consequence would have been, that all those 
nations which Napoleon had subdued, would, after his downfall, 
have proclaimed the principles and enjoyed the blessings of equality. 
But quite the contrary was the case. With England, the war had been 
commenced by the frightened aristocracy, and supported by the 
a Marie Louise.— Ed. 

=====第50页=====
22 Frederick Engels 
moneyocracy, who found a source of immense profit in the repeated 
loans,  and the swelling of the National Debt; in the opportunity 
afforded them to enter into the South American markets, to cram 
them with their own manufactures, and to conquer such French, 
Spanish and Dutch colonies as they thought proper, for the better 
filling of their purses; to make "Britannia rule the waves"a despotic, 
that they might harass to their heart's pleasure the trade of any other 
nation, whose competition threatened to endanger the progress of 
their own enrichment; and lastly, to assert their right of making 
enormous profits, by providing the European markets, in opposition 
to Napoleon's continental system. Such were the real causes of the 
long war on the part of those classes in whose hands the Government 
of England was then deposited; and as to the pretext, that the 
fundamental principles of the English Constitution were en­
dangered by the French Revolution, it only shows what a precious 
piece of workmanship this "perfection of human reason" must have 
been. As to Spain, the war had commenced in defence of the 
principle of legitimate succession, and of the inquisitorial despotism 
of the priesthood. The principles of the constitution of 1812 23 were 
introduced later, in order to give the people some inducement to 
continue the struggle, being  themselves  of French origin. Italy never 
was opposed to Napoleon, having received nothing but benefits from 
his hands, and having to thank him for her very existence as a nation. 
The same was the case with Poland. What Germany was indebted for 
to Napoleon I have related in my first letter. 
By all and each of the victorious powers the downfall of Napoleon 
was considered as the destruction of the French Revolution, and the 
triumph of legitimacy. The consequences were, of course, the 
restoration of this principle at home, first under the disguise of such 
sentimentalities as "Holy Alliance",24 "eternal peace", "public weal", 
"confidence between prince and subject", etc., etc., afterwards 
undisguised by the bayonet and the dungeon. The impotency of the 
conquerors was sufficiently shown by this one fact, that, after all, the 
vanquished French people, with a hated dynasty forced upon them, 
and maintained by 150,000 foreign muskets, yet inspired such awe in 
the breasts of their victorious enemies, that they got a tolerably 
liberal constitution, while the other nations, with all their exertions, 
and all their boasting of liberty, got nothing but fine words first, and 
hard bullets afterwards. The putting down of the French Revolution 
was celebrated by the massacres of Republicans in the south of 
France; by the blaze of the inquisitorial pile and the restoration of 
a Engels quotes "Rule, Britannia", a song by J. Thomson.— Ed. 

=====第51页=====
The State of Germany 23 
native despotism in Spain and Italy, and by the gagging-bills and 
"Peterloo" in England.25 We shall now see that in Germany things 
took a similar course. 
The Kingdom of Prussia was the first of all German states to 
declare war against Napoleon. It was then governed by Frederick 
William III, nicknamed "The Just", one of the greatest blockheads 
that ever graced a throne. Born to be a corporal and to inspect the 
buttons of an army; dissolute, without passion, and a morality-
monger at the same time, unable to speak otherwise but in the 
infinite tense, surpassed only by his son3  as a writer of proclama­
tions;  he knew only two feelings — fear and corporal-like imperious-
ness.  During the first half of his reign his predominating state of 
mind was the fear of Napoleon, who treated him with the generosity 
of contempt in giving him back half his kingdom, which he did not 
think worth the keeping. It was this fear which led him to allow a 
party of half-and-half reformers to govern in his stead, Hardenberg, 
Stein, Schön, Scharnhorst, etc., who introduced a more liberal 
organisation of municipalities, abolition of servitude, commutation 
of feudal services into rent, or a fixed sum of twenty-five years 
purchase, and above all, the military organisation, which gives the 
people a tremendous power, and which some time or other will be 
used against the Government. They also "prepared" a constitution 
which, however, has not yet made its appearance. We shall soon see 
what turn the affairs of Prussia took after the putting down of the 
French Revolution. 
The "Corsican monster" being got into safe custody, there was 
immediately a great congress of great and petty despots held at 
Vienna, in order to divide the booty and the prize-money, and to see 
how far the ante-revolutionary state of things could be restored. 
Nations were bought and sold, divided and united, just as it best 
suited the interests and purposes of their rulers. There were only 
three states present who knew what they were about — England, 
intending to keep up and extend her commercial supremacy, to 
retain the lion's share out of the colonial plunder, and to weaken all 
the remainder — France, not to suffer too much, and weaken all 
others — Russia, to get increase of strength and territory, and to 
weaken all others; the remainder were directed by sentimentalities, 
petty egotism, and some of them even by a sort of ridiculous 
disinterestedness. The consequence was, that France spoiled the job 
for the great German states; that Russia got the best part of Poland; 
and England extended her maritime power more by the peace than 
a Frederick William  IV.—Ed. 

=====第52页=====
24 Frederick Engels 
by the war, and obtained the superiority in all continental 
markets — of no use for the English people, but means of enormous 
enrichment to the English middle classes. The German states, who 
thought of nothing but of their darling principle of legitimacy, were 
cheated once more, and lost by the peace everything they had won by 
the war. Germany remained split up into thirty-eight states, whose 
division hinders all internal progress, and makes France more than a 
match for her; and who, continuing [to be] the best market for 
English manufactures, served only to enrich the English middle 
classes. It is all well for this section of the English people to boast of 
the generosity which prompted them to send enormous sums of 
money to keep up the war against Napoleon; but, if we even suppose 
that it was them, and not the working people, who in reality had to 
pay these subsidies — they only intended, by their generosity, to 
re-open the continental markets, and in this they succeeded so well 
that the profits they have drawn since the peace, from Germany 
alone, would repay those sums at least six times over. It is really 
middle-class generosity which first makes you a present in the shape 
of subsidies, and afterwards makes you repay it six-fold in the shape 
of profits. Would they have been so eager to pay those subsidies, if at 
the end of the war, the reverse had been likely to be the case, and 
England been inundated with German manufactures, instead of 
Germany being kept in manufacturing bondage by a few English 
capitalists? 
However, Germany was cheated on all hands, and mostly by her 
own so-called friends and allies. This I should not much care for 
myself,  as I know very well that we are approaching to a 
reorganisation of European society, which will prevent such tricks on 
the one hand, and such imbecilities on the other; what I want to show 
is, first, that neither the English people, nor any other people 
profited by cheating the German despots, but that it all was for the 
benefit of other despots; or of one particular class, whose interest is 
opposed to the people; and second, that the very first act of the 
German restored despots showed their thorough incapacity. We now 
turn to the home affairs of Germany. 
We have seen who were the parties that, with the aid of English 
money and Russian barbarism, put down the French Revolution. 
They were divided into two sections; first, the violent partisans of old 
"Christian-Germanic" society, the peasantry and the enthusiastic 
youth, who were impelled by the fanaticism of servitude, of 
nationality, of legitimacy and religion; and second, the more sober 
middle-class men, who wished "to be let alone", to make money and 
to spend it without being bothered with the impudent interference 

=====第53页=====
The State of Germany 25 
of great historical events. The latter party were satisfied as soon as 
they had obtained the peace, the right to buy in the cheapest market, 
to drink coffee without admixture of chicory, and to be excluded 
from all political affairs. The "Christian Germanics", however, now 
became the active supporters of the restored governments, and did 
everything in their power to screw history back to 1789. As to those 
who wished to see the people enjoy some of the fruits of their 
exertions, they had been strong enough to make their watchwords 
the battle-cry of 1813, but not the practice of 1815. They got some 
fine promises of constitutions, free press, etc., and that was all; in 
practice everything was carefully left as it had been previously. The 
Frenchified parts of Germany were purged, as far as possible, from 
the traces of "foreign despotism", and those provinces only which 
were situated on the left of the Rhine retained their French 
institutions. The Elector of Hesse3 went so far as to restore even the 
pig-tails of his  soldiers,  which had been cut off by the impious hands of 
the French. In short, Germany, as well as every other country, 
offered the picture of a shameless reaction which was only 
distinguished by a character of timidity and weakness; it did not even 
elevate itself to that degree of energy with which revolutionary 
principles were combated in Italy, Spain, France and England. 
The cheating system to which Germany had been subjected at the 
Congress of Vienna, now commenced to be practised between the 
different German states themselves. Prussia and Austria, in order to 
weaken the power of the different states, forced them to give some 
sort of mongrel constitutions, which weakened the governments, 
without imparting any power to the people, or even the middle 
classes. Germany being constituted a confederacy of states, whose 
embassies, sent by the governments alone, formed the diet, there was 
no risk that the people might become too strong, as every state was 
bound by the resolutions of the diet, which were law for all Germany, 
without being subject to the approval of any representative assembly. 
In this diet it was a matter of course that Prussia and Austria ruled 
absolutely; they only had to threaten the lesser princes to abandon 
them in their struggle with their representative assemblies, in order 
to frighten them into implicit obedience. By these means, by their 
overwhelming power, and by their being the true representatives of 
that principle from which every German prince derives his power, 
they have made themselves the absolute rulers of Germany. 
Whatever may be done in the small states is without any effect in 
practice. The struggles of the Liberal middle classes of Germany 
a Ludwig I.— Ed. 

=====第54页=====
26 Frederick Engels 
remained fruitless as long as they were confined to the smaller 
southern states; they became important as soon as the middle classes 
of Prussia were aroused from their lethargy. And as the Austrian 
people can hardly be said to belong to the civilised world, and, in 
consequence, submit quietly to their paternal despotism, the state 
which may be taken as the centre of German modern history, as the 
barometer of the movements of public opinion, is Prussia. 
After the downfall of Napoleon, the King of Prussia spent some of 
his happiest years. He was cheated, it is true, on every hand. England 
cheated him; France cheated him; his own dear friends, the 
Emperors of Austria and Russia,3 cheated him over and over again; 
but he, in the fulness of his heart, did not even find it out; he could 
not think of the possibility of there being any such scoundrels in the 
world who could cheat Frederick William III, "The Just". He was 
happy. Napoleon was overthrown. He had no fear. He pressed 
Article 13 of the Fundamental Federative Act of Germany, which 
promised a constitution for every state. He pressed the other article 
about the liberty of the press.26 Nay, on the 22nd of May, 1815, he 
issued a proclamation commencing with these words — words in 
which his benevolent happiness was beautifully blended with his 
corporal-like imperiousness— "There shall be a representation of the 
people!" He went on to order that a commission should be named to 
prepare a constitution for his people; and even in 1819, when there 
had been revolutionary symptoms in Prussia, when reaction was 
rifest all over Europe, and when the glorious fruit of the Congresses 
was in its full blossom, even then he declared that, in future, no 
public loan should be contracted without the assent of the future 
representative assemblies of the kingdom. 
Alas!  this happy time did not last. The fear of Napoleon was but 
too soon replaced in the king's mind by the fear of  the revolution. But 
of that in my next. 
I have only one word to add. Whenever in English democratic 
meetings the "patriots of all countries" are toasted, Andreas Hof er is 
sure to be amongst them. Now, after what I have said on the enemies 
of Napoleon in Germany, is Hofer's name worthy to be cheered by 
democrats? Hofer was a stupid, ignorant, bigoted, fanatical peasant, 
whose enthusiasm was that of La Vendée, 27 that of "Church and 
Emperor". He fought bravely — but so did the Vendéans against the 
Republicans. He fought for the paternal despotism of Vienna and 
Rome. Democrats of England, for the sake of the honour of the 
German people, leave that bigot out of the question in future. 
a Ferdinand I and Alexander  I.—Ed. 

=====第55页=====
The State of Germany 27 
Germany has better patriots than him. Why not mention Thomas 
Münzer, the glorious chief of the peasant insurrection of 1525, who 
was a real democrat, as far as possible, at that time? Why not glorify 
George Forster, the German Thomas Paine, who supported the 
French Revolution in Paris up to the last, in opposition to all his 
countrymen, and died on the scaffold? Why not a host of others, who 
fought for realities, and not for delusions? 
I am, dear Sir, yours respectfully, 
Your German Correspondent 
LETTER III 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE NORTHERN STAR 
[The Northern Star No. 438, April 4, 1846] 
Dear Sir,— I really must beg of you and your readers to excuse my 
apparent negligence in not continuing sooner the series of letters on 
the above subject which I commenced writing for this paper. You 
may, however, rest assured that nothing but the necessity of devoting 
some weeks to the German movement exclusively could detain me 
from the pleasant task I have undertaken, of informing the English 
democracy of the state of things in my native country. 
Your readers will, perhaps, have some recollection of the 
statements made in my first and second letters. I there related how 
the old, rotten state of Germany was rooted up by the French armies 
from 1792 to 1813; how Napoleon was overthrown by the union of 
the feudalists, or aristocrats, and the bourgeois, or trading middle 
classes of Europe; how, in the subsequent peace arrangements the 
German princes were cheated by their allies, and even by vanquished 
France; how the German Federative Act, and the present political 
state of Germany was brought about; and how Prussia and Austria, 
by inducing the lesser states to give constitutions, made themselves 
the exclusive masters of Germany. Leaving Austria, as a  half-
barbarian country, out of the question, we come to the result that 
Prussia is the battle-field on which the future fate of Germany is to be 
decided. 
We said in our last, that Frederick William III, King of Prussia, 
after being delivered from the fear of Napoleon, and spending a few 
happy, because fearless years, acquired another bugbear to frighten 
him — "the revolution". The way in which "the revolution" was 
introduced into Germany we shall now see. 

=====第56页=====
28 Frederick Engels 
After the downfall of Napoleon, which I must repeat again, by the 
kings and aristocrats of the time, was totally identified with the 
putting down of the French Revolution, or, as they called it, the 
revolution, after 1815, in all countries, the anti-revolutionary party 
held the reins of government. The feudalist aristocrats ruled in all 
cabinets from London to Naples, from Lisbon to St. Petersburg. 
However, the middle classes, who had paid for the job and assisted in 
doing it, wanted to have their share of the power. It was by no means 
their interest which was placed in the ascendant by the restored 
governments. On the contrary, middle-class interests were neglected 
everywhere, and even openly set at nought. The passing of the 
English Corn Law of 181528 is the most striking example of a fact 
which was common to all Europe; and yet the middle classes were 
more powerful then than ever they had been. Commerce and 
manufactures had been extending everywhere, and had swelled the 
fortunes of the fat bourgeois; their increased well-being was 
manifested in their increased spirit of speculation, their growing 
demand for comforts and luxuries. It was impossible, then, that they 
should quietly submit to be governed by a class whose decay had 
been going on for centuries — whose interests were opposed to those 
of the middle classes — whose momentary return to power was the 
very work of the bourgeois. The struggle between the middle classes 
and the aristocracy was inevitable; it commenced almost immediately 
after the peace. 
The middle classes being powerful by money only, cannot acquire 
political power but by making money the only qualification for the 
legislative capacity of an individual. They must merge all feudalistic 
privileges, all political monopolies of past ages, in the one great 
privilege and monopoly of money. The political dominion of the 
middle classes is, therefore, of an essentially  liberal  appearance. They 
destroy all the old differences of several estates co-existing in a 
country, all arbitrary privileges and exemptions; they are obliged to 
make the elective principle the foundation of government — to 
recognise equality in principle, to free the press from the shackles of 
monarchical censorship, to introduce the jury, in order to get rid of a 
separate class of judges, forming a state in the state. So far they 
appear thorough democrats. But they introduce all the improve­
ments so far only, as thereby all former individual and hereditary 
privileges are replaced by the privilege of money. Thus the principle 
of election is, by property qualifications for the right of electing and 
being elected, retained for their own class. Equality is set aside again 
by restraining it to a mere "equality before the law", which means 
equality in spite of the inequality of rich and poor — equality within 

=====第57页=====
The State of Germany 29 
the limits of the chief inequality existing—which means, in short, 
nothing else but giving inequality the name of equality. Thus the 
liberty of the press is, of  itself,  a middle-class privilege, because 
printing requires money, and buyers for the printed productions, 
which buyers must have money again. Thus the jury is a middle-class 
privilege, as proper care is taken to bring none but "respectables" 
into the jury-box. 
I have thought it necessary to make these few remarks upon the 
subject of middle-class government in order to explain two facts. 
The first is, that in all countries, during the time from 1815 to 1830, 
the essentially democratic movement of the working classes was 
more or less made subservient to the liberal movement of the 
bourgeois. The working people, though more advanced than the 
middle classes, could not yet see the total difference between 
liberalism and democracy — emancipation of the middle classes and 
emancipation of the working classes; they could not see the 
difference between liberty of money and liberty of man, until money 
had been made politically free, until the middle class had been made 
the exclusively ruling class. Therefore the democrats of Peterloo 
were going to petition, not only for Universal Suffrage, but for Corn 
Law repeal at the same time; therefore, the proletarians fought in 
1830 in Paris, and threatened to fight in 1831 in England, for the 
political interest of the bourgeoisie. In all countries the middle 
classes were, from 1815 to 1830, the most powerful component, and, 
therefore, the leaders of the revolutionary party. The working 
classes are necessarily the instruments in the hands of the middle 
classes, as long as the middle classes are themselves revolutionary or 
progressive. The distinct movement of the working classes is, 
therefore, in this case always of a secondary importance. But from 
that very day when the middle classes obtain full political 
power — from the day on which all feudal and aristocratic interests 
are annihilated by the power of money—from the day on which the 
middle classes  cease  to be progressive and revolutionary, and become 
stationary themselves, from that very day the working-class move­
ment takes the lead and becomes the national movement. Let the 
Corn Laws be repealed today, and tomorrow the Charter is the leading 
question in England—tomorrow the Chartist movement will exhibit that 
strength, that energy, that enthusiasm and perseverance which ensures 
success. 
The second fact, for the explanation of which I ventured to make 
some few remarks on middle-class government, refers to Germany 
exclusively. The Germans being a nation of theorists, and little 
experienced in practice, took the common fallacies brought forward 

=====第58页=====
30 Frederick Engels 
by the French and English middle classes to be sacred truths. The 
middle classes of Germany were glad to be left alone to their little 
private business, which was all in the "small way"; wherever they had 
obtained a constitution, they boasted of their liberty, but interfered 
little in the political business of the state; wherever they had none, 
they were glad to be saved the trouble of electing deputies and 
reading their speeches. The working people wanted that great lever 
which in France and England aroused them — extensive manufac­
tures—  and the consequence of it, middle-class rule. They, there­
fore,  remained quiet. The peasantry in those parts of Germany 
where the modern French institutions had been again replaced by 
the old feudal regime, felt oppressed, but this discontent wanted 
another stimulus to break out in open rebellion. Thus, the 
revolutionary party in Germany, from 1815 to 1830, consisted of 
theorists only. Its recruits were drawn from the universities; it was 
made up of none but students. 
It had been found impossible in Germany to re-introduce the old 
system of 1789. The altered circumstances of the time forced the 
governments to invent a new system, which has been peculiar to 
Germany. The aristocracy was willing to govern, but too weak; the 
middle classes were neither willing to govern nor strong 
enough — both, however, were strong enough to induce the 
government to some concessions. The form of government, 
therefore, was a sort of mongrel monarchy. A constitution, in some 
states,  gave an appearance of guarantee to the aristocracy and 
middle classes; for the remainder there was everywhere a bureaucra­
tic government—that is, a monarchy which pretends to take care 
of the interests of the middle class by a good administration, 
which administration is, however, directed by aristocrats, and 
whose proceedings are shut out as much as possible from the 
eyes of the public. The consequence is the formation of a sepa­
rate class of administrative government officers, in whose hands 
the chief power is concentrated, and which stands in opposition 
against all other classes. It is the barbarian form of middle-class 
rule. 
But this form of government satisfied neither the "Aristocrats", 
"Christian Germanics", "Romantics", "Reactionaries", nor the 
"Liberals". They, therefore, united against the governments, and 
formed the secret societies of the students. From the union of those 
two sects — for parties they cannot be called — arose that sect of 
mongrel Liberals, who in their secret societies dreamt of a German 
Emperor wearing crown, purple, sceptre, and all the remainder of 
that sort of apparatus, not to forget a long grey or red beard, 

=====第59页=====
The State of Germany 31 
surrounded by an assembly of estates in which clergy, nobility, 
burgesses, and peasants should be duly separated. It was the most 
ridiculous mixing up of feudal brutality with modern middle-class 
fallacies that could be imagined. But that was just the thing for the 
students, who wanted enthusiasm, no matter for what, nor at what 
price. Yet these ridiculous idiosyncrasies, together with the revolu­
tions in Spain, Portugal and Italy, the movements of the Carbonari in 
France, and the Reformation in England,29 frightened the monarchs 
almost out of their wits. Frederick William III got his bugbear, "the 
revolution" — under which name all these different and partly 
discordant movements were comprised. 
A number of incarcerations and wholesale prosecutions quashed 
this "revolution" in Germany; the French bayonets in Spain, and the 
Austrian in Italy, secured for a while the ascendancy of legitimate 
kings and rights divine. Even the right divine of the Grand Turk to 
hang and quarter his Grecian subjects was for a while maintained by 
the Holy Alliance; but this case was too flagrant, and the Greeks were 
allowed to slip from under the Turkish yoke.30 
At last, the three days of Paris31 gave the signal for a general 
outbreak of middle-class, aristocratic, and popular discontent 
throughout Europe. The aristocratic Polish revolution was put 
down; the middle classes of France and Belgium succeeded in 
securing to themselves political power32; the English middle classes 
likewise obtained this end by the Reform Bill; the partly popular, 
partly middle-class, partly national insurrections of Italy, were 
suppressed; and in Germany numerous insurrections and move­
ments betokened a new era of popular and middle-class agita­
tion. 
The new and violent character of liberal agitation in Germany, 
from 1830 to 1834, showed that the middle classes had now taken up 
the question for themselves. But Germany being divided into many 
states,  almost each of which had a separate line of customs and 
separate rates of duty, there was no community of interest in these 
movements. The middle classes of Germany wanted to become 
politically free, not for the purpose of arranging public matters in 
accordance with their interest, but because they were ashamed of 
their servile position in comparison to Frenchmen and Englishmen. 
Their movement wanted the substantial basis which had ensured the 
success of Liberalism in France and England; their interest in the 
question was far more theoretical than practical; they were, upon an 
average, what is called disinterested. The French bourgeois of 1830 
were not. Laffitte said, the day after the revolution: "Now we, the 
bankers, will govern"; and they do up to this hour. The English 

=====第60页=====
32 Frederick Engels 
middle classes, too, knew very well what they were about when they 
fixed the ten-pound qualification33; but the German middle classes 
being, as aforesaid, men in a small way of business, were mere 
enthusiasts — admirers of "liberty of the press", "trial by jury", 
"constitutional guarantees for the people", "rights of the people", 
"popular representation", and such like, which they thought not 
means, but ends; they took the shadow for the substance, and 
therefore got nothing. However, this middle-class movement was 
sufficient to bring about several dozens of revolutions, of which two 
or three contrived somehow to succeed; a great number of popular 
meetings, a deal of talk and newspaper-boasting, and a very slight 
beginning of a democratic movement among students, working men, 
and peasants. 
I shall not enter into the rather tedious details of this blustering 
and unsuccessful movement. Wherever somewhat important had 
been won, as liberty of the press in Baden, the German Diet stepped 
in and put a stop to it. The whole farce was concluded by a repetition 
of the wholesale imprisonments of 1819 and 1823, and, by a secret 
league of all German princes, concluded in 1834, at a Conference 
of delegates at Vienna, to resist all further progress of Liberal­
ism.34 The resolutions of this Conference were published some 
years ago.3 
From 1834 to 1840, every public movement in Germany died out. 
The agitators of 1830 and 1834 were either imprisoned or scattered 
in foreign countries, where they had fled. Those who had kept much 
of their middle-class timidity during the times of agitation, continued 
to struggle against the growing rigour of the censor, and the growing 
neglect and indifference of the middle classes. The leaders of 
Parliamentary opposition went on speechifying in the Chambers, but 
the governments found means to secure the votes of the majorities. 
There appeared no further chance of bringing about any public 
movement whatsoever in Germany; the governments had it all their 
own way. 
In all these movements the middle classes of Prussia took almost no 
part. The working people uttered their discontent throughout that 
country in numerous riots, having, however, no defined purpose, 
and therefore no result. The apathy of the Prussians was the 
principal strength of the German confederacy. It showed that the 
time for a general middle-class movement in Germany was not yet 
come. 
a C. Th. Welcker, Wichtige Urkunden für den Rechtszustand der deutschen Nation, 
Mannheim, 1844.— Ed. 

=====第61页=====
The State of Germany 33 
In my next,3 I shall pass to the movement of the last six years, 
unless I can bring together the necessary materials for characterising 
the spirit of the German governments by some of their own doings, 
in comparison to which tlose of your precious Home Secretary0 are 
pure and innocent.35 
I am, in the meantime, dear Sir, 
respectfully, 
Your German Correspondent 
Febr. 20th, 36 1846 
Written between October 15, 1845 and Reprinted from the newspaper 
February 20, 1846 
First published in The Northern Star 
Nos.  415, 417, 438, October 25, Novem­
bers,  1845 and April 4, 1846 
a Engels' letter did not appear in the following numbers.—Ed. 
b Sir James Robert George Graham.—Ed. 

=====第62页=====
Karl Marx 
STATEMENT 
According to the Rheinischer Beobachter of January 18, issue No. 18, 
the Trier'sche Zeitung contains an announcement by the Editorial 
Board according to which, among a number of writers, Marx also is 
named as a contributor to this newspaper. In order to prevent any 
confusion I state that I have never written a single line for this paper, 
whose bourgeois philanthropic, by no means communist tendencies 
are entirely alien to me. 
Brussels, January 18, 1846 
Karl Marx 
First published in Trier'sche Zeitung No. 26, 
January 26, 1846 Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第63页=====
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[CIRCULAR AGAINST KRIEGE] 37 
At a meeting attended by the undermentioned Communists: 
Engels, Gigot, Heilberg, Marx, Seiler, Weitling, von Westphalen and 
Wolff,  the following resolutions concerning the New York German-
language journal 
"Der Volks-Tribun" edited by Hermann Kriege 
were passed unanimously — with the single exception of Weitling 
"who voted against". The appendix explains the motives behind the 
resolutions. 
Resolutions: 
1. The line taken by the editor of the Volks-Tribun, Hermann 
Kriege, is not communist. 
2. Kriege's childish pomposity in support of this line is com­
promising in the highest degree to the Communist Party, both in 
Europe and America, inasmuch as he is held to be the literary 
representative of German communism in New York. 
3. The fantastic emotionalism which Kriege is preaching in New 
York under the name of "communism" must have an extremely 
damaging effect on the workers' morale if it is adopted by them. 
4. The present resolutions, together with the grounds for them, 
shall be communicated to the Communists in Germany, France and 
England. 
5. One copy shall be sent to the editors of the Volks-Tribun with 
the request that these resolutions together with the grounds for them 
should be printed in the forthcoming issues of the Volks-Tribun. 
Brussels, May 11, 1846 Engels, Phil. Gigot, 
Louis Heilberg, K. Marx, 
Seiler, von Westphalen, Wolff 

=====第64页=====
SECTION ONE 
HOW COMMUNISM BECAME LOVE-SICK 
No. 13 of the Volks-Tribun contains an article entitled: "An die 
Frauen". 
1) "Women, priestesses of love.'" 
2) "It is love that has sent us." 
3) "Apostles of love." 
a) Literary interlude: "The flaming eyes of humanity", "the 
sounds of truth". 
b) Woman's hypocritical and ignorant captatio benevolentiae3: 
"Even in the attire of a queen you cannot deny your femininity... nor 
have you learned to speculate upon the tears of the unhappy; you 
are too soft-hearted to let a mother's poor child starve so that you may 
profit." 
4) "The future of the beloved child." 
5) "Beloved sisters." 
6) "O give ear to us, you are betraying  love  if you do not do so." 
8) "Of love." 
8) "Of love." 
9) "For the sake of love." 
10) "The most sacred labour of love which we entreat of you" 
(whimper). 
c) Literary-biblical platitude: "Woman is destined to bear the son 
of man", whereby the fact is proclaimed that men do not bear 
children. 
11) "The holy spirit of community must evolve from the heart of 
LOVE." 
a Thirst for approval.—Ed. 

=====第65页=====
/ 
s*%4r4r*CJh,  ^4 *± fiJfl^ p**J*  <i*tn,p%  * t+iUfiirk.n.Pfa *ii  eat*, 
Jfr pjy^^vy 4+ftty  *UfA^  Zy^X?  ~~As  ^'2*, 
First page of the lithographed "Circular Against Kriege" 

=====第66页=====

=====第67页=====
Circular Against Kriege 39 
d) Interpolated Ave Maria: "Blessed, thrice  blessed  are you women, 
being chosen to pronounce the first  consecration  of the long-promised 
kingdom of bliss." 
12) "Beloved sisters." 
13) "Not love but hatred" (contrasting bourgeois and communist 
society). 
14) "You loved ones." 
15) "Raise love on to the throne." 
16) "Active people in loving community." 
17) "True priestesses of love." 
e) Aesthetic parenthesis: "If your trembling soul has not yet 
forgotten the flight sublime" — (a feat whose feasibility has yet to be 
demonstrated). 
18) "The world of love." 
19) "The kingdom of hatred and the kingdom of love." 
f) An attempt to hoodwink women: "And therefore you have a 
most mighty voice in politics too. You but need to use your influence, 
and all the old kingdom of hatred will fall in ruins to make way for 
the new kingdom of love." 
g) Philosophical fanfare to drown reflection: "The ultimate goal 
of their activity is that all mankind should take an ever-joyful delight 
in itself." 
20) "Your love." At this point women are required to be 
"unstinting" in their love so that it may "embrace all mankind with 
equal surrender". A demand that is as indecent as it is extravagant. 
h) Fugue: "That thousands and yet more thousands of deserted 
orphans are abandoned to the fearful massacre of circumstances." 
What does this "fearfulness" consist in? In the "orphans" massacr­
ing the "circumstances" or the "circumstances" massacring the 
"orphans"? 
i) Unveiling of the neo-communist policy: "We have no wish to lay 
hands on the private property of any man; what the usurer now has, 
let him keep; we merely wish to forestall the further pillaging of the 
people's assets and prevent capital from continuing to withhold from 
labour its rightful property." This purpose is to be achieved as 
follows: "Every poor man ... will instantly become a useful member 
of human society as soon as he is offered the opportunity of produc­
tive work." (According to this no one is more deserving in respect of 
"human society" than the capitalists, including those in New York 
against whom Kriege thunders so mightily.) "And this opportunity is 
assured him for ever, as soon as society gives him a piece of land on 
which he can produce food for himself and his family.... If this vast 
area of land" (the 1,400 million acres of the American state lands) "is 

=====第68页=====
40 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
withdrawn from  commerce  and ensured to labour in limited quantities, at 
one stroke all the poverty in America will have been eliminated; for 
each man will be given the opportunity to establish with his own 
hands an inviolable home for  himself."  That it does not lie in the 
legislators' power to decree either that the patriarchal system desired 
by Kriege shall not evolve into an industrial system or that the 
industrial and commercial states of the east coast of the United States 
shall revert to patriarchal barbarism — one had a right to expect that 
this would be realised. Meanwhile, for the day when the paradise 
just described will have arrived, Kriege prepares the following 
country-parson utterance: "And then we can teach men to live 
together in peace, to lighten for each other the burden and toil of 
their life and: 
21) build the first dwelling-places on earth for celestial love" (each 
one 160 acres in area). 
Kriege concludes his address to married women as follows: "Turn 
first to 
22) the men of your love, 
ask them ... to turn their backs on the politics of old,... show them 
their children, implore them in their name" (who are without reason) 
"to adopt reason." Secondly, to the "virgins": 
23) "For your lovers 
let the liberation of the land be the touchstone of their human worth and 
have no faith in 
24) their love 
until they have sworn fealty to mankind." (What is that supposed to 
mean?) If the virgins behave in this manner, he guarantees them that 
their children 
25) "will become as loving 
as they themselves" (that is, "the birds of heaven") and concludes 
this cant with another round of 
26) "true priestesses of love", "great kingdom of community" and 
"consecration". 
No. 13 of the Volks-Trib[un]:— "Antwort an Sollta." 
27) "It" (the great spirit of community) "flashes from fraternal 
eyes as the fire of love." 
28) "What is a woman without the man whom she can love, to 
whom she can surrender her trembling soul?" 
29) "To join all mankind in love." 
30) "Mother-love".... 
31) "Love of mankind".... 
32) "All the first sounds of love".... 
33) "The radiance of love." 

=====第69页=====
Circular Against Kriege 41 
k) The purpose of communism is to "subject the whole life of 
mankind to its" (the sentient heart's) "beating". 
34) "The sound of love flees before the rattle of money." 
35) "Everything may be achieved by love and surrender." 
In this one issue, then, we have love in approximately thirty-five 
shapes. It is in perfect accordance with this amorous slobbering that 
Kriege, in his "Antwort an Sollta" and elsewhere, presents 
communism as the love-imbued opposite of selfishness and reduces a 
revolutionary movement of world-historical importance to the few 
words: love — hate, communism — selfishness. Part and parcel of it is 
likewise the cowardice with which he here panders to the usurer by 
promising to let him keep what he already has and with which 
further on he assures that he does not want "to destroy the cherished 
sentiments of family life, of belonging to one's native land and people" 
but "only to fulfil them". This cowardly, hypocritical presentation of 
communism not as "destruction" but as "fulfilment" of existing evils 
and of the illusions which the bourgeoisie have about them, is found 
in every issue of the Volks-Tribun. This hypocrisy and cowardice are 
matched by the attitude which he adopts in discussions with 
politicians. He declares it (No. 10 a) a sin against communism to attack 
political visionaries like Lamennais and Börne who dabble in 
Catholicism, with the result that men like Proudhon, Cabet, Dézamy, 
in short all the French Communists, are just men "who call 
themselves Communists". The fact that the German Communists 
have left Börne as far behind as the French have Lamennais, is 
something Kriege could have discovered back in Germany, Brussels 
and London. 
We leave Kriege to reflect for himself on the enervating effect this 
love-sickness cannot fail to have on both sexes and the mass hysteria 
and anaemia it must produce in the "virgins". 
SECTION TWO 
THE VOLKS-TRIBUNS POLITICAL ECONOMY 
AND ITS ATTITUDE TOWARDS YOUNG AMERICA38 
We fully recognise that the American national Reformers' 
movement is historically justified. We know that this movement has 
set its sights on a goal which, although for the moment it would 
a Hermann Kriege an Harro Harring.—Ed. 

=====第70页=====
42 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
further the industrialism of modern bourgeois society, nevertheless, 
as the product of a proletarian movement, as an attack on landed 
property in general and more particularly in the circumstances 
obtaining in America, will by its own inner logic inevitably press on to 
communism. Kriege, who has joined the Anti-Rent movement along 
with the German Communists in New York, pastes over this plain 
fact with his customary communist and extravagant phrases, without 
ever going into the positive substance of the movement, thereby 
proving that he is quite unclear in his own mind about the 
connection between Young America and circumstances prevailing in 
America. In addition to the individual passages which in passing we 
have already quoted, we would give another example of how his 
humanitarianising quite smothers the issue of land-distribution to 
the small farmer on an American scale. 
In No. 10, "Was wir wollen", we read: 
"They" — that is, the Americ[an] National Reformers — "call the soil the communal 
heritage of all mankind ... and want the legislative power of the people to take steps to 
preserve as the inalienable communal property of all mankind the 1,400 millfion] acres of 
land which have not yet fallen into the hands of rapacious speculators." 
In order communally to "preserve for all mankind" this 
"communal heritage", this "inalienable communal property", he adopts 
the plan of the National Reformers: "to place 160 acres of American 
soil at the command of every farmer, from whatever country he may 
hail, so that he may feed  himself",  or, as it is put in No. 14, 
"Antwort" to Conze: 
"Of this as yet untouched property of the people no one shall take more than 160 
acres into his possession, and that only if he farms it  himself." 
So in order that the soil shall remain "inalienable communal 
property", for "all mankind" to boot, a start must be made without 
delay on dividing it up; Kriege here imagines he can use the law to 
forbid the necessary consequences of this division, that is, concentra­
tion, industrial progress, etc. He considers 160 acres of land as an 
ever-constant measure, as if the value of such an area did not vary 
according to its quality. The "farmers" will have to exchange, if not 
their land  itself,  then at least the produce of their land, with each 
other and with third parties, and when this juncture has been 
reached, it will soon become apparent that one "farmer", even 
though he has no capital, will, simply by his work and the greater 
initial productivity of his 160 acres, reduce his neighbour to the 
status of his farm  labourer.  And is it not then immaterial whether "the 

=====第71页=====
Circular Against Kriege 43 
land" or the produce of the land "falls into the hands of rapacious 
speculators"? 
Let us for the moment take Kriege's present to mankind seriously. 
1,400 million acres are to be "preserved as the inalienable 
communal property of all mankind". Specifically, 160 acres are to be 
the portion of each "farmer". From this we can calculate the size of 
Kriege's "all mankind"—exactly 8s/4 million "farmers", each of 
whom as head of family represents a family of five, a sum total 
therefore of  433/4  million people. We can likewise calculate how long 
"all eternity" will last, for the duration of which "the proletariat in its 
capacity as humanity" may "claim" "the whole earth" — at least in 
the United States. If the population of the United States continues to 
grow at the same rate as hitherto (i.e., if it doubles in 25 years), this 
"all eternity" will not last out 40 years; within this period the 1,400 
mill[ion] acres will be settled, and there will be nothing left for future 
generations to "claim". But since the release of the land would 
greatly increase immigration, Kriege's "all eternity" might well be 
foreclosed even earlier. The more so when one considers that land 
for 44 million would not even suffice to channel off the now 
existing pauper-population of Europe, where every tenth man is a 
pauper and the British Isles alone supply 7 million. Similar economic 
naivety is to be found in No.  13, "An die Frauen", in which Kriege 
says that if the city of New York were to release its 52,000 acres on 
Long Island, this would suffice to relieve New York "at one stroke" 
of all its pauperism, poverty and crime for all time. 
If Kriege had seen the free-land movement as a first, in certain 
circumstances necessary, form of the proletarian movement, as a 
movement which because of the social position of the class from 
which it emanates must necessarily develop into a communist 
movement, if he had shown how communist tendencies in America 
could, to begin with, only emerge in this agrarian form which 
appears to be a contradiction of all communism, then no objection 
could have been raised. As things are, however, he declares what is 
after all a still subordinate form of movement of real specific people 
to be a matter for mankind in general, presents it, against his better 
knowledge, as the ultimate, supreme goal of all movement in 
general, and thereby transforms the specific aims of the movement 
into sheer, extravagant nonsense. 
In the same essay (No. 10) he however continues his paean 
unperturbed, as follows: 
"In this way, therefore, the old dreams of the Europeans at last came true, on this 
side of the ocean a plot was prepared for them which they needed only to settle and 

=====第72页=====
44 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
make fruitful with the labour of their hands, and they would be able proudly to 
proclaim to all the tyrants of the world: 
This is my hut 
Which you did not build, 
This is my hearth 
Whose fire you envy me."a 
He could have added: This is my midden, which I and my wife, 
child, farm labourer, maid-servant and cattle have produced. Who 
are these Europeans then, whose "dreams" here come true? Not the 
communist workers, but bankrupt shopkeepers and master-
craftsmen or ruined cottagers striving for the bliss of becoming petty 
bourgeois and peasants once more in America. And what kind of 
"wish" is this which the 1,400 million acres are to make reality? None 
other than that everybody should be turned into a private-property-
owner, a wish that is just as practicable and communist as that 
everybody should be turned into an emperor, king or pope. The 
following sentence shall serve as a final sample of Kriege's insight 
into communist revolutionary movements and economic conditions: 
"Every man should at least learn enough of  every  trade to be able to stand on his own 
feet for a while if necessary, if misfortune should sever him from human society."b 
It is of course much easier to "gush" "love" and "surrender" than 
to concern oneself with the development of real conditions and 
practical questions. 
SECTION THREE 
METAPHYSICAL TRUMPETINGS 
No. 13 of the Volks-Trib[un]: "Antwort an Sollta". 
1) Kriege here asserts he is "not accustomed to performing on a 
logical tight-rope in the barren desert of theory". That he is walking 
on a "tight-rope", not a logical one, it is true, but one spun from 
philosophical and love-besotted phrases, is clear from every issue of 
the Volks-Tribun. 
2) The proposition that "each separate person lives individually" 
(which is itself nonsense) is expressed by Kriege as he walks the 
following illogical "tight-rope": "as long as the human species 
continues to find its representation in individuals at all", 
3) "putting an end to the present state of things" is supposed to 
depend on the "pleasure" of the "creative spirit of mankind", which 
does not exist anywhere. 
a A paraphrased stanza from Goethe's  Prometheus.—  Ed. 
b H. Kriege, "Antwort an Cattanio".—Ed. 

=====第73页=====
Circular Against Kriege 45 
4) The following is the ideal of the communist man: "He bears the 
stamp of the species" (and who does not do so by the mere fact of his 
existence?), "determines his own goals according to the goals of the 
species" (as if the species were a person who could have goals) "and 
seeks to be completely his own, solely in order to dedicate himself to 
the species with everything that he is and is capable of becoming" 
(total self-sacrifice and self-abasement before a vaporous fantasy-
concept). 
5) The relationship of the individual to the species is also 
described in the following extravagant nonsense: "All of us and 
our particular activities are but symptoms of the great movement 
which is afoot in the inner depths of mankind." "In the inner 
depths of mankind"—where is that? According to this proposi­
tion, then, real people are only "symptoms", features of a "move­
ment" that is afoot "in the depths" of a phantom conjured up by 
thinking. 
6) This country parson transforms the struggle for a communist 
society into "the search for that great spirit of community". He 
pictures this "great spirit" "foaming full and fine from the cup of 
communion" and as "the holy spirit flashing from fraternal eyes". 
Now that the revolutionary communist movement has thus 
been transformed into the "search" for the holy spirit and 
holy communion, Kriege can of course also assert that this spirit 
"needs only to be recognised for all men to be joined together in 
love". 
7) This metaphysical conclusion is preceded by the following 
confusion of communism with communion: "The spirit that conquers 
the world, the spirit that commands the storm and the thunder and 
lightning (!!!!), the spirit that heals the blind and the lepers, the spirit 
that offers all men to drink of  one  wine" (we prefer a variety of kinds) 
"and to eat of one bread" (the French and English Communists are 
rather more demanding), "the spirit that is eternal and omnipresent, 
that is the spirit of community." If this "spirit" is "eternal and 
omnipresent", it is quite beyond comprehension how, according to 
Kriege, private property has managed to exist for so long. But, true 
enough, it has not been "recognised" and was thus "eternal and 
omnipresent" solely in his own imagination. 
Kriege is therefore here preaching in the name of communism the 
old fantasy of religion and German philosophy which is the direct 
antithesis of communism. Faith, more specifically, faith in the "holy 
spirit of community" is the last thing required for the achievement of 
communism. 

=====第74页=====
46 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
SECTION FOUR 
FLIRTATIONS WITH RELIGION 
It is self-evident that Kriege's amorous slobberings and his 
antithesis to selfishness are no more than the inflated utterances of a 
mind that has become utterly and completely absorbed in religion. 
We shall see how Kriege, who in Europe always claimed to be an 
atheist, here seeks to foist off all the infamies of Christianity under 
the signboard of communism and ends, perfectly consistently, with 
man's self-desecration. 
In No. 10, "Was wir wollen" and "H[ermann] Kriege an Harro 
Harring" define the purpose of the communist struggle in the 
following terms: 
1) "To make a truth of the religion of  love  and a reality of the long 
yearned-for community of the blessed denizens of heaven." Kriege 
merely overlooks the fact that these obsessions of Christianity are 
only the fantastic expression of the existing world and that their 
"reality" therefore already  exists  in the evil conditions of this existing 
world. 
2) "We demand in the name of that religion of  love  that the hungry 
should be given food, the thirsty be given drink and the naked 
clothed." — A demand which has been reiterated ad nauseam for 
1,800 years already, without the slightest success. 
3) "We teach the practice of love" in order to 
4) "receive love". 
5) "In their realm of love there is no room for devils." 
6) "It is his" (man's) "most sacred need to merge his own person 
and whole individuality in the society of loving beings,  towards whom 
he can retain nothing but 
7) his boundless love." One might think that with this boundless­
ness the theory of love had reached its highest peak, a peak so 
high that one can think of nothing higher; and yet the ascent con­
tinues. 
8) "This hot outpouring of love, this surrender to all, this divine 
urge towards community — what else is this but the Communists' 
innermost religion which is only lacking in the appropriate external 
world to express itself in the fulness of human life." The present 
"external world" however seems to be quite sufficient for Kriege to 
lend the most lavish "expression" to his "innermost religion", his 
"divine urge", his "surrender to all" and his "hot outpouring" in the 
"fulness" of his own "human life". 

=====第75页=====
Circular Against Kriege 47 
9) "Do we not have the right to take the long pent-up desires of 
the religious heart seriously and march into battle in the name of the 
poor, the unhappy, and the rejected, for the final realisation of the 
sublime realm of brotherly love?" Kriege marches into battle, then, 
in order to take seriously the desires not of the real and the secular, 
but of the religious heart, not those of the heart made bitter by real 
need but those of the heart inflated by a fantasy of bliss. He 
forthwith offers proof of his "religious heart" by marching into 
battle as a priest, in the name of others, that is, in the name of the 
"poor", and in such a manner as to make it absolutely plain that he 
does not need communism for  himself,  he would have it that he is 
marching into battle in a spirit of pure, generous, dedicated, effusive 
self-sacrifice for the "poor, the unhappy and the rejected" who are 
in need of it — a feeling of elation which swells the heart of this 
worthy man in times of isolation and dejection, and outweighs all the 
troubles of this evil world. 
10) Kriege concludes his pompous prating: "Any man who does 
not support such a party can with justice be treated as an enemy of 
mankind." This intolerant sentence appears to be in contradiction to 
"surrender to all", and the "religion of love" towards all. It is 
however a perfectly consistent conclusion of this new religion, which 
like every other mortally detests and persecutes all its enemies. The 
enemy of the party is quite consistently turned into a heretic, by 
transforming him from an enemy of the actually existing  party  who is 
combated, into a sinner against humanity—which ,only exists in the 
imagination — who must be punished. 
11) In the letter to Harro Harring we read: "Our aim is to make 
all the poor of the world rebel against Mammon, under whose 
scourge they are condemned to work themselves to death, and when 
we have toppled the fearsome tyrant from his ancient throne, our 
aim will be to unite mankind by love, our aim will be to  teach  men to 
work communally and enjoy communally until the long-promised 
kingdom of joy finally comes about." In order to work up a fury 
against the present-day sovereignty of money, he first has to 
transform it into the idol Mammon. This idol is toppled — how, we 
do not discover; the revolutionary movement of the proletariat of all 
countries shrinks to no more than a rebellion — and when this 
toppling is complete, then the prophets— "we" —appear to "teach" 
the proletariat what is to be done next. These prophets "teach" their 
disciples, who here appear in remarkable ignorance of their own 
interests, how they are "to work and enjoy communally", not, 
indeed, for the sake of "working and enjoying communally" 
but rather just so that the scriptures shall be fulfilled and a 

=====第76页=====
48 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
number of visionaries shall not have prophesied in vain 1,800 years 
ago.—This prophetical manner is found elsewhere as well, for 
example: 
In No. 8, "Was ist das Proletariat?" and "Andreas Dietsch", with 
a) "Proletarians,... the hour of your redemption has come." 
b) "A thousand hearts beat joyfully in anticipation of the 
promised time" — in other words, "of that great realm of love ... for 
the long yearned-for realm of love." 
c) In No. 12, "Antwort an Koch, den Antipfaffen", 
"Already the gospel of the infinite redemption of the world goes 
quivering from eye to eye" and — even — "from hand to hand". 
This miracle of the "quivering gospel", this nonsense about the 
"infinite redemption of the world" is in perfect accordance with 
another miracle, namely that the long-abandoned prophecies of the 
old evangelists are unexpectedly fulfilled by Kriege. 
12) Seen from this religious point of view, the answer to all real 
questions can only consist in a few images of extravagant religiosity 
which befog all sense, in a few high-sounding catchwords, such as 
"mankind", "humanity", "species", etc., and in turning every real 
action into a fantastic phrase. This is particularly evident in the essay 
"Was ist das Proletariat?" (No. 8). The answer given to this 
title-question is: "The proletariat is mankind",—a deliberate lie, 
according to which the Communists are aiming at the abolition of 
mankind. This answer, "mankind", is supposed to be the same as 
the one Sieyès gave to the question: What is the tiers-état? 39 Proof 
enough of how Kriege befuddles historical facts. He then forthwith 
provides more proof of this in his bigoted presentation of the 
American Anti-Rent movement: "And how would it be in the end if 
this proletariat, in its capacity as mankind" (a necessary character-
mask for its appearance on the scene — a moment ago the proletariat 
was mankind, now mankind is only a capacity of the proletariat), 
"laid claim to the whole earth as its undisputed property for all 
eternity?" One observes how even an extremely simple, practical 
movement is transformed into empty phrases like "mankind", 
"undisputed property", "all eternity", etc., and for that reason rests 
content with a mere "claim".— Apart from the usual catchwords 
such as "outcast", etc., which is joined by the religious "accursed", all 
Kriege's statements about the proletariat amount to no more than 
the following mythological-biblical images: 
"Prometheus bound", 
"the Lamb of God which bears the sins of the world", 
"the Wandering Jew", 

=====第77页=====
Circular Against Kriege 49 
and finally he brings up the following remarkable question: "Is 
mankind to wander for ever, then, a homeless vagabond, about the 
earth?"  Meanwhile it is precisely the exclusive settlement of a 
part of "mankind" on the land which is his particular bugbear! 
13) The real point about Kriege's religion is revealed in the 
following passage: "We have other things to do than worry about our 
miserable selves, we belong to mankind." With this shameful and 
nauseating grovelling before a "mankind" that is separate and 
distinct from the  "self"  and which is therefore a metaphysical and in 
his case even a religious fiction, with what is indeed the most utterly 
"miserable" slavish self-abasement, this religion ends up like any 
other. Such a doctrine, preaching the voluptuous pleasure of 
cringing and self-contempt, is entirely suited to valiant—monks, but 
never to men of action, least of all in a time of struggle. It only 
remains for these valiant monks to castrate their "miserable selves" 
and thereby provide sufficient proof of their confidence in the ability 
of "mankind" to reproduce  itself!  — If Kriege has nothing better to 
offer than these sentimentalities in pitiful style, it would indeed be 
wiser for him to translate his "Père Lamennais" again and again in 
each issue of the Volks-Tribun. 
What the practical consequences are of Kriege's religion of infinite 
mercy and boundless surrender, is shown by the pleas for work 
which feature in almost every issue of the Volks-Tribun. We read, for 
instance, in No. 8: 
"Arbeit! Arbeit! Arbeit!" 
"Is there no one amongst all the wise3  gentlemen who does not consider it a waste 
of effort to provide sustenance for deserving families and preserve helpless young 
people from poverty and despair? Firstly there is Johann Stern from Mecklenburg, 
still without work, and he is only asking to work himself to skin and bone for the 
benefit of some capitalist and at the same time earn enough bread as will suffice 
to sustain him for his work,—is that asking too much, then, in civilised society?—And 
then Karl Gescheidtlç from Baden, a young man of the most excellent qualities and 
not without higher education—he looks so trustworthy and good, I guarantee 
he is honesty  itself....  And an old man, too, and several other young people are 
begging for occupation for their hands, for their daily bread.—Let any person 
who can help delay no longer, or his conscience will one day rob him of his sleep 
when he most needs it. It is true you might say: There are thousands crying out in 
vain for work, and we certainly can't help all of them—you could, no doubt, 
but you are slaves of selfishness and have no heart to do anything. But for as long 
as you will not help all, at least show that you have left still a vestige of human feeling 
and help as many individuals as is in your power." 
a In Volks-Tribun No. 8: rich.— Ed. 

=====第78页=====
50 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Of course, if they wished, they could help more than is in their 
power. That is how it is in practice, that is the real implementation of 
the self-abasement and degradation which this new religion teaches. 
SECTION FIVE 
KRIEGES PERSONAL STAND 
The nature of Kriege's personal stand in his journal cannot fail to 
be evident from the above quotations; we will therefore only single 
out a small number of points. 
Kriege appears as a prophet and therefore necessarily also as an 
emissary from a secret league of Essenes, 40 the "League of Justice". 
Hence, when he is not speaking in the name of the "oppressed", he 
is speaking in the name of "justice", which is not ordinary justice, 
however, but the justice of the "League of Justice". He not merely 
envelops himself in a fog of mystery, but  history  too. He envelops the 
real historical development of communism in the various countries 
of Europe, which he is not acquainted with, in a fog of mystery, by 
ascribing the origin and progress of communism to fabulous, 
novelettish and fictitious intrigues by this league of Essenes. There is 
evidence of this in every issue, especially in the reply to Harro 
Harring, which also contains the most absurd fantasies about the 
power of this league. 
As a true apostle of love Kriege addresses himself firstly to women, 
whom he cannot believe to be so depraved as to resist a heart beating 
with love, secondly, to the newly discovered agitators "filially and 
conciliatorily",— as a "son" — as a "brother" — as "brother of the 
heart" — and finally as a human being to the rich. Hardly has he 
arrived in New York when he sends out circulars to all rich German 
merchants, presses the popgun of love to their chests, takes very 
good care not to say what he wants of them, signs variously as "A 
Human Being", "A Friend of Man" or "A Fool" — and, "would you 
believe it, my friends?", nobody responds to his high-falutin' 
tomfoolery. This can surprise no one but Kriege  himself.—  The 
familiar phrases of love we have already quoted are occasionally 
spiced with ejaculations like (No. 12, "Antwort an Koch"): "Hurrah! 
Long live community, long live equality, long live love!" Practical 
questions and doubts (cf. No. 14, "Antwort" to Conze) he can only 
explain to himself as deliberate malice and obtuseness. As a true 
prophet and exponent of love, he expresses all the hysterical 
irritation which a sensitive soul who has been snubbed feels towards 
the mockers, the unbelievers and those people in the old world 

=====第79页=====
Circular Against Kriege 51 
whom the sweet warmth of his love fails to transmute into "the 
blessed denizens of heaven". It is in such a mood of sulky 
sentimentality that he cries out to them in No.  11, under the heading, 
"Frühling": "Therefore, you who mock us now, you shall soon have 
faith,  for you shall know, spring is coming." 
Written between April 20 Printed according to the litho-
and May 11, 1846 graphic circular 
First published as a lithographic circular Published in English for the first 
in May 1846 time 
Signed: Engels, K. Marx and others 

=====第80页=====
Frederick Engels 
VIOLATION OF THE PRUSSIAN CONSTITUTION 41 
There exists a law in Prussia, dated 17th of January3 1820, 
forbidding the King to contract any State Debts without the sanction 
of the States-General, an assembly which it is very well known, does 
not yet exist in Prussia.^ This law is the only guarantee the Prussians 
have for ever getting the constitution which, since 1815, has been 
promised to them. The fact of the existence of such a law not being 
generally known out of Prussia, the government succeeded in 1823 
in borrowing three millions of pounds in England — first violation. 
After the French revolution of 1830, the Prussian government being 
obliged to make extensive preparations for a war which was then 
likely to break out, they not having any money, made the "interests 
for transatlantic trade",43 a government concern, borrow twelve 
millions of dollars (£1,700,000), which, of course, were under the 
guarantee of the government, and spent by the government — sec­
ond violation. Not to speak of the small violations, such as loans of a 
few hundred thousands of pounds by the same concern, the King of 
Prussia0 has, at this moment, committed a third great violation. The 
credit of this concern being as it seems exhausted, the Bank of 
Prussia, being just in the same way, exclusively a government 
concern, has been empowered by the King to issue banknotes to the 
amount of ten millions of dollars (£1,350,000). This, deducting 37s 
millions as deposit and 2/3 million for the increased expenses of the 
establishment, amounts in reality to an "indirect loan" of six millions 
of dollars or nearly one million of pounds, which the government 
will be responsible for, as up to this time no private capitalists are 
The Northern Star mistakenly gives 22nd of June.— Ed. 
b Frederick William  IV.—Ed. 

=====第81页=====
Violation of the Prussian Constitution 53 
partners to the Bank of Prussia. It is to be hoped that the Prussians, 
particularly the middle classes, who are most interested in the 
constitution, will not let this pass without an energetic protest. 
Written in May 1846 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 446, May 30, 1846 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our German Correspondent" 

=====第82页=====
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
LETTER 
FROM THE BRUSSELS COMMUNIST CORRESPONDENCE 
COMMITTEE TO G. A. KÖTTGEN 44 
Brussels, June 15, 1846 
TO G[USTAV] AfDOLFj KÖTTGEN FOR FURTHER CIRCULATION 
We hasten to answer your call, communicated to us a few days ago, 
as follows: 
We are in full agreement with your view that the German 
Communists must emerge from the isolation in which they have 
hitherto existed and establish durable mutual contacts with one 
another; similarly, that associations for the purpose of reading and 
discussion are necessary. For Communists must first of all clear 
things up among themselves, and this cannot be done satisfactorily 
without regular meetings to discuss questions concerning commu­
nism. We therefore also agree with you completely that cheap, easily 
understandable books and pamphlets with a communist content 
must be widely circulated. Both of these things, the former as well as 
the latter, should be taken up soon and energetically. You recognise 
the necessity of establishing regular money contributions; but your 
suggestion to support the authors by means of these contributions, to 
provide a comfortable life for them we must for our part reject. In 
our view the contributions should be used only for the printing of 
cheap communist leaflets and pamphlets and to cover the costs of 
correspondence, including that from here abroad. It will be 
necessary to fix a minimum sum for the monthly contributions, so 
that the amount of money that can be used for common purposes 
can be accurately determined at any moment. It is furthermore 
necessary that you should communicate to us the names of the 
members of your communist association — since we have to know, as 
you know of us, who it is we are dealing with. Finally, we await your 
statement of the size of the monthly contributions earmarked for 
common purposes, since the printing of several popular pamphlets 

=====第83页=====
Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee to G. A. Köttgen 55 
ought to be proceeded with as soon as possible. That these pamphlets 
cannot be published in Germany is evident and needs no  proof. 
With regard to the Federal Diet, the King of Prussia, the 
assemblies of the estates, etc., you cherish really extensive illusions. A 
memorandum could only be effective if there already existed in 
Germany a strong and organised Communist Party, but neither is 
the case. A petition is only useful when at the same time it appears as 
a threat, behind which there stands a compact and organised mass. 
The only thing you could do, given suitable circumstances in your 
area, would be to produce a petition furnished with numerous and 
impressive workers' signatures. 
We do not consider the time to be appropriate yet for a communist 
congress. Only when communist associations have been formed in 
the whole of Germany and means for action have been collected will 
delegates from the individual associations be able to gather for a 
congress with any prospect of success. And this will not be likely to 
occur before next year. 
Until then the sole means of cooperation is the clarification of 
questions by letter and regular correspondence. 
We have already, from time to time, been engaged in correspon­
dence from here with the English and French Communists, as well as 
with the German Communists abroad. Whenever reports on the 
communist movement in England and France reach us, we shall 
communicate them to you, and we shall enclose anything else which 
comes to our notice in our current correspondence with you. 
We request you to specify a safe address to us (and in future not to 
print the complete name, like G. A. Köttgen, on the seal, since this 
permits immediate identification of the sender as well as the 
recipient). 
Write to us, however, at the following  completely  safe address: 
Monsieur Ph[ilippe] Gigot, 8, rue de Bodenbroek, Bruxelles. 
K. Marx, F. Engels, Ph. Gigot, F. Wolff 
Weerth sends his regards, is at the moment in Amiens. 
If you should carry out your intention with the petition, it would 
lead to nothing but the C[ommunist] Party publicly proclaiming its 
weakness, and at the same time giving to the Government the names 
of the people it has specially to watch. If you cannot produce a 
working men's petition with at least 500 signatures, then petition 
rather, as the bourgeoisie in Trier wish to do, for a progressive 
a Wilhelm (full name Friedrich Wilhelm) Wolff.—Ed. 

=====第84页=====
56 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
property tax, and if, even then, the bourgeoisie of the area do not 
join in, eh bien,a join them for the time being in public 
demonstrations, proceed jesuitically, put aside teutonic probity, 
true-heartedness and decency, and sign and push forward the 
bourgeois petitions for freedom of the press, a constitution, and so 
on. When this has been achieved a new era will dawn for 
c[ommunist] propaganda. Our means will be increased, the an­
tithesis between bourgeoisie and proletariat will be sharpened. In a 
party one must support everything which helps towards progress, 
and have no truck with any tedious moral scruples. For the rest, you 
must elect a standing committee for your correspondence, which will 
draft and discuss the letters to be written to us, and meet regularly. 
Otherwise matters will become disorganised. For drafting the letters 
you must elect the person you consider most capable. Personal 
considerations must be utterly disregarded, they ruin everything. 
The names of the committee members must naturally be communi­
cated to us. 
Salut. 
Signatories, as overleaf 
First published in Russian Printed according to the manu-
in the journal Bolshevik No. 3, script 
February 1933 Published in English for the first 
time 
a Well and good.—Ed. 

=====第85页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE PRUSSIAN BANK QUESTION 45 
You will probably have already heard that the King of Prussia's 
plan of making money out of paper has been found impracticable. 
Two of the administrators of the State Debts refused to sign the new 
banknotes, as they considered them to be a new public debt, 
therefore subject to the guarantee of the States-General. Frederick 
William IV, to show that he can make as much money as he likes, has 
now hit upon a far better plan. Instead of making ten millions, he 
makes thirty — twenty millions of paper-money and ten of good, 
solid gold and silver coin. He proposes that ten millions of capital be 
raised by shares, "which shares it appears shall bring no dividends, 
but merely 3V2 Per cent, interest and which shall not be trans­
ferable unless at the owner's death, in order to keep them out of 
the reach of speculation"!!! Now would you call such things shares? 
Why not? His Majesty of Prussia decrees that they are shares, and 
fosters the fond hope that he will find a lot of capitalists stupid 
enough to invest ten millions of dollars in such not transferable, 
leaden, three-and-a-half Bank Stock! And that at a time, too, when 
by speculating in railway shares they can make quite another 
percentage. When the King will have found the parcel of fools he is 
in want of, and thus borrowed ten millions in coin, he will issue twenty 
millions in banknotes, making "a sum total of thirty millions" 
increase of the national liabilities. Really this is raising the wind with 
a vengeance. Raising thirty millions, because one can't get ten. 
Written at the end of June 1846 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 451, July 4, 1846 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our German Correspondent" 

=====第86页=====
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
ADDRESS 
OF THE GERMAN DEMOCRATIC COMMUNISTS 
OF BRUSSELS TO MR. FEARGUS O'CONNOR46 
Sir.— We embrace the occasion of your splendid success at the 
Nottingham election to congratulate you, and through you the 
English Chartists, on this signal victory. We consider the defeat of a 
Free-Trade minister a at the show of hands by an enormous Chartist 
majority, and at the very time, too, when Free-Trade principles are 
triumphant in the Legislature,^ we consider this, Sir, as a sign that 
the working classes of England are very well aware of the position 
they have to take after the triumph of Free Trade. We conclude 
from this fact that they know very well that now, when the middle 
classes have carried their chief measure, when they have only to 
replace the present weak go-between cabinet by an energetical, really 
middle-class ministry, in order to be the acknowledged ruling class of 
your country, that now the great struggle of capital and labour, of 
bourgeois and proletarian must come to a decision. The ground is 
now cleared by the retreat of the landed aristocracy from the contest; 
middle class and working class are the only classes betwixt whom 
there can be a possible struggle. The contending parties have their 
respective battle-cries forced upon them by their interests and 
mutual position:—the middle class—"extension of commerce by 
any means whatsoever, and a ministry of Lancashire cotton-lords to 
carry this out"; — the working class—"a democratic reconstruction 
of the Constitution upon the basis of the People's Charter",48 by 
which the working class will become the ruling class of England. We 
a John Cam Hobhouse.— Ed. 

=====第87页=====
Address of German Democratic Communists of Brussels to O'Connor 59 
rejoice to see the English working men fully aware of this altered 
state of parties; of the new period Chartist agitation has entered into 
with the final defeat of the third party, the aristocracy; of the 
prominent position which Chartism henceforth will and must 
occupy, in spite of the "conspiracy of silence" of the middle-class 
press;  and finally, of the new task, which by these new circumst­
ances has devolved upon them. That they are quite aware of this 
task is proved by their intention to go to the poll at the next general 
election. 
We have to congratulate you, Sir, in particular, upon your brilliant 
speech at the Nottingham election,3 and the striking delineation 
given in it of the contrast between working-class democracy and 
middle-class liberalism. 
We congratulate you besides on the unanimous vote of confidence 
in you, spontaneously passed by the whole Chartist body on the 
occasion of Thomas Cooper, the would-be respectables calumnies.49 
The Chartist party cannot but profit by the exclusion of such 
disguised bourgeois, who, while they show off with the name of 
Chartist for popularity's sake, strive to insinuate themselves into the 
favour of the middle classes by personal flattery of their literary 
representatives (such as the Countess of Blessington, Charles 
Dickens, D. Jerrold, and other "friends" of Cooper's), and by 
propounding such base and infamous old women's doctrines as that 
of "non-resistance". 
Lastly, Sir, we have to thank you and your coadjutors for the noble 
and enlightened manner in which The Northern Star is conducted. 
We hesitate not a moment in declaring that the Star is the only 
English newspaper (save, perhaps, the People's Journal, which we 
know from the Star only), which knows the real state of parties 
in England; which is really and essentially democratic; which is free 
from national and religious prejudice; which sympathises with 
the democrats and working men (now-a-days the two are almost 
the same), all over the world; which in all these points speaks 
the mind of the English working class, and therefore is the only 
English paper really worth reading for the continental democrats. 
We hereby declare that we shall do everything in our power to 
extend the circulation of The Northern Star on the continent, and 
to have extracts from it translated in as many continental papers as 
possible. 
We beg to express these sentiments, Sir, as the acknowledged 
a O'Connor. [Speech at the Nottingham Nomination Meeting.] — Ed. 

=====第88页=====
60 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
representatives of many of the German Communists in Germany, 
for all their relations with foreign democrats. 
For the German Democratic Communists of Brussels. 
The Committee, 
Engels 
Ph. Gigot 
JVfctnc Brussels, July 17th, 1846 
First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper 
No. 454, July 25, 1846 

=====第89页=====
Frederick Engels 
[GOVERNMENT AND OPPOSITION IN FRANCE] 
The Chambers are now assembled. The Chamber of Peers have, 
as usual, nothing to do, now that they have disposed of the case 
of Joseph Henry, the new-fashioned regicide. The Chamber of 
Deputies are busily engaged in verifying the returns of members, 
and they profit by this opportunity to show the spirit which 
animates them. Never, since the revolution of 1830, has 
there been displayed such bare-faced impudence and contempt 
of public opinion. Three-fifths, at least, of the Deputies are 
thorough friends of the ministry; or, in other words, either 
great capitalists, stock-jobbers and railway speculators of the 
Paris Exchange, bankers, large manufacturers, etc., or their 
obedient servants. The present legislature is, more than any 
preceding one, the fulfilment of the words of Laffitte, the day 
after the revolution of July: Henceforth we, the bankers, shall 
govern France. It is the most striking proof that the government 
of France is in the hands of the great monied aristocracy, 
the haute-bourgeoisie. The fate of France is decided, not in 
the Cabinet of the Tuileries, 50 not in the Palace of Peers, not even in 
the Palace of Deputies, but on the Exchange of Paris. The actual 
ministers are not Messrs. Guizot and Duchâtel, but Messrs. 
Rothschild, Fould, and the rest of the large Paris bankers, whose 
tremendous fortunes make them the most eminent representatives 
of the rest of their class. They govern the ministry, and the ministry 
take care that in the elections none but men devoted to the present 
system, and to those who profit by this system, are carried. This time 
they have had a most signal success; government patronage and 
bribery of every description, united to the influence of the chief 
capitalists, upon a limited number of voters (less than 200,000), who 

=====第90页=====
62 Frederick Engels 
all belong, more or less, to their own class, the terror spread among 
monied men by the timely attempt to shoot the king, and ultimately 
the certainty that Louis-Philippe will not survive the present 
Chambers (whose powers expire in 1851), all these things united 
were sufficient to quench all serious opposition in most of the 
elective assemblies. And now, this precious Chamber having met, 
they take proper care of themselves. The independent electors have 
sent in hundreds of petitions and protests against the returns of 
ministerial members, stating and proving, or offering to prove, that 
almost in every case the elections have been carried by the grossest 
illegalities committed by government officers; proving bribery, 
corruption, intimidation, patronage of every description to have 
been employed. But the majority never take the slightest notice of 
these facts. Every opposition deputy who raises his voice to protest 
against such abomination is hooted down by hisses, noise, or cries of 
"Division, division". Every illegality is covered by a sanctioning vote. 
The money lords rejoice in their strength, and guessing it will not 
last very long, they make the best of the present moment. 
You may easily imagine that out of this narrow circle of capitalists 
there exists a general opposition against the present government, 
and those whose interests it serves. The centre of this opposition is 
Paris,  where the money lords have so little influence upon 
constituencies, that of the fourteen deputies of the department of 
the Seine only two are ministerialists and twelve belong to the 
opposition. The majority of the middle class, voters of Paris, belong 
to the party of Thiers and O. Barrot; they want to do away with the 
exclusive rule of Rothschild and Co., to recover an honourable and 
independent position for France in her external relations, and 
perhaps a little bit of electoral reform. The majority of non-voting 
tradesmen, shopkeepers, etc., are of a more radical cast, and demand 
an electoral reform, which would give them the vote; a number of 
them are also partisans of the National or Réforme, and join 
themselves to the democratic party, which embraces the great bulk of 
the working classes, and is itself divided into different sections, the 
most numerous of which, at least in Paris, is formed by the 
Communists. The present system is attacked by all these different 
sections, and, of course, by each in a different manner. But there has 
been started, a short time ago, a new mode of attack which deserves 
to be mentioned. A working man has written a pamphlet against the 
head of the system, not against Louis-Philippe, but against 
"Rothschild I. King of the Jews". 3 The success of this pamphlet (it 
a [G. M. Dairnvaell,] Histoire édifiante et curieuse de Rothschild I-er, roi  des juifs. —Ed. 

=====第91页=====
Government and Opposition in France 63 
has now gone through some twenty editions) shows how much this 
was an attack in the right direction. King Rothschild has been obliged 
to publish two defences against these attacks of a man whom nobody 
knows, and the whole of whose property consists in the suit of clothes 
he wears. The public have taken up the controversy with the greatest 
interest. Some thirty pamphlets have been published pro and con. 
The hatred against Rothschild and the money lords is enormous, 
and a German paper says, Rothschild might take this as a warning 
that he had better take up his headquarters somewhere else than 
upon the ever-burning volcano of Paris. 
Written about September 1, 1846 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 460, September 5, 1846 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our Own Correspondent" 

=====第92页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE PRUSSIAN CONSTITUTION 
At last this long-expected piece of workmanship has made its 
appearance!51 At last — if we believe the Times, Globe, some French 
and some German papers — Prussia has passed over to the ranks of 
constitutional countries. The Northern Star, however, has already 
sufficiently proved that this so-called Constitution is nothing but a 
trap offered to the Prussian people to cheat them of the rights 
promised by the late king,a  at the time he wanted popular support. 
That this is the fact, that Frederick William tries by this so-called 
Constitution to obtain money without being obliged to make 
concessions to public opinion, is certain beyond all doubt. The 
democratic papers of all countries — in France, particularly the 
National and Réforme, nay, the ministerial Journal  des Débats, — agree 
in this opinion. The fettered German press itself stammers words 
which allow no other conclusion, but that the movement party in 
Prussia is quite aware of the sly intentions of their "open-hearted, 
generous" king. Thequestion then is this: will the king succeed in his 
plans? Will the Central Assembly of Estates be either stupid or 
cowardly enough to guarantee a new loan, without securing to the 
people extended liberties, and thus give the king the means to 
continue the present system for an indefinite length of time? 
We answer: No; they will not, they cannot. 
The hitherto followed plan of government in Prussia was the 
consequence of the relative position of the nobility and the middle 
classes in Prussia. The nobility had lost too much of its former 
strength, wealth and influence, to dominate the king as formerly it 
a Frederick William III.— Ed. 

=====第93页=====
The Prussian Constitution 65 
had done. The middle classes were not yet strong enough to 
overcome the dead weight of the nobility, which cramped their 
commercial and industrial progress. Thus the king, representing the 
central power of the state, and supported by the numerous class of 
government officers, civil and military, besides having the army at 
his disposal, was enabled to keep down the middle classes by the 
nobility, and the nobility by the middle classes, by flattering now the 
interests of the one, and then those of the other; and balancing, as 
much as possible, the influence of both. This stage of absolute 
monarchy has been gone through by almost all the civilised countries 
of Europe, and in those most advanced it has now given place to the 
government of the middle classes. 
Prussia, the most advanced of German countries, had hitherto 
wanted a middle class, wealthy, strong, united and energetic enough 
to shake off the domination of absolutism, and to crush the remains 
of feudal nobility. The two contending elements, nobility and middle 
classes, are, however, placed in such circumstances, that by the 
natural progress of industry and civilisation, the one (the middle 
classes) must increase in wealth and influence, while the other (the 
nobility) must decrease, impoverish and lose more and more its 
ascendancy. While, therefore, the Prussian nobility and large landed 
proprietors, found themselves every year in a worse position, first, by 
the ruinous wars with France in the beginning of this century; then 
by the English Corn Laws,52  which shut them out from the market of 
that country; then by the competition of Australia, in one of their 
chief productions, wool, and by many other circumstances — the 
middle classes of Prussia increased enormously in wealth, productive 
powers, and influence in general. The wars with France, the shutting 
out of English manufactured goods from the Continental markets, 
created manufacturing industry in Prussia; and when peace was 
re-established, the upstart manufacturers were powerful enough to 
force government to grant them protective duties (1818). Soon 
afterwards, the Zollverein was founded, a union which almost 
exclusively advanced the interests of the middle classes. 53 And, above 
all, the violent competitive struggle arising between the different 
trading and manufacturing nations during these last 30 years of 
peace, forced the somewhat indolent Prussian middle classes, either 
to allow themselves to be entirely ruined by foreign competition, or 
to set to work in good earnest, as well as their neighbours. 
The progress of the middle classes was very little visible up to the 
year 1840, when the ascension to the throne of a new king3 appeared 
a Frederick William IV.— Ed. 

=====第94页=====
66 Frederick Engels 
to them the proper moment to show that, since 1815, things were 
rather changed in Prussia. I need not recapitulate how the 
middle-class movement has progressed since that time; how all parts 
of the kingdom acceded to it, until at last all the middle classes, a 
great part of the peasantry, and not a few of the nobility, joined in it. 
A representative constitution, liberty of the press, open courts of law, 
immovability of the judges, trial by jury — such were the demands of 
the middle classes. The peasantry or small landed proprietors saw 
very well — in the more enlightened parts of the kingdom, at 
least — that such measures were for their interests, too, being the 
only ones by which they could hope to free themselves from the 
remnants of feudality, and to have that influence upon the making 
of laws which it was desirable for them to possess. The poorer part of 
the nobility thought that the constitutional system might, perhaps, 
give them such a position in the legislature as their interests 
demanded; and that, at all events, this system could not be more 
ruinous to them than that under which they lived. It was principally 
the nobility of Prussia Proper and Posen, who, being severely 
oppressed by want of markets for their produce, acceded to the 
Liberal movement from such considerations. 
The middle classes themselves got more and more into an 
uncomfortable position. They had increased their manufacturing 
and mining concerns, as well as their shipping, to a considerable 
extent; they were the chief furnishers for the whole market of the 
Zollverein; their wealth and numbers had increased very much. But 
during the last ten or fifteen years the enormous progress of English 
manufactures and mining operations have threatened them with a 
deadly competition. Every glut in the English market threw large 
quantities of English goods into the Zollverein, where they were sold 
at prices more ruinous to the Germans than to the English, because 
these latter made, during the times of flourishing trade, large profits 
in the American and other markets, while the Prussians could never 
sell their produce anywhere but within the circle of their own line of 
customs. Their shipping was almost excluded from the ports of 
foreign nations, while ships of all flags entered the Prussian ports on 
equal conditions with the Prussians. Thus, although there is 
comparatively little capital in Prussia, there commenced a difficulty 
of investing this capital profitably. Trade appeared to be labouring 
under a continual pressure; factories, machinery, stock in trade, 
were slowly, but continually, depreciated; and this general uneasi­
ness was for a moment only interrupted by the railway speculations, 
which, within the last eight years, were started in Prussia. These 
speculations, by raising the value of ready money, increased the 

=====第95页=====
IcA und JfeùiffauJ,  Ww  woùUnebnJf£JlJiy<2ùncn . 
Cartoon by Engels of Frederick William IV making the royal speech at the opening of 
the United Diet in Berlin, April 11, 1847. Published as a special supplement 
to the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeituvg May 6, 1847 

=====第96页=====

=====第97页=====
The Prussian Constitution 69 
depreciation of stock in trade, and were themselves, on an average, 
not very profitable, on account of the comparatively thin population 
and trade of the greater part of the country. They offered, however, 
a still better chance of profit than other industrial investments; and 
thus every one who could dispose of some capital engaged in them. 
Very soon these speculations assumed, as usual, a feverish character, 
and ended in a crisis which now for about a twelve-month has 
oppressed the Prussian money markets. Thus the middle classes 
found themselves in a very uncomfortable position in the beginning 
of the present year: the money markets under the pressure of an 
extraordinary want of coin; the manufacturing districts requiring 
more than ever those protective duties which the government 
refused to grant; the coast towns requiring navigation laws as 
the only means to relieve them; and, over and above all, a rise in 
the corn markets, which brought the country to a state approaching 
famine. All these causes of discontent operated at the same 
time,  and more strongly so upon the people; the Silesian linen-
weavers in the greatest distress; the cotton factories stopped; in 
the large manufacturing district of the Rhine almost all hands 
out of work, the potato crop mostly ruined, and bread at famine 
prices. The moment was evidently come for the middle classes 
to take the government out of the hands of an imbecile king, 
weak nobility, and self-conceited bureaucracy, and to secure it to 
themselves. 
It is a curious fact, but which is repeated at every revolutionary 
epoch, that at the very moment when the leading class of a 
movement is most favourably placed for the accomplishment of that 
movement, the old worn-out government is reduced to beg the 
assistance of this same leading class. Thus in 1789, in France, when 
famine, bad trade, and divisions among the nobility pushed, so to 
say, the middle classes to a revolution — at that very moment the 
government found its money resources exhausted, and was reduced 
to begin the revolution by the convocation of the States-General.54 
Thus in 1847 in Prussia. At the very moment when the more 
indolent Prussian middle classes are almost forced by circumstances 
to change the governmental system, at that moment the king, by 
want of money, is forced to commence that change of system, and to 
convocate in his turn the Prussian States-General. It is indubitable 
that the States would offer him much less resistance than they will 
now, if the money market was easy, the factories at full work (which 
would be caused by a flourishing trade and ready sale, and 
consequent high prices for manufactured goods in England) and 
corn at a reasonably low price. But so it is: in times of approaching 

=====第98页=====
70 Frederick Engels 
revolution, the progressive classes of society have always all chances 
on their side. 
I have, during the course of 1845 and 1846, more than once 
shown to the readers of the Star, that the King of Prussia was in a 
very embarrassed financial situation3; I have at the same time called 
their attention to the several clever plans by which his ministers 
sought to extricate him; and predicted that the whole affair must end 
by a convocation of the States-General. The event, then, was neither 
unexpected, nor, as it now is represented, caused by the free grace of 
his squandering majesty; nothing but sheer necessity, poverty and 
distress could move him to such a step, and there is not a child in 
Prussia but knows this. The only question, then, is this: — Will the 
Prussian middle classes, by investing a new loan with their guarantee, 
allow the king to go on as he has done hitherto and to disregard for 
another seven years their petitions and their wants? 
We have already answered this question. They cannot do this. We 
have proved it from the situation of the respective classes, and we 
shall now prove it from the composition of the States-General 
themselves. 
Members of high and low nobility 311 
Do. for towns and peasantry 306 
As the king has declared his intention to increase the members of 
the high nobility (80 in all) by new creations of peers, we may add to 
the nobility, about 30 more; 341 members of nobility, or government 
party. Deduct from this number the liberal fractions of the lower 
nobility, namely, all the nobility of Prussia Proper, two-thirds of that 
of Posen, and some members of the Rhenish, Silesian, Brandenburg 
and Westphalian nobility, say 70 liberal members, voting with the 
towns and peasantry, and the position of parties is as follows: — 
Nobility, or government party 271 
Towns and peasantry, or liberal opposition 376 
Thus,  even allowing that thirty or forty town or peasantry 
members from the remote districts should vote for the government, 
there will always be a liberal majority of from twenty-five to fifty 
votes remaining, and with a little energy on the part of the Liberals, it 
will be easy to meet every demand for money with another demand 
for liberal institutions. There is besides, no doubt, that, under 
present circumstances, the people will support the middle classes, 
and by their pressure from without, which indeed is very much 
a See F. Engels' articles "Violation of the Prussian Constitution" and "The 
Prussian Bank Question" (this volume, pp. 52-53 and p.  57).—Ed. 

=====第99页=====
The Prussian Constitution 71 
wanted, strengthen the courage and enliven the energies of those 
within. 
Thus,  the Prussian constitution, insignificant in  itself,  is, for all 
that, the beginning of a new epoch for that country, and for all 
Germany. It marks the downfall of absolutism and nobility, and the 
ascendancy of the middle classes; it marks the beginning of a 
movement which will very soon lead to a representative constitution 
for the middle classes, a free press, independent judges and trial by 
jury, and which will end God knows where. It marks the repetition of 
1789 in Prussia. And if the revolutionary movement which now 
begins, will directly interest the middle classes only, it is yet not at all 
indifferent to the interests of the people. From the moment the 
power of the middle classes is constituted, from that moment begins 
the separate and distinct democratic movement. In the struggle 
against despotism and aristocracy, the people, the democratic party, 
cannot but play a secondary part; the first place belongs to the 
middle classes. From the moment, however, the middle classes 
establish their own government, identify themselves with a new 
despotism and aristocracy against the people, from that moment 
democracy takes its stand as the only, the exclusive movement party; 
from that moment the struggle is simplified, reduced to two parties, 
and changes, by that circumstance, into a "war to the knife". The his­
tory of the French and English democratic parties fully proves this. 
There is another circumstance to be remarked. The conquest of 
public power by the middle classes of Prussia will change the political 
position of all European countries. The alliance of the North will be 
dissolved. Austria and Russia, the chief spoliators of Poland, will be 
entirely isolated from the rest of Europe, for Prussia carries along 
with her the smaller states of Germany, who all have constitutional 
governments. Thus the balance of power in Europe will be entirely 
changed by the consequences of this insignificant constitution; the 
desertion of three-fourths of Germany from the camp of stationary 
Eastern Europe into that of progressive Western Europe. In 
February 1846, broke out the last Polish insurrection.55 In February 
1847,  Frederick William convocates his States-General. The vengeance 
of Poland is drawing nigh! 
Written at the end of February 1847 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 489, March 6, 1847 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our German Correspondent" 
Signed: E. 

=====第100页=====
iri.aai. ;; «••*«•  m,**,*». , »....  »«r..«««i.  »^«««••»iiH«. 
(ta SMi —»4 •  "™"•«•^  -—  <atli|iaaill IBJ jf < » 
Pi( 3a*rttiaa»irt«rtn  •*» lar M »aaai Am 9ttä|dli  « Cfntiaua.  - ft*  ««A*!»«,  »ft ,u m.hrfrhnto lapi,», AaMa attaaMri Ifoaitalw Ibit ürfft*w<l»»"^*iim 
!*. », w aMaaiatc.  iai Partia  ttr imana «Ut Jaat  Hl I Ol. ttffifM  bit 4 B*t «^mitlM-i.  Ja Ma M*fa»a «adffaataiaaca aaa Oatl Itajaarkt, PI»»- »«..it.. aa» Aiiliiaa  a. 0Ma*. »»KUf 4<* **».»• 
3m CaN an toaanara..  MM Mr ««»»lrat-.ita.eMiL« , m Mai *«^tif*ra Jtrrr.  > latwrrpra  hi «U» x»r ailrt, CuraMatiuat  ,.u, t, ,„ > e atrl  Mi Mr Ckn VefaaU*:d«tiaaxf-9i».htiaa far Ht aaaat •t)««f|. 
3a aaa|  rjiaatinre Mi atfan nclfaarritR.  - 3a «tfatlara  aa» Kl  Cffrialru*  k.n llrraalfr, t*#J»#ift,  tK 5« fantin  Mi Wilhaai. »aa >eaa.ii.. Houa~lk>.. aW«*.-«r»a . I*r«ejafr>m 
3a«i»'«atf MiMTB«4tMa»[aa»<l>a)Tbal.-iStaJt.- 3attatTi» Mi4>rrra«»aal(r, tcff.GaaaKL 3a««tttrtjai  Mi tjatttri'.-aiu Vdaram M|aa|0ilaifa  arMara  lataataaraH giUrtaajaaaa. 
N-M. SBtüffel, Eonntt(ta8  Kn 8. ï(>til IM». 
Karl Marx 
[DECLARATION AGAINST KARL GRÜN] 
Under the date-line Berlin, March 20, the Trier'sche Zeitung prints 
an article on my pamphlet now in printing, Contradictions dans le 
système des contradictions économiques de M. Proudhon ou  les misères de la 
philosophie. 3 The Berlin correspondent15  makes me out to be the 
author of a report printed in the Rhein- u. Mosel-Zeitung and else­
where concerning this pamphlet, Proudhon's book 0 and the activities 
of its translator, Herr Grün. 56 He hails me time and again as "editor 
of the former Rheinische Zeitung" quite in the style of the Brussels or 
another correspondent. "Buttressed by a knowledge of the current 
state of the press in Germany", our friend peddles his insinuation. 
Not merely his insinuation, but his whole literary existence may, as 
far as I am concerned, be "buttressed by a knowledge of the current 
state of the press in Germany". I grant him the most practically 
proven "knowledge of the current state of the press in Germany". 
But this time it has not "buttressed" him. 
The alleged Berlin correspondent need only read through my 
criticism of Proudhon in the Critical Criticismd  in order to realise that 
the report which arouses his enmity might well originate in Brussels, 
but could not possibly originate with me, if only because it "sets the 
same value" on Proudhon and H[er]r Grün. 
a The title of the work was changed later (see pp. 105-212 of this volume).—Ed. 
b Obviously Eduard Meyen.—Ed. 
c P. J. Proudhon, Systeme des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère, 
T. III, Paris, 1846.— Ed. 
d K. Marx and F. Engels, The Holy Family or Critique of Critical Criticism (see 
present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 23-54).—Ed. 

=====第101页=====
Declaration Against Karl Grün 73 
My criticism of Proudhon is written in French. Proudhon himself 
will be able to reply. A letter he wrote to me before the publication of 
his book shows absolutely no inclination to leave it to Herr Grün and 
his associates to avenge him in the event of criticism on my part. 57 
"Concerning further the translator of P[roudhon]'s work on 
economics", our friend in Berlin need only add to the record that 
" We here in Berlin have learnt much and of great diversity" from Herr 
Grün's Soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien [Social Movement 
in France and Belgium] in order to place the value of this book above 
all doubt. And one must consider what it means when "We here in 
Berlin" "learn" anything at all, and in this case even "much and of 
great diversity", quantitatively and qualitatively at the same time! We 
here in Berlin! 
Identifying me with the Brussels or another correspondent, the 
Berlin or alleged Berlin correspondent exclaims: 
Grün "has probably to make amends for the misfortune of having acquainted 
the German world with the results of foreign socialism  before  Herr Dr. Marx, 'editor of 
the former Rheinische Zeitung'". 
Our friend undeniably betrays great ingenuity in forming 
his conjectures! I should like to confide to him, sub rosa, 3 that, 
admittedly in my own view, Herr Grün's Soziale Bewegung in 
Frankreich und Belgien and the French and the Belgian social 
movement — individual names and data excepted — have nothing in 
common with each other. At  the"  same time, however, I must confide 
to him that I have experienced so little urge to acquaint "the German 
world" with the results of my studies of Herr Grün's Soziale 
Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien that I have permitted a fairly 
comprehensive review of Grün's book, prepared a year ago, peace­
fully to sleep the sleep of the just in manuscript form, and only 
now that I have been challenged by our friend in Berlin shall I send 
it to the  Westphälisches  Dampfboot to be printed. The review forms an 
appendix to the book written jointly by Fr. Engels and me on 
"the German ideology" (critique of modern German philosophy as 
expounded by its representatives Feuerbach, B[runo] Bauer and 
Stirner, and of German socialism as expounded by its various 
prophets). b The circumstances which have hindered the printing of 
this manuscript and still hinder it will perhaps be set forth for the 
reader elsewhere as a contribution to the description of the "current 
state of the press in Germany". Nothing hindered the separate 
printing of my review of Grün's book, which in no way offends 
a In secret.— Ed. 
b See present edition, Vol. 5.— Ed. 

=====第102页=====
74 Karl Marx 
against the censorship, except the slight obstacle that this book was 
not considered worthy of a special attack, and it was thought that 
only in a survey of the whole of the insipid and tastelessa  literature of 
German socialism would some reference to Herr Grün be unavoid­
able.  Now, however, after the article by our Berlin friend, the separ­
ate printing of this review has taken on the more or less humorous 
significance of showing the manner in which "the German world" 
"acquaints  itself"  with the "results of foreign socialism", and 
especially the desire and capacity "We here in Berlin" possess "to 
learn much and of great diversity". It will immediately be realised 
how strongly I was compelled to resort to pettv attacks in petty little 
newspaper articles if I had otherwise been anxious to bring Herr 
Grün's "Social Movement in France and Belgium" to a standstill. 
Finally, even our Berlin friend will be unable to refrain from making 
public testimony that if I really harboured the intention of 
"acquainting the German world with the results of foreign socialism" 
in his sense, and truly feared a competitor in a predecessor, then I 
should be obliged daily to beseech fate, "Give me no predecessor, or 
even better, give me Herr Grün as a predecessor!" 
A word more concerning "my conceit in imagining that I have 
scaled the topmost rung of human wisdom". 
Who else could have inoculated me with this disease but Herr 
Grün who found in my expositions in the  Deutsch-Französische  Jahr­
bücher 1' the solution to the ultimate riddle (see, for example, the 
foreword to his Bausteine) in the same way as he finds it now in 
Proudhon's economics; who, as he now extols in Proudhon the true 
point of view, likewise assured his readers about me (see Grün's 
Neue Anekdota), that I had "negated the constitutional and radical 
point of view". 5« Herr Grün first poisons me, in order then to be 
able to blame me for the fact that his poison worked! Let our Berlin 
friend calm  himself,  however—I enjoy perfect health. 
Brussels, April 3, 1847 Karl Marx 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the Trier'sche 
ZeitungNo. 28, April 8, 1847 Zeitung text checked with the 
and in the Trier'sche Zeitung No. 99, Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung 
April 9, 1847 „,,.,,.„,.,, , .. 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The words "the insipid and tasteless" are missing in the Trier'sche Zeitung. — Ed. 
The reference is to K. Marx's articles "On the Jewish Question" and 
"Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law" (see present edition, 
Vol. 3).—Ed. 

=====第103页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE CONSTITUTIONAL QUESTION IN GERMANY] 59 
I 
German socialist literature grows worse from month to month. It 
increasingly confines itself to the broad effusions of those true 
socialists whose whole wisdom amounts to an amalgam of German 
philosophy and German-philistine sentimentality with a few stunted 
communist slogans. It exhibits a peacefulness which enables it even 
under the censorship to state its most heartfelt opinions. Even the 
German police find little in it to take exception to—proof enough 
that it belongs not to the progressive, revolutionary elements but to 
the stale, reactionary elements in German literature. 
To these true socialists belong not only those who term themselves 
socialists par  excellence,  but also the greater part of those writers in 
Germany who have accepted the party name of Communists. The 
latter indeed are, if possible, even worse. 
Under these circumstances, it goes without saying that these 
soi-disant communist writers are in no way representative of the 
Party of the German Communists. They are neither recognised by 
the Party as its literary representatives nor do they represent its in­
terests. On the contrary, they look after quite other interests, they 
defend quite other principles, which are opposed in every respect to 
those of the Communist Party. 
The true socialists, to whom, as we have said, most German 
soi-disant communist writers belong, have learnt from the French 
Communists that the transition from the absolute monarchy to the 
modern representative state in no way abolishes the poverty of the 
great mass of the people, but only brings a new class, the bourgeoisie, 
to power. They have further learnt from the French Communists 
that it is precisely this bourgeoisie which, by means of its capital, 
presses most heavily upon the masses, and hence is the opponent par 

=====第104页=====
76 Frederick Engels 
excellence  of the Communists, or socialists respectively, as representa­
tives of the mass of the people. They have not taken the trouble to 
compare Germany's level of social and political development with 
that of France, nor to study the conditions actually existing in 
Germany upon which all further development depends; hastily and 
without long reflection they have transferred their hastily acquired 
knowledge to Germany. Had they been Party men who aimed at a 
practical, tangible result, who represented particular interests 
common to an entire class, they would at least have paid attention to 
the way in which the opponents of the bourgeoisie in France, from 
the editors of La Réforme to the ultra-Communists, such as in 
particular the acknowledged representative of the great mass of the 
French proletariat, old Cabet, behave in their polemic against the 
bourgeoisie. It should really have struck them that these representa­
tives of the Party not merely engage continually in politics of the day, 
but that even towards political measures such as proposals for 
electoral reforms, in which the proletariat has no direct interest, 
they nevertheless adopt an attitude far removed from sovereign dis­
dain. But our true socialists are not Party men, they are German 
theoreticians. They are not concerned with practical interests and 
results, but with eternal truth. The interests which they strive to 
uphold are the interests of "man", the results they pursue are 
limited to philosophical "achievements". So they only needed to 
bring their new elucidations into harmony with their own 
philosophical conscience, in order then to noise abroad before the 
whole of Germany that political progress, like all politics, is evil, that 
constitutional freedom in particular elevates to the throne the 
bourgeoisie, the class most dangerous to the people, and that in 
general the bourgeoisie cannot be attacked enough. 
In France, the rule of the bourgeoisie has for seventeen years been 
more complete than in any other country in the world. The attacks of 
the French proletarians, their Party chiefs and literary representa­
tives on the bourgeoisie were therefore attacks on the ruling class, on 
the existing political system, they were definitely revolutionary attacks. 
How well the ruling bourgeoisie knows this is proven by the countless 
press trials and prosecutions of associations, the prohibition of 
meetings and banquets, the hundred police chicaneries with which it 
persecutes the Réformistes 60 and Communists. In Germany, things 
are completely different. In Germany the bourgeoisie is not only not 
in power, it is even the most dangerous enemy of the existing 
governments. For these the diversion mounted by the true socialists 
was very opportune. The struggle against the bourgeoisie, which 
only too often brought the French Communists imprisonment or 

=====第105页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 77 
exile, brought our true socialists nothing except the permission to 
print. The revolutionary heat in the polemics by the French 
proletariat dwindled in the cool breasts of the German theoreticians 
to a tepidness satisfying the censorship and in this emasculated state 
was a quite welcome ally for the German governments against the 
threatening bourgeoisie. True socialism managed to use the most 
revolutionary propositions that have ever been framed as a 
protective wall for the morass of the German status quo. True 
socialism is reactionary through and through. 
The bourgeoisie long ago noticed this reactionary tendency of true 
socialism. But without further thought they took this trend for 
the literary representative also of German communism, and re­
proached the Communists publicly and privately with merely playing 
into the hands of the governments, the bureaucracy, and the nobility 
with their polemics against a representative system, trial by jury, free­
dom of the press, and their clamour against the bourgeoisie. 
It is high time that the German Communists disowned the 
responsibility imputed to them for the reactionary deeds and desires 
of the true socialists. It is high time that the German Communists, 
who represent the German proletariat with its very clear, very 
tangible needs, broke in the most decisive manner with that literary 
clique — for it is nothing more — which does not know itself whom it 
represents, and so against its will tumbles into the arms of the 
German governments; which believes itself to be "realising man" 
and is realising nothing but the deification of the wretched German 
philistine. We Communists have in fact nothing in common with the 
theoretical phantasms and scruples of conscience of this crafty 
company. Our attacks on the bourgeoisie differ as much from those 
of the true socialists as from those o£the reactionary nobles, e. g., the 
French legitimists or Young England.61  The German status quo 
cannot exploit our attacks in any way, because they are directed still 
more against it than against the bourgeoisie. If the bourgeoisie, so to 
speak, our natural enemy, is the enemy whose overthrow will bring 
our party to power, the German status quo is still more our enemy, 
because it stands between the bourgeoisie and us, because it hinders 
us from coming to grips with the bourgeoisie. For that reason we do 
not exclude ourselves in any way from the great mass of opposition 
to the German status quo. We only form its most advanced 
section—a section which at the same time through its unconcealed 
arrière pensée against the bourgeoisie takes up a quite definite 
position. 
With the meeting of the Prussian United Diet the struggle against 
the German status quo reaches a turning point. On the attitude of 

=====第106页=====
78 Frederick Engels 
this Diet depends the continuation or the end of the status quo. The 
parties in Germany, which are still very vague, confused and 
fragmented through ideological subtleties, are thus faced with the 
necessity to clarify for themselves what interests they represent, what 
tactics they must follow, to demarcate themselves from other parties 
and to become practical. The youngest of these parties, the 
Communist Party, cannot evade this necessity. It must likewise clarify 
for itself its position, its plan of campaign, its means of action, and 
the first step to this is to disavow the reactionary socialists who try 
to insinuate themselves among the Communists. It can take this step 
all the sooner because it is strong enough to refuse assistance from 
all allies who would discredit it. 
II 
THE STATUS QUO AND THE BOURGEOISIE 
The status quo in Germany is as follows. 
While in France and England the bourgeoisie has become 
powerful enough to overthrow the nobility and to raise itself to be 
the ruling class in the state, the German bourgeoisie has not yet had 
such power. It has indeed a certain influence upon the governments, 
but in all cases where there is a collision of interests, this influence 
must give way to that of the landed nobility. While in France and 
England the towns dominate the countryside, in Germany the 
countryside dominates the towns, agriculture dominates trade and 
industry. This is the case not only in the absolute, but also in the 
constitutional, monarchies of Germany, not only in Austria and 
Prussia, but also in Saxony, Württemberg and Baden. 
The cause of this is that in its stage of civilisation Germany lags 
behind the Western countries. In the latter it is predominantly trade 
and industry which provide the mass of the population with their 
livelihood, but with us it is agriculture. England exports no 
agricultural produce whatever, but is in constant need of supplies 
from abroad; France imports at least as much agricultural produce 
as it exports, and both countries base their wealth above all on their 
exports of industrial products. Germany, on the contrary, exports 
few industrial goods, but a great quantity of corn, wool, cattle, etc. 
When Germany's political system was established — in 1815, the 
overwhelming importance of agriculture was even greater than now 
and it was increased still more at that time by the fact that it was pre­
cisely the almost exclusively agricultural parts of Germany that had 
participated most zealously in the overthrow of the French Empire. 

=====第107页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 79 
The political representative of agriculture is, in Germany as in 
most European countries, the nobility, the class of big landed 
proprietors. The political system corresponding to the exclusive 
dominance of the nobility is the feudal system. The feudal system has 
everywhere declined in the same degree in which agriculture has 
ceased to be the decisive branch of production in a country, in the 
same degree in which an industrial class has formed itself beside the 
agricultural, towns beside villages. 
The class newly forming itself beside the nobility and the peasants 
more or less dependent on it is not the bourgeoisie, which today rules 
in the civilised countries and is striving for mastery in Germany; it is 
the class of the petty bourgeoisie. 
The present political system of Germany is nothing more than a 
compromise between the nobility and the petty bourgeoisie, which 
amounts to resigning power into the hands of a third class: the 
bureaucracy. In the composition of this class the two high 
contracting parties participate according to their respective status; 
the nobility, which represents the more important branch of 
production, reserves to itself the higher positions, the petty 
bourgeoisie contents itself with the lower and only in exceptional 
circumstances puts forward candidates for the higher administra­
tion. Where the bureaucracy is subjected to direct control, as in the 
constitutional states of Germany, the nobility and petty bourgeoisie 
share in it in the same way; and that here also the nobility reserves to 
itself the lion's share is easily understood. The petty bourgeoisie can 
never overthrow the nobility, nor make itself equal to it; it can do no 
more than weaken it. To overthrow the nobility, another class is 
required, with wider interests, greater property and more deter­
mined courage: the bourgeoisie. 
In all countries the bourgeoisie emerges from the petty bourgeoi­
sie with the development of world trade and large-scale industry, 
with the accompanying free competition and centralisation of 
property. The petty bourgeoisie represents inland and coastal trade, 
handicrafts, manufacture based on handwork—branches of industry 
which operate within a limited area, require little capital, have a slow 
turnover and give rise to only local and sluggish competition. The 
bourgeoisie represents world trade, the direct exchange of products 
of all regions, trade in money, large factory industry based on the use 
of machinery—branches of production which demand the greatest 
possible area, the greatest possible capital and the quickest possible 
turnover, and give rise to universal and stormy competition. The 
petty bourgeois represents local, the bourgeois general interests. 
The petty bourgeois finds his position sufficiently safeguarded if, 

=====第108页=====
80 Frederick Engels 
while exercising indirect influence on state legislation, he partici­
pates directly in provincial administration and is master of his local 
municipality. The bourgeois cannot protect his interests without 
direct, constant control of the central administration, foreign policy 
and legislation of his state. The classical creation of the petty 
bourgeoisie were the free cities of the German Reich, that of the 
bourgeoisie is the French representative state. The petty bourgeois is 
conservative as soon as the ruling class makes a few concessions to 
him; the bourgeois is revolutionary until he himself rules. 
What then is the attitude of the German bourgeoisie to the two 
classes that share political rule? 
While a rich and powerful bourgeoisie has been formed in 
England since the seventeenth and in France since the eighteenth 
century, one can speak of a German bourgeoisie only since the 
beginning of the nineteenth century. There were before then, it is 
true,  a few rich shipowners in the Hanseatic towns, a few rich 
bankers in the interior, but no class of big capitalists, and least of all 
of big industrial capitalists. The creator of the German bourgeoisie 
was Napoleon. His continental system62 and the freedom of trade 
made necessary by its pressure in Prussia gave the Germans a 
manufacturing industry and expanded their mining industry. After 
a few years these new or expanded branches of production were 
already so important, and the bourgeoisie created by them so 
influential, that by 1818 the Prussian government saw that it was 
necessary to allow them protective tariffs. The Prussian Customs 
Act of 1818 was the first official recognition of the bourgeoisie by the 
government. It was admitted, though reluctantly and with a heavy 
heart, that the bourgeoisie had become a class indispensable for the 
country. The next concession to the bourgeoisie was the Customs 
Union.63 The admission of most of the German states into the 
Prussian customs system was no doubt originally occasioned simply 
by fiscal and political considerations, but no one benefited from it as 
much as did the German, more especially the Prussian, bourgeoisie. 
Although the Customs Union here and there brought a few small 
advantages to the nobility and petty bourgeoisie, on the whole it 
harmed both groups still more through the rise of the bourgeoisie, 
keener competition and the supplanting of the previous means of 
production. Since then the bourgeoisie, especially in Prussia, has 
developed rather quickly. Although its advance during the last thirty 
years has not been nearly as great as that of the English and French 
bourgeoisie, it has nevertheless established most branches of modern 
industry, in a few districts supplanted peasant or petty-bourgeois 
patriarchalism, concentrated capital to some extent, produced 

=====第109页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 81 
something of a proletariat, and built fairly long stretches of railroad. 
It has at least reached the point of having either to go further and 
make itself the ruling class or to renounce its previous conquests, the 
point where it is the only class that can at the moment bring about 
progress in Germany, can at the moment rule Germany. It is already 
in fact the leading class in Germany, and its whole existence depends 
upon its becoming legally so as well. 
With the rise of the bourgeoisie and its growing influence 
coincides, indeed, the growing impotence of the hitherto official 
ruling classes. The nobility has become more and more impover­
ished and encumbered with debts since the time of Napoleon. The 
buying free from corvée raised the production costs of corn for the 
nobility and exposed it to competition from a new class of inde­
pendent small peasants—disadvantages which in the long run were 
far from being compensated for by the peasants overreaching 
themselves when they bought themselves free. Russian and Ameri­
can competition limited the market for its corn, Australian and in 
some years South Russian that of its wool. And the more the pro­
duction costs and competition increased, the more was exposed the 
incapacity of the nobility to work its estates profitably, and to apply 
the newest advances in agriculture. Like the French and English 
nobility of the last century, the German nobility employed the rising 
level of civilisation only to squander its fortune magnificently on 
pleasures in the big cities. Between the nobility and the bourgeoisie 
began that competition in social and intellectual education, in wealth 
and display, which everywhere precedes the political dominance of 
the bourgeoisie and ends, like every other form of competition, with 
the victory of the richer side. The provincial nobility turned into a 
Court nobility, only thereby to be ruined all the more quickly and 
surely. The three per cent revenues of the nobility went down before 
the fifteen per cent profit of the bourgeoisie, the three-per-centers 
resorted to mortgages, to credit banks for the nobility and so on, in 
order to be able to spend in accordance with their station, and only 
ruined themselves so much the quicker. The few landed gentry wise 
enough not to ruin themselves formed with the newly-emerging 
bourgeois landowners a new class of industrial landowners. This class 
carries on agriculture without feudal illusions and without the 
nobleman's nonchalance, as a business, an industry, with the 
bourgeois appliances of capital, expert knowledge and work. Such a 
class is so far from being incompatible with the rule of the 
bourgeoisie that in France it stands quite peacefully alongside it and 
participates according to its wealth in its rule. It constitutes the 
section of the bourg< oisie which exploits agriculture. 

=====第110页=====
82 Frederick Engels 
The nobility has therefore become so impotent, that a part of it has 
already gone over to the bourgeoisie. 
The petty bourgeoisie was already in a weak position in relation to 
the nobility; still less can it hold out against the bourgeoisie. Next to 
the peasants, it is the most pathetic class that has ever meddled with 
history. With its petty local interests, it advanced no further even in 
its heyday (the later Middle Ages) than to local organisations, local 
struggles and local advances, to an existence on sufferance alongside 
the nobility, never to general, political, dominance. With the 
emergence of the bourgeoisie it loses even the  appearance  of historical 
initiative. Wedged in between nobility and bourgeoisie, under 
pressure alike from the political preponderance of the former and 
from the competition of the heavy capital of the latter, it split into 
two sections. The one, that of the richer and big-city petty 
bourgeoisie, joins the revolutionary bourgeoisie more or less timidly; 
the other, recruited from the poorer burghers, especially those of 
the small provincial towns, clings to the existing state of things and 
supports the nobility with the whole weight of its inertia. The more 
the bourgeoisie develops, the worse becomes the position of the petty 
bourgeoisie. Gradually this second section also realises that under 
existing conditions its ruin is certain, whereas under the rule of the 
bourgeoisie, alongside the  probability  of that ruin, it enjoys at least the 
possibility of advancing into the ranks of the bourgeoisie. The more 
certain its ruin, the more it ranges itself under the banner of the 
bourgeoisie. As soon as the bourgeoisie has come to power, the petty 
bourgeoisie splits again. It supplies recruits to every section of the 
bourgeoisie, and besides forms, between the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat now emerging with its interests and demands, a chain of 
more or less radical political and socialist sects, which one can study 
more closely in the English or French Chamber of Deputies and the 
daily press. The more sharply the bourgeoisie penetrates into the 
undisciplined and poorly armed swarms of petty bourgeoisie with 
the heavy artillery of its capital, with the closed columns of its 
joint-stock companies, the more helpless the petty bourgeoisie 
becomes, the more disorderly its flight, until no other way of escape 
remains to it than either to muster behind the long files of the 
proletariat and to march under its banner—or to surrender to the 
bourgeoisie at its discretion. This diverting spectacle can be observed 
in England at every trade crisis, and in France at the present 
moment. In Germany we have only arrived at that phase when the 
petty bourgeoisie in a moment of despair and squeezed for money 
forms the heroic resolution to renounce the nobility and place its 
trust in the bourgeoisie. 

=====第111页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 83 
The petty bourgeoisie is therefore just as little able as the nobility 
to raise itself to be the ruling class in Germany; on the contrary, it 
places itself every day more and more under the command of the 
bourgeoisie. 
There remain the peasants and the propertyless classes. 
The peasants, among whom we include here only the small 
peasant tenants or proprietors, with the exclusion of the day labour­
ers and farm labourers—the peasants form a similarly helpless 
class as do the petty bourgeoisie, from whom, however, they differ to 
their advantage through their greater courage. But they are similarly 
incapable of all historical initiative. Even their emancipation from 
the fetters of serfdom comes about only under the protection of the 
bourgeoisie. Where the absence of nobility and bourgeoisie allows 
them to rule, as in the mountain cantons of Switzerland and in 
Norway, pre-feudal barbarisms, local narrow-mindedness, and dull, 
fanatical bigotry, loyalty and rectitude rule with them. Where, as in 
Germany, the nobility continues to exist beside them, they are 
squeezed, just like the petty bourgeoisie, between the nobility and 
the bourgeoisie. To protect the interests of agriculture against the 
growing power of trade and industry, they must join with the 
nobility. To safeguard themselves against the overwhelming compe­
tition of the nobility and especially the bourgeois landowners, they 
must join with the bourgeoisie. To which side they finally adhere 
depends upon the nature of their property. The big farmers of 
eastern Germany, who themselves exercise a certain feudal domi­
nance over their farm labourers, are in all their interests too closely 
involved with the nobles to dissociate themselves from them in 
earnest. The small landowners in the west who have emerged from 
the breaking up of the estates of the nobility, and the small farmers 
in the east who are subject to patrimonial jurisdiction and still partly 
liable to corvée labour, are oppressed too directly by the nobles or 
stand too much in opposition to them not to adhere to the side of the 
bourgeoisie. That this is actually the case is proved by the Prussian 
provincial diets. 
Rule by the peasants is also, therefore, fortunately unthinkable. 
The peasants themselves think of it so little that they have for the 
greatest part already placed themselves at the disposal of the 
bourgeoisie. 
And the propertyless, in common parlance the working, classes? 
We shall soon speak of them at greater length64; for the moment it is 
sufficient to point to the division among them. This division into 
farm labourers, day labourers, handicraft journeymen, factory 
workers and lumpen proletariat, together with their dispersal over a 

=====第112页=====
84 Frederick Engels 
great, thinly populated expanse of country with few and weak 
central points, already renders it impossible for them to realise that 
their interests are common, to reach understanding, to constitute 
themselves into one class. This division and dispersal makes nothing 
else possible for them but restriction to their immediate, everyday 
interests, to the wish for a good wage for good work. That is, it 
restricts the workers to seeing their interest in that of their 
employers, thus making every single section of the workers into an 
auxiliary army for the class employing them. The farm labourer and 
day labourer supports the interests of the noble or farmer on whose 
estate he works. The journeyman stands under the intellectual and 
political sway of his master. The factory worker lets himself be used 
by the factory owner in the agitation for protective tariffs. For a 
few talers the lumpen proletarian fights out with his fists the squabbles 
between bourgeoisie, nobility and police. And where two 
classes of employers have contradictory interests to assert, there 
exists the same struggle between the classes of workers they employ. 
So little is the mass of the workers in Germany prepared to assume 
the leadership in public matters. 
To summarise. The nobility is too much in decline, the petty 
bourgeoisie and peasants are, by their whole position in life, too 
weak, the workers are still far from sufficiently mature to be able to 
come forward as the ruling class in Germany. There remains only 
the bourgeoisie. 
The poverty of the German status quo consists chiefly in this: no 
single class has hitherto been strong enough to establish its branch of 
production as the national branch of production par  excellence  and 
thus to set itself up as the representative of the interests of the whole 
nation. All the estates and classes that have emerged in history since 
the tenth century: nobles, serfs, peasants subject to corvée labour, 
free peasants, petty bourgeoisie, journeymen, manufactory workers, 
bourgeoisie and proletarians, all exist alongside one another. Those 
among these estates and classes who in consequence of their prop­
erty represent a branch of production, namely the nobles, free 
peasants, petty bourgeoisie and bourgeoisie, have participated in 
political rule in proportion to their number, their wealth, and their 
share in the total production of the country. The result of this 
division is that, as we have said, the nobility has got the lion's share, 
the petty bourgeoisie the smaller share, and that officially the 
bourgeoisie count only as petty bourgeoisie and the peasants as 
peasants do not count at all, because they, with the slight influence 
they possess, divide themselves between the other classes. This 
regime represented by the bureaucracy is the political summing-up 

=====第113页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 85 
of the general impotence and contemptibility, of the dull boredom 
and the sordidness of German society. It is matched by the breaking 
up of Germany into thirty-eight local and provincial states together 
with the breaking up of Austria and Prussia into autonomous 
provinces from within and by the disgraceful helplessness against 
exploitation and kicks from without. The cause of this general 
poverty lies in the general lack of capital. In poverty-stricken 
Germany every single class has borne from the beginning the mark 
of civic mediocrity, and in comparison with the same classes in other 
countries has been poor and depressed. How petty bourgeois 
appears the high and low German nobility since the twelfth century 
beside the rich and carefree French and English nobility, so full of 
the joy of living and so purposeful in their whole behaviour! How 
tiny, how insignificant and parochial appear the burghers of the 
German free cities of the Reich and the Hanseatic towns beside the 
rebellious Parisian burghers of the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries, the London Puritans of the seventeenth century! How 
petty bourgeois still appear our principal magnates in industry, 
finance, shipping, beside the Stock Exchange princes of Paris, 
Lyons, London, Liverpool and Manchester! Even the working classes 
in Germany are thoroughly petty bourgeois. Thus the petty bour­
geoisie have at least the consolation in their depressed social and 
political position of being the standard class of Germany; and of 
having imparted to all other classes their specific depression and 
their concern over their existence. 
How is this poverty to be overcome? Only one way is possible: one 
class must become strong enough to make the rise of the whole 
nation dependent upon its rise, to make the advancement of the 
interests of all other classes dependent upon the advancement and 
development of its interests. The interest of this one class must 
become for the time being the national interest, and this class itself 
must become for the time being the representative of the nation. 
From that moment, this class and with it the majority of the nation, 
finds itself in contradiction with the political status quo. The political 
status quo corresponds to a state of affairs which has ceased to 
exist: to the conflict of interests of the different classes. The new in­
terests find themselves restricted, and even a part of the classes in 
whose favour the status quo was established no longer sees its own 
interests represented in it. The abolition of the status quo, peace­
fully or by force, is the necessary consequence. In its place enters 
dominance by the class which for the moment represents the 
majority of the nation, and under whose rule a new development 
begins. 

=====第114页=====
86 Frederick Engels 
As the lack of capital is the basis of the status quo, of the general 
weakness, so possession of capital, its concentration in the hands of 
one class, can alone give this class the power to supplant the status quo. 
Does this class, which can overthrow the status quo, exist now in 
Germany? It exists, although, compared with the corresponding 
class in England and France, in a perhaps very petty bourgeois way; 
but still it exists and, indeed, in the bourgeoisie. 
The bourgeoisie is the class which in all countries overthrows the 
compromise established between nobility and petty bourgeoisie in 
the bureaucratic monarchy, and thus to begin with conquers power 
for itself. 
The bourgeoisie is the only class in Germany which at least gives a 
great part of the industrial landowners, petty bourgeoisie, peasants, 
workers and even a minority among the nobles a share in its 
interests, and has united these under its banner. 
The party of the bourgeoisie is the only one in Germany that 
definitely knows with what it must replace the status quo; the only 
one that does not limit itself to abstract principles and historical 
deductions, but wishes to carry into effect very definite, concrete and 
immediately practicable measures; the only one which is at least 
organised to some extent on a local and provincial basis and has a 
sort of plan of campaign, in short, it is the party which fights first and 
foremost against the status quo and is directly interested in its 
overthrow. 
The party of the bourgeoisie is therefore the only one that at 
present has a chance of success. 
The only question then is: Is the bourgeoisie compelled by 
necessity to conquer political rule for itself through the overthrow of 
the status quo, and is it strong enough, given its own power and the 
weakness of its opponents, to overthrow the status quo? 
We shall see. 
The decisive section of the German bourgeoisie are the factory 
owners. On the prosperity of industry depends the prosperity of the 
whole domestic trade, of the Hamburg and Bremen and, to some 
extent, Stettin sea trade, of banking; on it depend the revenues of 
the railways, and with that the most significant part of the Stock 
Exchange business. Independent of industry are only the corn and 
wool exporters of the Baltic towns and the insignificant class of 
importers of foreign industrial products. The needs of the factory 
owners thus represent the needs of the whole bourgeoisie and of the 
classes at present dependent upon it. 
The factory owners are further divided into two sections: the one 
gives the initial processing to raw materials and sends them into 

=====第115页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 87 
trade half-finished, the other takes over the half-finished materials 
and brings them to market as finished commodities. To the first 
group belong the spinners, to the second the weavers. In Germany 
the first section also includes the iron producers.3 
... to introduce newly invented techniques, to establish good 
communications, to obtain cheap machines and raw materials, to 
train skilled workers, requires an entire industrial system; it requires 
the interlocking of all branches of industry, sea-ports which are 
tributary to the industrial interior and carry on a flourishing trade. 
All this has long ago been proved by the economists. But such an 
industrial system requires also nowadays, when England is almost the 
only country that has no competition to fear, a complete protective 
system embracing all branches of industry threatened by foreign 
competition, and modifications to this system must always be made 
according to the position of industry. Such a system the existing 
Prussian Government cannot give, nor can all the governments of the 
Customs Union. It can only be set up and operated by the ruling 
bourgeoisie  itself.  And for this reason also the German bourgeoisie 
can no longer do without political power. 
Such a protective system, moreover, is all the more necessary in 
Germany, since there manufacture lies in its death throes. Without 
systematic tariff protection the competition of English machinery 
will kill manufacture, and the bourgeoisie, petty bourgeoisie and 
workers hitherto maintained by it will be ruined. Reason enough for 
the German bourgeoisie to ruin what remains of manufacture rather 
with German machines. 
Protective tariffs are therefore necessary for the German 
bourgeoisie and only by that bourgeoisie itself can they be 
introduced. If only for that reason, then, it must seize state power. 
But it is not only by insufficient tariffs that the factory owners 
are hindered in the complete utilisation of their capital; they are also 
hindered by the bureaucracy. If in the matter of customs legislation 
they meet with indifference from the government, in their relations 
with the bureaucracy they meet with its most direct hostility. 
The bureaucracy was set up to govern petty bourgeoisie and 
peasants. These classes, dispersed in small towns or villages, with 
interests which do not reach beyond the narrowest local boundaries, 
have necessarily the restricted horizons corresponding to their 
restricted mode of life. They cannot govern a large state, they can 
have neither the breadth of vision nor the knowledge to balance the 
different conflicting interests. And it was exactly at that stage of 
a Here four pages of the manuscript are missing.—Ed. 

=====第116页=====
88 Frederick Engels 
civilisation when the petty bourgeoisie was most flourishing that the 
different interests were most complicatedly intertwined (one need 
only think of the guilds and their conflicts). The petty bourgeoisie 
and the peasants cannot, therefore, do without a powerful and 
numerous bureaucracy. They must let themselves be kept in leading 
strings so as to escape the greatest confusion, and not to ruin 
themselves with hundreds and thousands of lawsuits. 
But the bureaucracy, which is a necessity for the petty bourgeoisie, 
very soon becomes an unbearable fetter for the bourgeoisie. Already 
at the stage of manufacture official supervision and interference 
become very burdensome; factory industry is scarcely possible under 
such control. The German factory owners have hitherto kept the 
bureaucracy off their backs as much as possible by bribery, for which 
they can certainly not be blamed. But this remedy frees them only 
from the lesser half of the burden; apart from the impossibility of 
bribing all the officials with whom a factory owner comes into 
contact, bribery does not free him from perquisites, honorariums to 
jurists, architects, mechanics, nor from other expenses caused by the 
system of supervision, nor from extra work and waste of time. And 
the more industry develops, the more "conscientious officials" 
appear—that is, officials who either from pure narrow-mindedness 
or from bureaucratic hatred of the bourgeoisie, pester the factory 
owners with the most infuriating chicaneries. 
The bourgeoisie, therefore, is compelled to break the power of this 
indolent and pettifogging bureaucracy. From the moment the state 
administration and legislature fall under the control of the 
bourgeoisie, the independence of the bureaucracy ceases to exist; 
indeed from this moment, the tormentors of the bourgeoisie turn 
into their humble slaves. Previous regulations and decrees, which 
served only to lighten the work of the officials at the expense of the 
industrial bourgeoisie, give place to new regulations which lighten 
the work of the industrialists at the expense of the officials. 
The bourgeoisie is all the more compelled to do this as soon as 
possible because, as we have seen, all its sections are directly 
concerned in the quickest possible increase of factory industry, and 
factory industry cannot possibly grow under a regime of bureau­
cratic harassment. 
The subordination of the customs and the bureaucracy to the 
interest of the industrial bourgeoisie are the two measures with the 
implementation of which the bourgeoisie is most directly concerned. 
But that does not by any means exhaust its needs. The bourgeoisie is 
compelled to subject the whole system of legislation, administration 
and justice in almost all the German states to a thoroughgoing 

=====第117页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 89 
revision, for this whole system serves to maintain and uphold a social 
condition which the bourgeoisie is continually working to overthrow. 
The conditions under which nobility and petty bourgeoisie can exist 
side by side are absolutely different from the conditions of life of the 
bourgeoisie, and only the former are officially recognised in the 
German states. Let us take the Prussian status quo as an example. If 
the petty bourgeoisie could subject themselves to the judicial as well 
as to the administrative bureaucracy, if they could entrust their 
property and persons to the discretion and torpidity of an 
"independent", i. e., bureaucratically self-sufficient judicial class, 
which in return offered them protection against the encroachments 
of the feudal nobility and at times also against those of the 
administrative bureaucracy, the bourgeoisie cannot do so. For 
lawsuits concerning property the bourgeoisie requires at least the 
protection of publicity, and for criminal trials moreover that of the 
jury as well, the constant control of justice through a deputation of 
the bourgeoisie.—The petty bourgeois can put up with the 
exemption of nobles and officials from common legal procedure 
because his official humiliation in this way fully corresponds to his 
lower social status. The bourgeois, who must either be ruined or 
make his class the first in society and state, cannot do this.—The 
petty bourgeois can, without prejudice to the smooth course of his 
way of life, leave legislation on landed property to the nobility alone; 
in fact he must, since he has enough to do to protect his own urban 
interests from the influence and encroachment of the nobles. The 
bourgeois cannot in any way leave the regulation of property rela­
tionships in the countryside to the discretion of the nobility, for the 
complete development of his own interests requires the fullest 
possible industrial exploitation of agriculture too, the creation of a 
class of industrial farmers, free saleability and mobilisation of land­
ed property. The need of the landowner to procure money on 
mortgage gives to the bourgeois here an opportunity and forces the 
nobility to allow the bourgeoisie, at least in relation to the mortgage 
laws,  to influence legislation concerning landed property.—If the 
petty bourgeois, with his small scale of business, his slow turnover 
and his limited number of customers concentrated in a small area, 
has not found the miserable old Prussian legislation on trade too 
oppressive but has even been grateful for the bit of protection it 
provided, the bourgeois cannot bear it any longer. The petty bour­
geois,  whose highly simple transactions are seldom dealings between 
merchant and merchant, but almost always only sales from retailer or 
producer direct to consumer—the petty bourgeois seldom goes 
bankrupt and easily accommodates himself to the old Prussian 

=====第118页=====
90 Frederick Engels 
bankruptcy laws. According to these laws, debts on bills are paid off 
from total assets before book debts, but customarily the whole assets 
are devoured by court costs. The laws are framed first of all in the 
interests of the judicial bureaucracy who administer the assets, and 
then in the interests of the non-bourgeois as opposed to the 
bourgeois. The noble in particular, who draws or receives bills on the 
purchaser or consignee of the corn he has dispatched, is thereby 
covered, and so are in general all those who have something to sell 
only once a year and draw the proceeds of that sale in a single 
transaction. Among those engaged in trade, the bankers and 
wholesalers are again protected, but the factory owner is rather 
neglected. The bourgeois, whose dealings are only from merchant to 
merchant, whose customers are scattered, who receives bills on the 
whole world, who must move in the midst of a highly complicated 
system of transactions, who is involved at every moment in a 
bankruptcy—the bourgeois can only be ruined by these absurd 
laws.—The petty bourgeois is interested in the general policy of his 
country only in so far as he wants to be left in peace; his narrow 
round of life makes him incapable of surveying the relations of state 
to state. The bourgeois, who has to deal or to compete with the most 
distant countries, cannot work his way up without the most direct in­
fluence on the foreign policy of his state.—The petty bourgeois 
could let the bureaucracy and nobility levy taxes on him, for the same 
reasons that he subjected himself to the bureaucracy; the bourgeois 
has a quite direct interest in having the public burdens so distributed 
that they affect  his profit as litde as possible. 
In short, if the petty bourgeois can content himself with opposing 
to the nobility and the bureaucracy his inert weight, with securing for 
himself influence on the official power through his vis inertiae* the 
bourgeois cannot do this. He must make his class dominant, his 
interests crucial, in legislation, administration, justice, taxation and 
foreign policy. The bourgeoisie must develop itself to the full, daily 
expand its capital, daily reduce the production costs of its 
commodities, daily expand its trade connections and markets, daily 
improve its communications, in  order  not to be  ruined.  The competition 
on the world market compels it to do so. And to be able to develop 
freely and to the full, what it requires is precisely political 
dominance, the subordination of all other interests to its own. 
That in order not to be ruined the German bourgeoisie requires 
political dominance now, we have shown above in connection with the 
question of protective tariffs and with its attitude to the bureaucracy. 
a Force of inertia.— Ed. 

=====第119页=====
The Constitutional Question in Germany 91 
But the most striking proof of this is the present state of the German 
money and commodity market. 
The prosperity of English industry in 1845 and the railway 
speculations to which it led had on this occasion a stronger effect on 
France and Germany than at any earlier lively period of business. 
The German factory owners did good business, which stimulated 
German business in general. The agricultural districts found a will­
ing market for their corn in England. The general prosperity 
enlivened the money market, facilitated credit and attracted on to 
the market a large number of small amounts of capital, of which in 
Germany there were so many lying half idle. As in England and 
France, only somewhat later and in somewhat—a 
Written in March-April 1847 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in Russian in: Marx and 
Engels, Works (first Russian edition), Published in English for the first 
Vol. V, Moscow, 1929 and in German in: time 
Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Erste Ab­
teilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 
a Here the manuscript breaks  off.—  Ed. 

=====第120页=====
Frederick Engels 
PROTECTIVE TARIFFS OR FREE TRADE SYSTEM 
From the instant that lack of money and credit forced the King of 
Prussia to issue the Letters Patent of February 3,65 no reasonable 
person could doubt any longer that the absolute monarchy in 
Germany and the "Christian-Germanic" management as it has 
hitherto existed, also known under the name of "paternal govern­
ment", had, in spite of all bristling resistance and sabre-rattling 
speeches from the throne, abdicated for ever. The day had now 
dawned from which the bourgeoisie in Germany can date its rule. 
The Letters Patent themselves are nothing but an acknowledgement, 
though still wrapped in a great deal of Potsdam mist and fog, of the 
power of the bourgeoisie. A good deal of this mist and fog has 
already been blown away by a little weak puffing from the United 
Diet, and very soon the whole Christian-Germanic misty phantom 
will be dissolved into its nothingness. 
But as soon as the rule of the middle classes began, the first 
demand to be made was bound to be that the whole trade policy of 
Germany, or of the Customs Union,66 should be wrested from the 
incompetent hands of German princes, their ministers, and arro­
gant, but in commercial and industrial matters utterly unimaginative 
and ignorant bureaucrats, and be made dependent upon and 
decided by those who possess both the necessary insight and the most 
immediate interest in the matter. In other words: the question of 
protective and differential tariffs or free trade must fall within the 
sole decision of the bourgeoisie. 
The United Diet in Berlin has shown the Government that the 
bourgeoisie knows what it needs; in the recent tariff negotiations 
it was made clear to the Spandau System of Government, 67 in pretty 
plain and bitter words, that it is incapable of grasping, protecting and 

=====第121页=====
Protective Tariffs  or Free Trade System 93 
promoting  the  material interests concerned.  The  Cracow affair68 
alone would have been sufficient  to brand  the  foreheads  of 
Holy-Alliance William3  and his  ministers with  the  stamp  of the 
crudest ignorance  of, or the  most culpable treachery against,  the 
welfare  of the  nation.  To the  horror  of his  all-highest Majesty  and 
his Excellencies  a host  of other things came  up for  discussion, 
in the  course  of which royal  and  ministerial capabilities  and 
discernment—living  as well  as defunct—could feel anything  but 
flattered. 
In the  bourgeoisie  itself,  indeed,  two  different views dominate 
with regard  to industry  and  trade. Nonetheless there  is no  doubt that 
the party  in favour  of protective,  or, rather, differential tariffs  is by 
far the most powerful, numerous  and  predominant.  The  bourgeoisie 
cannot,  in fact, even maintain  itself,  cannot consolidate  its position, 
cannot attain unbounded power unless  it shelters  and  fosters  its 
industry  and  trade  by artificial means. Without protection against 
foreign industry  it would  be crushed  and  trampled down within  a 
decade.  It is  quite easily possible that  not even protection will help  it 
much  or for  long.  It has  waited  too long,  it has  lain too peacefully  in 
the swaddling clothes  in which  it has  been trussed  so many years  by 
its precious princes.  It has  been outflanked  and  overtaken  on every 
side,  it has had its  best positions taken from  it, while  at home  it 
peacefully  let its  knuckles  be rapped  and did not  even have enough 
energy  to rid  itself  of its  partly imbecile, partly extremely cunning 
paternal schoolmasters  and  disciplinarians. 
Now  a new  page  has  been turned.  The  German princes  can 
henceforth only  be the  servants  of the  bourgeoisie, only  be the dot 
over the "i" of the  bourgeoisie.  In so far as  there  is still time  and 
opportunity  for the  latter's rule, protection*for German industry  and 
German trade  is the  only foundation  on which  it may  rest.  And  what 
the bourgeoisie wants  and  must want  of the  German princes,  it will 
also be able  to achieve. 
There exists, however, alongside  the bourgeoisie,  a quite consider­
able number  of people called proletarians—the working  and 
propertyless class. 
The question therefore arises: What does this class gain from  the 
introduction  of the  protective system? Will  it thereby receive more 
wages,  be able  to feed  and  clothe itself better, house itself more 
healthily, afford somewhat more time  for recreation  and  education, 
and some means  for the  more sensible  and  careful upbringing  of its 
children? 
a Frederick William  IV.— Ed. 

=====第122页=====
94 Frederick Engels 
The gentlemen of the bourgeoisie who advocate the protective 
system never fail to push the well-being of the working class into the 
foreground. To judge by their words, a truly paradisial life will 
commence for the workers with the protection of industry, Germany 
will then become a Canaan "flowing with milk and honey"3 for the 
proletarians. But listen on the other hand to the free trade men 
speaking, and only under their system would the propertyless be able 
to live "like God in France", that is, in the greatest jollity and 
merriment. 
Among both parties there are still plenty of limited minds who 
more or less believe in the truth of their own words. The intelligent 
among them know very well that this is all vain delusion, merely 
calculated, furthermore, to deceive and win the masses. 
The intelligent bourgeois does not need to be told that whether the 
system in force is that of protective tariffs or free trade or a 
mixture of both, the worker will receive no bigger wage for his 
labour than will just suffice for his scantiest maintenance. From the 
one side as from the other, the worker gets precisely what he needs 
to keep going as a labour-machine. 
It might thus appear to be a matter of indifference to the 
proletarian, to the propertyless, whether the protectionists or the 
free traders have the last word. 
Since, however, as has been said above, the bourgeoisie in 
Germany requires protection against foreign countries in order to 
clear away the medieval remnants of a feudal aristocracy and the 
modern vermin by the Grace of God, and to develop purely and 
simply its own proper, innermost essence (!)—then the working class 
also has an interest in what helps the bourgeoisie to unimpeded rule. 
Not until only one class—the bourgeoisie—is seen to exploit and 
oppress, until penury and misery can no longer be blamed now on 
this estate, now on that, or simply on the absolute monarchy and its 
bureaucrats—only then will the last decisive battle break out, the 
battle between the propertied and the propertyless, between the 
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
Only then will the field of battle have been swept clean of all 
unnecessary barriers, of all that is misleading and accessory; the 
position of the two hostile armies will be clear and visible at a glance. 
With the rule of the bourgeoisie, the workers, compelled by 
circumstances, will also make the infinitely important advance that 
they will no longer come forward as individuals, as at the most a 
couple of hundreds or thousands, in rebellion against the established 
a Exodus 3:8.— Ed. 

=====第123页=====
Protective Tariffs or Free Trade System 95 
order, but all together, as one class, with its specific interests and 
principles, with a common plan and united strength, they will launch 
their attack on the last and the worst of their mortal enemies, the 
bourgeoisie. 
There can be no doubt as to the outcome of this battle. The 
bourgeoisie will and must fall to the ground before the proletariat, 
just as the aristocracy and the absolute monarchy have received their 
coup de grâce from the middle class. 
With the bourgeoisie, private property will at the same time be 
overthrown, and the victory of the working class will put an end to all 
class or caste rule for ever. 
Written at the beginning of June 1847 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler 
ZeitungNo. 46, June 10, 1847 Printed according to the news­
paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第124页=====
Frederick Engels 
DRAFT OF A COMMUNIST CONFESSION OF FAITH 1 
Question 1: Are you a Communist? 
Answer: Yes. 
Question 2: What is the aim of the Communists? 
Answer: To organise society in such a way that every member of it 
can develop and use all his capabilities and powers in complete 
freedom and without thereby infringing the basic conditions 
of this society. 
Question 3: How do you wish to achieve this aim? 
Answer: By the elimination of private property and its replacement 
by community of property. 
Question 4: On what do you base your community of property? 
Answer: Firstly, on the mass of productive forces and means of 
subsistence resulting from the development of industry, 
agriculture, trade and colonisation, and on the possibility 
inherent in machinery, chemical and other resources of their 
infinite extension. 
Secondly, on the fact that in the consciousness or feeling 
of every individual there exist certain irrefutable basic 
principles which, being the result of the whole of historical 
development, require no  proof. 
Question 5: What are such principles? 
Answer: For example, every individual strives to be happy. The 
happiness of the individual is inseparable from the happiness 
of all, etc. 
Question 6: How do you wish to prepare the way for your community of 
property? 
Answer: By enlightening and uniting the proletariat. 

=====第125页=====
Jen. _ -, ,  — •  ^ 
4<. é?*Z#L 4^ 
Beginning of Engels' manuscript, "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith' 

=====第126页=====

=====第127页=====
Draft of a Communist Contession of Faith 99 
Question 7: What is the proletariat? 
Answer: The proletariat is that class of society which lives exclusively 
by its labour and not on the profit from any kind of capital; 
that class whose weal and woe, whose life and death, 
therefore, depend on the alternation of times of good and bad 
business; in a word, on the fluctuations of competition. 
Question 8: Then there have not always been proletarians? 
Answer: No. There have always been poor and working  classes;  and 
those who worked were almost always the poor. But there 
have not always been proletarians, just as competition has not 
always been free. 
Question 9: How did the proletariat arise? 
Answer: The proletariat came into being as a result of the 
introduction of the machines which have been invented since 
the middle of the last century and the most important of 
which are: the steam-engine, the spinning machine and the 
power loom. These machines, which were very expensive and 
could therefore only be purchased by rich people, supplanted 
the workers of the time, because by the use of machinery it 
was possible to produce commodities more quickly and 
cheaply than could the workers with their imperfect spinning 
wheels and hand-looms. The machines thus delivered indus­
try entirely into the hands of the big capitalists and rendered 
the workers' scanty property which consisted mainly of their 
tools,  looms, etc., quite worthless, so that the capitalist was left 
with everything, the worker with nothing. In this way the 
factory system was introduced. Once the capitalists saw how 
advantageous this was for them, they sought to extend it to 
more and more branches of labour. They divided work more 
and more between the workers so that workers who formerly 
had made a whole article now produced only a part of it. 
Labour simplified in this way produced goods more quickly 
and therefore more cheaply and only now was it found in 
almost every branch of labour that here also machines could 
be used. As soon as any branch of labour went over to factory 
production it ended up, just as in the case of spinning and 
weaving, in the hands of the big capitalists, and the workers 
were deprived of the last remnants of their independence. We 
have gradually arrived at the position where almost all 
branches of labour are run on a factory basis. This has 
increasingly brought about the ruin of the previously existing 
middle class, especially of the small master craftsmen, 
completely transformed the previous position of the workers, 
5— 1826 

=====第128页=====
100 Frederick Engels 
and two new classes which are gradually swallowing up all 
other classes have come into being, namely: 
I. The class of the big capitalists, who in all advanced 
countries are in almost exclusive possession of the 
means of subsistence and those means (machines, facto­
ries, workshops, etc.) by which these means of subsis­
tence are produced. This is the bourgeois class, or the 
bourgeoisie. 
II. The class of the completely propertyless, who are 
compelled to sell their labour70 to the first class, the 
bourgeois, simply to obtain from them in return their 
means of subsistence. Since the parties to this trading in 
labour are not equal, but the bourgeois have the 
advantage, the propertyless must submit to the bad 
conditions laid down by the bourgeois. This class, 
dependent on the bourgeois, is called the class of the 
proletarians or the proletariat. 
Question 10: In what way does the proletarian differ from the slave? 
Answer: The slave is sold once and for all, the proletarian has to sell 
himself by the day and by the hour. The slave is the property 
of one master and for that very reason has a guaranteed 
subsistence, however wretched it may be. The proletarian is, 
so to speak, the slave of the entire bourgeois  class,  not of one 
master, and therefore has no guaranteed subsistence, since 
nobody buys his labour if he does not need it. The slave is 
accounted a thing and not a member of civil society. The 
proletarian is recognised as a person, as a member of civil 
society. The slave may, therefore, have a better subsistence 
than the proletarian but the latter stands at a higher stage of 
development. The slave frees himself by becoming a proletarian, 
abolishing from the totality of property relationships only the 
relationship of slavery. The proletarian can free himself only 
by abolishing property in general. 
Question 11: In what way does the proletarian differ from the serf? 
Answer: The serf has the use of a piece of land, that is, of an 
instrument of production, in return for handing over a 
greater or lesser portion of the yield. The proletarian works 
with instruments of production which belong to someone else 
who,  in return for his labour, hands over to him a portion, 
determined by competition, of the products. In the case of the 
serf,  the share of the labourer is determined by his own 
labour, that is, by  himself.  In the case of the proletarian it is 
determined by competition, therefore in the first place by the 

=====第129页=====
Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith 101 
bourgeois. The serf has guaranteed subsistence, the pro­
letarian has not. The serf frees himself by driving out his 
feudal lord and becoming a property owner  himself,  thus 
entering into competition and joining for the time being the 
possessing class, the privileged class. The proletarian frees 
himself by doing away with property, competition, and all 
class differences. 
Question 12: In what way does the proletarian differ from the 
handicraftsman ? 
Answer: As opposed to the proletarian, the so-called handi­
craftsman, who still existed nearly everywhere during the last 
century and still exists here and there, is at most a temporary 
proletarian. His aim is to acquire capital himself and so to 
exploit other workers. He can often achieve this aim where 
the craft guilds still exist or where freedom to follow a trade 
has not yet led to the organisation of handwork on a factory 
basis and to intense competition. But as soon as the factory 
system is introduced into handwork and competition is in full 
swing, this prospect is eliminated and the handicraftsman 
becomes more and more a proletarian. The handicraftsman 
therefore frees himself either by becoming a bourgeois or in 
general passing over into the middle class, or, by becoming a 
proletarian as a result of competition (as now happens in most 
cases) and joining the movement of the proletariat—i. e., the 
more or less conscious communist movement. 
Question 13: Then you do not believe that community of property has been 
possible at any time? 
Answer: No. Communism has only arisen since machinery and 
other inventions made it possible to hold out the prospect of 
an all-sided development, a happy existence, for all members 
of society. Communism is the theory of a liberation which was 
not possible for the slaves, the serfs, or the handicraftsmen, 
but only for the proletarians and hence it belongs of necessity 
to the 19th century and was not possible in any earlier 
period. 
Question 14: Let us go  back  to the sixth question. As you wish  to prepare for 
community of property by the enlightening and uniting of the 
proletariat, then you reject revolution? 
Answer: We are convinced not only of the uselessness but even of 
the harmfulness of all conspiracies. We are also aware that 
revolutions are not made deliberately and arbitrarily but that 
everywhere and at all times they are the necessary conse­
quence of circumstances which are not in any way whatever 

=====第130页=====
102 Frederick Engels 
dependent either on the will or on the leadership of individual 
parties or of whole classes. But we also see that the 
development of the proletariat in almost all countries of the 
world is forcibly repressed by the possessing classes and that 
thus a revolution is being forcibly worked for by the 
opponents of communism. If, in the end, the oppressed 
proletariat is thus driven into a revolution, then we will 
defend the cause of the proletariat just as well by our deeds as 
now by our words. 
Question 15: Do you intend to replace the existing social order by 
community of property at one stroke? 
Answer: We have no such intention. The development of the masses 
cannot be ordered by decree. It is determined by the 
development of the conditions in which these masses live, and 
therefore proceeds gradually. 
Question 16: How do you think the transition from  the present  situation to 
community of property is to be effected? 
Answer: The first, fundamental condition for the introduction of 
community of property is the political liberation of the 
proletariat through a democratic constitution. 
Question 17: What will be your first measure once you have  established 
democracy? 
Answer: Guaranteeing the subsistence of the proletariat. 
Question 18: How will you do this? 
Answer, I. By limiting private property in such a way that it 
gradually prepares the way for its transformation into social 
property, e. g., by progressive taxation, limitation of the right 
of inheritance in favour of the state, etc., etc. 
II. By employing workers in national workshops and fac­
tories and on national estates. 
III. By educating all children at the expense of the state. 
Question 19: How will you arrange this kind of education during the 
period of transition? 
Answer: All children will be educated in state establishments from 
the time when they can do without the first maternal care. 
Question 20: Will not the introduction of community of property be 
accompanied by the proclamation of the community of women? 
Answer: By no means. We will only interfere in the personal 
relationship between men and women or with the family in 
general to the extent that the maintenance of the existing 
institution would disturb the new social order. Besides, we are 
well aware that the family relationship has been modified in 
the course of history by the property relationships and by pe-

=====第131页=====
Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith 103 
riods of development, and that consequently the ending of  pri­
vate property will also have a most important influence on it. 
Question  21 :  Will nationalities continue to exist under communism? 
Answer: The nationalities of the peoples who join together accord­
ing to the principle of community will be just as much 
compelled by this union to merge with one another and 
thereby supersede themselves as the various differences 
between estates and classes disappear through the supersed­
ing of their basis—private property. 
Question 22: Do Communists reject the existing religions? 
Answer: All religions which have existed hitherto were expressions 
of historical stages of development of individual peoples or 
groups of peoples. But communism is that stage of historical 
development which makes all existing religions superfluous 
and supersedes them.3 
In the name and on the mandate of the Congress. 
Secretary: President: 
Heide b Karl Schillc 
London, June 9, 1847 
Written by Engels Printed according to the photocopy 
of the manuscript First published in the book Gründungs-
dokumente des Bundes der Kommunisten 
(Juni bis September 1847), Hamburg, 1969 
a Here the text written in Engels' hand  ends.—Ed. 
b Alias of Wilhelm Wolff in the League of the  Just.—Ed. 
c Alias of Karl Schapper in the League of the  Just.—Ed. 

=====第132页=====

=====第133页=====
Karl Marx 
THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY 
ANSWER  TO THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  POVERTY 
BY M. PROUDHON 71 

=====第134页=====
Written in the first half of 1847 
First published separately in Paris 
and Brussels in 1847 Printed according to the edition of 
1847 with the author's changes 
and the changes in the German 
edition of 1885 and the French 
edition of 1896 
Translated from the French 

=====第135页=====
MISERE 
DE 
LA PHILOSOPHIE 
RÉPONSE  A 
LA PHILOSOPHIE DE LA MISÈRE 
DEM.PROÜDM. 
pat ®atl $katp. 
PARIS. \  BRUXELLES. 
A. FRANK, \ C. G. VOGLER, 
69, nie Richelieu S 2,  petite ruede I» Madeleine. 
1847 
Cover of the first edition of Marx's The Poverty of Philosophy 

=====第136页=====

=====第137页=====
FOREWORD 
M. Proudhon has the misfortune of being peculiarly misunder­
stood in Europe. In France, he has the right to be a bad economist, 
because he is reputed to be a good German philosopher. In 
Germany, he has the right to be a bad philosopher, because he is 
reputed to be one of the ablest of French economists. Being both a 
German and an economist at the same time, we desire to protest 
against this double error. 
The reader will understand that in this thankless task we have 
often had to abandon our criticism of M. Proudhon in order to 
criticise German philosophy, and at the same time to give some 
observations on political economy. 
Karl Marx 
Brussels, June 15, 1847 

=====第138页=====
M. Proudhon's work is not just a treatise on political economy, an 
ordinary book; it is a bible. "Mysteries", "Secrets Wrested from the 
Bosom of God", "Revelations"—it lacks nothing. But as prophets are 
discussed nowadays more conscientiously than profane writers, the 
reader must resign himself to going with us through the arid and 
gloomy erudition of "Genesis", in order to ascend later, with M. 
Proudhon, into the ethereal and fertile realm of super-socialism. (See 
Proudhon, Philosophie de la misère, Prologue, p. Ill, line 20.) 

=====第139页=====
CHAPTER I 
A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 
§1. THE OPPOSITION BETWEEN USE VALUE 
AND EXCHANGE VALUE 
"The capacity of all products, whether natural or industrial, to contribute to man's 
subsistence is specifically termed use value; their capacity to be given in exchange for 
one another, exchange value.... How does use value become exchange value?... The 
genesis of the idea of" (exchange) "value has not been noted by economists with 
sufficient care. It is necessary, therefore, for us to dwell upon it. Since a very large 
number of the things I need occur in nature only in moderate quantities, or even not 
at all, I am forced to assist in the production of what I lack. And as I cannot set my 
hand to so many things, I shall propose to other men, my collaborators in various 
functions, to cede to me a part of their products in exchange for mine." (Proudhon, 
tome I, chap. II, [pp. 33-34].) 
M. Proudhon undertakes to explain to us first of all the double 
nature of value, the "distinction in value" [I 34], the process by which 
use value is transformed into exchange value. It is necessary for 
us to dwell with M. Proudhon upon this act of transubstantiation. 
The following is how this act is accomplished, according to our 
author. 
A very large number of products are not to be found in nature, 
they are products of industry. If man's needs go beyond nature's 
spontaneous production, he is forced to have recourse to industrial 
production. What is this industry in M. Proudhon's view? What is its 
origin? A single individual, feeling the need for a very great number 
of things, "cannot set his hand to so many things". So many needs to 
satisfy presuppose so many things to produce—there are no 
products without production. So many things to produce presup­
pose at once more than one man's hand helping to produce them. 
Now, the moment you postulate more than one hand helping in 
production, you at once presuppose a whole production based on the 
division of labour. Thus need, as M. Proudhon presupposes it, itself 
presupposes the whole division of labour. In presupposing the 

=====第140页=====
112 Karl Marx 
division of labour, you get exchange, and, consequently, exchange 
value. One might as well have presupposed exchange value from the 
very beginning. 
But M. Proudhon prefers to go the roundabout way. Let us follow 
him in all his detours, which always bring us back to his starting 
point. 
In order to emerge from the condition in which everyone 
produces in isolation and to arrive at exchange, "I turn to my 
collaborators in various functions," says Mr. Proudhon. I  myself, 
then, have collaborators, all with different functions. And yet, for all 
that, I and all the others, always according to M. Proudhon's 
supposition, have got no farther than the solitary and hardly social 
position of the Robinsons. The collaborators and the various 
functions, the division of labour and the exchange it implies, are 
already to hand. 
To sum up: I have certain needs which are founded on the 
division of labour and on exchange. In presupposing these needs, M. 
Proudhon has thus presupposed exchange, exchange value, the very 
thing of which he purposes to "note the genesis with more care 
than other economists". 
M. Proudhon might just as well have inverted the order of things, 
without in any way affecting the accuracy of his conclusions. To 
explain exchange value, we must have exchange. To explain 
exchange, we must have the division of labour. To explain the 
division of labour, we must have needs which render necessary the 
division of labour. To explain these needs, we must "presuppose" 
them, which is not to deny them—contrary to the first axiom in M. 
Proudhon's prologue: "To presuppose God is to deny Him." 
(Prologue, p. I.) 
How does M. Proudhon, who assumes the division of labour as 
the known, manage to explain exchange value, which for him is 
always the unknown? 
"A man" sets out to "propose to other men, his collaborators in 
various functions", that they establish exchange, and make a 
distinction between use value and exchange value. In accepting this 
proposed distinction, the collaborators have left M. Proudhon no 
other "care" than that of recording the fact, of marking, of 
"noting" in his treatise on political economy "the genesis of the idea 
of value". But he has still to explain to us the "genesis" of this 
proposal, to tell us at last how this single individual, this Robinson, 
suddenly had the idea of making "to his collaborators" a proposal 
of the type known and how these collaborators accepted it without 
the slightest protest. 

=====第141页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 113 
M. Proudhon does not enter into these genealogical details. He 
merely places a sort of historical stamp upon the fact of exchange, by 
presenting it in the form of a motion supposed to have been made by 
a third party, tending to establish exchange. 
That is a sample of the "historical and descriptive  method" 
[I 30] of M. Proudhon, who professes a superb disdain for the 
"historical and descriptive methods" of the Adam Smiths and 
Ricardos. 
Exchange has a history of its own. It has passed through different 
phases. 
There was a time, as in the Middle Ages, when only the 
superfluous, the excess of production over consumption, was 
exchanged. 
There was again a time, when not only the superfluous, but all 
products, all industrial existence, had passed into commerce, when 
the whole of production depended on exchange. How are we to 
explain this second phase of exchange—marketable value at its 
second power? 
M. Proudhon would have a reply ready-made: Assume that a 
man has "proposed to other men, his collaborators in various 
functions", to raise marketable value to its second power. 
Finally, there came a time when everything that men had 
considered as inalienable became an object of exchange, of traffic 
and could be alienated. This is the time when the very things which 
till then had been communicated, but never exchanged; given, but 
never sold; acquired, but never bought—virtue, love, conviction, 
knowledge, conscience, etc.—when everything finally passed into 
commerce. It is the time of general corruption, of universal venality, 
or, to speak in terms of political economy, the time when every­
thing, moral or physical, having become a marketable value, is 
brought'to the market to be assessed at its truest value. 
How, again, can we explain this new and last phase of ex­
change—marketable value at its third power? 
M. Proudhon would have a reply ready-made: Assume that a 
person has "proposed to other persons, his collaborators in various 
functions", to make a marketable value out of virtue, love, etc., to 
raise exchange value to its third and last power. 
We see that M. Proudhon's "historical and descriptive method" is 
applicable to everything, it answers everything, explains everything. 
If it is a question above all of explaining historically "the genesis of 
an economic idea", it postulates a man who proposes to other men, 
his collaborators in various functions, that they perform this act of 
genesis and that is the end of it. 

=====第142页=====
114 Karl Marx 
We shall hereafter accept the "genesis" of exchange value as an 
accomplished act; it now remains only to expound the relation 
between exchange value and use value. Let us hear what M. 
Proudhon has to say: 
"Economists have very well brought out the double character of value, but what 
they have not pointed out with the same precision is its contradictory nature; this is 
where our criticism begins.... It is a small thing to have drawn attention to this 
surprising contrast between use value and exchange value, in which economists have 
been wont to see only something very simple: we must show that this alleged simplicity 
conceals a profound mystery into which it is our duty to penetrate.... In technical 
terms,  use value and exchange value stand in inverse ratio to each other." [I 36, 38] 
If we have thoroughly grasped M. Proudhon's thought the 
following are the four points which he sets out to establish: 
1. Use value and exchange value form a "surprising contrast", 
they are in opposition to each other. 
2. Use value and exchange value are in inverse ratio, in 
contradiction, to each other. 
3. Economists have neither observed nor recognised either the 
opposition or the contradiction. 
4. M. Proudhon's criticism begins at the end. 
We, too, shall begin at the end, and, in order to clear the 
economists from M. Proudhon's accusations, we shall let two 
sufficiently well-known economists speak for themselves. 
Sismondi: "It is the opposition between use value and exchange value to which 
commerce has reduced everything, etc." (Etudes,3 t. II, p. 162, Brussels edition.) 
Lauderdale: "In proportion as the riches of individuals are increased by an 
augmentation of the exchange value, the national wealth" (use value) "is generally 
diminished; and in proportion as the mass of individual riches is diminished, by the 
diminution of the exchange value, its opulence is generally increased."  (Recherches  sur 
la nature et l'origine de la  richesse  publique; traduit par Lagentie de Lavaïsse, Paris, 1808 
[p. 33; cf. Eng. ed., p. 50].) 
Sismondi founded on the opposition between use value and 
exchange value his principal doctrine, according to which diminu­
tion in revenue is proportional to the increase in production. 
Lauderdale founded his system on the inverse ratio of the two 
kinds of value, and his doctrine was indeed so popular in Ricardo's 
time that the latter could speak of it as of something generally 
known. 
"It is through confounding the ideas of exchange value and riches" (use value) "that 
it has been asserted, that by diminishing the quantity of commodities, that is to say, of 
the necessaries, conveniences, and enjoyments of human life, riches may be 
increased." (Ricardo, Des principes de l'économie politique, traduit par Constancio, 
a Simonde de Sismondi, Études sur l'économie politique. —Ed. 

=====第143页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 115 
annoté par J. B. Say, Paris, 1835; tome II, chap. "Sur la valeur et les richesses" 
[p. 65; cf. Eng. ed., p. 323].) 
We have just seen that the economists before M. Proudhon had 
"drawn attention" to the profound mystery of opposition and 
contradiction. Let us now see how M. Proudhon in his turn explains 
this mystery after the economists. 
The exchange value of a product falls as the supply increases, the 
demand remaining the same; in other words, the more abundant a 
product is relatively to the demand, the lower is its exchange value, or 
price. Vice  versa:  The weaker the supply relatively to the demand, the 
higher rises the exchange value or the price of the product supplied; 
in other words, the greater the scarcity in the products supplied, 
relatively to the demand, the higher the prices. The exchange value 
of a product depends upon its abundance or its scarcity, but always in 
relation to the demand. Take a product that is more than scarce, 
unique of its kind if you will: this unique product will be more than 
abundant, it will be superfluous, if there is no demand for it. On the 
other hand, take a product multiplied into millions, it will always be 
scarce if it does not satisfy the demand, that is, if there is too great a 
demand for it. 
These are what we should almost call truisms, yet we have had to 
repeat them here in order to render M. Proudhon's mysteries 
comprehensible. 
"So that, following up the principle to its ultimate consequences, one would come 
to the conclusion, the most logical in the world, that the things whose use is 
indispensable and whose quantity is unlimited should be had for nothing, and those 
whose utility is nil and whose scarcity is extreme should be of incalculable price. To 
cap the difficulty, these extremes are impossible in practice: on the one hand, no 
human product could ever be unlimited in magnitude; on the other, even the scarcest 
things must perforce be useful to a certain degree, otherwise they would be quite 
valueless. Use value and exchange value are thus inexorably bound up with each 
other, although by their nature they continually tend to be mutually exclusive." 
(Tome I, p. 39.) 
What caps M. Proudhon's difficulty? That he has simply forgotten 
about demand, and that a thing can be scarce or abundant only 
insofar as it is in demand. The moment he leaves out demand, he 
identifies exchange value with scarcity and use value with abundance. 
In reality, in saying that things "whose utility is nil and  scarcity  extreme 
are of incalculable price", he is simply declaring that exchange value is 
merely scarcity. "Scarcity extreme and utility nil" means pure 
scarcity. "Incalculable price" is the maximum of exchange value, it is 
pure exchange value. He equates these two terms. Therefore 
exchange value and scarcity are equivalent terms. In arriving at these 

=====第144页=====
116 Karl Marx 
alleged "extreme consequences", M. Proudhon has in fact carried to 
the extreme, not the things, but the terms which express them, and, 
in so doing, he shows proficiency in rhetoric rather than in logic. He 
merely rediscovers his first hypotheses in all their nakedness when 
he thinks he has discovered new consequences. Thanks to the same 
procedure he succeeds in identifying use value with pure abundance. 
After having equated exchange value and scarcity, use value and 
abundance, M. Proudhon is quite astonished not to find use value in 
scarcity and exchange value, nor exchange value in abundance and 
use value; and seeing that these extremes are impossible in practice, 
he can do nothing but believe in mystery. Incalculable price exists for 
him, because buyers do not exist, and he will never find any buyers, 
so long as he leaves out demand. 
On the other hand, M. Proudhon's abundance seems to be 
something spontaneous. He completely forgets that there are people 
who produce it, and that it is to their interest never to lose sight of 
demand. Otherwise, how could M. Proudhon have said that things 
which are very useful must have a very low price, or even cost 
nothing? On the contrary, he should have concluded that abun­
dance, the production of very useful things, should be restricted if 
their price, their exchange value, is to be raised. 
The old vine-growers of France in petitioning for a law to forbid 
the planting of new vines; the Dutch in burning Asiatic spices, in 
uprooting clove trees in the Moluccas, were simply trying to reduce 
abundance in order to raise exchange value. During the whole of the 
Middle Ages this same principle was acted upon, in limiting by laws 
the number of journeymen a single master could employ and the 
number of implements he could use. (See Anderson, History of 
Commerce.*) 
After having represented abundance as use value and scarcity as 
exchange value—nothing indeed is easier than to prove that 
abundance and scarcity are in inverse ratio—M. Proudhon identifies 
use value with supply and exchange value with demand. To make the 
antithesis even more clear-cut, he substitutes a new term, putting 
"estimation value" for exchange value. [I 32] The battle has now shifted 
its ground, and we have on one side utility (use value, supply), on the 
other, estimation (exchange value, demand). 
Who is to reconcile these two contradictory forces? What is to be 
done to bring them into harmony with each other? Is it possible to 
find in them even a single point of comparison? 
A. Anderson, An Historical and Chronological Deduction of  the Origin of Commerce 
from the Earliest Accounts to the Present Time (Marx gives the title in French).— Ed. 

=====第145页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 117 
Certainly, cries M. Proudhon, there is one—free will. The price 
resulting from this battle between supply and demand, between 
utility and estimation will not be the expression of eternal justice. 
M. Proudhon goes on to develop this antithesis. 
"In my capacity as a free  buyer,  I am judge of my needs, judge of the suitability of an 
object, judge of the price I am willingto pay for it. On the other hand, in your capacity 
as a free producer, you are master of the means of execution, and in consequence, you 
have the power to reduce your expenses." (Tome I, p. 41.) 
And as demand, or exchange value, is identical with estimation, M. 
Proudhon is led to say: 
"It is proved that it is man's free will that gives rise to the opposition between use 
value and exchange value. How can this opposition be removed, so long as free will 
exists? And how can the latter be sacrificed without sacrificing man?" (Tome I, p. 41.) 
Thus there is no possible way out. There is a struggle between two 
as it were incommensurable powers, between utility and estimation, 
between the free buyer and the free producer. 
Let us look at things a little more closely. 
Supply does not represent exclusively utility, demand does not 
represent exclusively estimation. Does not the demander also supply 
a certain product or the token representing all products, viz., money; 
and as supplier, does he not represent, according to M. Proudhon, 
utility or use value? 
Again, does not the supplier also demand a certain product or the 
token representing all products, viz., money? And does he not thus 
become the representative of estimation, of estimation value or of 
exchange value? 
Demand is at the same time a supply, supply is at the same time a 
demand. Thus M. Proudhon's antithesis, in simply identifying 
supply and demand, the one with utility, the other with estimation, is 
based only on a futile abstraction. 
What M. Proudhon calls use value is called estimation value by 
other economists, and with just as much right. We shall quote only 
Storch (Cours d'économie politique, Paris, 1823 [tome I], pp. 48 and 
49). 
According to him,  needs  are the things for which we feel the need; 
values are things to which we attribute value. Most things have value 
only because they satisfy needs engendered by estimation. The 
estimation of our needs may change; therefore the utility of things, 
which expresses only a relation of these things to our needs, may also 
change. Natural needs themselves are continually changing. Indeed, 
what could be more varied than the objects which form the staple 
food of different peoples! 

=====第146页=====
118 Karl Marx 
The conflict does not take place between utility and estimation; it 
takes place between the marketable value demanded by the supplier 
and the marketable value supplied by the demander. The exchange 
value of the product is each time the resultant of these contradictory 
appreciations. 
In final analysis, supply and demand bring together production 
and consumption, but production and consumption based on 
individual exchanges. 
The product supplied is not useful in  itself.  It is the consumer who 
determines its utility. And even when its quality of being useful is 
admitted, it does not exclusively represent utility. In the course of 
production, it has been exchanged for all the costs of production, 
such as raw materials, wages of workers, etc., all of which are 
marketable values. The product, therefore, represents, in the eyes 
of the producer, a sum total of marketable values. What he sup­
plies is not only a useful object, but also and above all a marketable 
value. 
As to demand, it will only be effective on condition that it has 
means of exchange at its disposal. These means are themselves 
products, marketable values. 
In supply and demand, then, we find, on the one hand, a product 
which has cost marketable values, and the need to sell; on the other, 
means which have cost marketable values, and the desire to buy. 
M. Proudhon opposes the free  buyer  to the free  producer.  To the one 
and to the other he attributes purely metaphysical qualities. It is this 
that makes him say: "It is proved that it is man's free will that gives 
rise to the opposition between use value and exchange value." [141] 
The producer, the moment he produces in a society founded on 
the division of labour and on exchange (and that is Mr. Proudhon's 
hypothesis), is forced to sell. M. Proudhon makes the producer 
master of the means of production; but he will agree with us that his 
means of production do not depend on free will. Moreover, many 
of these means of production are products which he gets from 
the outside, and in modern production he is not even free to 
produce the amount he wants. The actual degree of development 
of the productive forces compels him to produce on such or such 
a scale. 
The consumer is no freer than the producer. His estimation 
depends on his means and his needs. Both of these are determined 
by his social position, which itself depends on the whole social 
organisation. True, the worker who buys potatoes and the kept 
woman who buys lace both follow their respective estimations. But 
the difference in their estimations is explained by the difference in 

=====第147页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 119 
the positions which they occupy in society, and which themselves 
are the product of social organisation. 
Is the entire system of needs founded on estimation or on the 
whole organisation of production? Most often, needs arise directly 
from production or from a state of affairs based on production. 
World trade turns almost entirely round the needs, not of individual 
consumption, but of production. Thus, to choose another example, 
does not the need for lawyers suppose a given civil law which is but 
the expression of a certain development of property, that is to say, of 
production? 
It is not enough for M. Proudhon to have eliminated the elements 
just mentioned from the relation of supply and demand. He carries 
abstraction to the extreme limits when he fuses all producers into one 
single producer, all consumers into  one single consumer, and sets up a 
struggle between these two chimerical personages. But in the real 
world, things happen otherwise. The competition among the 
suppliers and the competition among the demanders form a 
necessary part of the struggle between buyers and sellers, of which 
marketable value is the result. 
After having eliminated the cost of production and competition, 
M. Proudhon can as he likes reduce the formula of supply and 
demand to an absurdity. 
"Supply and demand," he says, "are merely two  ceremonial  forms that serve to bring 
use value and exchange value face to face, and to lead to their reconciliation. They are 
the two electric poles which, when connected, must produce the phenomenon of 
affinity called exchange." (Tome I, pp. 49 and 50.) 
One might as well say that exchange is merely a "ceremonial 
form" for introducing the consumer to the object of consumption. 
One might as well say that all economic relations are "ceremonial 
forms"  serving immediate consumption as go-betweens. Supply and 
demand are neither more nor less relations of a given production 
than are individual exchanges. 
What, then, does all M. Proudhon's dialectic consist in? In the 
substitution for use value and exchange value, for supply and 
demand, of abstract and contradictory notions like scarcity and 
abundance, utility and estimation, one producer and one consumer, 
both of them knights of free will. 
And what was he aiming at? 
At arranging for himself a means of introducing later on one of 
the elements he had set aside, the  cost  of production,  as the  synthesis  of 
use value and exchange value. And it is thus that in his eyes the cost 
of production constitutes synthetic value or constituted value. 

=====第148页=====
120 Karl Marx 
§ 2. CONSTITUTED VALUE OR SYNTHETIC VALUE 
"Value" (marketable value) "is the corner-stone of the economic 
structure." [I 32] "Constituted" value is the corner-stone of the system 
of economic contradictions. 
What then is this "constituted value" which is all M. Proudhon has 
discovered in political economy? 
Once utility is admitted, labour is the source of value. The measure 
of labour is time. The relative value of products is determined by the 
labour time required for their production. Price is the monetary 
expression of the relative value of a product. Finally, the constituted 
value of a product is purely and simply the value which is constituted 
by the labour time incorporated in it. 
Just as Adam Smith discovered the division of labour, so he, M. 
Proudhon, claims to have discovered "constituted value". This is not 
exactly "something unheard of", but then it must be admitted that 
there is nothing unheard of in any discovery of economic science. M. 
Proudhon, who appreciates to the full the importance of his own 
invention, seeks nevertheless to tone down the merit thereof "in 
order to reassure the reader as to his claims to originality, and to win 
over minds whose timidity renders them little favourable to new 
ideas".  [I 52] But in assessing the contribution made by each of 
his predecessors to the understanding of value, he is forced to 
confess openly that the largest portion, the lion's share, falls to 
himself. 
"The synthetic idea of value had been vaguely perceived by Adam Smith.... But 
with Adam Smith this idea of value was entirely intuitive. Now, society does not 
change its habits merely on the strength of intuitions: its decisions are made only on 
the authority of facts. The antinomy had to be stated more palpably and more clearly: 
J. B. Say was its chief interpreter." [I 66] 
Here, in a nutshell, is the history of the discovery of synthetic 
value: Adam Smith—vague intuition; J. B. Say—antinomy; M. 
Proudhon—constituting and "constituted" truth. And let there be 
no mistake about it: all the other economists, from Say to Proudhon, 
have merely been trudging along in the rut of antinomy. 
"It is incredible that for the last forty years so many men of sense should have 
fumed and fretted at such a simple idea. But no, values are compared without  there  being 
any point of comparison between them and with no unit of measurement; this, rather than 
embrace the revolutionary theory of equality, is what the economists of the nineteenth 
century are resolved to uphold against all comers. What will  posterity say  about it?" (Tome 
I, p. 68.) 
Posterity, so abruptly invoked, will begin by getting muddled over 
the chronology. It is bound to ask  itself:  are not Ricardo and his 

=====第149页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 121 
school economists of the nineteenth century? Ricardo's system, 
posing as a principle that "the relative value of commodities depends 
exclusively on the amount of labour required for their production", 
dates from 1817.a  Ricardo is the head of a whole school dominant in 
England since the Restoration.^ The Ricardian doctrine sums up 
severely, remorselessly, the whole of the English bourgeoisie, which 
is itself the type of the modern bourgeoisie. "What will posterity say 
about it?" It will not say that M. Proudhon did not know Ricardo, for 
he talks about him, he talks at length about him, he keeps coming 
back to him, and concludes by calling his system "trash". If ever 
posterity does interfere, it will say perhaps that M. Proudhon, afraid 
of offending his readers' Anglophobia, preferred to make himself 
the responsible editor of Ricardo's ideas. In any case, it will think it 
very naïve that M. Proudhon should give as a "revolutionary theory 
of the future" what Ricardo expounded scientifically as the theory of 
present-day society, of bourgeois society, and that he should thus 
take for the solution of the antinomy between utility and exchange 
value what Ricardo and his school presented long before him as the 
scientific formula of one single side of this antinomy, that of exchange 
value. But let us leave posterity aside once and for all, and confront 
M. Proudhon with his predecessor Ricardo. Here are some extracts 
from this author which summarise his doctrine on value: 
"Utility then is not the measure of exchangeable value, although it is absolutely 
essential to it." (Tome I, p. 3 of Principes de l'économie politique, etc., traduit de 
l'anglais par F. S. Constancio, Paris, 1835 [Eng. ed., p. 2].) 
"Possessing utility, commodities derive their exchangeable value from two sources: 
from their scarcity, and from the quantity of labour15  required to obtain them. There 
are some commodities, the value of which is determined by their scarcity alone. No 
labour can increase the quantity of such goods, and therefore their value cannot be 
lowered by an increased supply. Some rare statues and pictures, etc. are all of this 
description. Their value ... varies with the varying wealth and inclinations of those who 
are desirous to possess them." (Tome I, pp. 4 and 5, I. c. [Eng. ed., p. 2].) "These 
commodities, however, form a very small part of the mass of commodities daily 
exchanged in the market. By far the greatest part of those goods which are the objects 
of desire, are procured by labour; and they may be multiplied, not in one country 
alone, but in many, almost without any assignable limit, if we are disposed to bestow 
the labour necessary to obtain them." (Tome I, p. 5, I. c. [Eng. ed., p. 3].) "In speaking 
then of commodities, of their exchangeable value, and of the laws which regulate their 
relative prices, we mean always such commodities only as can be increased in quantity 
by the exertion of human industry, and on the production of which competition 
operates without restraint." (Tome I, p. 5 [Eng. ed., p. 3].) 
a D. Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation, London, 
1817.—  Ed. 
b The 1847 edition did not have the words "of labour", which were added in the 
copy with corrections in Marx's hand.—Ed. 

=====第150页=====
122 Karl Marx 
Ricardo quotes Adam Smith, who, according to him, "so accurately 
defined the original source of exchangeable value" (Adam Smith, 
Book I, Chap. 5 a), and he adds: 
"That this" (i. e., labour time) "is really the foundation of the exchangeable value 
of all things, excepting those which cannot be increased by human industry, is a 
doctrine of the utmost importance in political economy; for from no source do so 
many errors, and so much difference of opinion in that science proceed, as from the 
vague ideas which are attached to the word value." (Tome I, p. 8 [Eng. ed., p. 4].) "If 
the quantity of labour realised in commodities regulate their exchangeable value, 
every increase of the quantity of labour must augment the value of that commodity on 
which it is exercised, as every diminution must lower it." (Tome I, p. 8 [Eng. ed., p. 4].) 
Ricardo goes on to reproach Smith: 
1. "With having himself erected another standart measure of value than labour, 
sometimes the value of corn, at other times the quantity of labour an object can 
command in the market," etc. (Tome I, pp. 9 and 10 [cf. Eng. ed., p. 5].) 
2. "With having admitted the principle without qualification and at the same time 
restricted its application to that early and rude state of society, which precedes both 
the accumulation of stock and the appropriation of land.  " (Tome I, p.  21 r) 
Ricardo endeavours to prove that the ownership of land, that is, 
rent, cannot change the relative value of commodities and that the 
accumulation of capital has only a passing and fluctuating effect on 
the relative values determined by the comparative quantity of labour 
expended on their production. In support of this thesis, he gives his 
famous theory of rent, analyses capital, and ultimately finds nothing 
in it but accumulated labour. Then he develops a whole theory of 
wages and profits, and proves that wages and profits rise and fall in 
inverse ratio to each other, without affecting the relative value of the 
product. He does not neglect the influence that the accumulation of 
capital and its different aspects (fixed capital and circulating capital), 
as also the rate of wages, can have on the proportional value of 
products. In fact, these are the chief problems with which Ricardo is 
concerned. 
"Economy in the use of labour never fails to reduce the relative value* of a 
commodity, whether the saving be in the labour necessary to the manufacture of the 
* Ricardo, as is well known, determines the value of a commodity by "the quantity 
of labour necessary for its production". Owing, however, to the prevailing form of ex­
change in every mode of production based on production of commodities, includ­
ing therefore the capitalist mode of production, this value is not expressed directly 
in quantities of labour but in quantities of some other commodity. The value of a 
commodity expressed in a quantity of some other commodity (whether money or not) is 
termed by Ricardo its relative value. F. E. [Note  to the  German edition, 1885. The copy with 
corrections in Marx's hand has here a marginal note: nota ("la valeur relative")] 
a A. Smith, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.— Ed. 
b In the third edition of Ricardo's book (London, 1821) this part of the text is 
omitted.—Ed. 

=====第151页=====
The Poverty  of Philosophy 123 
commodity  itself, or in  that necessary  to the  formation  of the  capital,  by the aid of 
which  it is  produced." (Tome  I, p. 28 [Eng. ed., pp. 19-20]). "Consequently  as long  as 
a day's work continues  to give  one the  same quantity  of fish  and the  other  the  same 
quantity  of game,  the natural rate  of the  respective exchange prices will always  be the 
same despite variations  of wages  and  profit  and  despite  all the  effects  of accumulation 
of capital." (Tome  I, p. 32 [cf. Eng. ed., pp. 21-22].)  "In making labour  the foundation 
of the value  of commodities  and the  comparative quantity  of labour which  is necessary 
to their production,  the  rule which determines  the  respective quantities  of goods 
which shall  be given  in exchange  for each other,  we must  not be  supposed  to deny  the 
accidental  and  temporary deviations  of the  actual  or market price  of commodities 
from this, their primary  and  natural price." (Tome  1, p. 105, /.  c. [Eng.  ed., p. 80].) "It 
is the cost  of production which must ultimately regulate  the price  of commodities,  and 
not, as has  been often said,  the proportion between supply  and  demand." (Tome  II, p. 
253 [Eng. ed., p. 460].) 
Lord Lauderdale  had  developed  the  variations  of exchange value 
according  to the law of  supply  and  demand,  or of  scarcity  and 
abundance relatively  to demand.  In his  opinion  the value  of a  thing 
can increase when  its quantity decreases  or when  the  demand  for it 
increases;  it can  decrease owing  to an  increase  of its  quantity  or 
owing  to the  decrease  in demand. Thus  the  value  of a  thing  can 
change through eight different causes, namely, four causes that 
apply  to the  thing  itself, and  four causes that apply  to money  or to 
any other commodity which serves  as a  measure  of its  value. Here  is 
Ricardo's refutation: 
"Commodities which are  monopolised,  either  by an  individual,  or by a  company, vary 
according  to the law  which Lord Lauderdale  has  laid down: they fall  in proportion  as 
the sellers augment their quantity,  and  rise  in proportion  to the  eagerness  of the 
buyers  to purchase them; their price  has no  necessary connexion with their natural 
value:  but the  prices  of commodities, which  are  subject  to competition,  and  whose 
quantity  may be  increased  in any  moderate degree, will ultimately depend,  not on the 
state  of demand  and  supply,  but on the  increased  or diminished cost  of their 
production." (Tome  II, p. 259 [Eng. ed., p. 465].) 
We shall leave  it to the  reader  to make  the  comparison between 
this simple, clear, precise language  of Ricardo's  and M.  Proudhon's 
rhetorical attempts  to arrive  at the  determination  of relative value  by 
labour time. 
Ricardo shows  us the  real movement  of bourgeois production, 
which constitutes value.  M. Proudhon, leaving this real movement 
out of account, "fumes  and  frets"  in order  to invent  new  processes 
and to achieve  the  reorganisation  of the  world  on a  would-be  new 
formula, which formula  is no  more than  the theoretical expression  of 
the real movement which exists  and  which  is so  well described  by 
Ricardo. Ricardo takes present-day society  as his  starting point  to 
demonstrate  to us how it  constitutes value—M. Proudhon takes 
constituted value  as his  starting point  to constitute  a new  social world 

=====第152页=====
124 Karl Marx 
with the aid of this value. For him, M. Proudhon, constituted value 
must complete a circle and become once more the constituting factor 
in a world already entirely constituted according to this mode of 
evaluation. The determination of value by labour time is, for 
Ricardo, the law of exchange value; for M. Proudhon, it is the 
synthesis of use value and exchange value. Ricardo's theory of values 
is the scientific interpretation of actual economic life; M. Proudhon's 
theory of values is the Utopian interpretation of Ricardo's theory. 
Ricardo establishes the truth of his formula by deriving it from all 
economic relations, and by explaining in this way all phenomena, 
even those like rent, accumulation of capital and the relation of 
wages to profits, which at first sight seem to contradict it; it is 
precisely that which makes his doctrine a scientific system: M. 
Proudhon, who has rediscovered this formula of Ricardo's by means 
of quite arbitrary hypotheses, is forced thereafter to seek out isolated 
economic facts which he twists and falsifies to pass them off as 
examples, already existing applications, beginnings of realisation of 
his regenerating idea. (See our § 3. Application of Constituted Value.*) 
Now let us pass on to the conclusions M. Proudhon draws from 
value constituted (by labour time). 
— A certain quantity of labour is equivalent to the product 
created by this same quantity of labour. 
— Each day's labour is worth as much as another day's labour; 
that is to say, if the quantities are equal, one man's labour is worth as 
much as another man's labour: there is no qualitative difference. 
With the same quantity of labour, one man's product can be given in 
exchange for another man's product. All men are wage workers 
getting equal pay for an equal labour time. Perfect equality rules the 
exchanges. 
Are these conclusions the strict, natural consequences of value 
"constituted" or determined by labour time? 
If the relative value of a commodity is determined by the quantity 
of labour required to produce it, it follows naturally that the relative 
value of labour, or wages, is likewise determined by the quantity of 
labour needed to produce the wages. Wages, that is, the relative 
value or the price of labour, are thus determined by the labour time 
needed to produce all that is necessary for the maintenance of the 
worker. 
"Diminish the cost of production of hats, and their price will ultimately fall to their 
new natural price, although the demand should be doubled, trebled, or quadrupled. 
Diminish the cost of  subsistence  of men, by diminishing the natural price of the food and 
a See this volume, pp. 144-60.—Ed. 

=====第153页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 125 
clothing by which life is sustained, and wages will ultimately fall, notwithstanding 
that the demand for labourers may very greatly increase." (Ricardo, tome II, p. 253 
[Eng. ed., p. 460].) 
Doubtless, Ricardo's language is as cynical as can be. To put the cost 
of manufacture of hats and the cost of maintenance of men on the 
same plane is to turn men into hats. But do not make an outcry at the 
cynicism of it. The cynicism is in the facts and not in the words which 
express, the facts. French writers like MM. Droz, Blanqui, Rossi and 
others take an innocent satisfaction in proving their superiority over 
the English economists, by seeking to observe the etiquette of a 
"humanitarian" phraseology; if they reproach Ricardo and his 
school for their cynical language, it is because it annoys them to see 
economic relations exposed in all their crudity, to see the mysteries 
of the bourgeoisie unmasked. 
To sum up: Labour, being itself a commodity, is measured as such 
by the labour time needed to produce the labour-commodity. And 
what is needed to produce this labour-commodity? Just enough 
labour time to produce the objects indispensable to the constant 
maintenance of labour, that is, to keep the worker alive and in a 
condition to propagate his race. The natural price of labour is no 
other than the minimum wage.* If the current rate of wages rises 
above the natural price, it is precisely because the law of value posed 
as a principle by M. Proudhon happens to be counterbalanced by the 
consequences of the varying relations of supply and demand. But the 
minimum wage is nonetheless the centre towards which the current 
rates of wages gravitate. 
Thus relative value, measured by labour time, is inevitably the 
formula of the present enslavement of the worker, instead of being, 
as M. Proudhon would have it, the "revolutionary theory" of the 
emancipation of the proletariat. 
Let us see now to what extent the application of labour time as a 
* The thesis that the "natural", i.e., normal, price of labour power coincides with 
the minimum wage, i.e., with the equivalent in value of the means of subsistence 
absolutely indispensable for the life and procreation of the worker, was first put 
forward by me in Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher, Paris, 1844) and in The Condition of  the Working Class in England. As seen 
here,  Marx at that time accepted the thesis. Lassalle took it over from both of us. 
Although, however, in reality wages have a constant tendency to approach the 
minimum, the above thesis is nevertheless incorrect. The fact that labour power is 
regularly and on the average paid below its value cannot alter its value. In Capital, 
Marx has put the above thesis right (Section on the Buying and Selling of Labour 
Power) and also (Chapter 25: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation) analysed the 
circumstances which permit capitalist production to depress the price of labour power 
more and more below its value. F. E. [Note to the German edition, 1885.] 

=====第154页=====
126 Karl Marx 
measure of value is incompatible with the existing class antagonism 
and the unequal distribution of the product between the immediate 
worker and the owner of accumulated labour. 
Let us take a particular product, for example, linen. This product, 
as such, contains a definite quantity of labour. This quantity of 
labour will always be the same, whatever the reciprocal position of 
those who have collaborated to create this product. 
Let us take another product: broadcloth, which has required the 
same quantity of labour as the linen. 
If there is an exchange of these two products, there is an exchange 
of equal quantities of labour. In exchanging these equal quantities of 
labour time, one does not change the reciprocal position of the 
producers, any more than one changes anything in the situation of 
the workers and manufacturers among themselves. To say that this 
exchange of products measured by labour time results in an equality 
of payment for all the producers is to suppose that equality of 
participation in the product existed before the exchange. When the 
exchange of broadcloth for linen has been accomplished, the 
producers of broadcloth will share in the linen in a proportion equal to 
that in which they previously shared in the broadcloth. 
M. Proudhon's illusion is brought about by his taking for a 
consequence what could be at most but a gratuitous supposition. 
Let us go further. 
Does labour time, as the measure of value, suppose at least that the 
days are equivalent, and that one man's day is worth as much as 
another's? No. 
Let us suppose for a moment that a jeweller's day is equivalent to 
three days of a weaver; the fact remains that any change in the value 
of jewels relative to that of woven materials, unless it be the 
transitory result of the fluctuations of demand and supply, must 
have as its cause a reduction or an increase in the labour time 
expended in the production of one or the other. If three working 
days of different workers be related to one another in the ratio of 
1:2:3, then every change in the relative value of their products will be 
a change in this same proportion of 1:2:3. Thus values can be 
measured by labour time, in spite of the inequality of value of 
different working days; but to apply such a measure we must have a 
comparative scale of the different working days: it is competition 
that sets up this scale. 
Is your hour's labour worth mine? That is a question which is 
decided by competition. 
Competition, according to an American economist, determines 
how many days of simple labour are contained in one day's 

=====第155页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 127 
compound labour. Does not this reduction of days of compound 
labour to days of simple labour suppose that simple labour is itself 
taken as a measure of value? If the mere quantity of labour functions 
as a measure of value regardless of quality, it presupposes that 
simple labour has become the pivot of industry. It presupposes that 
labour has been equalised by the subordination of man to the 
machine or by the extreme division of labour; that men are effaced 
by their labour; that the pendulum of the clock has become as 
accurate a measure of the relative activity of two workers as it is of 
the speed of two locomotives. Therefore, we should not say that one 
man's hour is worth another man's hour, but rather that one man 
during an hour is worth just as much as another man during an 
hour. Time is everything, man is nothing; he is, at the most, time's 
carcase. Quality no longer matters. Quantity alone decides every­
thing; hour for hour, day for day; but this equalising of labour is not 
by any means the work of M. Proudhon's eternal justice; it is purely 
and simply a fact of modern industry. 
In the automatic workshop, one worker's labour is scarcely 
distinguishable in any way from another worker's labour: workers 
can only be distinguished one from another by the length of time 
they take for their work. Nevertheless, this quantitative difference 
becomes, from a certain point of view, qualitative, in that the time 
they take for their work depends partly on purely material causes, 
such as physical constitution, age and sex; partly on purely negative 
moral causes, such as patience, imperturbability, diligence. In short, 
if there is a difference of quality in the labour of different workers, it 
is at most a quality of the last kind, which is far from being a 
distinctive peculiarity. This is what the state of affairs in modern 
industry amounts to in the last analysis. It is upon this equality, 
already realised in automatic labour, that M. Proudhon wields his 
smoothing-plane of "equalisation", which he means to establish 
universally in "time to come"! 
All the "equalitarian" consequences which M. Proudhon deduces 
from Ricardo's doctrine are based on a fundamental error. He 
confounds the value of commodities measured by the quantity of 
labour embodied in them with the value of commodities measured 
by "the value of labour". If these two ways of measuring the value of 
commodities merged into one, it could be said indifferently that the 
relative value of any commodity is measured by the quantity of 
labour embodied in it; or that it is measured by the quantity of labour 
it can buy; or again that it is measured by the quantity of labour which 
can acquire it. But this is far from being so. The value of labour74 can 
no more serve as a measure of value than the value of any other 

=====第156页=====
128 Karl Marx 
commodity. A few examples will suffice to explain still better what we 
have just stated. 
If a muida of corn cost two days' labour instead of one, it would 
have twice its original value: but it would not set in operation double 
the quantity of labour, because it would contain no more nutritive 
matter than before. Thus the value of the corn, measured by the 
quantity of labour used to produce it, would have doubled; but 
measured either by the quantity of labour it can buy or by the 
quantity of labour with which it can be bought, it would be far from 
having doubled. On the other hand, if the same labour produced 
twice as many clothes as before, their relative value would fall by 
half;  but, nevertheless, this double quantity of clothing would not 
thereby be reduced to disposing over only half the quantity of 
labour, nor could the same labour command double the quantity of 
clothing; for half the clothes would still go on rendering the worker 
the same service as before. 
Thus it is going against economic facts to determine the relative 
value of commodities by the value of labour. It is moving in a vicious 
circle, it is to determine relative value by a relative value which itself 
needs to be determined. 
It is beyond doubt that M. Proudhon confuses the two measures, 
measure by the labour time needed for the production of a 
commodity and measure by the value of the labour. 
"Any man's labour," he says, "can buy the value it represents." [181] 
Thus,  according to him, a certain quantity of labour embodied in a 
product is equivalent to the worker's payment, that is, to the value of 
labour. It is the same reasoning that makes him confuse cost of 
production with wages. 
"What are wages? They are the cost price of corn, etc., the integral price of all 
things. Let us go still further. Wages are the proportionality of the elements which 
compose wealth." TI 1101 
What are wages? They are the value of labour. 
Adam Smith takes as the measure of value, now the labour time 
needed for the production of a commodity, now the value of labour. 
Ricardo exposes this error by showing clearly the disparity of these 
two ways of measuring. M. Proudhon outdoes Adam Smith in error 
by identifying the two things which the latter had merely put in 
juxtaposition. 
It is in order to find the proper proportion in which workers 
should share in the products, or, in other words, to determine the 
a An old French measure equivalent to 18 hectolitres.— Ed. 

=====第157页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 129 
relative value of labour, that M. Proudhon seeks a measure for the 
relative value of commodities. To find out the measure for the 
relative value of commodities he can think of nothing better than to 
give as the equivalent of a certain quantity of labour the sum total of 
the products it has created, which is as good as supposing that the 
whole of society consists merely of immediate workers who receive 
their own produce as wages. In the second place, he takes for 
granted the equivalence of the working days of different workers. In 
short, he seeks the measure of the relative value of commodities in 
order to arrive at equal payment for the workers, and he takes the 
equality of wages as an already established fact, in order to go off on 
the search for the relative value of commodities. What admirable 
dialectic! 
"Say and the economists after him have observed that labour being itself subject to 
valuation, being a commodity like any other commodity, it is moving in a vicious circle 
to treat it as the principle and the determining cause of value.... In so doing, these 
economists, if they will allow me to say so, show a prodigious carelessness. Labour is 
said to have value not as a commodity  itself,  but in view of the values which it is 
supposed to contain potentially. The value of labour is a figurative expression, an 
anticipation of the cause for the effect. It is a fiction of the same stamp as the 
productivity of capital. Labour produces, capital has value.... By a sort of ellipsis one 
speaks of the value of labour.... Labour like liberty ... is a thing vague and 
indeterminate by nature, but defined qualitatively by its object, that is to say, it 
becomes a reality by the product." [I 61] 
"But is there any need to dwell on this? The moment the economist" (read M. 
Proudhon) "changes the name of things, vera rerum vocabula, he is implicitly 
confessing his impotence and proclaiming himself not privy to the cause." (Proudhon, 
tome I, p. 188.) 
We have seen that M. Proudhon makes the value of labour the 
"determining cause" of the value of products to such an extent that 
for him wages, the official name for the "value of labour", form the 
integral price of all things. That is why Say's objection troubles him. 
In labour-commodity, which is a grim reality, he sees nothing but a 
grammatical ellipsis. Thus the whole of existing society, founded on 
labour-commodity, is henceforth founded on a poetic licence, a 
figurative expression. If society wants to "eliminate all the draw­
backs"  that assail it, well, let it eliminate all the ill-sounding terms, 
change the language; and to this end it has only to apply to the 
Academy for a new edition of its dictionary. After all that we have 
just seen, it is easy for us to understand why M. Proudhon, in a work 
on political economy, has to enter upon long dissertations on 
etymology and other parts of grammar. Thus he is still learnedly 
discussing the antiquated derivation of servus*  from  servarè*.  These 
a A slave, servant.— Ed. 
To preserve.— Ed. 

=====第158页=====
130 Karl Marx 
philological dissertations have a deep meaning, an esoteric mean­
ing— they form an essential part of M. Proudhon's argument. 
Labour,8 inasmuch as it is bought and sold, is a commodity like any 
other commodity, and has, in consequence, an exchange value. 
But the value of labour, or labour as a commodity, produces as 
little as the value of wheat, or wheat as a commodity, serves as 
food. 
Labour has more or less "value," according to whether food 
commodities are more or less dear, whether the supply and demand 
of hands exist to such or such a degree, etc., etc. 
Labour is not a "vague thing"; it is always some definite labour, it 
is never labour in general that is sold and bought. It is not only 
labour which is qualitatively defined by the object; but also the object 
which is determined by the specific quality of labour. 
Labour, insofar as it is sold and bought, is itself a commodity. Why 
is it bought? "In view of the values it is supposed to contain 
potentially." But if a certain thing is said to be a commodity, there is 
no longer any question as to the reason why it is bought, that is, as to 
the utility to be derived from it, the application to be made of it. It is 
a commodity as an object of traffic. All M. Proudhon's arguments are 
limited to this: labour is not bought as an immediate object of 
consumption. No, it is bought as an instrument of production, as a 
machine would be bought. As a commodity, labour has value and 
does not produce. M. Proudhon might just as well have said that 
there is no such thing as a commodity, since every commodity is 
acquired merely for some utilitarian purpose, and never as a 
commodity in  itself. 
In measuring the value of commodities by labour, M. Proudhon 
vaguely glimpses the impossibility of excluding labour from this 
same measure, insofar as labour has a value, labour-commodity. He 
has a misgiving that it is turning the minimum wage into the natural 
and normal price of immediate labour, that it is accepting the 
existing state of society. So, to get away from this fatal consequence, 
he faces about and asserts that labour is not a commodity, that it 
cannot have value. He forgets that he himself has taken the value of 
labour as a measure, he forgets that his whole system rests on 
labour-commodity, on labour which is bartered, sold, bought, 
exchanged for produce, etc., on labour, in fact, which is an 
immediate source of income for the worker. He forgets everything. 
a In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and the one presented in 1876 to N. 
Utina after the word "travail" ("labour") is added "la force du travail" ("labour 
power"). The same addition is made in the 1896 French edition.—Ed. 

=====第159页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 131 
To save his system, he consents to sacrifice its basis. 
Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas? 
We now come to a new definition of "constituted value". 
"Value is the proportional relation of the products which constitute wealth." [I 62] 
Let us note in the first place that the simple phrase "relative or 
exchange value" implies the idea of some relation in which products 
are exchanged reciprocally. By giving the name "proportional 
relation" to this relation, no change is made in the relative value, 
except in the expression. Neither the depreciation nor the enhance­
ment of the value of a product destroys its quality of being in some 
"proportional relation" with the other products which constitute 
wealth. 
Why then this new term, which introduces no new idea? 
"Proportional relation" suggests many other economic relations, 
such as proportionality in production, the correct proportion 
between supply and demand, etc., and M. Proudhon is thinking of all 
that when he formulates this didactic paraphrase of marketable 
value. 
In the first place, the relative value of products being determined 
by the comparative amount of labour used in the production of each 
of them, proportional relations, applied to this special case, stand for 
the respective quota of products which can be manufactured in a 
given time, and which in consequence are given in exchange for one 
another. 
Let us see what advantage M. Proudhon draws from this 
proportional relation. 
Everyone knows that when supply and demand are evenly 
balanced, the relative value of any product is accurately determined 
by the quantity of labour embodied in it, that is to say, that this 
relative value expresses the proportional relation precisely in the 
sense we have just attached to it. M. Proudhon inverts the order of 
things. Begin, he says, by measuring the relative value of a product 
by the quantity of labour embodied in it, and supply and demand will 
infallibly balance one another. Production will correspond to 
consumption, the product will always be exchangeable. Its current 
price will express exactly its true value. Instead of saying like 
everyone else: when the weather is fine, a lot of people are to be seen 
going out for a walk, M. Proudhon makes his people go out for a 
walk in order to be able to ensure them fine weather. 
a And for the sake of life to lose the reasons for living (Juvenal, Satires, VIII).— Ed. 

=====第160页=====
132 Karl Marx 
What M. Proudhon gives as the consequence of marketable value 
determined a priori by labour time could be justified only by a law 
couched more or less in the following terms: 
Products will in future be exchanged in the exact ratio of the 
labour time they have cost. Whatever may be the proportion of 
supply to demand, the exchange of commodities will always be made 
as if they had been produced proportionately to the demand. Let M. 
Proudhon take it upon himself to formulate and lay down such a law, 
and we shall relieve him of the necessity of giving proofs. If, on the 
other hand, he insists on justifying his theory, not as a legislator, but 
as an economist, he will have to prove that the time needed to create a 
commodity indicates exactly the degree of its utility and marks its 
proportional relation to the demand, and in consequence, to the total 
amount of wealth. In this case, if a product is sold at a price equal to 
its cost of production, supply and demand will always be evenly 
balanced; for the cost of production is supposed to express the true 
relation between supply and demand. 
Actually, M. Proudhon sets out to prove that the labour time 
needed to create a product indicates its correct proportional relation 
to needs, so that the things whose production costs the least time are 
the most immediately useful, and so on, step by step. The mere 
production of a luxury object proves at once, according to this 
doctrine, that society has spare time which allows it to satisfy a need 
for luxury. 
M. Proudhon finds the very proof of his thesis in the observation 
that the most useful things cost the least time to produce, that society 
always begins with the easiest industries and successively "starts on 
the production of objects which cost more labour time and which 
correspond to a higher order of needs". [I 57] 
M. Proudhon borrows from M. Dunoyer the example of extractive 
industry—fruit-gathering, pasturage, hunting, fishing, etc. —which 
is the simplest, the least costly of industries, and the one by which 
man began "the first day of his second creation". [I 78] The first day 
of his first creation is recorded in Genesis, which shows us God as the 
world's first manufacturer. 
Things happen in quite a different way from what M. Proudhon 
imagines. The very moment civilisation begins, production begins to 
be founded on the antagonism of orders, estates, classes, and finally 
on the antagonism of accumulated labour and immediate labour. No 
antagonism, no progress. This is the law that civilisation has followed 
up to our days. Till now the productive forces have been developed 
by virtue of this system of class antagonisms. To say now that, 
because all the needs of all the workers were satisfied, men could 

=====第161页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 133 
devote themselves to the creation of products of a higher order—to 
more complicated industries—would be to leave class antagonism out 
of account and turn all historical development upside down. It is like 
saying that because, under the Roman emperors, muraena were 
fattened in artificial fishponds, therefore there was enough to feed 
abundantly the whole Roman population. Actually, on the contrary, 
the Roman people had not enough to buy bread with, while the 
Roman aristocrats had slaves enough to throw as fodder to the 
muraena. 
The price of food has almost continuously risen, while the price of 
manufactured and luxury goods has almost continuously fallen. 
Take the agricultural industry  itself:  the most indispensable objects, 
like corn, meat, etc., rise in price, while cotton, sugar, coffee, etc., 
continually fall in a surprising proportion. And even among 
comestibles proper, the luxury articles, like artichokes, asparagus, 
etc., are today relatively cheaper than foodstuffs of prime necessity. 
In our age, the superfluous is easier to produce than the necessary. 
Finally, at different historical epochs, the reciprocal price relations 
are not only different, but opposed to one another. In the whole of 
the Middle Ages, agricultural products were relatively cheaper than 
manufactured products; in modern times they are in inverse ratio. 
Does this mean that the utility of agricultural products has 
diminished since the Middle Ages? 
The use of products is determined by the social conditions in 
which the consumers find themselves placed, and these conditions 
themselves are based on class antagonism. 
Cotton, potatoes and spirits are objects of the most common use. 
Potatoes have engendered scrofula; cotton has to a great extent 
driven out flax and wool, although wool and flax are, in many cases, 
of greater utility, if only from the point of view of hygiene; finally, 
spirits have got the upper hand of beer and wine, although spirits 
used as an alimentary substance are everywhere recognised to be 
poison. For a whole century, governments struggled in vain against 
the European opium; economics prevailed, and dictated its orders to 
consumption. 
Why are cotton, potatoes and spirits the pivots of bourgeois 
society? Because the least amount of labour is needed to produce 
them, and, consequently, they have the lowest price. Why does the 
minimum price determine the maximum consumption? Is it by any 
chance because of the absolute utility of these objects, their intrinsic 
utility, their utility insomuch as they correspond, in the most useful 
manner, to the needs of the worker as a man, and not of the man as a 
worker? No, it is because in a society founded on poverty the poorest 
6* 

=====第162页=====
134 Karl Marx 
products have the fatal prerogative of being used by the greatest 
number. 
To say now that because the least costly things are in greater use, 
they must be of greater utility, is saying that the wide use of spirits, 
because of their low cost of production, is the most conclusive proof 
of their utility; it is telling the proletarian that potatoes are more 
wholesome for him than meat; it is accepting the present state of 
affairs; it is, in short, making an apology, with M. Proudhon, for a 
society without understanding it. 
In a future society, in which class antagonism will have ceased, in 
which there will no longer be any classes, use will no longer be 
determined by the minimum time of production; but the time of 
production3 devoted to an articleb will be determined by the degree 
of its social utility. 
To return to M. Proudhon's thesis; since the labour time necessary 
for the production of an article is not the expression of its degree of 
utility, the exchange value of this same article, determined 
beforehand by the labour time embodied in it, can never regulate the 
correct relation of supply to demand, that is, the proportional 
relation in the sense M. Proudhon attributes to it at the moment. 
It is not the sale of a given product at the price of its cost of 
production that constitutes the "proportional relation" of supply to 
demand, or the proportional quota of this product relatively to the 
sum total of production; it is the variations in demand and supply that 
show the producer what amount of a given commodity he must 
produce in order to receive at least the cost of production in 
exchange. And as these variations are continually occurring, there is 
also a continual movement of withdrawal and application of capital 
in the different branches of industry. 
"It is only in consequence of such variations that capital is apportioned precisely, in 
the requisite abundance and no more, to the production of the different commodities 
which happen to be in demand. With the rise or fall of price, profits are elevated 
above, or depressed below their general level, and capital is either encouraged to enter 
into,  or is warned to depart from, the particular employment in which the variation 
has taken place."—"When we look to the markets of a large town, and observe how 
regularly they are supplied both with home and foreign commodities, in the quantity 
The 1896 French edition has "production sociale". —Ed. 
b In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and the one presented to N. Utina 
the words "à un objet" are replaced by "aux différents objets". This change was also 
made in the 1896 French edition.— Ed. 
c The word "sociale", which is not in the 1847 edition, was added in the copy with 
corrections in Marx's hand and the one which he presented to N. Utina and also in the 
1896 French edition.— Ed. 

=====第163页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 135 
in which they are required, under all the circumstances of varying demand, arising 
from the caprice of taste, or a change in the amount of population, without often 
producing either the effects of a glut from a too abundant supply, or an enormously 
high price from the supply being unequal to the demand, we must confess that the 
principle which apportions capital to each trade in the  precise  amount that is required, is 
more active than is generally supposed." (Ricardo, tome I, pp. 105[-106] and 108 
[Eng. ed., pp. 80 and 82].) 
If M. Proudhon admits that the value of products is determined by 
labour time, he should equally admit that it is the fluctuating 
movement alone that3 makes labour time the measure of value. 
There is no ready constituted "proportional relation", but only a 
constituting movement. 
We have just seen in what sense it is correct to speak of 
"proportion" as of a consequence of value determined by labour 
time.  We shall see now how this measure by time, called by M. 
Proudhon the "law of proportion", becomes transformed into a law 
of disproportion. 
Every new invention that enables the production in one hour of 
that which has hitherto been produced in two hours depreciates all 
similar products on the market. Competition forces the producer to 
sell the product of two hours as cheaply as the product of one hour. 
Competition implements the law according to which the relative 
value of a product is determined by the labour time needed to 
produce it. Labour time serving as the measure of marketable value 
becomes in this way the law of the continual depreciation of labour. 
We will say more. There will be depreciation not only of the 
commodities brought into the market, but also of the instruments of 
production and of whole plants. This fact was already pointed out by 
Ricardo when he said: 
"By constantly increasing the facility of production, we constantly diminish the 
value of some of the commodities before produced." (Tome II, p. 59 [Eng. ed., 
p. 321]  > 
Sismondi goes further. He sees in this "value constituted" by labour 
time the source of all the contradictions of modern industry and com­
merce. 
"Mercantile value," he says, "is always determined in the long run by the quantity 
of labour needed to obtain the thing evaluated: it is not what it has actuallv cost, but 
what it would cost in future with, perhaps, perfected means; and this quantity, al­
though difficult to evaluate, is always faithfully established by competition... It is on 
a In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand the words "in societies founded on 
individual exchanges" are added here and then struck out; in the copy presented to 
N. Utina this addition was made except for the word "individual".— Ed. 

=====第164页=====
136 Karl Marx 
this basis that the demand of the seller as well as the supply of the buyer is reckoned. 
The former will perhaps declare that the thing has cost him ten days' labour; but if the 
latter realises that it can henceforth be produced with eight days' labour, in the event 
of competition proving this to the two contracting parties, the value will be reduced, 
and the market price fixed at eight days only. Of course, each of the parties believes 
that the thing is useful, that it is desired, that without desire there would be no sale; 
but the fixing of the price has nothing to do with utility." (Etudes, etc., t. II, p. 267, 
Brussels edition.) 
It is important to emphasise the point that what determines value 
is not the time taken to produce a thing, but the minimum time it 
could possibly be produced in, and this minimum is ascertained by 
competition. Suppose for a moment that there is no more 
competition and consequently no longer any means to ascertain the 
minimum of labour necessary for the production of a commodity; 
what will happen? It will suffice to spend six hours' work on the 
production of an object, in order to have the right, according to M. 
Proudhon, to demand in exchange six times as much as he who has 
taken only one hour to produce the same object. 
Instead of a "proportional relation", we have a disproportional 
relation, at any rate if we insist on sticking to relations, good or bad. 
The continual depreciation of labour is only one side, one 
consequence of the evaluation of commodities by labour time. The 
excessive raising of prices, overproduction and many other features 
of industrial anarchy have their explanation in this mode of 
evaluation. 
But does labour time used as a measure of value give rise at least to 
the proportional variety of products that so fascinates M. Proudhon? 
On the contrary, monopoly in all its monotony follows in its wake 
and invades the world of products, just as to everybody's knowledge 
monopoly invades the world of the instruments of production. It is 
only in a few branches of industry, like the cotton industry, that very 
rapid progress can be made. The natural consequence of this 
progress is that the products of cotton manufacture, for instance, 
fall rapidly in price: but as the price of cotton goes down, the price 
of flax must go up in comparison. What will be the outcome? Flax 
will be replaced by cotton. In this way, flax has been driven out 
of almost the whole of North America. And we have obtained, 
instead of the proportional variety of products, the dominance of 
cotton. 
What is left of this "proportional relation"? Nothing but the pious 
wish of an honest man who would like commodities to be produced 
in proportions which would permit of their being sold at an honest 
price. In all ages good-natured bourgeois and philanthropic 
economists have taken pleasure in expressing this innocent wish. 

=====第165页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 137 
Let us hear what old Boisguillebert says: 
"The price of commodities," he says, "must always be proportionate; for it is such 
mutual understanding alone that can enable them to exist together so as to give 
themselves to one another at any moment" (here is M. Proudhon's continual exchangeabili­
ty) "and reciprocally give birth to one another.... As wealth, then, is nothing but this 
continual intercourse between man and man, craft and craft, etc., it is a frightful 
blindness to go looking for the cause of misery elsewhere than in the cessation of such 
traffic brought about by a disturbance of proportion in prices." (Dissertation sur la 
nature des richesses,  Daire ed. [pp. 405, 408].) 
Let us listen also to a modern economist: 
"The great law as necessary to be affixed to production, that is, the law of 
proportion,* which alone can preserve the continuity of value.... The equivalent must be 
guaranteed.... All nations have attempted, at various periods of their history, by 
instituting numerous commercial regulations and restrictions, to effect, in some 
degree, the object here explained.... But the natural and inherent selfishness of man 
... has urged him to break down all such regulations.... Proportionate production  *' is the 
realisation of the entire truth of the Science of Social Economy." (W. Atkinson, 
Principles of Political Economy, London, 1840, pp. 170-95.) 
Fuit Troja.b  This correct proportion between supply and demand, 
which is beginning once more to be the object of so many wishes, 
ceased long ago to exist. It has passed into the stage of senility. It was 
possible only at a time when the means of production were limited, 
when exchange took place within very restricted bounds. With the 
birth of large-scale industry this correct proportion had to come to 
an end, and production is inevitably compelled to pass in continuous 
succession through vicissitudes of prosperity, depression, crisis, 
stagnation, renewed prosperity, and so on. 
Those who, like Sismondi, wish to return to the correct proportion 
of production, while preserving the present basis of society, are 
reactionary, since, to be consistent, they must also wish to bring back 
all the other conditions of industry of former times. 
What kept production in correct, or more or less correct, 
proportions? It was demand that dominated supply, that preceded it. 
Production followed close on the heels of consumption. Large-scale 
industry, forced by the very instruments at its disposal to produce on 
an ever-increasing scale, can no longer wait for demand. Production 
precedes consumption, supply compels demand. 
In existing society, in industry based on individual exchange, 
anarchy of production, which is the source of so much misery, is at 
the same time the source of all progress. 
Thus,  one or the other: 
a In the original the English term is given in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
Troy is no more (Virgil,  Aeneid,  2, 325).— Ed. 

=====第166页=====
138 Karl Marx 
Either you want the correct proportions of past centuries with 
present-day means of production, in which case you are both 
reactionary and Utopian. 
Or you want progress without anarchy: in which case, in order to 
preserve the productive forces, you must abandon individual 
exchange. 
Individual exchange is consistent only with the small-scale industry 
of past centuries and its corollary of "correct proportion", or else 
with large-scale industry and all its train of misery and anarchy. 
After all,3 the determination of value by labour time—the formula 
M. Proudhon gives us as the regenerating formula of the future—is 
therefore0  merely the scientific expression of the economic relations 
of present-day society, as was clearly and precisely demonstrated by 
Ricardo long before M. Proudhon. 
But does the " equalitarian" application of this formula at least 
belong to M. Proudhon? Was he the first to think of reforming 
society by transforming all men into immediate workers exchanging 
equal amounts of labour? Is it for him to reproach the Commu­
nists—these people devoid of all knowledge of political economy, 
these "obstinately foolish men", these "paradise dreamers"—with 
not having found, before him, this "solution of the problem of the 
proletariat"? 
Anyone who is in any way familiar with the trend of political 
economy in England cannot fail to know that almost all the socialists 
in that country have, at different periods, proposed the equalitarian 
application of the Ricardian theory. We could quote for M. 
Proudhon: Hodgskin, Political Economy, 182775 ; William Thompson, 
An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most 
Conducive to Human Happiness, 1824; T. R. Edmonds, Practical Moral 
and Political Economy, 1828, etc., etc., and four pages more of  etc. We 
shall content ourselves with listening to an English Communist, Mr. 
Bray. We shall give the decisive passages in his remarkable work, 
Labour's Wrongs and Labour's Remedy, Leeds, 1839, and we shall dwell 
some time upon it, firstly, because Mr. Bray is still little known in 
France, and, secondly, because we think that we have discovered in 
him the key to the past, present and future works of M. Proudhon. 
a In the 1847 edition this sentence begins with the words: "D'après tout ce que 
nous venons de dire." In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and the one 
presented to N. Utina "D'après" is changed to "Après" and the rest of the phrase is 
crossed out; this correction was reproduced in the 1896 French edition.— Ed. 
The word "therefore" ("done") is not in the 1847 edition; it was added in the 
copy with corrections in Marx's hand and the one presented to N. Utina; this addition 
is reproduced in the 1896 French edition.— Ed. 

=====第167页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 139 
"The only way to arrive at truth is to go at once to First Principles.... Let us ... go at 
once to the source from whence governments themselves have arisen.... By thus going 
to the origin of the thing, we shall find that every form of government, and every 
social and governmental wrong, owes its rise to the existing social system—to the 
institution of property as it at present exists3 —and that, therefore, if we would end our 
wrongs and our miseries at once and for ever, the present arrangements of  society  must be 
totally subverted.... By thus fighting them upon their own ground, and with their own 
weapons, we shall avoid that senseless chatter respecting 'visionaries' and  'theorists',  with 
which they are so ready to assail.... Before the conclusions arrived at by such a course 
of proceeding can be overthrown, the economists must unsav or disprove those 
established truths and principles on which their own arguments are founded." (Brav, 
pp. 17 and 41.) "It is labour alone which  bestows  value 1'.... Every man has an undoubted 
right to all that his honest labour can procure him. When he thus appropriates the 
fruits of his labour, he commits no injustice upon anv other human being; for he 
interferes with no other man's right of doing the same with the produce of his labour.... 
All these ideas of superior and inferior—of master and man—mav be traced to the 
neglect of First Principles, and to the consequent rise of inequality of possessions0, and 
such ideas will never be eradicated, nor the institutions founded upon them be 
subverted, so long as this inequality is maintained. Men have hitherto blindlv hoped to 
remedy the present unnatural state of things ... bv destroying existing inequality, and 
leaving untouched the cause of the inequality; but it will shortlv be seen ... that 
government is not a cause, but a consequence—that it is not the creator, but the 
created—that it is the offspring of inequality of possessions6; and that the inequality of 
possessions is inseparably connected with our present social svstem." (Bray, pp. 33, 36 
and 37.) 
"Not only are the greatest advantages, but strict justice also, on the side of a system 
of equality.... Every man is a link, and an indispensable link, in the chain of 
effects—the beginning of which is but an idea, and the end, perhaps, the production 
of a piece of cloth. Thus, although we may entertain different feelings towards the 
several parties, it does not follow that one should be better paid for his labour than 
another. The inventor will ever receive, in addition to his just pecuniary reward, that 
which genius only can obtain from us—the tribute of our admiration.... 
"From the very nature of labour and exchange, strict justice requires that all 
exchangers should be not only mutually, but that thev should likewise be equally, 
benefited. Men have only two things which they can exchange with each other, 
namely, labour, and the produce of labour.... If a just svstem of exchanges were acted 
upon, the value of all articles would be determined by the entire  cost  of production;  and 
equal values should always  exchange  for equal values fi If, lor instance, it takes a hatter one 
3 In the original the end of the phrase beginning with the words "the institution of 
property ..." is given in English in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
In the original this phrase is given in English in parentheses after the 
French.— Ed. 
' In the original the words "and to the consequent rise of inequality of 
possessions" are given in English in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
d Bray has here: "misgovernment".— Ed. 
In the original the words "the offspring of inequality of possessions" are given in 
English in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
' In the original the words "all exchangers should be" to the end of the sentence 
are given in English in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
8 In the original this sentence is given in English in parentheses after the 
French.— Ed. 

=====第168页=====
140 Karl Marx 
day to make a hat, and a shoemaker the same time to make a pair of shoes—supposing 
the material used by each to be of the same value—and they exchange these articles 
with each other, they are not only mutually but equally benefited: the advantage 
derived by either party cannot be a disadvantage to the other, as each has given the 
same amount of labour, and the materials made use of by each were of equal value. 
But if the hatter should obtain two pair of shoes for one hat—time and value of 
material being as before—the exchange would clearly be an unjust one. The hatter 
would defraud the shoemaker of one day's labour; and were the former to act thus in 
all his exchanges, he would receive, for the labour of half a  year,  the product of some 
other person's whole year.... We have heretofore acted upon no other than this most 
unjust systenï of exchanges—the workmen have given the capitalist the labour of a 
whole year, in exchange for the value of only half a year 3—and from this, and not 
from the assumed inequality of bodily and mental powers in individuals, has arisen 
the inequality of wealth and power.... It is an inevitable condition of inequality of 
exchanges—of buying at one price and selling at another—that capitalists shall 
continue to be capitalists, and working men to be working men—the one a class of 
tyrants and the other a class of slaves—to eternity.... The whole transaction, therefore, 
plainly shews that the capitalists and proprietors do no more than give the working 
man, for his labour of one week, a part of the wealth which they obtained from him 
the week before!—which just amounts to giving him nothing for something3.... The 
whole transaction ... between the producer and the capitalist is ... a mere farce: it 
is, in fact, in thousands of instances, no other than a barefaced though legalised 
robbery?" (Bray, pp. 45, 48, 49 and 50.) 
"... the gain of the employer will never cease to be the loss of the employed—until 
the exchanges between the parties are equal; and exchanges never can be equal while 
society is divided into capitalists and producers—the last living upon their labour and 
the first bloating upon the profit of that labour.... 
"It is plain," continues Mr. Bray, "that, establish whatever form of government we 
will ... we may talk of morality and brotherly love ... no reciprocity can exist where 
there are unequal exchanges.... Inequality of exchanges, as being the cause of 
inequality of possessions, is the secret enemy that devours us." d (Bray, pp. 51 and 52.) 
"It has been deduced, also, from a consideration of the intention and end of 
society, not only that all men should labour, and thereby become exchangers, but that 
equal values should always exchange for equal values — and that, as the gain of one 
man ought never to be the loss of another, value should ever be determined by cost of 
production. But we have seen, that, under the present arrangements of society ... the 
gain of the capitalist and the rich man is always the loss of the workman — that this 
result will invariably take place, and the poor man be left entirely at the mercy of the 
rich man, under any and every form of government, so long as there is inequality of 
exchanges—and that equality of exchanges can be ensured only under social 
arrangements in which labour is universal.... If exchanges were equal, would the 
wealth of the present capitalists gradually go from them to the working classes." (Bray, 
pp. 53-55.) 
a In the original the words from "the workmen" to "half a year" are given in 
English in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
In the original the words "nothing for something" are given in English in 
parentheses after the French.— Ed. 
c In the original this phrase is given in parentheses in English after the 
French.— Ed. 
d In the original the words from "no reciprocity" to "devours us" are given in 
English in parentheses after the French.— Ed. 

=====第169页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 141 
"So long as this system of unequal exchanges is tolerated, the producers will be 
almost as poor and as ignorant and as hardworked as they are at present, even if  every 
governmental burthen  be swept away and all taxes  be abolished ... nothing but a total change 
of system — an equality of labour and exchanges — can alter this state of things and 
guarantee true equality of rights.... The producers have but to make an effort — and 
by them must every effort for their own redemption be made — and their chains will 
be snapped asunder for ever.... As an end, the political equality is there a failure ... as a 
means, also, it is there a failure.3 
"Where equal exchanges are maintained, the gain of one man cannot be the loss of 
another; for every exchange is then simply a transfer, and not a sacrifice, of labour and 
wealth. Thus, although under a social system based on equal exchanges, a parsimonious 
man may become rich, his wealth will be no more than the accumulated produce of his 
own labour. He may exchange his wealth, or he may give it to others ... but a rich man 
cannot continue wealthy for any length of time after he has ceased to labour. Under 
equality of exchanges, wealth cannot have, as it now has, a procreative and apparently 
self-generating power, such as replenishes all waste from consumption; for, unless it 
be renewed by labour, wealth, when once consumed, is given up for ever. That which 
is now called profit and interest cannot exist as such in connection with equality of 
exchanges; for producer and distributor would be alike remunerated, and the sum 
total of their labour would determine the value of the article created and brought to 
the hands of the consumer. 
"The principle of equal exchanges, therefore, must from its very nature ensure 
universal labour." (Bray, pp. 67, 88, 89, 94, 109-10.) 
After having refuted the objections of the economists to commu­
nism,  Mr. Bray goes on to say: 
"If, then, a changed character be essential to the success of the social system of 
community in its most perfect form—and if, likewise, the present system affords no 
circumstances and no facilities for effecting the requisite change of character and 
preparing man for the higher and better state desired — it is evident that these things 
must necessarily remain as they are, ... or else some preparatory step must be 
discovered and made use of — some movement partaking partly of the present and 
partly of the desired system" (the system of community), "some intermediate 
resting-place, to which society may go with all its faults and its follies, and from which 
it may move forward, imbued with those qualities and attributes without which the 
system of community and equality cannot as such have existence." (Bray, p. 134.) 
"The whole movement would require only co-operation in its simplest form.... 
Cost of production would in every instance determine value; and equal values would 
always exchange for equal values. If one person worked a whole week, and another 
worked only half a week, the first would receive double the remuneration of the last; 
but this extra pay of the one would not be at the expense of the other, nor would the 
loss incurred by the last man fall in any way upon the first. Each person would 
exchange the wages he individually received for commodities of the same value as his 
respective wages; and in no case could the gain of one man or one trade be a loss to 
another man or another trade. The labour of every individual would alone determine his 
gains or his losses.... 
"...By means of general and local boards of trade b ... the quantities of the various 
a In the original this sentence is given in English in parentheses after the 
French.— Ed. 
b In the original the last three words are given in English in parentheses after the 
French.— Ed. 

=====第170页=====
142 Karl Marx 
commodities required for consumption — the relative value of each in regard to each 
other — the number of hands required in various trades and descriptions of 
labour — and all other matters connected with production and distribution, could in a 
short time be as easily determined for a nation as for an individual company under the 
present arrangements.... Individuals would compose families, and families towns, as 
under the existing system.... The present distribution of people in towns and villages, 
bad as it is, would not be directly interfered with.... Under this joint-stock system, the 
same as under that now existing, every individual would be at liberty to accumulate as 
much as he pleased, and to enjoy such accumulations when and where he might think 
proper.... The great productive section of the community ... is divided into an 
indefinite number of smaller sections, all working, producing and exchanging their 
products on a footing of the most perfect equality.... And the joint-stock modification 
(which is nothing but a concession to present-day society in order to obtain 
communism), by being so constituted as to admit of individual  property  in productions 
in connection with a common  property  in productive powers — making every individual 
dependent on his own exertions, and at the same time allowing him an equal 
participation in every advantage afforded by nature and art —  is fitted to take society 
as it is, and to prepare the way for other and better changes." (Bray, pp. 158, 160, 162, 
[163],  168, [170 and] 194.) 
We only need to reply in a few words to Mr. Bray who without us 
and in spite of us has managed to supplant M. Proudhon, except that 
Mr. Bray, far from claiming the last word on behalf of humanity, 
proposes merely measures which he thinks good for a period of 
transition between existing society and a community regime. 
One hour of Peter's labour exchanges for one hour of Paul's 
labour. That is Mr. Bray's fundamental axiom. 
Let us suppose Peter has twelve hours' labour before him, and 
Paul only six. Peter will be able to make with Paul an exchange of 
only six for six. Peter will consequently have six hours' labour left 
over. What will he do with these six hours' labour? 
Either he will do nothing — in which case he will have worked six 
hours for nothing; or else he will remain idle for another six hours to 
get even; or else, as a last resource, he will give these six hours' 
labour, which he has no use for, to Paul into the bargain. 
What in the end will Peter have earned more than Paul? Some 
hours of labour? No! He will have gained only hours of leisure; he 
will be forced to play the loafer for six hours. And in order that this 
new right to loaf might be not only relished but sought after in the 
new society, this society would have to find in idleness its highest 
bliss,  and to look upon labour as a heavy shackle from which it must 
break free at all costs. And again, to return to our example, if only 
these hours of leisure that Peter has gained in excess of Paul were 
really a gain! Not in the least. Paul, beginning by working only six 
hours,  attains by steady and regular work a result that Peter secures 
only by beginning with an excess of work. Everyone will want to be 

=====第171页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 143 
Paul, there will be a competition to occupy Paul's position, a 
competition in idleness. 
Well, then! What has the exchange of equal quantities of labour 
brought us? Overproduction, depreciation, excess of labour followed 
by unemployment; in short, economic relations such as we see in 
present-day society, minus the competition of labour. 
No! We are wrong! There is still an expedient which may save this 
new society, the society of Peters and Pauls. Peter will consume by 
himself the product of the six hours' labour which he has left. But 
since he has no longer to exchange in order to have produced, he has 
no need to produce in order to exchange; and the whole hypothesis 
of a society founded on the exchange and division of labour will fall 
to the ground. Equality of exchange will have been saved by the 
simple fact that exchange will have ceased to be: Paul and Peter will 
arrive at the position of Robinson. 
Thus,  if all the members of society are supposed to be immediate 
workers, the exchange of equal quantities of hours of labour is 
possible only on condition that the number of hours to be spent on 
material production is agreed on beforehand. But such an agree­
ment negates individual exchange. 
We still come to the same result, if we take as our starting point not 
the distribution of the products created but the act of production. In 
large-scale industry, Peter is not free to fix for himself the time of his 
labour, for Peter's labour is nothing without the co-operation of all 
the Peters and all the Pauls who make up the workshop. This 
explains very well the dogged resistance which the English factory 
owners put up to the Ten Hours Bill. They knew only too well 
that a two hours' reduction of labour granted to women and 
children76 would carry with it an equal reduction of working hours 
for adult men. It is in the nature of large-scale industry that working 
hours should be equal for all. What is today the result of capital and 
the competition of workers among themselves will be tomorrow, 
if you sever the relation between labour and capital, an actual 
agreement based upon the relation between the sum of productive 
forces and the sum of existing needs. 
But such an agreement is a condemnation of individual exchange, 
and we are back again at our first conclusion! 
In principle, there is no exchange of products—but there 
is the exchange of the labour which co-operates in produc­
tion. The mode of exchange of products depends upon the mode 
of exchange of the productive forces. In general, the form of ex­
change of products corresponds to the form of production. Change 
the latter, and the former will change in consequence. Thus 

=====第172页=====
144 Karl Marx 
in the history of society we see that the mode of exchanging products 
is regulated by the mode of producing them. Individual exchange 
corresponds also to a definite mode of production which itself 
corresponds to class antagonism. There is thus no individual 
exchange without the antagonism of classes. 
But the honest conscience refuses to see this obvious fact. So long 
as one is a bourgeois, one cannot but see in this relation of 
antagonism a relation of harmony and eternal justice, which allows 
no one to gain at the expense of another. For the bourgeois, 
individual exchange can exist without any antagonism of classes. For 
him, these are two quite unconnected things. Individual exchange, as 
the bourgeois conceives it, is far from resembling individual 
exchange as it is practised. 
Mr. Bray turns the illusion of the respectable bourgeois into an 
ideal he would like to attain. In a purified individual exchange, freed 
from all the elements of antagonism he finds in it, he sees an 
" equalitariari, relation which he would like society to adopt. 
Mr. Bray does not see that this equalitarian relation, this corrective 
ideal that he would like to apply to the world, is itself nothing but the 
reflection of the actual world; and that therefore it is totally 
impossible to reconstitute society on the basis of what is merely an 
embellished shadow of it. In proportion as this shadow takes on 
substance again, we perceive that this substance, far from being the 
transfiguration dreamt of, is the actual body of existing society.* 
§ 3. APPLICATION OF THE LAW 
OF THE PROPORTIONALITY OF VALUE 
A) Money 
"Gold and silver were the first commodities to have their value constituted." fl 69] 
Thus gold and silver are the first applications of "value 
constituted" ... by M. Proudhon. And as M. Proudhon constitutes the 
* Mr. Bray's theory, like all theories, has found supporters who have allowed 
themselves to be deluded by appearances. Equitable-labour-exchange bazaars have 
been set up in London, Sheffield, Leeds and many other towns in England. These 
bazaars have all ended in scandalous failures after having absorbed considerable 
capital. The taste for them has gone for ever. You are warned, M. Proudhon! [Note  by 
Marx. The copy with corrections in Marx's hand has "Nota!" in the margin opposite 
this note.] 
It is known that Proudhon did not take this warning to heart. In 1849 he himself 
made an attempt with a new Exchange Bank in Paris. The bank, however, failed 
before it had got going properly: a court case against Proudhon had to serve to cover 
its collapse. F. E. [Note to the German edition, 1885.] 

=====第173页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 145 
value of products determining it by the comparative amount of 
labour embodied in them, the only thing he had to do was to prove 
that variations in the value of gold and silver are always explained by 
variations in the labour time taken to produce them. M. Proudhon 
has no intention of doing so. He speaks of gold and silver not as 
commodities, but as money. 
His only logic, if logic it be, consists in juggling with the capacity of 
gold and silver to be used as money for the benefit of all the 
commodities which have the property of being evaluated by labour 
time.  Decidedly there is more naïveté than malice in this jugglery. 
A useful product, being evaluated by the labour time needed to 
produce it, is always acceptable in exchange. Witness, cries M. 
Proudhon, gold and silver, which exist in my desired conditions of 
"exchangeability"! Gold and silver, then, are value which has 
reached a state of constitution: they are the incorporation of M. 
Proudhon's idea. He could not have been happier in his choice of an 
example. Gold and silver, apart from their capacity of being 
commodities, evaluated like other commodities in labour time, have 
also the capacity of being the universal agents of exchange, of being 
money. By now considering gold and silver as an application of 
"value constituted" by labour time, nothing is easier than to prove that 
all commodities whose value is constituted by labour time will always 
be exchangeable, will be money. 
A very simple question occurs to M. Proudhon. Why have gold and 
silver the privilege of typifying "constituted value"? 
"The special function which usage has devolved upon the precious metals, that of 
serving as a medium for trade, is purely conventional^ and any other commodity 
could, less conveniently perhaps, but just as authentically, fulfil this function. 
Economists recognise this, and cite more than one example. What then is the reason 
for this universal preference for metals as money? And what is the explanation of this 
specialisation of the functions of silver — which has no analogy in political economy?... 
Is it possible to reconstruct the  series  from which money seems to have broken away, and 
hence to trace it back to its true principle?" [I 68, 69] 
By formulating the question in these terms, M. Proudhon has 
already presupposed the existence of money. The first question he 
should have asked himself was, why, in exchanges as they are actually 
constituted, it has been necessary to individualise exchangeable 
value, so to speak, by the creation of a special agent of exchange. 
Money is not a thing, it is a social relation. Why is the money relation 
a production relation like any other economic relation, such as the 
division of labour, etc.? If M. Proudhon had properly taken account 
of this relation, he would not have seen in money an exception, an 
element detached from a series unknown or needing reconstruction. 

=====第174页=====
146 Karl Marx 
He would have realised, on the contrary, that this relation is a link, 
and, as such, closely connected with a whole chain of other economic 
relations; that this relation corresponds to a definite mode of 
production neither more nor less than does individual exchange. 
What does he do? He starts off by detaching money from the actual 
mode of production as a whole, and then makes it the first member 
of an imaginary series, of a series to be reconstructed. 
Once the necessity for a specific agent of exchange, that is, for 
money, has been recognised, all that remains to be explained is why 
this particular function has devolved upon gold and silver rather 
than upon any other commodity. This is a secondary question, which 
is explained not by the chain of production relations, but by the 
specific qualities inherent in gold and silver as substances. If all this 
has made economists for once "go outside the domains of their own 
science, to dabble in physics, mechanics, history and so on" [I 69], as 
M. Proudhon reproaches them with doing, they have merely done 
what they were compelled to do. The question is no longer within the 
domain of political economy. 
"What no economist," says M. Proudhon, "has either seen or understood is the 
economic reason which has determined, in favour of the precious metals, the favour 
they enjoy." [I 69] 
This economic reason which nobody — with good ground in­
deed— has seen or understood, M. Proudhon has seen, understood 
and bequeathed to posterity. 
"What nobody else has noticed is that, of all commodities, gold and silver were the 
first to have their value attain constitution. In the patriarchal period, gold and silver 
were still bartered and exchanged in ingots but even then they showed a visible 
tendency to become dominant and received a marked preference. Little by 
little the sovereigns took possession of them and affixed their seal to them: and of this 
sovereign consecration was born money, that is, the commodity par  excellence,  which, 
notwithstanding all the shocks of commerce, retains a definite proportional value and 
makes itself accepted for all payments.... The distinguishing characteristic of gold and 
silver is due, I repeat, to the fact that, thanks to their metallic properties, to the 
difficulties of their production, and above all to the intervention of state authority 
they early won stability and authenticity as commodities." [I 69, 70] 
To say that, of all commodities, gold and silver were the first to 
have their value constituted, is to say, after all that has gone before, 
that gold and silver were the first to attain the status of money. This 
is M. Proudhon's great revelation, this is the truth that none had 
discovered before him. 
If, by these words, M. Proudhon means that of all commodities 
gold and silver are the ones whose time of production was known the 
earliest, this would be yet another of the suppositions with which he 

=====第175页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 147 
is so ready to regale his readers. If we wished to harp on this 
patriarchal erudition, we would inform M. Proudhon that it was the 
time needed to produce objects of prime necessity such as iron, etc., 
which was the first to be known. We shall spare him Adam Smith's 
classic bow.78 
But, after all that, how can M. Proudhon go on talking about the 
constitution of a value, since a value is never constituted all alone? It 
is constituted, not by the time needed to produce it all alone, but in 
relation to the quota of each and every other product which can be 
created in the same time. Thus the constitution of the value of gold 
and silver presupposes an already completed constitution of a 
number of other products. 
It is then not the commodity that has attained, in gold and silver, 
the status of "constituted value", it is M. Proudhon's "constituted 
value" that has attained, in gold and silver, the status of money. 
Let us now make a closer examination of these economic reasons 
which, according to M. Proudhon, have bestowed upon gold and 
silver the advantage of being raised to the status of money sooner 
than other products, thanks to their having passed through the 
constitutive phase of value. 
These economic reasons are: the "visible tendency to become 
dominant", the "marked preference" even in the "patriarchal 
period" [I 69], and other circumlocutions about the actual 
fact — which increase the difficulty, since they multiply the fact by 
multiplying the incidents which M. Proudhon brings in to explain 
the fact. M. Proudhon has not yet exhausted all the so-called 
economic reasons. Here is one of sovereign, irresistible force: 
"Money is born of sovereign consecration: the sovereigns took possession of gold 
and silver and affixed their seal to them." fl 69] 
Thus the whim of sovereigns is for M. Proudhon the highest 
reason in political economy. 
Truly, one must be destitute of all historical knowledge not to 
know that it is the sovereigns who in all ages have been subject to 
economic conditions, but they have never dictated laws to them. 
Legislation, whether political or civil, never does more than 
proclaim, express in words, the will of economic relations. 
Was it the sovereign who took possession of gold and silver to 
make them the universal agents of exchange by affixing his seal to 
them? Or was it not, rather, these universal agents of exchange 
which took possession of the sovereign and forced him to affix his 
seal to them and thus give them a political consecration? 
The impress which was and is still given to silver is not that of its 

=====第176页=====
148 Karl Marx 
value but of its weight. The stability and authenticity M. Proudhon 
speaks of apply only to the standard of the money; and this standard 
indicates how much metallic matter there is in a coined piece of 
silver. 
"The sole intrinsic value of a silver mark," says Voltaire, with his habitual good 
sense, "is a mark of silver, half a pound weighing eight ounces. The weight and the 
standard alone form this intrinsic value." (Voltaire, Systeme de Law. 3) 
But the question: how much is an ounce of gold or silver worth, 
remains nonetheless. If a cashmere from the Grand Colbert stores 
bore the trade mark pure  wool,  this trade mark would not tell you the 
value of the cashmere. There would still remain the question: how 
much is wool worth? 
"Philip I, King of France," says M. Proudhon, "mixes with Charlemagne's Tours 
pound a third of alloy, imagining that, having the monopoly of the manufacture of 
money, he could do what is done by every tradesman who has the monopoly of a 
product. What was actually this debasement of the currency for which Philip and his 
successors have been so much blamed? It was perfectly sound reasoning from the 
point of view of commercial practice, but very unsound economic science, viz., to 
suppose that, as supply and demand regulate value, it is possible, either by producing 
an artificial scarcity or by monopolising manufacture, to increase the estimation and 
consequently the value of things; and that this is true of gold and silver as of corn, 
wine, oil or tobacco. But Philip's fraud was no sooner suspected than his money was 
reduced to its true value, and he himself lost what he had thought to gain from his 
subjects. The same thing has happened as a result of every similar attempt." [I 70-71] 
It has been proved times without number that, if a prince takes 
into his head to debase the currency, it is he who loses. What he gains 
once at the first issue he loses every time the falsified coinage returns 
to him in the form of taxes, etc. But Philip and his successors were 
able to protect themselves more or less against this loss, for, once the 
debased coinage was put into circulation, they hastened to order a 
general re-minting of money on the old footing. 
And besides, if Philip I had really reasoned like M. Proudhon, he 
would not have reasoned well "from the commercial point of view". 
Neither Philip I nor M. Proudhon displays any mercantile genius in 
imagining that it is possible to alter the value of gold as well as that of 
every other commodity merely because their value is determined by 
the relation between supply and demand. 
If King Philip had decreed that one muid of wheat was in future to 
be called two muids of wheat, he would have been a swindler. He 
would have deceived all the rentiers, all the people who were entitled 
to receive a hundred muids of wheat. He would have been the cause 
a Voltaire, Histoire du parlement, chapitre LX "Finances et système de Law pendant 
la régence." —Ed. 

=====第177页=====
The Poverty  of Philosophy 149 
of all these people receiving only fifty instead  of a  hundred. Suppose 
the king owed  a hundred muids  of wheat;  he would have  had to pay 
only fifty.  But in  commerce  a hundred such muids would never have 
been worth more than fifty.  By changing  the name  we do not  change 
the thing.  The  quantity  of wheat, whether supplied  or demanded, 
will be neither decreased  nor  increased  by this mere change  of name. 
Thus,  the  relation between supply  and  demand being just  the same 
in spite  of this change  of name,  the price  of wheat will undergo  no 
real change. When  we speak  of the  supply  and  demand  of things,  we 
do not speak  of the  supply  and  demand  of the  name  of things. Philip 
I was not a  maker  of gold  or silver,  as M.  Proudhon says;  he was a 
maker  of names  for coins. Pass  off your French cashmeres  as Asiatic 
cashmeres,  and you may  deceive  a buyer  or two;  but once  the fraud 
becomes known, your so-called Asiatic cashmeres will drop  to the 
price  of French cashmeres. When  he put a  false label  on gold  and 
silver, King Philip could deceive only  so long  as the  fraud  was not 
known. Like  any  other shopkeeper,  he deceived  his customers  by a 
false description  of his  wares, which could  not  last for long.  He was 
bound sooner  or later  to suffer  the  rigour  of commercial laws.  Is this 
what  M. Proudhon wanted  to prove?  No.  According  to him it is  from 
the sovereign  and not  from commerce that money gets  its value.  And 
what  has he  really proved? That commerce  is more sovereign than 
the sovereign.  Let the  sovereign decree that  one  mark shall  in future 
be two  marks, commerce will keep  on saying that these  two  marks  are 
worth  no more than  one  mark  was  formerly. 
But, for all  that,  the question  of value determined  by the  quantity 
of labour  has not  been advanced  a step.  It still remains  to be  decided 
whether  the  value  of these  two  marks (which have become what  one 
mark  was  once)  is determined  by the  cost of production  or by the law 
of supply  and  demand. 
M. Proudhon continues: 
"It should even  be borne  in mind that  if, instead  of debasing  the currency,  it had 
been  in the  king's power  to double  its bulk,  the  exchange value  of gold  and  silver 
would immediately have dropped  by half,  always  for reasons  of proportion  and 
equilibrium."  [I 71] 
If this opinion, which  M.  Proudhon shares with  the  other 
economists,  is valid,  it argues  in favour  of the  latter's doctrine  of 
supply  and  demand,  and in no way in  favour  of M.  Proudhon's 
proportionality.  For,  whatever  the  quantity  of labour embodied  in 
the doubled bulk  of gold  and  silver,  its value would have dropped  by 
half, the  demand having remained  the  same  and the  supply having 
doubled.  Or can it be, by any  chance, that  the "law of  proportionality" 

=====第178页=====
150 Karl Marx 
would become confused this time with the so much disdained law of 
supply and demand? This correct proportion of M. Proudhon's is 
indeed so elastic, is capable of so many variations, combinations and 
permutations, that it might well coincide for once with the relation 
between supply and demand. 
To make "every commodity acceptable in exchange, if not in fact 
then at least in law," on the basis of the role of gold and silver is, 
then, to misunderstand this role. Gold and silver are acceptable in 
law only because they are acceptable in fact; and they are acceptable 
in fact because the present organisation of production needs a 
universal agent of exchange. Law is only the official recognition of 
fact. 
We have seen that the example of silver as an application of value 
which has attained constitution was chosen by M. Proudhon only to 
smuggle through his whole doctrine of exchangeability, that is to say, 
to prove that every commodity assessed by its cost of production 
must attain the status of money. All this would be very fine, were it 
not for the awkward fact that precisely gold and silver, as money, are 
of all commodities the only ones not determined by their cost of 
production; and this is so true that in circulation they can be replaced 
by paper. So long as there is a certain proportion observed between 
the requirements of circulation and the amount of money issued, be 
it paper, gold, platinum or copper money, there can be no question 
of a proportion to be observed between the intrinsic value (cost of 
production) and the nominal value of money. Doubtless, in 
international trade, money is determined, like any other commodity, 
by labour time. But it is also true that gold and silver in international 
trade are means of exchange as products and not as money. In other 
words, they lose this characteristic of "stability and authenticity", of 
"sovereign consecration", which, for M. Proudhon, forms their 
specific characteristic. Ricardo understood this truth so well that 
after basing his whole system on value determined by labour time, 
and after saying: "Gold and silver, like all other commodities, are 
valuable only in proportion to the quantity of labour necessary to 
produce them, and bring them to market", he adds, nevertheless, 
that the value of money is not determined by the labour time its 
substance embodies, but by the law of supply and demand only. 
"Though it" (paper money) "has no intrinsic value, yet, by limiting its quantity, its 
value in exchange is as great as an equal denomination of coin, or of bullion in that 
coin. On the same principle, too, namely, by a limitation of its quantity, a debased coin 
would circulate at the value it should bear, if it were of the legal weight and fineness, 
and not at the value of the quantity of metal which it actually contained. In the history 
of the British coinage, we find, accordingly, that the currency was never depreciated 

=====第179页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 151 
in the same proportion that it was debased; the reason of which was, that it never was 
increased in quantity, in proportion to its diminished intrinsic value." (Ricardo,  loc. cit. 
[II 206-07; Eng. ed., pp. 422-23].) 
This is what J. B. Say observes on this passage of Ricardo's: 
"This  example  should suffice, I think, to convince the author that the basis of all value 
is not the amount of labour needed to make a commodity, but the need felt for that 
commodity, balanced by its scarcity,"3 
Thus money, which for Ricardo is no longer a value determined bv 
labour time, and which J. B. Say therefore takes as an example to 
convince Ricardo that the other values could not be determined by 
labour time either, this money, I say, taken by J. B. Say as an example 
of a value determined exclusively by supply and demand, becomes 
for M. Proudhon the example par  excellence  of the application of 
value constituted ... by labour time. 
To conclude, if money is not a "value constituted" by labour time, 
it is all the less likely that it could have anything in common with M. 
Proudhon's correct "proportion". Gold and silver are always 
exchangeable, because they have the special function of serving as 
the universal agent of exchange, and in no wise because they exist in 
a quantity proportional to the sum total of wealth; or, to put it still 
better, they are always proportional because, alone of all com­
modities, they serve as money, the universal agent of exchange, 
whatever their quantity in relation to the sum total of wealth. 
"A circulation can never be so abundant as to overflow; for by diminishing its 
value in the same proportion you will increase its quantity, and by increasing its value, 
diminish its quantity." (Ricardo [II 205; Eng. ed., p. 422 ].) 
"What an imbroglio political economy  is!" cries M. Proudhon. [I 72] 
"'Cursed gold!' cries a Communist flippantly" (through the mouth of M 
Proudhon). "You might as well say: Cursed wheat, cursed vines, cursed sheep!—for 
just like gold and silver, every commercial value must attain its strict and exact 
determination." [I 73] 
The idea of making sheep and vines attain the status of money is 
not new. In France, it belongs to the age of Louis XIV. At that 
period, money having begun to establish its omnipotence, the 
depreciation of all other commodities was being complained of, and 
the time when "every commercial value" might attain its strict and 
exact determination, the status of money, was being eagerly invoked. 
Even in the writings of Boisguillebert, one of the oldest of French 
economists, we find: 
a Say's note to the French edition of Ricardo's book, tome II, p. 207.— Ed. 

=====第180页=====
152 Karl Marx 
"Money then, by the arrival of innumerable competitors in the form of 
commodities themselves, re-established in their true values, will be thrust back again 
within its natural limits."a  (Économistes financiers du XVIII e siècle, Daire edition, 
p. 422.) 
One sees that the first illusions of the bourgeoisie are also their 
last. 
B) Surplus Left by Labour 
"In works on political economy we read this absurd hypothesis: If the price of 
everything were doubled.... As if the price of everything were not the proportion of 
things—and one could double a proportion, a relation, a law!" (Proudhon, tome I, 
p. 81.) 
Economists have fallen into this error through not knowing how to 
apply the "law of proportionality" and "constituted value". 
Unfortunately in the very same work by M. Proudhon, tome I, p. 
110, we read the absurd hypothesis that, "if wages rose generally, the 
price of everything would rise". Furthermore, if we find the phrase 
in question in works on political economy, we also find an 
explanation of it. 
"When one speaks of the price of all commodities going up or down, one always 
excludes some one commodity. The excluded commodity is, in general, money or 
labour." (Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, or Universal Dictionary of Knowledge, Vol. VI, 
Article Political Economy, by Senior, London, 1836. Regarding the phrase under 
discussion, see also J. St. Mill: Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy, 
London, 1844, and Tooke: A History of Prices,  etc., London, 1838.) 
Let us pass now to the  second  applicationoî "constituted value", and 
of other proportions—whose only defect is their lack of proportion. 
And let us see whether M. Proudhon is happier here than in the 
monétisation of sheep. 
"An axiom generally admitted by economists is that all labour must leave a surplus. 
In my opinion this proposition is universally and absolutely true: it is the corollary of 
the law of proportion, which may be regarded as the summary of the whole of 
economic science. But, if the economists will permit me to say so, the principle that all 
labour must leave a surplus is meaningless according to their theory, and is not 
susceptible of any demonstration." (Proudhon [I 73].) 
To prove that all labour must leave a surplus, M. Proudhon 
personifies society; he turns it into a  person-society—a  society which is 
not by any means a society of persons, since it has its laws apart, 
which have nothing in common with the persons of which society is 
composed, and its "own intelligence", which is not the intelligence of 
P. Boisguillebert, Dissertation sur la nature des richesses....—  Ed. 

=====第181页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 153 
common men, but an intelligence devoid of common sense. M. 
Proudhon reproaches the economists with not having understood 
the personality of this collective being. We have pleasure in 
confronting him with the following passage from an American 
economist, who accuses the economists of just the opposite: 
"The moral entity—the grammatical being3 called a nation, has been clothed in 
attributes that have no real existence except in the imagination of those who 
metamorphose a word into a thing.... This has given rise to many difficulties and to 
some deplorable misunderstandings in political economy." (Th. Cooper, Lectures on 
the Elements of Political Economy, Columbia, 1826. ) 
"This principle of the surplus left by labour," continues M. Proudhon, "is true of 
individuals only because it emanates from society, which thus confers on them the 
benefit of its own laws." [I 75] 
Does M. Proudhon thereby mean merely that the production of 
the social individual exceeds that of the isolated individual? Is M. 
Proudhon referring to this surplus of the production of associated 
individuals over that of non-associated individuals? If so, we could 
quote for him a hundred economists who have expressed this simple 
truth without any of the mysticism with which M. Proudhon 
surrounds  himself.  This, for example, is what Mr. Sadler says: 
"Combined labour produces results which individual exertion could never 
accomplish. As mankind, therefore, multiply in number, the products of their united 
industry would greatly exceed the amount of any mere arithmetical addition 
calculated on such an increase.... In the mechanical arts, as well as in pursuits of 
science, a man may achieve more in a day ... than a solitary ... individual could perform 
in his whole life.... Geometry says ... that the whole is only equal to the sum of all its 
parts;  as applied to the subject before us, this axiom would be false. Regarding labour, 
the great pillar of human existenceb, it may be said that the entire product of 
combined exertion almost infinitely exceeds all which individual and disconnected 
efforts could possibly accomplish." (T. Sadler, The Law of Population, London, 1830 
[pp. 83, 84].) 
To return to M. Proudhon. The surplus left by labour, he says, is 
explained by the person-society. The life of this person is guided by 
laws which are the opposite of those which govern the activities of 
man as an individual. He desires to prove this by "facts". 
"The discovery of an economic process can never provide the inventor with a 
profit equal to that which he procures for society.... It has been remarked that railway 
enterprises are much less a source of wealth for the contractors than for the state.... 
The average cost of transporting commodities by road is 18 centimes per ton per 
kilometre, from the collection of the goods to their delivery. It has been calculated that 
a In the original both terms are given in English in parentheses after the 
French.— Ed. 
b In the original the words "the great pillar of human existence" are given in 
English in parentheses after the French.—Ed. 

=====第182页=====
154 Karl Marx 
at this rate an ordinary railway enterprise would not obtain 10 per cent net profit, a 
result approximately equal to that of a road-transport enterprise. But let us suppose 
that the speed of rail transport compared with that of road transport is as 4 is to 1. 
Since in society time is value  itself,  the railway would, prices being equal, present an 
advantage of 400 per cent over road transport. Yet this enormous advantage, very real 
for society, is far from being realised in the same proportion for the carrier, who, 
while bestowing upon society an extra value of 400 per cent, does not for his own part 
draw 10 per cent. To bring the matter home still more pointedly, let us suppose, in 
fact, that the railway puts up its rate to 25 centimes, the cost of road transport 
remaining at 18: it would instantly lose all its consignments. Senders, receivers, 
everybody would return to the van, to the primitive waggon if necessary. The 
locomotive would be abandoned. A social advantage of 400 per cent would be 
sacrificed to a private loss of 35 per cent. The reason for this is easily grasped: the 
advantage resulting from the speed of the railway is entirely social, and each 
individual participates in it only in a minute proportion (it must be remembered that 
at the moment we are dealing only with the transport of goods), while the loss strikes 
the consumer directly and personally. A social profit equal to 400 represents for the 
individual, if society is composed only of a million men, four ten-thousandths; while a 
loss of 33 per cent for the consumer would suppose a social deficit of 33 million." 
(Proudhon [I 75, 76].) 
We may even overlook the fact that M. Proudhon expresses a 
quadrupled speed as 400 per cent of the original speed; but that he 
should bring into relation the percentage of speed and the 
percentage of profit and establish a proportion between two 
relations which, although measured separately by percentages, are 
nevertheless incommensurable with each other, is to establish a 
proportion between the percentages without reference to denomina­
tions. 
Percentages are always percentages, 10 per cent and 400 per cent 
are commensurable; they are to each other as 10 is to 400. 
Therefore, concludes M. Proudhon, a profit of 10 per cent is worth 
forty times less than a quadrupled speed. To save appearances, he 
says that, for society, time is money.3 This error arises from his 
recollecting vaguely that there is a connection between value and 
labour time, and he hastens to identify labour time with transport 
time;  that is, he identifies the few firemen, guards and conductors, 
whose labour time is actually transport time, with the whole of society. 
Thus at one blow, speed has become capital, and in this case he is en­
tirely right in saying: "A profit of 400 per cent will be sacrificed to a 
loss of 35 per cent." After establishing this strange proposition as a 
mathematician, he gives us the explanation of it as an economist. 
"A social profit equal to 400 represents for the individual, if 
society is composed only of a million men, four ten-thousandths." 
In the original the words "time is money" are given in English in parentheses 
after the French.— Ed. 

=====第183页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 155 
Agreed; but we are dealing not with 400, but with 400 per cent, and a 
profit of 400 per cent represents for the individual 400 per cent, 
neither more nor less. Whatever be the capital, the dividends will 
always be in the ratio of 400 per cent. What does M. Proudhon do? 
He takes percentages for capital, and, as if he were afraid of his 
confusion not being manifest enough, "pointed" enough, he 
continues: 
"A loss of 33 per cent for the consumer would suppose a social 
deficit of 33 million." A loss of 33 per cent for the consumer remains 
a loss of 33 per cent for a million consumers. How then can M. 
Proudhon say pertinently that the social deficit in the case of a 33 per 
cent loss amounts to 33 million, when he knows neither the social 
capital nor even the capital of a single one of the persons concerned? 
Thus it was not enough for M. Proudhon to have confused capital 
with percentage;  he surpasses himself by identifying the capital sunk in 
an enterprise with the number of interested parties. 
"To bring the matter home still more pointedly let us suppose in 
fact" a given capital. A social profit of 400 per cent divided among a 
million participants, each of them interested to the extent of one 
franc,  would give 4 francs profit per head—and not 0.0004, as M. 
Proudhon alleges. Likewise a loss of 33 per cent for each of the 
participants represents a social deficit of 330,000 francs and not of 
33 million (100:33=1,000,000:330,000). 
M. Proudhon, preoccupied with his theory of the person-society, 
forgets to divide by 100 and gets a loss of 330,000 francs; but 4 francs 
profit per head makes 4 million francs profit for society. There 
remains for society a net profit of 3.670,000 francs. This accurate 
calculation proves precisely the contrary of that which M. Proudhon 
wanted to prove: namely, that the profits and losses of society are not 
in inverse ratio to the profits and losses of individuals. 
Having rectified these simple errors of pure calculation let us take 
a look at the consequences which we would arrive at, if we admitted 
this relation between speed and capital in the case of railways, as M. 
Proudhon gives it—minus the mistakes in calculation. Let us suppose 
that a transport four times as rapid costs four times as much; this 
transport would not yield less profit than cartage, which is four times 
slower and costs a quarter of the amount. Thus, if cartage takes 18 
centimes, rail transport could take 72 centimes. This would be, 
according to "the rigour of mathematics", the consequence of M. 
Proudhon's suppositions—always minus his mistakes in calculation. 
But here he is all of a sudden telling us that if, instead of 72 centimes, 
rail transport takes only 25, it would instantly lose all its consign­
ments. Decidedly we should have to go back to the van, to the 

=====第184页=====
156 Karl Marx 
primitive waggon even. Only, if we have any advice to give M. 
Proudhon, it is not to forget, in his Programme of the Progressive 
Association, to divide by 100. But, alas! it is scarcely to be hoped that 
our advice will be listened to, for M. Proudhon is so delighted with 
his "progressive" calculation, corresponding to the "progressive 
association", that he cries most emphatically: 
"I have already shown in Chapter II, by the solution of the antinomy of value, that 
the advantage of every useful discovery is incomparably less for the inventor, 
whatever he may do, than for society. I have carried the demonstration in regard to 
this point to the rigour of mathematicsl" [I 241] 
Let us return to the fiction of the person-society, a fiction which 
has no other aim than that of proving this simple truth—that a new 
invention which enables a given amount of labour to produce a 
greater number of commodities, lowers the marketable value of the 
product. Society, then, makes a profit, not by obtaining more 
exchange values, but by obtaining more commodities for the same 
value. As for the inventor, competition makes his profit fall 
successively to the general level of profits. Has M. Proudhon proved 
this proposition as he wanted to? No. This does not prevent him 
from reproaching the economists with failure to prove it. To prove 
to him on the contrary that they have proved it, we shall cite only 
Ricardo and Lauderdale— Ricardo, the head of the school which 
determines value by labour time, and Lauderdale, one of the most 
uncompromising defenders of the determination of value by supply 
and demand. Both have expounded the same proposition: 
"By constantly increasing the facility of production, we constantly diminish the 
value of some of the commodities before produced, though by the same means we not 
only add to the national riches, but also to the power of future production.... As soon as 
by the aid of machinery, or by the knowledge of natural philosophy, you oblige 
natural agents to do the work which was before done by man, the exchangeable value 
of such work falls accordingly. If ten men turned a corn mill, and it be discovered that 
by the assistance of wind, or of water, the labour of these ten men may be spared, the 
flour which is the produce partly of the work performed by the mill, would 
immediately fall in value, in proportion to the quantity of labour saved; and the society 
would be richer by the commodities which the labour of the ten men could produce, 
the funds destined for their maintenance being in no degree impaired." (Ricardo [II 
59, 82; Eng. ed., pp. 321-22, 336].) 
Lauderdale, in his turn, says: 
"In every instance where capital is so employed as to produce a profit, it uniformly 
arises,  either—from its supplanting a portion of labour, which would otherwise be 
performed by the hand of man; or—from its performing a portion of labour, which is 
beyond the reach of the personal exertion of man to accomplish.... The small profit 
which the proprietors of machinery generally acquire, when compared with the wages 
of labour, which the machine supplants, may perhaps create a suspicion of the 

=====第185页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 157 
rectitude of this opinion. Some fire-engines, for instance, draw more water from a 
coalpit in one day than could be conveyed on the shoulders of three hundred men, 
even assisted by the machinery of buckets; and a fire-engine undoubtedly performs its 
labour at a much smaller expense than the amount of the wages of those whose labour 
it thus supplants. This is, in truth, the case with all machinery. All machines must 
execute the labour that was antecedently performed at a cheaper rate than it could be 
done by the hand of man.... If such a privilege is given for the invention of a machine, 
which performs, by the labour of one man, a quantity of work that used to take the 
labour of four; as the possession of the exclusive privilege prevents any competition in 
doing the work, but what proceeds from the labour of the workmen, their wages, as 
long as the patent continues, must obviously form the measure of the patentee's 
charge; that is to secure employment, he has only to charge a little less than the wages 
of the labour which the machine supplants. But when the patent expires, other 
machines of the same nature are brought into competition; and then his charge must 
be regulated on the same principle as every other, according to the abundance of 
machines.... The profit of capital employed..., though it arises from supplanting 
labour, comes to be regulated, not by the value of the labour it supplants, but, as in all 
other cases, by the competition among the proprietors of capital; and it will be great or 
small in proportion to the quantity of capital that presents itself for performing the 
duty, and the demand for it." [Pp. 119, 123, 124-25, 134; Eng. ed., pp. 161, 166-67, 
168-69,  181-82.] 
Finally, then, so long as the profit is greater than in other 
industries, capital will be thrown into the new industry until the rate 
of profit falls to the general level. 
We have just seen that the example of the railway was scarcely 
suited to throw any light on the fiction of the person-society. 
Nevertheless, M. Proudhon boldly resumes his discourse: 
"With these points cleared up, nothing is easier than to explain how labour must 
leave a surplus for each producer." [I 77] 
What now follows belongs to classical antiquity. It is a poetical 
narrative intended to refresh the reader after the fatigue which the 
rigour of the preceding mathematical demonstrations must have 
caused him. M. Proudhon gives his person-society the name of 
Prometheus, whose high deeds he glorifies in these terms: 
"First of all, Prometheus emerging from the bosom of nature awakes to life, in a 
delightful inertia," etc., etc. "Prometheus sets to work, and on this first day, die first day 
of the second creation, Prometheus' product, i. e., his wealth, his well-being, is equal 
to ten. On the second day, Prometheus divides his labour, and his product becomes 
equal to a hundred. On the third day and on each of the following days, Prometheus 
invents machines, discovers new utilities in bodies, new forces in nature.... With every 
step of his industrial activity, there is an increase in the number of his products, which 
marks an enhancement of happiness for him. And since, after all, to consume is for 
him to produce, it is clear that every day's consumption, using up only the product of 
the day before, leaves a surplus product for the next day." [I 77, 78] 
This Prometheus of M. Proudhon's is a queer character, as weak in 
logic as in political economy. So long as Prometheus merely teaches 

=====第186页=====
158 Karl Marx 
us the division of labour, the application of machinery, the 
exploitation of natural forces and scientific power, multiplying the 
productive forces of men and giving a surplus compared with the 
produce of labour in isolation, this new Prometheus has the 
misfortune only of coming too late. But the moment Prometheus 
starts talking about production and consumption he becomes really 
ludicrous. To consume, for him, is to produce; he consumes the next 
day what he produced the day before, so that he is always one day in 
advance; this day in advance is his "surplus left by labour". But, if he 
consumes one day what he produced the day before, he must, on the 
first day, which had no day before, have done two days' work in 
order to be one day in advance later on. How did Prometheus earn 
this surplus on the first day, when there was neither division of 
labour, nor machinery, nor even any knowledge of physical forces 
other than fire? Thus the question, for all its being carried back "to 
the first day of the second creation", has not advanced a single step 
forward. This way of explaining things savours both of Greek and of 
Hebrew, it is at once mystical and allegorical. It gives M. Proudhon a 
perfect right to say: 
"I have proved by theory and by facts the principle that all labour must leave a 
surplus." [I 79] 
The "facts" are the famous progressive calculation; the theory is 
the myth of Prometheus. 
"But," continues M. Proudhon, "this principle, while being as certain as an 
arithmetical proposition, is as yet far from being realised by everyone. Whereas, with 
the progress of collective industry, every day's individual labour produces a greater 
and greater product, and whereas therefore, by a necessary consequence, the worker 
with the same wagea ought to become richer every day, there actuallv exist estates in 
society which profit and others which decay." fl 79-80] 
In 1770 the population of the United Kingdom of Great Britain 
was 15 million, and the productive population was 3 million. The 
scientific power of production equalled a population of about 12 
million individuals more. Therefore there were, altogether, 15 
million of productive forces. Thus the productive power was to the 
population as 1 is to  1 ; and the scientific power was to the manual 
power as 4 is to 1. 
In 1840 the population did not exceed 30 million: the productive 
population was 6 million. But the scientific power amounted to 650 
million; that is, it was to the whole population as 21 is to 1, and to 
manual power as 108 is to 1. 
d In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand the words "with the same wage" are 
underscored and the word "Nota" is written in the margin.— Ed. 

=====第187页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 159 
In English society the working day thus acquired in seventy years a 
surplus of 2,700 per cent productivity; that is, in 1840 it produced 27 
times as much as in 1770. According to M. Proudhon, the following 
question should be raised: why was not the English worker of 1840 
twenty-seven times as rich as the one of 1770? In raising such a 
question one would naturally be supposing that the English could 
have produced this wealth without the historical conditions in which 
it was produced, such as: private accumulation of capital, modern 
division of labour, automatic workshops, anarchical competition, the 
wage system—in short, everything that is based upon class antago­
nism. Now, these were precisely the necessary conditions of existence 
for the development of productive forces and of the surplus left by 
labour. Therefore, to obtain this development of productive forces 
and this surplus left by labour, there had to be classes which profited 
and classes which decayed. 
What then, ultimately, is this Prometheus resuscitated by M. 
Proudhon? It is society, social relations based on class antagonism. 
These relations are not relations between individual and individual, 
but between worker and capitalist, between farmer and landlord, etc. 
Wipe out these relations and you annihilate all society, and your 
Prometheus is nothing but a ghost without arms or legs; that is, 
without automatic workshops, without division of labour—in a word, 
without everything that you gave him to start with in order to make 
him obtain this surplus left by labour. 
If then, in theory, it sufficed to interpret, as M. Proudhon does, 
the formula of the surplus left by labour in the equalitarian sense, 
without taking into account the actual conditions of production, it 
should suffice, in practice, to share out equally among the workers all 
the wealth at present acquired, without changing in any way the 
present conditions of production. Such a distribution would certainly 
not assure a high degree of comfort to the individual participants. 
But M. Proudhon is not so pessimistic as one might think. As 
proportionality is everything for him, he has to see in his fully 
equipped Prometheus, that is, in present-day society, the beginnings 
of a realisation of his favourite idea. 
"But everywhere, too, the progress of wealth, that is, the proportion of values,  is the 
dominant law; and when economists hold up against the complaints of the social party 
the progressive growth of the public wealth, and the improved conditions of even the 
most unfortunate classes, they unwittingly proclaim a truth which is the condemnation 
of their theories." [I 80] 
What is, actually, collective wealth, public fortune? It is the wealth 
of the bourgeoisie—not that of each bourgeois in particular. Well, 
the economists have done nothing but show how, in the existing 

=====第188页=====
160 •Karl Marx 
relations of production, the wealth of the bourgeoisie has grown and 
must grow still further. As for the working classes, it still remains a 
very debatable question whether their condition has improved as a 
result of the increase in so-called public wealth. If the economists, in 
support of their optimism, cite the example of the English workers 
employed in the cotton industry, they see the condition of the latter 
only in the rare moments of trade prosperity. These moments of 
prosperity are to the periods of crisis and stagnation in the "correct 
proportion" of 3 to 10. But perhaps also, in speaking of 
improvement, the economists were thinking of the millions of 
workers who had to perish in the East Indies so as to procure for the 
million and a half workers employed in the same industry in England 
three years' prosperity out of ten. 
As for the temporary participation in the increase of public wealth, 
that is a different matter. The fact of temporary participation is 
explained by the theory of the economists. It is the confirmation of 
this theory and not its "condemnation", as M. Proudhon calls it. If 
there were anything to be condemned, it would surely be the system 
of M. Proudhon, who would reduce the worker, as we have shown, to 
the minimum wage, in spite of the increase in wealth. It is only by 
reducing the worker to the minimum wage that he would be able to 
apply the correct proportion of values, of "value constituted" by 
labour time. It is because wages, as a result of competition, oscillate 
now above, now below, the price of food necessary for the sustenance 
of the worker, that he can participate to a certain extent in the 
development of collective wealth, and can also perish from want. 
This is the whole theory of the economists who have no illusions on 
the subject. 
After his lengthy digressions on railways, on Prometheus, and on 
the new society to be reconstituted on "constituted value", M. 
Proudhon collects  himself;  emotion overpowers him and he cries in 
fatherly tones: 
"I beseech  the economists to question themselves for one moment, in the silence of 
their hearts—far from the prejudices that trouble them and regardless of the 
employment they are engaged in or hope to obtain, of the interests they subserve, or 
the approbation to which they aspire, of the honours which nurse their vanity—let 
them say whether before this day the principle that all labour must leave a surplus 
appeared to them with this chain of premises and consequences that we have 
revealed." [I 80] 

=====第189页=====
CHAPTER II 
THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 
§1. THE METHOD 
Here we are, in the heart of Germany. We shall now have to talk 
metaphysics while talking political economy. And in this again we 
shall but follow M. Proudhon's "contradictions". Just now he forced 
us to speak English, to become pretty well English ourselves. Now the 
scene is changing. M. Proudhon is transporting us to our dear 
fatherland and is forcing us, whether we like it or not, to become 
German again. 
If the Englishman transforms men into hats, the German 
transforms hats into ideas. The Englishman is Ricardo, a rich 
banker and distinguished economist; the German is Hegel, an 
ordinary professor of philosophy at the University of Berlin. 
Louis XV, the last absolute monarch and representative of the 
decadence of French royalty, had attached to his person a physician 
who was himself France's first economist. This physician, this 
economist, represented the imminent and certain triumph of the 
French bourgeoisie. Doctor Quesnay made a science out of political 
economy; he summarised it in his famous Tableau économique. 
Besides the thousand and one commentaries on this table which have 
appeared, we possess one by the doctor  himself.  It is the "Analyse du 
Tableau économique", followed by "seven observations importantes". 
M. Proudhon is another Dr. Quesnay. He is the Quesnay of the 
metaphysics of political economy. 
Now metaphysics—indeed all philosophy—can be summed up, 
according to Hegel, in method. We must, therefore, try to elucidate 
the method of M. Proudhon, which is at least as obscure as Tableau 
économique. It is for this reason that we are making seven more or less 
important observations. If Dr. Proudhon is not pleased with our 

=====第190页=====
162 Karl Marx 
observations, well, then,  he will have  to become  an Abbé Baudeau a 
and give  the  "explanation  of the  economico-metaphysical method" 
himself. 
First Observation 
"We are not  giving  a history according  to the order  in time,  but according  to the sequence 
of ideas.  Economic  phases  or categories  are in  their manifestation sometimes contempor­
ary, sometimes inverted.... Economic theories have nonetheless their logical  sequence 
and their serial relation  in the  understanding:  it is  this order that  we flatter ourselves  to 
have discovered." (Proudhon, tome  I, pp. 145 and 146.) 
M. Proudhon most certainly wanted  to frighten  the  French  by 
flinging quasi-Hegelian phrases  at them.  So we  have  to deal with  two 
men: first with  M. Proudhon,  and  then with Hegel.  How  does  M. 
Proudhon distinguish himself from other economists?  And  what 
part does Hegel play  in M.  Proudhon's political economy? 
Economists express  the  relations  of bourgeois production,  the 
division  of labour, credit, money,  etc., as  fixed, immutable, eternal 
categories.  M.  Proudhon,  who has  these ready-made categories 
before  him,  wants  to explain  to us the act of  formation,  the genesis  of 
these categories, principles, laws, ideas, thoughts. 
Economists explain  how  production takes place  in the  above-
mentioned relations,  but  what they  do not  explain  is how  these 
relations themselves  are  produced, that  is, the  historical movement 
which gave them birth.  M. Proudhon, taking these relations  for 
principles, categories, abstract thoughts,  has merely  to put  into order 
these thoughts, which  are to be  found alphabetically arranged  at the 
end of every treatise  on political economy.  The  economists' material 
is the  active, energetic life  of man; M.  Proudhon's material  is the 
dogmas  of the  economists.  But the  moment  we cease  to pursue  the 
historical movement  of production relations,  of which  the categories 
are but the  theoretical expression,  the  moment  we want  to see in 
these categories  no more than ideas, spontaneous thoughts, indepen­
dent  of real relations,  we are  forced  to attribute  the origin  of these 
thoughts  to the  movement  of pure reason.  How  does pure, eternal, 
impersonal reason give rise  to these thoughts?  How  does  it proceed 
in order  to produce them? 
If we had M.  Proudhon's intrepidity  in the  matter  of Hegelianism 
we should  say: it is  distinguished  in itself from  itself.  What does this 
mean? Impersonal reason, having outside itself neither  a base  on 
which  it can  pose  itself, nor an  object  to which  it can  oppose  itself, 
a An  allusion  to the  book:  N. Baudeau, Explication  du Tableau économique. — Ed. 

=====第191页=====
The Poverty  of Philosophy  163 
nor a subject with which  it can  compose  itself, is  forced  to turn head 
over heels,  in posing  itself,  opposing itself  and  composing  it­
self—position, opposition, composition.  Or, to  speak Greek—we 
have thesis, antithesis  and  synthesis.  For  those  who do not  know  the 
Hegelian language,  we shall give  the  ritual formula: affirmation, 
negation  and  negation  of the  negation. That  is what language means. 
It is certainly  not  Hebrew (with  due  apologies  to M.  Proudhon);  but 
it is the  language  of this pure reason, separate from  the  individual. 
Instead  of the  ordinary individual with  his  ordinary manner  of 
speaking  and  thinking  we have nothing  but  this ordinary manner 
purely  and  simply—without  the  individual. 
Is it surprising that everything,  in the  final abstraction—for  we 
have here  an abstraction,  and not an  analysis—presents itself  as a 
logical category?  Is it  surprising that,  if you let  drop little  by little  all 
that constitutes  the individuality  of a  house, leaving  out first  of all the 
materials  of which  it is  composed, then  the form that distinguishes  it, 
vou end up  with nothing  but a  body; that,  if you  leave  out of  account 
the limits  of this body,  you  soon have nothing  but a  space—that  if, 
finally,  you  leave  out of  account  the dimensions  of this space, there  is 
absolutely nothing left  but  pure quantity,  the logical category?  If we 
abstract thus from every subject  all the  alleged accidents, animate  or 
inanimate,  men or  things,  we are  right  in saying that  in the  final 
abstraction,  the only substance left  is the  logical categories. Thus  the 
metaphysicians  who, in  making these abstractions, think they  are 
making analyses,  and who, the  more they detach themselves from 
things, imagine themselves  to be  getting  all the  nearer  to the  point  of 
penetrating  to their core—these metaphysicians  in turn  are  right  in 
saying that things here below  are embroideries  of which  the  logical 
categories constitute  the  canvas. This  is what distinguishes  the 
philosopher from  the  Christian.  The  Christian,  in spite  of logic,  has 
only one  incarnation  of the  Logos; with  the  philosopher there  is 
no end to  incarnations.  If all  that exists,  all that lives  on land  and 
under water  can be  reduced  by abstraction  to a  logical category— 
if the  whole real world  can be  drowned thus  in a  world  of abstrac­
tions,  in the  world  of logical categories—who need  be astonished 
at it? 
All that exists,  all that lives  on land  and  under water, exists  and 
lives only  by some kind  of movement. Thus  the movement  of history 
produces social relations; industrial movement gives  us industrial 
products,  etc. 
Just as by  dint  of abstraction  we have transformed everything into 
a logical category,  so one has  only  to make  an abstraction  of every 
characteristic distinctive  of different movements  to attain movement 
7—1826 

=====第192页=====
164 Karl Marx 
in its abstract condition—purely formal movement,  the purely logical 
formula  of movement.  If one  finds  in logical categories  the substance 
of all things,  one  imagines  one has  found  in the  logical formula  of 
movement  the absolute  method,  which  not only explains  all things,  but 
also implies  the  movement  of things. 
It is of  this absolute method that Hegel speaks  in these terms: 
"Method  is the  absolute, unique, supreme, infinite force, which  no object  can 
resist;  it is the  tendency  of reason  to find itself again,  to recognise itself  in every 
object."80 (Logic,3  Vol. III.) 
All things being reduced  to a  logical category,  and  every 
movement, every  act of  production,  to method,  it follows naturally 
that every aggregate  of products  and  production,  of objects  and of 
movement,  can be  reduced  to applied metaphysics. What Hegel  has 
done  for  religion,  law, etc., M.  Proudhon seeks  to do for  political 
economy. 
So what  is this absolute method?  The  abstraction  of movement. 
What  is the  abstraction  of movement? Movement  in abstract 
condition. What  is movement  in abstract condition?  The  purely 
logical formula  of movement  or the  movement  of pure reason. 
Wherein does  the  movement  of pure reason consist?  In posing 
itself,  opposing  itself,  composing  itself; in  formulation itself  as 
thesis,  antithesis, synthesis;  or, yet  again,  in affirming  itself,  negating 
itself  and  negating  its negation. 
How does reason manage  to affirm  itself, to  pose itself  as a  definite 
category? That  is the  business  of reason itself  and of its  apologists. 
But once  it has  managed  to pose itself  as a  thesis, this thesis, this 
thought, opposed  to itself,  splits  up  into  two  contradictory 
thoughts—the positive  and the  negative,  the yes and the no. The 
struggle between these  two  antagonistic elements comprised  in the 
antithesis constitutes  the  dialectic movement.  The yes  becoming 
no, the no  becoming  yes, the yes  becoming both  yes and no, the no 
becoming both  no and yes, the  contraries balance, neutralise, 
paralyse each other.  The  fusion  of these  two  contradictory thoughts 
constitutes  a new  thought, which  is the  synthesis  of them. This 
thought splits  up once again into  two  contradictory thoughts, which 
in turn fuse into  a new  synthesis.  Of this travail  is born  a group  of 
thoughts. This group  of thoughts follows  the  same dialectic 
movement  as the  simple category,  and has a  contradictory group  as 
antithesis.  Of these  two  groups  of thoughts  is born  a new  group  of 
thoughts, which  is the  synthesis  of them. 
a G. W. F.  Hegel, Wissenschaft  der Logik. — Ed. 

=====第193页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 165 
Just as from the dialectic movement of the simple categories is 
born the group, so from the dialectic movement of the groups is 
born the series, and from the dialectic movement of the series is born 
the entire system. 
Apply this method to the categories of political economy, and you 
have the logic and metaphysics of political economy, or, in other 
words, you have the economic categories that everybody knows 
translated into a little-known language which makes them look as if 
they had newly blossomed forth in an intellect of pure reason; so 
much do these categories seem to engender one another, to be linked 
up and intertwined with one another by the very working of the 
dialectic movement. The reader must not get alarmed at these 
metaphysics with all their scaffolding of categories, groups, series 
and systems. M. Proudhon, in spite of all the trouble he has taken to 
scale the heights of the  system  of contradictions,  has never been able to 
raise himself above the first two rungs of simple thesis and antithesis; 
and even these he has mounted only twice, and on one of these two 
occasions he fell over backwards. 
Up to now we have expounded only the dialectics of Hegel. We 
shall see later how M. Proudhon has succeeded in reducing it to the 
meanest proportions. Thus, for Hegel, all that has happened and is 
still happening is only just what is happening in his own mind. Thus 
the philosophy of history is nothing but the history of philosophy, of 
his own philosophy. There is no longer a "history according to 
the order in time", there is only "the sequence of ideas in the 
understanding". He thinks he is constructing the world by the 
movement of thought, whereas he is merely reconstructing systemat­
ically and classifying by the absolute method the thoughts which are 
in the minds of all. 
Second Observation 
Economic categories are only the theoretical expressions, the 
abstractions of the social relations of production. M. Proudhon, 
holding things upside down like a true philosopher, sees in actual 
relations nothing but the incarnation of these principles, of these 
categories, which were slumbering—so M. Proudhon the phi­
losopher tells us—in the bosom of the "impersonal reason of hu­
manity". 
M. Proudhon the economist understands very well that men make 
cloth, linen or silk materials in definite relations of production. But 
what he has not understood is that these definite social relations are 

=====第194页=====
166 Karl Marx 
just as much produced by men as linen, flax, etc. Social relations are 
closely bound up with productive forces. In acquiring new produc­
tive forces men change their mode of production; and in changing 
their mode of production, in changing the way of earning their 
living, they change all their social relations. The hand-mill gives' you 
society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the 
industrial capitalist. 
The same men who establish their social relations in conformity 
with their material productivity, produce also principles, ideas and 
categories, in conformity with their social relations. 
Thus these ideas, these categories, are as little eternal as the 
relations they express. They are historical and transitory products. 
There is a continual movement of growth in productive forces, of 
destruction in social relations, of formation in ideas; the only 
immutable thing is the abstraction of movement—mors immortalisa 
Third Observation 
The production relations of every society form a whole. M. 
Proudhon considers economic relations as so many social phases, 
engendering one another, resulting one from the other like the 
antithesis from the thesis, and realising in their logical sequence the 
impersonal reason of humanity. 
The only drawback to this method is that when he comes to 
examine a single one of these phases, M. Proudhon cannot explain it 
without having recourse to all the other relations of society; which 
relations, however, he has not yet made his dialectic movement 
engender. When, after that, M. Proudhon, by means of pure reason, 
proceeds to give birth to these other phases, he treats them as if they 
were newborn babes. He forgets that they are of the same age as the 
first. 
Thus,  to arrive at the constitution of value, which for him is the 
basis of all economic evolutions, he could not do without division of 
labour, competition, etc. Yet in the series, in the understanding of 
M. Proudhon, in the logical sequence, these relations did not yet 
exist. 
In constructing the edifice of an ideological system by means of the 
categories of political economy, the limbs of the social system are 
a These words are from Lucretius' poem On the Nature of Things, Book III, line 
882 ("mortalem vitam mors immortalis ademit" — "mortal life has been usurped by 
death the immortal").— Ed. 

=====第195页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 167 
dislocated. The different limbs of society are converted into so many 
separate societies, following one upon the other. How, indeed, could 
the single logical formula of movement, of sequence, of time, explain 
the structure of society, in which all relations coexist simultaneously 
and support one another? 
Fourth Observation 
Let us see now to what modifications M. Proudhon subjects 
Hegel's dialectics when he applies it to political economy. 
For him, M. Proudhon, every economic category has two 
sides—one good, the other bad. He looks upon these categories as 
the petty bourgeois looks upon the great men of history: Napoleon 
was a great man; he did a lot of good; he also did a lot of harm. 
The good side and the bad side, the advantages and the drawbacks, 
taken together form for M. Proudhon the contradiction in every 
economic category. 
The problem to be solved: to keep the good side, while eliminating 
the bad. 
Slavery is an economic category like any other. Thus it also has its 
two sides. Let us leave alone the bad side and talk about the good side 
of slavery. Needless to say we are dealing only with direct slavery, 
with Negro slavery in Surinam, in Brazil, in the Southern States of 
North America. 
Direct slavery is just as much the pivot of bourgeois industry as 
machinery, credits, etc. Without slavery you have no cotton; without 
cotton you have no modern industry. It is slavery that gave the 
colonies their value; it is the colonies that created world trade, and it 
is world trade that is the precondition of large-scale industry. Thus 
slavery is an economic category of the greatest importance. 
Without slavery North America, the most progressive of countries, 
would be transformed into a patriarchal country. Wipe North 
America off the map of the world, and you will have anarchy—the 
complete decay of modern commerce and civilisation. Cause slavery 
to disappear and you will have wiped America off the map of 
nations.* 
* This was perfectly correct for the year 1847. At that time the world trade of the 
United States was limited mainly to import of immigrants and industrial products, and 
export of cotton and tobacco, i.e., of the products of southern slave labour. The 
Northern States produced mainly corn and meat for the slave States. It was only when 
the North produced corn and meat for export and also became an industrial country, 
and when the American cotton monopoly had to face powerful competition, in In-

=====第196页=====
168 Karl Marx 
Thus slavery, because it is an economic category, has always 
existed among the institutions of the peoples. Modern nations have 
been able only to disguise slavery in their own countries, but they 
have imposed it without disguise upon the New World. 
What would M. Proudhon do to save slavery? He would formulate 
the problem thus: preserve the good side of this economic category, 
eliminate the bad. 
Hegel has no problems to formulate. He has only dialectics. 
M. Proudhon has nothing of Hegel's dialectics but the language. For 
him the dialectic movement is the dogmatic distinction between good 
and bad. 
Let us for a moment consider M. Proudhon himself as a category. 
Let us examine his good and his bad side, his advantages and his 
drawbacks. 
If he has the advantage over Hegel of setting problems which he 
reserves the right of solving for the greater good of humanity, he has 
the drawback of being stricken with sterility when it is a question of 
engendering a new category by dialectical birth-throes. What 
constitutes dialectical movement is the coexistence of two contradic­
tory sides, their conflict and their fusion into a new category. The 
very setting of the problem of eliminating the bad side cuts short the 
dialectical movement. It is not the category which is posed and 
opposed to  itself,  by its contradictory nature, it is M. Proudhon who 
gets excited, perplexed and frets and fumes between the two sides of 
the category. 
Caught thus in a blind alley, from which it is difficult to escape by 
legal means, M. Proudhon takes a real flying leap which transports 
him at one bound into a new category. Then it is that to his 
astonished gaze is revealed the serial relation in the understanding. 
He takes the first category that comes handy and attributes to it 
arbitrarily the quality of supplying a remedy for the drawbacks of the 
category to be purified. Thus, if we are to believe M. Proudhon, 
taxes remedy the drawbacks of monopoly; the balance of trade, the 
drawbacks of taxes; landed property, the drawbacks of credit. 
By taking the economic categories thus successively, one by one, 
and making one the antidote to the other, M. Proudhon manages to 
make with this mixture of contradictions and antidotes to contradic­
tions,  two volumes of contradictions, which he rightly entitles: Le 
Système des contradictions économiques. 
dia, Egypt, Brazil, etc., that the abolition of slavery became possible. And even then 
this led to the ruin of the South, which did not succeed in replacing the open Negro 
slavery by the disguised slavery of Indian and Chinese coolies, F. E. [Note  to the German 
edition, 1885.] 

=====第197页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 169 
Fifth Observation 
"In the absolute reason all these ideas ... are equally simple, and general.... In fact, 
we attain knowledge only by a sort of scaffolding of our ideas. But truth in itself is 
independent of these dialectical symbols and free from the combinations of our 
minds." (Proudhon, tome II, p. 97.) 
Here all of a sudden, by a kind of switch-over of which we now 
know the secret, the metaphysics of political economy has become an 
illusion. Never has M. Proudhon spoken more truly. Indeed, from 
the moment the process of the dialectic movement is reduced to the 
simple process of opposing good to bad, of posing problems tending 
to eliminate the bad, and of administering one category as an 
antidote to another, the categories are deprived of all spontaneity; 
the idea "no longer functions"; there is no life left in it. It is no longer 
posed or decomposed into categories. The sequence of categories 
has become a sort of scaffolding. Dialectics has ceased to be the 
movement of absolute reason. There is no longer any dialectics but 
only, at the most, absolutely pure morality. 
When M. Proudhon spoke of the serial relation in  the understanding, 
of the logical sequence of  categories,  he declared positively that he did 
not want to give history according to the order in time, that is, in M. 
Proudhon's view, the historical sequence in which the categories have 
manifested themselves. Thus for him everything happened in the pure 
ether of  reason.  Everything was to be derived from this ether by means 
of dialectics. Now that he has to put this dialectics into practice, his 
reason is in default. M. Proudhon's dialectics runs counter to Hegel's 
dialectics, and now we have M. Proudhon reduced to saying that the 
order in which he gives the economic categories is no longer the 
order in which they engender one another. Economic evolutions are 
no longer the evolutions of reason  itself. 
What then does M. Proudhon give us? Real history, which is, 
according to M. Proudhon's understanding, the sequence in which 
the categories have manifested themselves in order of time? No! His­
tory as it takes place in the idea itself? Still less! That is, neither the 
profane history of the categories, nor their sacred history! What his­
tory does he give us then? The history of his own contradictions. Let 
us see how they go, and how they drag M. Proudhon in their train. 
Before entering upon this examination, which gives rise to the 
sixth important observation, we have yet another, less important 
observation to make. 
Let us admit with M. Proudhon that real history, history according 
to the order in time, is the historical sequence in which ideas 
categories and principles have manifested themselves. 

=====第198页=====
170 Karl Marx 
Each principle has had its own century in which to manifest  itself. 
The principle of authority, for example, had the eleventh century, 
just as the principle of individualism had the eighteenth century. In 
logical sequence, it was the century that belonged to the principle, 
and not the principle that belonged to the century. In other words it 
was the principle that made the history, and not the history that 
made the principle. When, consequently, in order to save principles 
as much as to save history, we ask ourselves why a particular 
principle was manifested in the eleventh or in the eighteenth century 
rather than in any other, we are necessarily forced to examine 
minutely what men were like in the eleventh century, what they were 
like in the eighteenth, what were their respective needs, their 
productive forces, their mode of production, the raw materials of 
their production—in short, what were the relations between man 
and man which resulted from all these conditions of existence. To 
get to the bottom of all these questions—what is this but to draw up 
the real, profane history of men in every century and to present 
these men as both the authors and the actors of their own drama? 
But the moment you present men as the actors and authors of their 
own history, you arrive—by a detour—at the real starting point, 
because you have abandoned those eternal principles of which you 
spoke at the outset. 
M. Proudhon has not even gone far enough along the sideroad 
which an ideologist takes to reach the main road of history. 
Sixth Observation 
Let us take the sideroad with M. Proudhon. 
We shall concede that economic relations, viewed as immutable 
laws, eternal principles, ideal categories, existed before active and 
energetic men did; we shall concede further that these laws, 
principles and categories had, since the beginning of time, slum­
bered "in the impersonal reason of humanity". We have already 
seen that, with all these changeless and motionless eternities, there is 
no history left; there is at most history in the idea, that is, history 
reflected in the dialectic movement of pure reason. M. Proudhon, by 
saying that, in the dialectic movement, ideas are no longer 
"differentiated', has done away with both the shadow of movement and 
the movement of shadows, by means of which one could still have 
created at least a semblance of history. Instead of that, he imputes to 
history his own impotence. He lays the blame on everything, even the 
French language. 

=====第199页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 171 
"It is inexact then," says M. Proudhon the philosopher, "to say that something 
appears, that something is produced: in civilisation as in the universe, everything has 
existed, has acted, from eternity.... This applies to the whole of social economy." (Tome 
II. p. 102.) 
So great is the productive force of the contradictions which 
function and which make M. Proudhon function, that, in trying to 
explain history, he is forced to deny it; in trying to explain the 
successive appearance of social relations, he denies that anything can 
appear: in trying to explain production, with all its phases, he 
questions whether anything can be  produced] 
Thus,  for M. Proudhon, there is no longer any history: no longer 
any sequence of ideas. And yet his book still exists; and it is precisely 
that book which is, to use his own expression, "history according to the 
sequence of ideas". How shall we find a formula, for M. Proudhon is a 
man of formulas, to help him to clear all these contradictions in one 
leap? 
To this end he has invented a new reason, which is neither the 
pure and virgin absolute reason, nor the common reason of men 
living and acting in different periods, but a reason quite apart—the 
reason of the person-society—of the subject, humanity—which under 
the pen of M. Proudhon figures at times also as "social genius", 
"general reason", or finally as "human reason". This reason, decked 
out under so many names, betrays itself nevertheless, at every 
moment, as the individual reason of M. Proudhon, with its good and 
its bad side, its antidotes and its problems. 
"Human reason does not create truth", hidden in the depths of 
absolute, eternal reason. It can only unveil it. But such truths as it 
has unveiled up to now are incomplete, insufficient and consequent­
ly contradictory. Hence, economic categories, being themselves 
truths discovered, revealed by human reason, by social genius, are 
equally incomplete and contain within themselves the germ of 
contradiction. Before M. Proudhon, social genius saw only the 
antagonistic elements, and not the synthetic formula, both hidden 
simultaneously in absolute reason. Economic relations, which merely 
realise on earth these insufficient truths, these incomplete categories, 
these contradictory notions, are consequently contradictory in 
themselves, and present two sides, one good, the other bad. 
To find complete truth, the notion, in all its fullness, the synthetic 
formula that is to annihilate the antinomy, this is the problem of 
social genius. This again is why, in M. Proudhon's illusion, this same 
social genius has been carried from one category to another without 
ever having been able, despite all its battery of categories, to snatch 
from God, from absolute reason, a synthetic formula. 

=====第200页=====
172 Karl Marx 
"At first, society" (social genius) "poses a primary fact, puts forward a hypothesis... 
a veritable antinomy, whose antagonistic results develop in the social economy in the 
same way as its consequences could have been deduced in the mind; so that industrial 
movement, following in all things the deduction of ideas, splits up into two currents, 
one of useful effects, the other of subversive results.... To bring harmony into 
the constitution of this two-sided principle, and to solve this antinomy, society gives 
rise to a  second,  which will soon be followed by a third; and the  progress  of social  genius 
will take place in this manner, until, having exhausted all its contradictions—I sup­
pose,  but it is not proved that there is a limit to human contradictions—it returns in 
one leap to all its former positions and in a single formula solves all its problems." 
(Tome I, p. 133.) 
Just as the antithesis was before turned into an antidote, so now the 
thesis becomes a hypothesis. This change of terms, coming from M. 
Proudhon, has no longer anything surprising for us! Human reason, 
which is anything but pure, having only incomplete vision, 
encounters at every step new problems to be solved. Every new thesis 
which it discovers in absolute reason and which is the negation of the 
first thesis, becomes for it a synthesis, which it accepts rather naively 
as the solution of the problem in question. It is thus that this reason 
frets and fumes in ever renewing contradictions until, coming to the 
end of the contradictions, it perceives that all its theses and syntheses 
are merely contradictory hypotheses. In its perplexity, "human 
reason, social genius, returns in one leap to all its former positions 
and in a single formula solves all its problems". This unique formula, 
by the way, constitutes M. Proudhon's true discovery. It is constituted 
value. 
Hypotheses are made only in view of some aim. The aim that social 
genius, speaking through the mouth of M. Proudhon, set itself in the 
first place, was to eliminate the bad in every economic category, in 
order to have nothing left but the good. For it, the good, the 
supreme good, the real practical aim, is equality. And why did the 
social genius aim at equality rather than inequality, fraternity, Catholi­
cism, or any other principle? Because "humanity has successively 
realised so many separate hypotheses only in view of a superior 
hypothesis" [I 12], which precisely is equality. In other words: 
because equality is M. Proudhon's ideal. He imagines that the 
division of labour, credit, the workshop—all economic rela­
tions—were invented merely for the benefit of equality, and yet they 
always ended up by turning against it. Since history and the fiction of 
M. Proudhon contradict each other at every step, the latter concludes 
that there is a contradiction. If there is a contradiction, it exists only 
between his fixed idea and real movement. 
Henceforth the good side of an economic relation is that which 
affirms equality; the bad side, that which negates it and affirms 

=====第201页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 173 
inequality. Every new category is a hypothesis of the social genius to 
eliminate the inequality engendered by the preceding hypothesis. In 
short, equality is the primordial intention, the mystical tendency, the 
providential aim that the social genius has constantly before its eyes as 
it whirls in the circle of economic contradictions. Thus Providence is 
the locomotive which makes the whole of M. Proudhon's economic 
baggage move better than his pure and volatilised reason. He has 
devoted to providence a whole chapter, which follows the one on 
taxes.81 
Providence, providential aim, this is the great word used today to 
explain the march of history. In fact, this word explains nothing. It is 
at most a rhetorical form, one of the various ways of paraphrasing 
facts. 
It is a fact that in Scotland landed property acquired a new value 
through the development of English industry. This industry opened 
up new outlets for wool. In order to produce wool on a large scale, 
arable land had to be transformed into pastures. To effect this 
transformation, the estates had to be concentrated. To concentrate 
the estates, small holdings had first to be abolished, thousands of 
tenants had to be driven from their native soil and a few shepherds 
in charge of millions of sheep to be installed in their place. Thus, by 
successive transformations, landed property in Scotland has resulted 
in men being driven out by sheep. Now say that the providential 
aim of the institution of landed property in Scotland was to have 
men driven out by sheep, and you will have made providential 
history. 
Of course, the tendency towards equality belongs to our century. 
To say now that all former centuries, with entirely different needs, 
means of production, etc., worked providentially for the realisation 
of equality is, first of all, to substitute the means and the men of our 
century for the men and the means of earlier centuries and to 
misunderstand the historical movement by which the successive 
generations transformed the results acquired by the generations that 
preceded them. Economists know very well that the very thing that 
was for the one a finished product was for the other but the raw 
material for new production. 
Suppose, as M. Proudhon does, that social genius produced, or 
rather improvised, the feudal lords with the providential aim of 
transforming the settlers into responsible and equally-placed workers: 
and you will have effected a substitution of aims and of persons 
worthy of the Providence that instituted landed property in 
Scotland, in order to give itself the malicious pleasure of having men 
driven out by sheep. 

=====第202页=====
174 Karl Marx 
But since M. Proudhon takes such a tender interest in Providence, 
we refer him to the Histoire de l'économie politique of M. de 
Villeneuve-Bargemont, who likewise goes in pursuit of a providen­
tial aim. This aim, however, is not equality, but Catholicism. 
Seventh and Last Observation 
Economists have a singular method of procedure. There are only 
two kinds of institutions for them, artificial and natural. The 
institutions of feudalism are artificial institutions, those of the 
bourgeoisie are natural institutions. In this they resemble the 
theologians, who likewise establish two kinds of religion. Every 
religion which is not theirs is an invention of men, while their own is 
an emanation from God. When the economists say that present-day 
relations—the relations of bourgeois production—are natural, they 
imply that these are the relations in which wealth is created and 
productive forces developed in conformity with the laws of nature. 
These relations therefore are themselves natural laws independent 
of the influence of time. They are eternal laws which must always 
govern society. Thus there has been history, but there is no longer 
any. There has been history, since there were the institutions 
of feudalism, and in these institutions of feudalism we find 
quite different relations of production from those of bourgeois 
society, which the economists try to pass off as natural and as such, 
eternal. 
Feudalism also had its proletariat—serfage, which contained all 
the germs of the bourgeoisie. Feudal production also had two 
antagonistic elements which are likewise designated by the name of 
the good side and the bad side of feudalism, irrespective of the fact 
that it is always the bad side that in the end triumphs over the good 
side.  It is the bad side that produces the movement which makes 
history, by providing a struggle. If, during the epoch of the 
domination of feudalism, the economists, enthusiastic over the 
knightly virtues, the beautiful harmony between rights and duties, 
the patriarchal life of the towns, the prosperous condition of 
domestic industry in the countryside, the development of industry 
organised into corporations, guilds and fraternities, in short, every­
thing that constitutes the good side of feudalism, had set themselves 
the problem of eliminating everything that cast a shadow on this 
picture—serfdom, privileges, anarchy—what would have happened? 
All the elements which called forth the struggle would have been 

=====第203页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 175 
destroyed, and the development of the bourgeoisie nipped in the 
bud. One would have set oneself the absurd problem of eliminating 
history. 
After the triumph of the bourgeoisie there was no longer any 
question of the good or the bad side of feudalism. The bourgeoisie 
took possession of the productive forces it had developed under 
feudalism. All the old economic forms, the corresponding civil 
relations, the political system which was the official expression of the 
old civil society, were smashed. 
Thus feudal production, to be judged properly, must be 
considered as a mode of production founded on antagonism. It must 
be shown how wealth was produced within this antagonism, how the 
productive forces were developed at the same time as class 
antagonisms, how one of the classes, the bad side, the drawback of 
society, went on growing until the material conditions for its 
emancipation had attained full maturity. Is not this as good as saying 
that the mode of production, the relations in which productive forces 
are developed, are anything but eternal laws, but that they 
correspond to a definite development of men and of their 
productive forces, and that a change in men's productive forces 
necessarily brings about a change in their3 relations of production? 
As the main thing is not to be deprived of the fruits of civilisation, of 
the acquired productive forces, the traditional forms in which they 
were produced must be smashed. From this moment the revolu­
tionary class becomes conservative. 
The bourgeoisie begins with a proletariat which is itself a relic of 
the proletariatb of feudal times. In the course of its historical 
development, the bourgeoisie necessarily develops its antagonistic 
character, which at first is more or less disguised, existing only in a 
latent state. As the bourgeoisie develops, there develops in its bosom 
a new proletariat, a modern proletariat; there develops a struggle 
between the proletarian class and the bourgeois class, a struggle 
which, before being felt, perceived, appreciated, understood, 
avowed and proclaimed aloud by both sides, expresses  itself,  to start 
with, merely in partial and momentary conflicts, in subversive acts. 
a In the 1847 edition the word "leurs" ("their") is not used; in the copy with 
corrections in Marx's hand and the one presented to N. Utina the word "leurs" is 
inserted instead of "les" ("the"). The correction was reproduced in the German 
edition of 1885 and the French edition of 1896.— Ed. 
In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand the words "du proletariat" ("of the 
proletariat") are underscored and the words "de la classe travailleuse" ("of the class of 
workers") are written in Engels' hand in the margin. These latter words are 
reproduced in the copy presented to N. Utina.— Ed. 

=====第204页=====
176 Karl Marx 
On the other hand, if all the members of the modern bourgeoisie 
have the same interests inasmuch as they form a class as against 
another class, they have opposite, antagonistic interests inasmuch as 
they stand face to face with one another. This opposition of interests 
results from the economic conditions of their bourgeois life. From 
day to day it thus becomes clearer tnat the production relations in 
which the bourgeoisie moves have not a simple, uniform character, 
but a dual character; that in the selfsame relations in which wealth is 
produced, poverty is produced also; that in the selfsame relations in 
which there is a development of the productive forces, there is also a 
force producing repression; that these relations produce bourgeois 
wealth, i. e., the wealth of the bourgeois class, only by continually 
annihilating the wealth of the individual members of this class and by 
producing an ever-growing proletariat. 
The more the antagonistic character comes to light, the more the 
economists, the scientific representatives of bourgeois production, 
find themselves in conflict with their own theory; and different 
schools arise. 
We have the fatalist economists, who in their theory are as 
indifferent to what they call the drawbacks of bourgeois production 
as the bourgeois themselves are in practice to the sufferings of the 
proletarians who help them to acquire wealth. In this fatalist school 
there are Classics and Romantics. The Classics, like Adam Smith and 
Ricardo, represent a bourgeoisie which, while still struggling with the 
relics of feudal society, works only to purge economic relations of 
feudal taints, to increase the productive forces and to give a new 
upsurge to industry and commerce. The proletariat that takes part in 
this struggle and is absorbe'd in this feverish labour experiences only 
passing, accidental sufferings, and itself regards them as such. 
Economists like Adam Smith and Ricardo, who are the historians of 
this epoch, have no other mission than that of showing how wealth is 
acquired in bourgeois production relations, of formulating these 
relations into categories, into laws, and of showing how superior 
these laws, these categories, are for the production of wealth to the 
laws and categories of feudal society. Poverty is in their eyes merely 
the pang which accompanies every childbirth, in nature as in 
industry. 
The Romantics belong to our own age, in which the bourgeoisie is 
in direct opposition to the proletariat; in which poverty is 
engendered in as great abundance as wealth. The economists now 
pose as blasé fatalists, who, from their elevated position, cast a 
proudly disdainful glance at the human machines who manufacture 
wealth. They copy all the developments given by their predecessors, 

=====第205页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 177 
and the indifference which in the latter was merely naïveté becomes 
in them coquetry. 
Next comes the humanitarian  school,  which takes to heart the bad 
side of present-day production relations. It seeks, by way of easing its 
conscience, to palliate even if slightly the real contrasts; it sincerely 
deplores the distress of the proletariat, the unbridled competition of 
the bourgeois among themselves; it counsels the workers to be 
sober, to work hard and to have few children; it advises the bour­
geois to put a judicious ardour into production. The whole theory 
of this school rests on interminable distinctions between theory 
and practice, between principles and results, between idea 
and application, between content and form, between essence and 
reality, between law and fact, between the good side and the bad 
side. 
The philanthropic school is the humanitarian school carried to 
perfection. It denies the necessity of antagonism; it wants to turn all 
men into bourgeois; it wants to realise theory insofar as it is 
distinguished from practice and contains no antagonism. It goes 
without saying that, in theory, it is easy to make an abstraction of the 
contradictions that are met with at every moment in actual reality. 
This theory would therefore become idealised reality. The philan­
thropists, then, want to retain the categories which express bour­
geois relations, without the antagonism which constitutes them 
and is inseparable from them. They think they are seriously 
fighting bourgeois practice, and they are more bourgeois than the 
others. 
Just as the economists are the scientific representatives of the 
bourgeois class, so the socialists and the Communists are the 
theoreticians of the proletarian class. So long as the proletariat is not 
yet sufficiently developed to constitute itself as a class, and 
consequently so long as the very struggle of the proletariat with the 
bourgeoisie has not yet assumed a political character, and the 
productive forces are not yet sufficiently developed in the bosom of 
the bourgeoisie itself to enable us to catch a glimpse of the material 
conditions necessary for the emancipation of the proletariat and for 
the formation of a new society, these theoreticians are merely 
Utopians who, to meet the wants of the oppressed classes, improvise 
systems and go in search of a regenerating science. But in the 
measure that history moves forward, and with it the struggle of the 
proletariat assumes clearer outlines, they no longer need to seek 
science in their minds; they have only to take note of what is 
happening before their eyes and to Become its mouthpiece. So long 
as they look for science and merely make systems, so long as they are 

=====第206页=====
178 Karl Mark 
at the  beginning  of the  struggle, they  see in  poverty nothing  but 
poverty, without seeing in  it the revolutionary, subversive side, which 
will overthrow  the old  society. From  the  moment they  see  this side, 
science, which  is produced by the historical movement and associating 
itself consciously with  it, has ceased  to be doctrinaire and has become 
revolutionary. 
Let us return  to M.  Proudhon. 
Every economic relation  has a  good  and a bad  side;  it is the one 
point  on which  M. Proudhon does  not  give himself  the  lie. He sees 
the good side expounded  by the  economists;  the bad  side  he 
sees denounced  by the  socialists.  He  borrows from  the  econo­
mists  the  necessity  of eternal relations;  he  borrows from  the 
socialists  the  illusion  of seeing  in poverty nothing but poverty.  He is 
in agreement with both  in wanting  to fall back upon  the  authority 
of science. Science  for him  reduces itself  to the  slender pro­
portions  of a  scientific formula;  he is the man in  search  of formu­
las. Thus  it is  that  M.  Proudhon flatters himself  on having given 
a criticism  of both political economy  and  communism:  he is 
beneath them both. Beneath  the  economists, since,  as a  philos­
opher  who has at his  elbow  a magic formula,  he thought  he could 
dispense with going into purely economic details; beneath  the 
socialists, because  he has  neither courage enough  nor  insight 
enough  to rise,  be it  even speculatively, above  the  bourgeois 
horizon. 
He wants  to be the  synthesis—he  is a  composite error. 
He wants  to soar as the man  of science above the bourgeois and  the 
proletarians;  he is  merely  the  petty bourgeois, continually tossed 
back and  forth between capital  and  labour, political economy  and 
communism. 
§2. DIVISION  OF  LABOUR  AND  MACHINERY 
The division  of labour, according  to M.  Proudhon, opens  the 
series  of economic evolutions. 
Good side  of 
the division  of labour "Considered  in its  essence,  the  divi­
sion of labour  is the  manner  in which 
equality  of conditions  and of  intelli 
'^ence  is realised." (Tome  I, p. 93.) 

=====第207页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 179 
Bad side of 
the division of labour 
Problem to be solved "The division of labour has become 
for us an instrument of poverty." 
(Tome I, p. 94.) 
Variant 
"Labour, by dividing itself according 
to the law which is peculiar to it and 
which is the primary condition of its 
fruitfulness, ends in the negation of its 
aims and destroys  itself."  (Tome I, p. 
V 94.) 
To find the "recomposition which 
wipes out the drawbacks of the divi­
sion, while retaining its useful effects." 
UTome I, p. 97.) 
The division of labour is, according to M. Proudhon, an eternal 
law, a simple, abstract category. Therefore the abstraction, the idea, 
the word must suffice for him to explain the division of labour at 
different historical epochs. Castes, corporations, manufacture, 
large-scale industry must be explained by the single word divide. 
First study carefully the meaning of "divide", and you will have no 
need to study the numerous influences which give the division of 
labour a definite character in each epoch. 
Certainly, it would be oversimplifying things to reduce them to 
M. Proudhon's categories. History does not proceed so categorically. 
It took three whole centuries in Germany to establish the first big 
division of labour, the separation of the towns from the country. In 
proportion as this one relation of town and country was modified, 
the whole of society was modified. To take only this one aspect of the 
division of labour, you have the republics of antiquity and you have 
Christian feudalism; you have old England with its barons and you 
have modern England with its cotton lords.3 In the fourteenth and 
fifteenth centuries, when there were as yet no colonies, when 
America did not yet exist for Europe, when Asia existed only 
through the intermediary of Constantinople, when the Mediterra­
nean was the centre of commercial activity, the division of labour had 
a very different form, a very different aspect from that of the 
seventeenth century, when the Spanish, the Portuguese, the Dutch, 
the English, and the French had colonies established in all parts of 
a In the original the words "cotton lords" are given in English in parentheses after 
the French.— Ed. 

=====第208页=====
180 Karl Marx 
the world. The extent 01 the market, its physiognomy, give to the 
division of labour at different periods a physiognomy, a character, 
which it would be difficult to deduce from the single word divide, 
from the idea, from the category. 
"All economists since Adam Smith," says M. Proudhon, "have pointed out the 
advantages and  drawbacks  of the law of division, but insist much more on the first than 
on the second, because that was more serviceable for their optimism, and none of 
them has ever wondered what could be the drawbacks to a law.... How does the same 
principle, pursued vigorously to its consequences, lead to diametrically opposite 
results? Not one economist before or since A. Smith has even perceived that here was a 
problem to elucidate. Say goes to the length of recognising that in the division of 
labour the same cause that produces the good engenders the bad." [I 95-96] 
Adam Smith goes further than M. Proudhon thinks. He saw 
clearly that 
"the difference of natural talents in different men is, in reality, much less than we 
are aware of; and the very different genius which appears to distinguish men of 
different professions, when grown up to maturity, is not so much the cause as the 
effect of the division of labour".3 
In principle, a porter differs less from a philosopher than a mastiff 
from a greyhound. It is the division of labour which has set a gulf 
between them. All this does not prevent M. Proudhon from saying 
elsewhere that Adam Smith had not the slightest idea of the 
drawbacks produced by the division of labour. It is this again that 
makes him say that J. B. Say was the first to recognise "that in the 
division of labour the same cause that produces the good engenders 
the bad". [I 96] 
But let us listen to Lemontey; Suum cuique. 
"M. J. B. Say has done me the honour of adopting in his excellent treatise on 
political economy the principle that I brought to light in this fragment on the moral 
influence of the division of labour. The somewhat frivolous title of my book b  doubtless 
prevented him from citing me. It is only to this motive that I can attribute the silence 
of a writer too rich in his own stock to disavow so modest a loan." (Lemontey 
[»"Influence morale de la division du travail"], Œuvres  complètes,  tome I, p. 245, Paris, 
1840.) 
Let us do him this justice: Lemontey wittily exposed the 
regrettable consequences of the division of labour as it is constituted 
today, and M. Proudhon found nothing to add to it. But now that, 
through the fault of M. Proudhon, we have been drawn into this 
question of priority, let us say again, in passing, that long before M. 
a A. Smith, Recherches sur la nature et les causes de la  richesse  des nations, t. I, Paris, 
1802,  pp. 33-34; Eng. ed., pp. 56-57.— Ed. 
b P. E. Lemontey, Raison, folie, chacun son mot; petit cours de morale mis a  la portée des 
vieux enfants. — Ed. 

=====第209页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 181 
Lemontey, and seventeen years before Adam Smith, who was a pupil 
of A. Ferguson, the last-named gave a clear exposition of the subject 
in a chapter which deals specifically with the division of labour. 
"It may even be doubted, whether the measure of national capacity increases with 
the advancement of arts. Many mechanical arts ... succeed best under a total 
suppression of sentiment and reason; and ignorance is the mother of industry as well 
as of superstition. Reflection and fancy are subject to err; but a habit of moving the 
hand, or the foot, is independent of either. Manufactures, accordingly, prosper most, 
where the mind is least consulted, and where the workshop may, without any great 
effort of imagination, be considered as an engine, the parts of which are men.... The 
general officer may be a great proficient in the knowledge of war, while the skill of the 
soldier is confined to a few motions of the hand and the foot. The former may have 
gained what the latter has lost.... And thinking  itself,  in this age of separations, may 
become a peculiar craft." (A. Ferguson, Essai sur l'histoire de la  société  civile,  Paris, 1783 
[II 108, 109, 110; Eng. ed., pp. 280, 281].) 
To bring this literary survey to a close, we expressly deny that "all 
economists have insisted far more on the advantages than on the 
drawbacks of the division of labour". It suffices to mention 
Sismondi. 
Thus,  as far as the advantages of the division of labour are 
concerned, M. Proudhon had nothing further to do than to 
paraphrase more or less pompously the general propositions known 
to everybody. 
Let us now see how he derives from the division of labour, taken as 
a general law, as a category, as a thought, the drawbacks which are 
attached to it. How is it that this category, this law implies an unequal 
distribution of labour to the detriment of M. Proudhon's equalitarian 
system? 
"At this solemn hour of the division of labour, the storm winds begin to blow over 
humanity. Progress does not take place for all in an equal and uniform manner.... It 
begins by taking possession of a small number of the privileged.... It is this preference 
for persons on the part of progress that has for so long kept up the belief in the 
natural and providential inequality of conditions, has given rise to castes, and 
hierarchically constituted all societies." (Proudhon, tome I, p. 94.) 
The division of labour created castes. Now, castes are the 
drawbacks of the division of labour; thus it is the division of labour 
that has engendered the drawbacks. Quod erat demonstrandum. Will 
you go further and ask what made the division of labour create 
castes, hierarchical constitutions and privileged persons? M. 
Proudhon will tell you: Progress. And what made progress? 
Limitation. Limitation, for M. Proudhon, is discrimination of 
persons on the part of progress. 
After philosophy comes history. It is no longer either descriptive 
history or dialectical history, it is comparative history. M. Proudhon 

=====第210页=====
182 Karl Marx 
establishes a parallel between the present-day printing worker and 
the printing worker of the Middle Ages; between the worker of 
Creusot 82 and the country blacksmith; between the man of letters of 
today and the man of letters of the Middle Ages, and he weighs down 
the balance on the side of those who belong more or less to the 
division of labour as the Middle Ages constituted or transmitted it. 
He opposes the division of labour of one historical epoch to the 
division of labour of another historical epoch. Was that what M. 
Proudhon had to prove? No. He should have shown us the 
drawbacks of the division of labour in general, of the division of 
labour as a category. Besides, why stress this part of M. Proudhon's 
work, since a little later we shall see him formally retract all these 
alleged arguments? 
"The first effect of fractional labour," continues M. Proudhon, "after the 
depravation of  the soul,  is the lengthening of the shifts, which grow in inverse ratio to the 
sum total of intelligence expended.... But as the length of the shifts cannot exceed 
sixteen to eighteen hours per day, since the compensation cannot be taken out of the 
time,  it will be taken out of the price, and the wages will diminish.... What is certain, 
and the only thing for us to note, is that the universal  conscience  does not assess at the 
same rate the work of a foreman and the labour of an unskilled worker. It is therefore 
necessary to reduce the price of the day's work; so that the worker, after having been 
afflicted in his soul by a degrading function, cannot escape being struck in his body by 
the meagreness of his remuneration." [I 97, 98] 
We pass over the logical value of these syllogisms, which Kant 
would call paralogisms which lead astray. 
This is the substance of it: 
The division of labour reduces the worker to a degrading 
function; to this degrading function corresponds a depraved soul; to 
the depravation of the soul is befitting an ever-increasing wage 
reduction. And to prove that this reduction is befitting to a depraved 
soul, M. Proudhon says, to relieve his conscience, that the universal 
conscience wills it thus. Is M. Proudhon's soul to be reckoned as a 
part of the universal conscience? 
Machinery is, for M. Proudhon, "the logical antithesis of the 
division of labour" [I 135], and in support of his dialectics, he begins 
by transforming the machinery into the workshop. 
After presupposing the modern workshop, in order to make 
poverty the outcome of the division of labour, M. Proudhon 
presupposes poverty engendered by the division of labour, in order 
to come to the workshop and be able to represent it as the dialectical 
negation of that poverty. After striking the worker morally by a 
degrading function, physically by the meagreness of the wage; after 
putting the worker under the  dependence  of the foreman, and debasing 

=====第211页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 183 
his work to the labour of an unskilled  worker,  he lays the blame again on 
the workshop and the machinery for degrading the worker "by giving 
him a master", and he completes his abasement by making him "sink 
from the rank of artisan to that of navvy". [I 164] Excellent dialectics! 
And if he only stopped there! But no, he has to have a new history of 
the division of labour, not any longer to derive the contradictions 
from it, but to reconstruct the workshop after his own fashion. To 
attain this end he finds himself compelled to forget all he has just 
said about division. 
Labour is organised, is divided differently according to the 
instruments it has at its disposal. The hand-mill presupposes a 
different division of labour from the steam-mill. Thus it is slapping 
history in the face to want to begin with the division of labour in 
general, in order to arrive subsequently at a specific instrument of 
production, machinery. 
Machinery is no more an economic category than the bullock that 
drags the plough. Machinery is merely a productive force. The 
modern workshop, which is based on the application of machinery, is 
a social production relation, an economic category. 
Let us see now how things happen in M. Proudhon's brilliant 
imagination. 
"In society, the incessant appearance of machinery is the antithesis, the inverse 
formula of the division of labour: it is the protest of the industrial genius against 
fractional and homicidal labour. What, actually, is a machine? A way of uniting different 
portions of labour which had been separated by the division of labour. Every machine 
can be defined as a summary of several operations.... Thus through the machine there 
will be a restoration of  the worker....  Machinery, which in political economy places itself in 
contradiction to the division of labour, represents synthesis, which in the human mind 
is opposed to analysis.... Division merely separated the different parts of labour, 
letting each one devote himself to the speciality which most suited him; the workshop 
groups the workers according to the relation of each part to the whole.... It introduces 
the principle of authority in labour.... But this is not all; the machine or the workshop, 
after degrading the worker by giving him a master, completes his abasement by 
making him sink from the rank of artisan to that of navvy.... The period we are going 
through at the moment, that of machinery, is distinguished by a special characteristic, 
the wage system. The wage system is subsequent to the division of labour and to 
exchange." [I 135, 136, 161, 164, 161] 
Just a simple remark to M. Proudhon. The separation of the 
different parts of labour, leaving to each one the opportunity of 
devoting himself to the speciality best suited to him—a separation 
which M. Proudhon dates from the beginning of the world—exists 
only in modern industry under the rule of competition. 
M. Proudhon goes on to give us a most "interesting genealogy", to 
show how the workshop arose from the division of labour and the 
wage system from the workshop. 

=====第212页=====
184 Karl Marx 
1) He supposes a man who "noticed that by dividing up 
production into its different parts and having each one performed 
by a separate worker" the forces of production would be multi­
plied. 
2) This man, "grasping the thread of this idea, tells himself that, 
by forming a permanent group of workers selected for the special 
purpose he  sets  himself,  he will obtain a more sustained production, 
etc."  [I 161] 
3) This man makes a proposal to other men, to make them grasp 
his idea and the thread of his idea. 
4) This man, at the beginning of industry, deals on terms of equality 
with his companions who later become his workmen. 
5) "One realises, in fact, that this original equality had rapidly to 
disappear in view of the advantageous position of the master and the 
dependence of the wage worker." [I 163] 
There we have another example of M. Proudhon's historical and 
descriptive  method. 
Let us now examine, from the historical and economic point of 
view, whether the workshop or the machine really introduced the 
principle of authority in society subsequently to the division of labour; 
whether it rehabilitated the worker on the one hand, while 
submitting him to authority on the other; whether the machine is the 
recomposition of divided labour, the  synthesis  of labour as opposed to 
its analysis. 
Society as a whole has this in common with the interior of a 
workshop, that it too has its division of labour. If one took as a model 
the division of labour in a modern workshop, in order to apply it to a 
whole society, the society best organised for the production of wealth 
would undoubtedly be that which had a single chief employer, 
distributing tasks to the different members of the community 
according to a previously fixed rule. But this is by no means the case. 
While inside the modern workshop the division of labour is 
meticulously regulated by the authority of the employer, modern 
society has no other rule, no other authority for the distribution of 
labour than free competition. 
Under the patriarchal system, under the caste system, under the 
feudal and guild system, there was division of labour in the whole of 
society according to fixed rules. Were these rules established by a 
legislator? No. Originally born of the conditions of material 
production, they were raised to the status of laws only much later. In 
this way these different forms of the division of labour became so 
many bases of social organisation. As for the division of labour in the 
workshop, it was very little developed in all these forms of society. 

=====第213页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 185 
It can even be laid down as a general rule that the less authority 
presides over the division of labour inside society, the more the 
division of labour develops inside the workshop, and the more it is 
subjected there to the authority of a single person. Thus authority in 
the workshop and authority in society, in relation to the division of 
labour, are in inverse ratio to each other. 
The question now is what kind of workshop it is in which the 
occupations are very much separated, where each worker's task is 
reduced to a very simple operation, and where the authority, capital, 
groups and directs the work. How was this workshop brought into 
existence? In order to answer this question we shall have to examine 
how manufacturing industry, properly so-called, has developed. I 
am speaking here of that industry which is not yet modern industry, 
with its machinery, but which is already no longer the industry of the 
artisans of the Middle Ages, nor domestic industry. We shall not go 
into great detail: we shall merely give a few main points to show that 
history cannot be made with formulas. 
One of the most indispensable conditions for the formation of 
manufacturing industry was the accumulation of capital, facili­
tated by the discovery of America and the import of its precious 
metals. 
It is sufficiently proved that the increase in the means of exchange 
resulted in the depreciation of wages and land rents, on the one 
hand, and the growth of industrial profits on the other. In other 
words: to the extent that the propertied class and the class of 
workers, the feudal lords and the people, sank, to that extent the 
capitalist class, the bourgeoisie, rose. 
There were yet other circumstances which contributed simultane­
ously to the development of manufacturing industry: the increase of 
commodities put into circulation from the moment trade penetrated 
to the East Indies by way of the Cape of Good Hope; the colonial 
system; the development of maritime trade. 
Another point which has not yet been sufficiently appreciated in 
the history of manufacturing industry is the disbanding of the 
numerous retinues of feudal lords, whose subordinate ranks became 
vagrants before entering the workshop. The creation of the 
workshop was preceded by an almost universal vagrancy in the 
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The workshop found, besides, a 
powerful support in the many peasants who, continually driven from 
the country owing to the transformation of the fields into pastures 
and to the progress in agriculture which necessitated fewer hands for 
the tillage of the soil, went on congregating in the towns during 
whole centuries. 

=====第214页=====
186 Karl Marx 
The growth of the market, the accumulation of capital, the 
modification in the social position of the classes, a large number of 
persons being deprived of their sources of income, all these are 
historical preconditions for the formation of manufacture. It was 
not, as M. Proudhon says, friendly agreements between equals that 
brought men together into the workshop. It was not even in the 
bosom of the old guilds that manufacture was born. It was the 
merchant that became the head of the modern workshop, and not 
the old guildmaster. Almost everywhere there was a desperate 
struggle between manufacture and the crafts. 
The accumulation and concentration of instruments and workers 
preceded the development of the division of labour inside the 
workshop. Manufacture consisted much more in the bringing 
together of many workers and many crafts in one place, in one room, 
under the command of one capital, than in the analysis of labour and 
the adaptation of a special worker to a very simple task. 
The utility of a workshop consisted much less in the division of 
labour as such than in the circumstance that work was done on a 
much larger scale, that many unnecessary expenses were saved, etc. 
At the end of the sixteenth and at the beginning of the seventeenth 
century, Dutch manufacture scarcely knew any division of labour. 
The development of the division of labour supposes the assem­
blage of workers in a workshop. There is not one single example, 
whether in the sixteenth or in the seventeenth century, of the 
different branches of one and the same craft being exploited 
separately to such an extent that it would have sufficed to assemble 
them all in one place so as to obtain a complete, ready-made work­
shop.  But once the men and the instruments had been brought toge­
ther, the division of labour, such as it had existed in the form of the 
guilds, was reproduced, necessarily reflected inside the workshop. 
For M. Proudhon, who sees things upside down, if he sees them at 
all, the division of labour, in Adam Smith's sense, precedes the 
workshop, which is a condition of its existence. 
Machinery, properly so-called, dates from the end of the eighteenth 
century. Nothing is more absurd than to see in machinery the 
antithesis of the division of labour, the synthesis restoring unity to 
divided labour. 
The machine is a uniting of the instruments of labour, and by no 
means a combination of different operations for the worker  himself. 
"When," by the division of labour, "each particular operation has been simplified 
to the use of a simple instrument, the linking-up of all these instruments, set in motion 
by a single engine, constitutes a machine." (Babbage, Traité sur l'Économie  des machines, 
etc., Paris, 1833 [p. 230; cf. Eng. ed., p. 171].) 

=====第215页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 187 
Simple tools; accumulation of tools; composite tools; setting in 
motion of a composite tool by a single hand engine, by man; setting 
in motion of these instruments by natural forces; machines; system 
of machines having one motor; system of machines having an 
automatic motor—this is the progress of machinery. 
The concentration of the instruments of production and the 
division of labour are as inseparable one from the other as are, in the 
political sphere, the concentration of public powers and the division 
of private interests. England, with the concentration of the land, this 
instrument of agricultural labour, has at the same time division of 
agricultural labour and the application of machinery to the 
exploitation of the soil. France, which has the division of the 
instruments, the small holdings system, has, in general, neither 
division of agricultural labour nor application of machinery to the 
soil. 
For M. Proudhon the concentration of the instruments of labour is 
the negation of the division of labour. In reality we find again the 
reverse. As the concentration of instruments develops, the division 
develops also, and vice versa. This is why every big mechanical 
invention is followed by a greater division of labour* and each 
increase in the division of labour gives rise in turn to new mechanical 
inventions. 
We need not recall the fact that the great progress of the division 
of labour began in England after the invention of machinery. Thus 
the weavers and spinners were for the most part peasants like those 
one still meets in backward countries. The invention of machinery 
brought about the separation of manufacturing industry from 
agricultural industry. The weaver and the spinner, united but lately 
in a single family, were separated by the machine. Thanks to the 
machine, the spinner can live in England while the weaver resides in 
the East Indies. Before the invention of machinery, the industry of a 
country was carried on chiefly with raw materials that were the 
products of its own soil; in England — wool, in Germany — flax, in 
France — silks and flax, in the East Indies and the Levant — cotton, 
etc. Thanks to the application of machinery and of steam, the 
division of labour was able to assume such dimensions that 
large-scale industry, detached from the national soil, depends 
entirely on the world market, on international exchange, on an 
international division of labour. Finally—the machine has so great an 
influence on the division of labour, that when, in the manufacture of 
some object, a means has been found to produce parts of it 
mechanically, the manufacture splits up immediately into two 
branches independent of each other. 

=====第216页=====
188 Karl Marx 
Need we speak of the providential and philanthropic aim that M. 
Proudhon discovers in the invention and first application of 
machinery? 
When in England the market had become so far developed that 
manual labour was no longer adequate, the need for machinery was 
felt. Then came the idea of applying mechanical science, already 
quite developed in the eighteenth century. 
The automatic workshop opened its career with acts which were 
anything but philanthropic. Children were kept at work by means of 
the whip; they were made an object of traffic and contracts were 
undertaken with the orphanages. All the laws on the apprenticeship 
of workers were repealed, because, to use M. Proudhon's phraseolo­
gy, there was no further need of  synthetic  workers. Finally, from 1825 
onwards, 8^ almost all the new inventions were the result of collisions 
between the worker and the employer who sought at all costs to 
depreciate the worker's specialised ability. After each new strike of 
any importance, there appeared a new machine. So little indeed did 
the worker see in the application of machinery a sort of rehabilita­
tion, restoration—as M. Proudhon would say—that in the eighteenth 
century he resisted for a very long time the incipient domination of 
automation. 
"Wyatt," says Doctor Ure, "... invented the series of fluted rollers (the spinning 
fingers usually ascribed to Arkwright).... The main difficulty did not ... lie so much in 
the invention of a proper self-acting mechanism ... as ... in training human beings to 
renounce their desultory habits of work, and to identify themselves with the unvarying 
regularity of the complex automation. To devise and administer a successful code of 
factory discipline, suited to the necessities of factory diligence, was the Herculean 
enterprise, the noble achievement of Arkwright."3 
In short, with the introduction of machinery the division of labour 
inside society has increased, the task of the worker inside the 
workshop has been simplified, capital has been concentrated, the 
human being has been further dismembered. 
When M. Proudhon wants to be an economist, and to abandon for 
a moment the "evolution in serial relation in the understanding", 
then he goes and draws erudition from Adam Smith, from a 
time when the automatic workshop was only just coming into 
existence. Indeed, what a difference between the division of labour 
as it existed in Adam Smith's day and as we see it in the automatic 
workshop! In order to make this properly understood, we need only 
quote a few passages from Dr. Ure's Philosophie des manufactures. 
3 A. Ure, Philosophie des manufactures, t. I, Bruxelles, 1836, pp. 23, 21, 22, Eng. ed., 
pp. 16 and  15.—  Ed. 

=====第217页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 189 
"When Adam Smith wrote his immortal elements of economics, automatic 
machinery being hardly known, he was properly led to regard the division of labour as 
the grand principle of manufacturing improvement; and he showed, in the example 
of pin-making, how each handicraftsman, being thereby enabled to perfect himself by 
practice in one point, became a quicker and cheaper workman. In each branch of 
manufacture he saw that some parts were, on that principle, of easy execution, like the 
cutting of pin wires into uniform lengths, and some were comparatively difficult, like 
the formation and fixation of their heads; and therefore he concluded that to each a 
workman of appropriate value and cost was naturally assigned. This appropriation 
forms the very essence of the division of labour.... But what was in Dr. Smith's time a 
topic of useful illustration, cannot now be used without risk of misleading the public 
mind as to the right principle of manufacturing industry. In fact, the division, or 
rather adaptation of labour to the different talents of men, is little thought of in 
factory employment. On the contrary, wherever a process requires peculiar dexterity 
and steadiness of hand, it is withdrawn as soon as possible from the cunning workman, 
who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is placed in charge of a peculiar 
mechanism, so self-regulating, that a child may superintend it.... 
"The principle of the factory system then is to substitute mechanical science for 
hand skill, and the partition of a process into its essential constituents, for the division 
or gradation of labour among artisans. On the handicraft plan, labour more or less 
skilled was usually the most expensive element of production ... but on the automatic 
plan, skilled labour gets progressively superseded, and will, eventually, be replaced by 
mere overlookers of machines. 
"By the infirmity of human nature it happens, that the more skilful the workman, 
the more self-willed and intractable he is apt to become, and, of course, the less fit a 
component of a mechanical system, in which, by occasional irregularities, he may do 
great damage to the whole. The grand object therefore of the modern manufacturer 
is, through the union of capital and science, to reduce the task of his workpeople to the 
exercise of vigilance and dexterity—faculties, when concentrated to one  process,  speedily 
brought to perfection in the young.... 
"On the gradation system, a man must serve an apprenticeship of many years 
before his hand and eye become skilled enough for certain mechanical feats; but on 
the system of decomposing a process into its constituents, and embodying each part in 
an automatic machine, a person of common care and capacity may be entrusted with 
any of the said elementary parts after a short probation, and may be transferred from 
one to another, on any emergency, at the discretion of the master. Such translations 
are utterly at variance with the old practice of the division of labour, which fixed one 
man to shaping the head of a pin, and another to sharpening its point, with most 
irksome and spirit-wasting uniformity.... But on the equalisation plan of self-acting 
machines, the operative needs to call his faculties only into agreeable exercise.... As his 
business consists in tending the work of a well-regulated mechanism, he can learn it in 
a short period; and when he transfers his services from one machine to another, he 
varies his task, and enlarges his views, by thinking on those general combinations 
which result from his and his companions' labours. Thus, that cramping of the 
faculties, that narrowing of the mind, that stunting of the frame, which were ascribed, 
and not unjustly, ... to the division of labour, cannot, in common circumstances, occur 
under the equable distribution of industry.... 
"It is, in fact, the constant aim and tendency of every improvement in machinery to 
supersede human labour altogether, or to diminish its cost, by substituting the 
industry of women and children for that of men; or that of ordinary labourers for 
trained artisans.... This tendency to employ merely children with watchful eyes and 

=====第218页=====
190 Karl Marx 
nimble fingers, instead of journeymen of long experience, shows how the scholastic 
dogma of the division of labour into degrees of skill has been exploded by our 
enlightened manufacturers." (André Ure, Philosophie des manufactures ou Économie 
industrielle, t. I, chap. I [pp. 27-30, 32-35; Eng. ed., pp. 19-23].) 
What characterises the division of labour inside modern society is 
that it engenders specialities, specialists, and with them craft-idiocy. 
"We are struck with admiration," says Lemontey, "when we see among the 
ancients the same person distinguishing himself to a high degree as philosopher, poet, 
orator, historian, priest, administrator, general of an army. Our souls are appalled at 
the sight of so vast a domain. Each one of us plants his hedge and shuts himself up in 
his enclosure. I do not know whether by this parcellation the field is enlarged, but I do 
know that man is belittled." [Op. cit., p. 213.] 
What characterises the division of labour in the automatic 
workshop is that labour has there completely lost its specialised 
character. But the moment every special development stops, the 
need for universality, the tendency towards an integral development 
of the individual begins to be felt. The automatic workshop wipes out 
specialists and craft-idiocy. 
M. Proudhon, not having understood even this one revolutionary 
side of the automatic workshop, takes a step backward and proposes 
to the worker that he make not only the twelfth part of a pin, but 
successively all twelve parts of it. The worker would thus come to 
know and realise the pin. This is M. Proudhon's synthetic labour. 
Nobody will contest that to make a movement forward and another 
movement backward is also to make a synthetic movement. 
To sum up, M. Proudhon has not gone further than the 
petty-bourgeois ideal. And to realise this ideal, he can think of 
nothing better than to take us back to the journeyman or, at most, to 
the master craftsman of the Middle Ages. It is enough, he says 
somewhere in his book, to have created a masterpiece once in one's 
life, to have felt oneself just once to be a man. Is not this, in form as 
in content, the masterpiece demanded by the craft guild of the 
Middle Ages? 
§3. COMPETITION AND MONOPOLY 
"Competition is as essential to labour 
as division.... It is necessary ... for the 
advent of equality." [I 186, 1881 
"The principle is the negation of 
Bad side of J  itself.  Its most certain result is to ruin 
competition | those whom it drags in its train." [I 
I 185] Good side of 
competition 

=====第219页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 191 
"The drawbacks which follow in its 
wake, just as the good it provides ... 
both flow logically from the principle." 
[I 185-86] 
"To seek the principle of accommoda­
tion, which must be derived from a law 
superior to liberty  itself."  [I 185] 
Variant 
"There can, therefore, be no ques­
tion here of destroying competition, a 
thing as impossible to destroy as liber­
ty; we have only to find its equilibrium, 
I would be ready to say its police." [I 
223] 
M. Proudhon begins by defending the eternal necessity of 
competition against those who wish to replace it by emulation.* 
There is no "purposeless emulation", and as "the object of every passion is 
necessarily analogous to the passion itself—a woman for the lover, power for the 
ambitious, gold for the miser, a garland for the poet—the object of industrial 
emulation is necessarily profit... Emulation is nothing but competition  itself."  [I 187] 
Competition is emulation with a view to profit. Is industrial 
emulation necessarily emulation with a view to profit, that is, 
competition? M. Proudhon proves it by affirming it. We have seen 
that, for him, to affirm is to prove, just as to suppose is to deny. 
If the immediate object of the lover is the woman, the immediate 
object of industrial emulation is the product and not the profit. 
Competition is not industrial emulation, it is commercial emula­
tion. In our time industrial emulation exists only in view of 
commerce. There are even phases in the economic life of modern 
nations when everybody is seized with a sort of craze for making 
profit without producing. This speculation craze, which recurs 
periodically, lays bare the true character of competition, which seeks 
to escape the need for industrial emulation. 
If you had told an artisan of the fourteenth century that the 
privileges and the whole feudal organisation of industry were going 
to be abrogated in favour of industrial emulation, called competition, 
he would have replied that the privileges of the various corporations, 
guilds and fraternities were organised competition. M. Proudhon 
* The Fourierists. F. E. [Note to the German edition, 1885.] General reflection 
Problem to be 
solved 

=====第220页=====
192 Karl Marx 
does not improve upon this when he affirms that "emulation is 
nothing but competition  itself". 
"Ordain that from the first of January 1847, labour and wages shall be guaranteed 
to everybody: immediately an immense relaxation will succeed the high tension of 
industry." [I 189] 
Instead of a supposition, an affirmation and a negation, we have 
now an ordinance that M. Proudhon issues purposely to prove the 
necessity of competition, its eternity as a category, etc. 
If we imagine that ordinances are all that is needed to get away 
from competition, we shall never get away from it. And if we go so 
far as to propose to abolish competition while retaining wages, we 
shall be proposing nonsense by royal decree. But nations do not 
proceed by royal decree. Before framing such ordinances, they must 
at least have changed from top to bottom the conditions of their 
industrial and political existence, and consequently their whole 
manner of being. 
M. Proudhon will reply, with his imperturbable assurance, that it is 
the hypothesis of "a transformation of our nature without historical 
antecedents", and that he would be right in "excluding us from the 
discussion" [I 191], we know not in virtue of which ordinance. 
M. Proudhon does not know that all history is nothing but a 
continuous transformation of human nature. 
"Let us stick to the facts.... The French Revolution was made for industrial liberty 
as much as for political liberty; and although France, in 1789, had not perceived—let 
us say it openly—all the consequences of the principle whose realisation it demanded, 
it was mistaken neither in its wishes nor in its expectations. Whoever attempts to deny 
this loses, in my view, the right to criticism. I will never dispute with an adversary who 
puts as principle the spontaneous error of twenty-five million men.... Why then, if 
competition had not been a principle of social economy, a  decree  of fate, a  necessity  of the 
human soul, why, instead of abolishing corporations, guilds and fraternities, did nobody 
think rather of repairing the whole?" [I 191, 192] 
So, since the French of the eighteenth century abolished 
corporations, guilds and fraternities instead of modifying them, the 
French of the nineteenth century must modify competition instead 
of abolishing it. Since competition was established in France in the 
eighteenth century as a result of historical needs, this competition 
must not be destroyed in the nineteenth century because of other 
historical needs. M. Proudhon, not understanding that the establish­
ment of competition was bound up with the actual development of 
the men of the eighteenth century, makes of competition a necessity 
of the human soul, in partibus infidelium.84 What would he have made 
of the great Colbert for the seventeenth century? 

=====第221页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 193 
After the revolution comes the present state of affairs. M. 
Proudhon equally draws facts from it to show the eternity of 
competition, by proving that all industries in which this category is 
not yet sufficiently developed, as in agriculture, are in a state of 
inferiority and decay. 
To say that there are industries which have not yet reached the 
stage of competition, that others again are below the level of 
bourgeois production, is drivel which gives not the slightest proof of 
the eternity of competition. 
All M. Proudhon's logic amounts to this: competition is a social 
relation in which we are now developing our productive forces. To 
this truth, he gives no logical development, but only forms, often 
very well developed, when he says that competition is industrial 
emulation, the present-day mode of freedom, responsibility in 
labour, constitution of value, a condition for the advent of equality, a 
principle of social economy, a decree of fate, a necessity of the 
human soul, an inspiration of eternal justice, liberty in division, 
division in liberty, an economic category. 
"Competition and association rely on each other.... Far from excluding each other 
they are not even divergent. Whoever says competition already supposes a common aim. 
Competition is therefore not egoism, and the most deplorable error committed by 
socialism is to have regarded it as the overthrow of society." [I 223] 
Whoever says competition says common aim, and that proves, on 
the one hand, that competition is association; on the other, that 
competition is not egoism. And whoever says egoism, does he not say 
common aim? Every egoism operates in society and by the fact of 
society. Hence it presupposes society, that is to say, common aims, 
common needs, common means of production, etc., etc. Is it, then, 
by mere chance that the competition and association which the 
socialists talk about are not even-divergent? 
Socialists know well enough that present-day society is founded on 
competition. How could they accuse competition of overthrowing 
present-day society which they want to overthrow themselves? And 
how could they accuse competition of overthrowing the society to 
come, in which they see, on the contrary, the overthrow of 
competition? 
M. Proudhon says, later on, that competition is the opposite of 
monopoly, and consequently cannot be the opposite of association. 
Feudalism was, from its origin, opposed to patriarchal monarchy; 
it was thus not opposed to competition, which was not yet in 
existence. Does it follow that competition is not opposed to 
feudalism? 

=====第222页=====
194 Karl Marx 
In actual fact, society, association  are denominations which  can be 
given  to every society,  to feudal society  as well  as to  bourgeois society, 
which  is association founded  on competition.  How  then  can  there  be 
socialists,  who, by the  single word association, think they  can  refute 
competition?  And how can M.  Proudhon himself wish  to defend 
competition against socialism  by describing competition  by the  single 
word association? 
All we have just said makes  up the  beautiful side  of competition  as 
M. Proudhon sees  it. Now let us  pass  on to the  ugly side, that  is the 
negative side,  of competition,  its drawbacks,  its destructive subver­
sive injurious qualities. 
There  is something dismal about  the  picture  M. Proudhon draws 
of it. 
Competition engenders misery,  it foments civil  war, it  "changes 
natural zones", mixes  up nationalities, causes trouble  in families, 
corrupts  the  public conscience, "subverts  the  notion  of equity,  of 
justice",  of morality,  and  what  is worse,  it destroys free, honest trade, 
and does  not  even give  in exchange synthetic value, fixed, honest 
price.  [I 203] It  disillusions everyone, even economists.  It pushes 
things  so far as to  destroy  its very  self. 
After  all the ill M.  Proudhon says  of it, can  there  be for the 
relations  of bourgeois society,  for its  principles  and its  illusions,  a 
more disintegrating, more destructive element than competition? 
It must  be noted that competition always becomes  the  more 
destructive  for  bourgeois relations  in proportion  as it  urges  on a 
feverish creation  of new  productive forces, that  is, of the  material 
conditions  of a new  society.  In this respect  at least,  the bad  side  of 
competition would have  its good points. 
"Competition  as an  economic position  or phase, considered  in its  origin,  is the 
necessary result  ... of the  theory  of the  reduction  of general expenses."  [I 235] 
For M.  Proudhon,  the  circulation  of the  blood must  be a 
consequence  of Harvey's theory. 
"Monopoly  is the  inevitable doom  of competition, which engenders  it by a  continual 
negation  of itself.  This generation  of monopoly  is in  itself  a justification  of it.... 
Monopoly  is the  natural opposite  of competition  ... but  since competition  is necessary, 
it implies  the idea  of monopoly,  for monopoly  is, as it  were,  the seat of each competing 
individuality."  [I 236, 237] 
We rejoice with  M. Proudhon that  he can for  once  at least properly 
apply  his  formula  of thesis  and  antithesis. Everyone knows that 
modern monopoly  is engendered  by competition  itself. 
As for the  content,  M.  Proudhon clings  to poetic images. 
Competition made  "of  every subdivision  of labour  a sort  of 

=====第223页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 195 
sovereignty in which each individual stood with his power and his 
independence." [I 186] Monopoly is "the seat of each competing 
individuality". The sovereignty is worth at least as much as the seat. 
M. Proudhon speaks only of modern monopoly engendered by 
competition. But we all know that competition was engendered by 
feudal monopoly. Thus competition was originally the opposite of 
monopoly and not monopoly the opposite of competition. So that 
modern monopoly is not a simple antithesis, it is on the contrary the 
true synthesis. 
Thesis: Feudal monopoly, before competition. 
Antithesis: Competition. 
Synthesis: Modern monopoly, which is the negation of feudal 
monopoly insofar as it implies the system of competition, and the 
negation of competition insofar as it is monopoly. 
Thus modern monopoly, bourgeois monopoly, is synthetic 
monopoly, the negation of the negation, the unity of opposites. It is 
monopoly in the pure, normal, rational state. M. Proudhon is in 
contradiction with his own philosophy when he turns bourgeois 
monopoly into monopoly in the crude, primitive, contradictory, 
spasmodic state. M. Rossi, whom M. Proudhon quotes several times 
on the subject of monopoly, seems to have a better grasp of the 
synthetic character of bourgeois monopoly. In his Cours d'économie 
politique, he distinguishes between artificial monopolies and natural 
monopolies. Feudal monopolies, he says, are artificial, that is, 
arbitrary; bourgeois monopolies are natural, that is, rational. 
Monopoly is a good thing, M. Proudhon reasons, since it is an 
economic category, an emanation "from the impersonal reason of 
humanity". Competition, again, is a good thing, since it also is an 
economic category. But what is not good is the reality of monopoly 
and the reality of competition. What is still worse is that competition 
and monopoly devour each other. What is to be done? Look for the 
synthesis of these two eternal thoughts, wrest it from the bosom of 
God, where it has been deposited from time immemorial. 
In practical life we find not only competition, monopoly and the 
antagonism between them, but also the synthesis of the two, which is 
not a formula, but a movement. Monopoly produces competition, 
competition produces monopoly. Monopolists compete among 
themselves; competitors become monopolists. If the monopolists 
restrict thçir mutual competition by means of partial associations, 
competition increases among the workers; and the more the mass of 
the proletarians grows as against the monopolists of one nation, the 
more desperate competition becomes between the monopolists of 
different nations. The synthesis is such that monopoly can only 
8—1826 

=====第224页=====
196 Karl Marx 
maintain itself by continually entering into the struggle of competi­
tion. 
To make the dialectical transition to the taxes which come after 
monopoly, M. Proudhon talks to us about the  social  genius which, after 
zigzagging intrepidly onward, 
"after striding with a jaunty step, without repenting and without halting,  reaches  the 
corner of  monopoly,  casts backward a melancholy glance, and, after profound reflection, 
assails all the objects of production with taxes, and creates a whole administrative 
organisation, in order that all employments  be given to  the proletariat and paid  by the men  of 
monopoly". [I 284, 285] 
What can we say of this genius, which, while fasting, walks about in 
a zigzag? And what can we say of this walking which has no other 
object than to destroy the bourgeois by taxes, whereas taxes are the 
very means of giving the bourgeois the wherewithal to preserve 
themselves as the ruling class? 
Merely to give a glimpse of the manner in which M. Proudhon 
treats economic details, it suffices to say that, according to him, the 
tax on consumption was established with a view to equality, and to 
relieve the proletariat. 
The tax on consumption has assumed its true development only 
since the rise of the bourgeoisie. In the hands of industrial capital, 
that is, of sober and economical wealth, which maintains, reproduces 
and increases itself by the direct exploitation of labour, the tax on 
consumption was a means of exploiting the frivolous, gay, prodigal 
wealth of the fine lords who did nothing but consume. James Steuart 
clearly developed this original purpose of the tax on consumption in 
his Recherche des principes de l'économie politique, which he published 
ten years before Adam Smith. 
"Under the pure monarchy, the prince seems jealous, as it were, of growing 
wealth, and therefore imposes taxes upon people who are grooving richer,—taxes on 
production. Under constitutional government they are calculated chiefly to affect those 
who are growing poorer,—taxes on consumption. Thus the monarch imposes a tax 
upon industry... the poll-tax and taille, for example, are proportioned to the supposed 
opulence of everyone liable to them. Everyone is taxed in proportion to the gain he is 
supposed to make. In constitutional governments, impositions are more generally laid 
upon consumption. Everyone is taxed according to his expenditure." [II  190-91;  cf. 
Eng. ed., pp. 353,  354] 85 
As for the logical sequence of taxes, of the balance of trade, of 
credit—in the understanding of M. Proudhon—we would only 
remark that the English bourgeoisie, on attaining its political 
constitution under William of Orange, created all at once a new 
system of taxes, public credit and the system of protective duties, as 
soon as it was in a position freely to develop its conditions of 
existence. 

=====第225页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 197 
This brief summary will suffice to give the reader a true idea of M. 
Proudhon's lucubrations on the police or on taxes, the balance of 
trade, credit, communism and population. We defy the most 
indulgent criticism to treat these chapters seriously. 
§ 4. PROPERTY OR RENT 
In each historical epoch, property has developed differently and 
under a set of entirely different social relations. Thus to define 
bourgeois property is nothing else than to give an exposition of all 
the social relations of bourgeois production. 
To try to give a definition of property as of an independent 
relation, a category apart, an abstract and eternal idea, can be 
nothing but an illusion of metaphysics or jurisprudence. 
M. Proudhon, while seeming to speak of property in general, deals 
only with landed property, with rent. 
"The origin of rent, as of property, is, so to speak, extra-economic: it rests in 
psychological and moral considerations which are only very distantly connected with 
the production of wealth." (T. II, p. 269.) 
So M. Proudhon declares himself incapable of understanding the 
economic origin of rent and of property. He admits that this 
incapacity obliges him to resort to psychological and moral 
considerations, which, indeed, while only distantly connected with 
the production of wealth, have yet a very close connection with the 
narrowness of his historical views. M. Proudhon affirms that there is 
something mystical and  mysterious  about the origin of property. Now, 
to see mystery in the origin of property—that is, to make a mystery of 
the relation between production itself and the distribution of the 
instruments of production—is not this, to use M. Proudhon's 
language, a renunciation of all claims to economic science? 
M. Proudhon 
"confines himself to recalling that at the seventh epoch of economic evolution" 
(credit) "when fiction had caused reality to vanish, and human activity threatened to 
lose itself in empty space, it had become necessary to bind man more  closely  to nature. 
Now rent was the price of this new contract." (T. II, p. 265.) 
L'homme aux quarante ecus foresaw a M. Proudhon of the future: 
"Mr. Creator, by your leave; everyone is master in his own world; but you will never 
make me believe that the one we live in is made of glass."3 
a Voltaire, "L'homme aux quarante ecus", Œuvres complètes de Voltaire, t. 45, 
Gotha, 1787, p. 44.— Ed. 
s* 

=====第226页=====
198 Karl Marx 
In your world, where credit was a means of losing oneself in empty 
space, it is very possible that property became necessary in order to 
bind man to nature. In the world of real production, where landed 
property always precedes credit, M. Proudhon's horror vacui could 
not exist. 
The existence of rent once admitted, whatever its origin, it 
becomes a subject of a violent contention between the farmer and the 
landed proprietor. What is the ultimate result of this contention, in 
other words, what is the average amount of rent? This is what M. 
Proudhon says: 
"Ricardo's theory answers this question. In the beginnings of society, when man, 
new to earth, had before him nothing but huge forests, when the earth was vast and 
when industry was beginning to come to life, rent must have been nil. Land, as yet 
unformed by labour, was an object of utility; it was not an exchange value, it was 
common, not social. Little by little, the multiplication of families and the progress of 
agriculture caused the price of land to make itself felt. Labour came to give the soil its 
worth: from this, rent came into being. The more fruit a field yielded with the same 
amount of labour, the higher it was valued; hence the tendency of proprietors was 
always to arrogate to themselves the whole amount of the fruits of the soil, less the 
wages of the farmer—that is, less the costs of production. Thus property followed on 
the heels of labour to take from it all the product that exceeded the actual expenses. 
As the proprietor fulfils a mystic duty and represents the community as against the 
colonus, the farmer is, by the dispensation of Providence, no more than a responsible 
labourer, who must account to society for all he reaps above his legitimate wage.... In 
essence and by destination, then, rent is an instrument of distributive justice, one of 
the thousand means that the genius of economy employs to attain to equality. It is an 
immense land valuation which is carried out contradictorily by the proprietors and the 
farmers, without any possible collusion,3 in a higher interest, and whose ultimate 
result must be to equalise the possession of the land between the exploiters of the soil 
and the industrialists.... It needed no less than this magic of property to snatch from 
the colonus the surplus of his product which he cannot help regarding as his own and 
of which he considers himself to be exclusively the author. Rent, or rather property, 
has broken down agricultural egoism and created a solidarity that no power, no 
partition of the land could have brought into being.... The moral effect of property 
having been secured, at present what remains to be done is to distribute the rent." 
[II 270-72] 
All this tumult of words may be reduced firstly to this: Ricardo says 
that the excess of the price of agricultural products over their cost of 
production, including the ordinary profit and interest on the capital, 
gives the measure of the rent. M. Proudhon does better. He makes 
the proprietor intervene, like a deus ex machinal and snatch from the 
a The original has a misprint: "collision" instead of "collusion".— Ed. 
b Literally: god out of the machine. (In the theatre of antiquity actors playing the 
role of gods made their appearance by means of stage machinery.) Figuratively, a 
person who appears unexpectedly to save a situation.— Ed. 

=====第227页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 199 
colonus all the surplus of his production over the cost of production. 
He makes use of the intervention of the proprietor to explain 
property, of the intervention of the rent-receiver to explain rent. He 
answers the problem by formulating the same problem and adding 
an extra syllable.3 
Let us note also that in determining rent by the difference in 
fertility of the soil, M. Proudhon assigns a new origin to it, since land, 
before being assessed according to different degrees of fertility, "was 
not", in his view, "an exchange value, but was common". What, then, 
has happened to the fiction about rent having come into being 
through the  necessity  of bringing back to the land man who was about to 
lose himself in the infinity of empty space? 
Now let us free Ricardo's doctrine from the providential, 
allegorical and mystical phrases in which M. Proudhon has been 
careful to wrap it. 
Rent, in the Ricardian sense, is property in land in its bourgeois 
state,  that is, feudal property which has become subject to the 
conditions of bourgeois production. 
We have seen that, according to the Ricardian doctrine, the price 
of all objects is determined ultimately by the cost of production, 
including the industrial profit; in other words, by the labour 
time employed. In manufacturing industry, the price of the 
product obtained by the minimum of labour regulates the price 
of all other commodities of the same kind, seeing that the cheap­
est and most productive instruments of production can be mul­
tiplied to infinity and that free competition necessarily gives rise to 
a market price, that is, a common price for all products of the same 
kind. 
In agricultural industry, on the contrary, it is the price of the 
product obtained by the greatest amount of labour which regulates 
the price of all products of the same kind. In the first place, one 
cannot, as in manufacturing industry, multiply at will the instru­
ments of production possessing the same degree of productivity, that 
is, plots of land with the same degree of fertility. Then, as population 
increases, land of an inferior quality begins to be exploited, or new 
outlays of capital, proportionately less productive than before, are 
made upon the same plot of land. In both cases a greater amount of 
labour is expended to obtain a proportionately smaller product. The 
needs of the population having rendered necessary this increase of 
labour, the product of the land whose exploitation is the more costly 
a Propriété (property) is explained by the intervention of the propriétaire 
(proprietor); rente (rent), by the intervention of the rentier (rent-receiver).—Ed. 

=====第228页=====
200 Karl Marx 
has as certain a sale as has that of a piece of land whose exploitation is 
cheaper. As competition levels the market price, the product of the 
better soil will be paid for as dearly as that of the inferior. It is the 
excess of the price of the products of the better soil over the cost of 
their production that constitutes rent. If one could always have at 
one's disposal plots of land of the same degree of fertility; if one 
could, as in manufacturing industry, have recourse continually to 
cheaper and more productive machines, or if the subsequent outlays 
of capital produced as much as the first, then the price of 
agricultural products would be determined by the cost price of 
commodities produced by the best instruments of production, as we 
have seen with the price of manufactured products. But from this 
moment rent would have disappeared also. 
For the Ricardian doctrine to be generally true, it is essential3 that 
capital should be freely applicable to different branches of industry; 
that a strongly developed competition among capitalists should have 
brought profits to an equal level; that the farmer should be no more 
than an industrial capitalist claiming for the use of his capital on 
inferior land5 a profit equal to that which he would draw from his 
capital if it were applied in any kind of manufacture0; that 
agricultural exploitation should be subjected to the regime of 
large-scale industry; and finally, that the landowner himself should 
aim at nothing beyond the money return. 
It may happen, as in Ireland, that rent does not yet exist,d although 
the letting of land has reached an extreme development there. Rent 
being the excess not only over wages, but also over industrial profit, 
a In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and in the one presented to N. 
Utina, the beginning of the phrase was altered as follows: "Pour que la doctrine de 
Ricardo —les prémisses une fois accordées —soit généralement vraie, il faut encore" 
("For the Ricardian doctrine, once the premises granted, to be generally true it is 
moreover essential...").—Ed. 
In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and in the one presented to 
N. Utina the words "à la terre" ("on the land") are substituted for "à des terrains-
inférieurs" ("on inferior land"). The correction is reproduced in the French edition 
of 1896.—Ed. 
The edition of 1847 had "par exemple, à l'industrie cotonnière" ("for example, 
in cotton industry") instead of "dans une manufacture quelconque" ("in any kind of 
manufacture"). The change was made in the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and 
in the one presented to N. Utina, and reproduced in the German edition of 1885 and 
the French edition of 1896.—Ed. 
d In the 1847 edition this sentence began as follows: "En Irlande, la rente n'existe 
pas encore" ("In Ireland rent does not yet exist"). The changes were made in the copy 
with corrections in Marx's hand and in the one presented to N. Utina, and reproduced 
in the German edition of 1885 and the French edition of 1896.— Ed. 

=====第229页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 201 
it cannot exist where the landowner's income is nothing but a 
deduction from wages.3 
Thus,  far from converting the exploiter of the land, the farmer, 
into a simple  labourer,  and "snatching from the  colonus  the surplus of 
his product which he cannot help regarding as his own", rent 
confronts the landowner, not with the slave, the  serf,  the payer of 
tribute, the wage labourer, but with the industrial capitalist. Once 
constituted as rent, landed property has in its possession only the 
surplus over production costs, which are determined not only by 
wages but also by industrial profit. It is therefore from the 
landowner that rent snatched a part of his income.5 Hence, there was 
a big lapse of time before the feudal farmer was replaced by the 
industrial capitalist. In Germany, for example, this transformation 
began only in the last third of the eighteenth century. It is in England 
alone that this relation between the industrial capitalist and the 
landed proprietor has been fully developed. 
So long as there was only M. Proudhon's  colonus,  there was no rent. 
The moment rent exists, the  colonus  is no longer the farmer, but the 
worker, the farmer's colonus. The abasement of the labourer, 
reduced to the role of a simple worker, day labourer, wage-earner, 
working for the industrial capitalist; the intervention of the 
industrial capitalist, exploiting the land like any other factory; the 
transformation of the landed proprietor from a petty sovereign into 
a vulgar usurer: these are the different relations expressed by rent. 
Rent, in the Ricardian sense, is patriarchal agriculture trans­
formed into commercial industry, industrial capital applied to land, 
the town bourgeoisie transplanted into the country. Rent, instead of 
binding man to nature, has merely bound the exploitation of the land 
to competition. Once established as rent, landed property itself is the 
result of competition, since from that time onwards it depends on the 
market value of agricultural produce. As rent, landed property is 
a In the 1847 edition the end of this sentence read: "elle ne saurait exister dans les 
pays où, comme en Irlande, le revenu du propriétaire n'est qu'un prélèvement sur le 
salaire" ("It cannot exist in those countries where, as in Ireland, the landowner's 
income is a deduction from wages"). The changes were made in the copy with 
corrections in Marx's hand and in the one presented to N. Utina, and reproduced in 
the German edition of 1885 and the French edition of 1896.—Ed. 
b In the copy with corrections in Marx's hand and in the one presented to N. Utina 
this paragraph has many changes, some of which are illegible. In the German 
edition of 1885 the last two sentences were omitted and instead the following sentence 
was added after the words "the industrial capitalist": "who exploits the soil by means 
of his wage workers, and who pays to the landowner as rent only the surplus over the 
production costs, including profit on capital". In the French edition of 1896 the two 
sentences mentioned are also omitted.— Ed. 

=====第230页=====
202 Karl Marx 
mobilised and becomes an article of commerce. Rent is possible only 
from the moment when the development of urban industry, and the 
social organisation resulting therefrom, force the landowner to aim 
solely at commercial profit, at the money his agricultural products 
fetch—in fact to look upon his landed property only as a machine for 
coining money. Rent has so completely divorced the landed 
proprietor from the soil, from nature, that he has no need even to 
know his estates, as is to be seen in England. As for the farmer, the 
industrial capitalist and the agricultural worker, they are no more 
bound to the land they exploit than are the employer and the worker 
in the factories to the cotton and wool they manufacture; they feel an 
attachment only for the price of their production, the monetary 
product. Hence the jeremiads of the reactionary parties, who offer 
up all their prayers for the return of feudalism, of the good old 
patriarchal life, of the simple manners and the fine virtues of our 
forefathers. The subjection of the soil to the laws which dominate all 
other industries is and always will be the subject of interested 
condolences. Thus it may be said that rent has become the motive 
power which has introduced idyll into the movement of history. 
Ricardo, after postulating bourgeois production as necessary for 
determining rent, applies the conception of rent, nevertheless, to the 
landed property of all ages and all countries. This is an error 
common to all the economists, who represent the bourgeois relations 
of production as eternal categories. 
From the providential aim of rent—which is, for M. Proudhon, the 
transformation of the  colonus  into a  responsible  worker,  he passes to the 
equalised distribution of rent. 
Rent, as we have just seen, is constituted by the equal price of the 
products of lands of unequal fertility, so that a hectolitre of corn 
which has cost ten francs is sold for twenty francs if the cost of 
production rises to twenty francs upon soil of inferior quality. 
So long as necessity forces the purchase of all the agricultural 
products brought into the market, the market price is determined by 
the cost of the most expensive product. Thus it is this equalisation of 
price, resulting from competition and not from the different 
fertilities of the lands, that secures for the owner of the better soil a 
rent of ten francs for every hectolitre that his farmer sells. 
Let us suppose for a moment that the price of corn is determined 
by the labour time needed to produce it, and at once the hectolitre of 
corn obtained from the better soil will sell at ten francs, while the 
hectolitre of corn obtained on the inferior soil will cost twenty francs. 
This being admitted, the average market price will be fifteen francs, 
whereas, according to the law of competition, it is twenty francs. If 

=====第231页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 203 
the average price were fifteen francs, there would be no occasion for 
any distribution, whether equalised or otherwise, for there would be 
no rent. Rent exists only when one can sell for twenty francs the 
hectolitre of corn which has cost the producer ten francs. M. 
Proudhon supposes equality of the market price, with unequal costs 
of production, in order to arrive at an equalised sharing out of the 
product of inequality. 
We understand such economists as Mill, Cherbuliez, Hilditch and 
others demanding that rent should be handed over to the state to 
serve in place of taxes. That is a frank expression of the hatred the 
industrial capitalist bears towards the landed proprietor, who seems 
to him a useless thing, an excrescence upon the general body of 
bourgeois production. 
But first to make the price of the hectolitre of corn twenty francs in 
order then to make a general distribution of the ten francs 
overcharge levied on the consumer, is indeed enough to make the 
social genius pursue its zigzag course mournfully—and knock its head 
against some corner. 
Rent becomes, under M. Proudhon's pen, 
"an immense land valuation which is carried out contradictorily by the proprietors 
and the farmers ... in a higher interest, and whose ultimate result must be to equalise the 
possession of the land between the exploiters of the soil and the industrialists". [I I 271 ] 
For any land valuation based upon rent to be of practical value, the 
conditions of present society must not be departed from. 
Now we have shown that the rent paid by the farmer to the 
landowner expresses the rent with any exactitude only in the 
countries most advanced in industry and commerce. Moreover, this 
rent often includes interest paid to the landowner on capital 
incorporated in the land. The location of the land, the nearness of 
towns, and many other circumstances influence the farm rent and 
modify the land rent. These peremptory reasons would be enough to 
prove the inaccuracy of a land valuation based on rent. 
On the other hand, rent could not be the invariable index of the 
degree of fertility of the land, since every moment the modern 
application of chemistry is changing the nature of the soil, and 
geological knowledge is just now, in our days, beginning to 
revolutionise all the old estimates of relative fertility. It is only about 
twenty years since vast lands in the eastern counties of England 
were cleared; they had been left uncultivated due to the lack of 
proper comprehension of the relation between the humus and the 
composition of the sub-soil. 

=====第232页=====
204 Karl Marx 
Thus history,  far  from supplying,  in rent,  a ready-made land 
valuation, does nothing  but  change  and  turn topsy-turyy  the  land 
valuations already made. 
Finally, fertility  is not so  natural  a quality  as might  be thought;  it is 
closely bound  up with  the social relations  of the  time.  A piece  of land 
may be very fertile  for corn growing,  and yet the  market price  may 
induce  the cultivator  to turn  it into  an artificial pastureland  and  thus 
render  it infertile. 
M. Proudhon  has  improvised  his  land valuation, which  has not 
even  the value  of an  ordinary land valuation, only  to give substance 
to the providentially equalitarian  aim of  rent. 
"Rent," continues  M. Proudhon,  "is the  interest paid  on a  capital which never 
perishes, namely—land.  And as the  capital  is capable  of no  increase  in matter,  but only 
of an indefinite improvement  in its use, it  comes about that while  the interest  or profit 
on a loan (mutuum) tends  to diminish continually through abundance  of capital, rent 
tends always  to increase through  the  perfecting  of industry, from which results  the 
improvement  in the use of the  land.... Such,  in its  essence,  is rent." (Tome  II, p. 265.) 
This time,  M. Proudhon sees  in rent  all the  characteristics  of 
interest, save that  it is  derived from capital  of a  specific nature. This 
capital  is land,  an eternal capital, "which  is capable  of no  increase  in 
matter,  but  only  of an  indefinite improvement  in its use". In the 
progressive advance  of civilisation, interest  has a  continual tendency 
to fall, whilst rent continually tends  to rise. Interest falls because  of 
the abundance  of capital; rent rises owing  to the  improvements 
brought about  in industry, which result  in an  ever better utilisation 
of land. 
Such,  in its  essence,  is the  opinion  of M.  Proudhon. 
Let us first examine  how far it is  true  to say  that rent  is interest  on 
capital. 
For the landed proprietor himself rent represents  the interest  on 
the capital that  the land  has cost him, or  that  he would draw from.it  if 
he sold  it. But in  buying  or selling land  he only buys  or sells rent.  The 
price  he pays  to make himself  a receiver  of rent  is regulated  by the 
rate of interest  in general  and has  nothing  to do  with  the  actual 
nature  of rent.  The  interest  on capital invested  in land  is in  general 
lower than  the  interest  on  capital invested  in manufacture  or 
commerce. Thus,  for those  who  make  no distinction between  the 
interest that  the land represents  to the  owner  and the  rent  itself, the 
interest  on land  as capital diminishes still more than does  the interest 
on other capital.  But it is not a  question  of the  purchase  or sale price 
of rent,  of the  marketable value  of rent,  of capitalised rent,  it is a 
question  of rent  itself. 

=====第233页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 205 
Farm rent can imply again, apart from rent proper, the interest on 
the capital incorporated in the land. In this instance the landowner 
receives this part of the farm rent, not as a landowner but 
as a capitalist; but this is not the rent proper that we are to deal 
with. 
Land, so long as it is not exploited as a means of production, is not 
capital. Land as capital can be increased just as much as all the other 
instruments of production. Nothing is added to its matter, to use M. 
Proudhon's language, but the lands which serve as instruments of 
production are multiplied. The very fact of applying further outlays 
of capital to land already transformed into means of production 
increases land as capital without adding anything to land as matter, 
that is, to the extent of the land. M. Proudhon's land as matter is the 
earth in its limitation. As for the eternity he attributes to land, we 
grant readily it has this virtue as matter. Land as capital is no more 
eternal than any other capital. 
Gold and silver, which yield interest, are just as lasting and eternal 
as land. If the price of gold and silver falls, while that of land keeps 
rising, this is certainly not because of its more or less eternal nature. 
Land as capital is fixed capital; but fixed capital gets used up just 
as much as circulating capital. Improvements to the land need 
reproduction and upkeep; they last only for a time; and this they 
have in common with all other improvements used to transform 
matter into means of production. If land as capital were eternal, 
some lands would present a very different appearance from what 
they do today, and we should see the Roman Campagna, Sicily, 
Palestine, in all the splendour of their former prosperity. 
There are even instances when land as capital might disappear, 
even though the improvements remain incorporated in the land 
In the first place, this occurs every time rent proper is wiped out oy 
the competition of new and more fertile soils; secondly, the 
improvements which might have been valuable at one time cease to 
be of value the moment they become universal owing to the 
development of agronomy. 
The representative of land as capital is not the landowner, but the 
farmer. The proceeds yielded by land as capital are interest and 
industrial profit, not rent. There are lands which yield such interest 
and profit but still yield no rent. 
Briefly, land insofar as it yields interest is land capital, and as land 
capital it yields no rent, it is not landed property. Rent results from 
the social relations in which the exploitation of the land takes place. 
It cannot be a result of the more or less solid, more or less durable 
nature of the soil. Rent is a product of society and not of the soil. 

=====第234页=====
206 Karl Marx 
According to M. Proudhon, "improvement in the use of the 
land"—a consequence "of the perfecting of industry"—causes the 
continual rise in rent. On the contrary, this improvement causes its 
periodical fall. 
Wherein consists, in general, any improvement, whether in 
agriculture or in manufacture? In producing more with the same 
labour; in producing as much, or even more, with less labour. 
Thanks to these improvements, the farmer is spared from using a 
greater amount of labour for a relatively smaller product. He has no 
need, therefore, to resort to inferior soils, and instalments of capital 
applied successively to the same soil remain equally productive. 
Thus,  these improvements, far from continually raising rent, as M. 
Proudhon says, become on the contrary so many temporary obstacles 
preventing its rise. 
The English landowners of the seventeenth century were so well 
aware of this truth, that they opposed the progress of agriculture for 
fear of seeing their incomes diminish. (See Petty, an English 
economist of the time of Charles II.a) 
§ 5. STRIKES AND COMBINATIONS OF WORKERS 
"Every upward movement in wages can have no other effect than a rise in the price 
of corn, wine, etc., that is, the effect of a dearth. For what are wages? They are the cost 
price of corn, etc.; they are the integrant price of everything. We may go even further: 
wages are the proportion of the elements composing wealth and consumed 
reproductively every day by the mass of the workers. Now, to double wages ... is to 
attribute to each one of the producers a greater share than his product, which is 
contradictory, and if the rise extends only to a small number of industries, it brings 
about a general disturbance in exchange; in a word, a dearth.... It is impossible, I 
declare, for strikes followed by an increase in wages not to culminate in a general rise in 
prices: this is as certain as that two and two make four." (Proudhon, tome I, pp. 110 
and 111.) 
We deny all these assertions, except that two and two make four. 
In the first place, there is no general rise in prices. If the price of 
everything doubles at the same time as wages, there is no change in 
price, the only change is in terms. 
Then again, a general rise in wages can never produce a more or 
less general rise in the price of goods. Actually, if every industry 
employed the same number of workers in relation to fixed capital or 
to the instruments used, a general rise in wages would produce a 
general fall in profits and the current price of goods would undergo 
no alteration. 
a W. Petty, Political Arithmetick (1676).—Ed. 

=====第235页=====
The Poverty of Philosophy 207 
But as the relation of manual labour to fixed capital is not the same 
in different industries, all the industries which employ a relatively 
greater mass of fixed capital and fewer workers, will be forced 
sooner or later to lower the price of their goods. In the opposite case, 
in which the price of their goods is not lowered, their profit will rise 
above the general rate of profits. Machines are not wage-earners. 
Therefore, the general rise in wages will affect less those industries, 
which, compared with the others, employ more machines than 
workers. But as competition always tends to level the rate of profits, 
those profits which rise above the general rate cannot but be 
transitory. Thus, apart from a few fluctuations, a general rise in 
wages will lead, not as M. Proudhon says, to a general increase in 
prices, but to a partial fall, that is a fall in the current price of the 
goods that are made chiefly with the help of machines. 
The rise and fall of profits and wages express merely the 
proportion in which capitalists and workers share in the product of a 
day's work, without influencing in most instances the price of the 
product. But that "strikes followed by an increase in wages culminate 
in a general rise in prices, in a dearth even"—these are notions which 
can blossom only in the brain of a poet who has not been understood. 
In England, strikes have regularly given rise to the invention and 
application of new machines. Machines were, it may be said, the 
weapon employed by the capitalists to quell the revolt of specialised 
labour. The self-acting mule? the greatest invention of modern 
industry, put out of action the spinners who were in revolt. If 
combinations and strikes had no other effect than that of making the 
efforts of mechanical genius react against them, they would still 
exercise an immense influence on the development of industry. 
"I find," continues M. Proudhon, "in an article published by M. Léon Faucher ... 
September 1845, b that for some time the English workers have got out of the habit of 
combination, which is assuredly a progress for which one cannot but congratulate 
them: but this improvement in the morale of the workers comes chiefly from their 
economic education. 'It is not on the manufacturers,' cried a spinning-mill worker at a 
Bolton meeting, 'that wages depend. In periods of depression the masters are, so to 
speak, merely the whip with which necessity arms  itself,  and whether they want to or 
not, they have to deal blows. The regulative principle is the relation of supply to 
demand; and the masters have not this power'.... Well done," cries M. Proudhon, 
"these are well-trained workers, model workers," etc., etc. "Such poverty did not 
exist in England; it will not cross the Channel." (Proudhon, tome I, pp. 261 and 262.) 
Of all the towns in England, Bolton is the one in which radicalism 
is the most developed. The Bolton workers are known to be the most 
a This term is given in English in the original.— Ed. 
b L. Faucher, "Les coalitions condamnées par les ouvriers anglais."— Ed. 

=====第236页=====
208 Karl Marx 
revolutionary of all. At the time of the great agitation in England for 
the abolition of the Corn Laws,86 the English manufacturers thought 
that they could cope with the landowners only by thrusting the 
workers to the fore. But as the interests of the workers were no less 
opposed to those of the manufacturers than the interests of the 
manufacturers were to those of the landowners, it was natural that 
the manufacturers should fare badly in the workers' meetings. What 
did the manufacturers do? To save appearances they organised 
meetings composed, to a large extent, of foremen, of the small 
number of workers who were devoted to them, and of the real friends 
of trade. When later on the genuine workers tried, as in Bolton and 
Manchester, to take part in these sham demonstrations, in order to 
protest against them, they were forbidden admittance on the ground 
that it was a ticket meeting1—a meeting to which only persons with 
entrance cards were admitted. Yet the posters placarded on the walls 
had announced public meetings. Every time one of these meetings 
was held, the manufacturers' newspapers gave a pompous and 
detailed account of the speeches made. It goes without saying that it 
was the foremen who made these speeches. The London papers 
reproduced them word for word. M. Proudhon has the misfortune 
to take foremen for ordinary workers, and enjoins them not to cross 
the Channel. 
If in 1844 and 1845 strikes drew less attention than before, it was 
because 1844 and 1845 were the first two years of prosperity that 
English industry had had since 1837.87 Nevertheless none of the 
trades unions had been dissolved. 
Now let us listen to the foremen of Bolton. According to them 
manufacturers have no command over wages because they have no 
command over the price of products, and they have no command 
over the price of products because they have no command over the 
world market. For this reason they wish it to be understood that 
combinations should not be formed to extort an increase in wages 
from the masters. M. Proudhon, on the contrary, forbids combina­
tions for fear they should be followed by a rise in wages which would 
bring with it a general dearth. We have no need to say that on one 
point there is an entente cordiale between the foremen and M. 
Proudhon: that a rise in wages is equivalent to a rise in the price of 
products. 
But is the fear of a dearth the true cause of M. Proudhon's 
rancour? No. Quite simply he is annoyed with the Bolton foremen 
These two words are given in English in the original.—Ed. 

=====第237页=====
The Poverrty of Philosophy 209 
because they determine value by supply and demand and hardly take 
any account of constituted value, of value which has passed into the 
state of constitution, of the constitution of value, including permanent 
exchangeability and all the other proportionalities of relations and 
relations of proportionality, with Providence at their side. 
"A workers' strike is illegal, and it is not only the Penal Code that says so, it is the 
economic system, the necessity of the established order.... That each worker 
individually should dispose freely over his person and his hands, this can be tolerated, 
but that workers should undertake by combination to do violence to monopoly, is 
something society cannot permit." (Tome I, pp. 334 and 335.) 
M. Proudhon wants to pass off an article of the Penal Code as a 
necessary and general result of bourgeois relations of production. 
In England combination is authorised by an Act of Parliament, 
and it is the economic system which has forced Parliament to grant 
this legal authorisation. In 1825, when, under the Minister 
Huskisson, Parliament had to modify the law in order to bring it 
more and more into line with the conditions resulting from free 
competition, it had of necessity to abolish all laws forbidding 
combinations of workers.88 The more modern industry and competi­
tion develop, the more elements there are which call forth and 
strengthen combination, and as soon as combination becomes an 
economic fact, daily gaining in solidity, it is bound before long to 
become a legal fact. 
Thus the article of the Penal Code proves at the most that modern 
industry and competition were not yet well developed under the 
Constituent Assembly and under the Empire.89 
Economists and socialists* are in agreement on one point: the 
condemnation of combinations. Only they have different motives for 
their act of condemnation. 
The economists say to the workers: Do not combine. By 
combination you hinder the regular progress of industry, you 
prevent manufacturers from carrying out their orders, you disturb 
trade and you precipitate the invasion of machines which, by 
rendering your labour in part useless, force you to accept a still lower 
wage. Besides, whatever you do, your wages will always be 
determined by the relation of hands demanded to hands supplied, 
and it is an effort as ridiculous as it is dangerous for you to revolt 
against the eternal laws of political economy. 
The socialists say to the workers: Do not combine, because what 
will you gain by it anyway? A rise in wages? The economists will 
* That is, the socialists of that time: the Fourierists in France, the Owenites in 
England. F. E. [Note to the German edition, 1885.] 

=====第238页=====
210 Karl Marx 
prove to you quite clearly that the few ha'pence you may gain by it 
for a few moments if you succeed, will be followed by a permanent 
fall. Skilled calculators will prove to you that it would take you years 
merely to recover, through the increase in your wages, the expenses 
incurred for the organisation and upkeep of the combinations. And 
we, as socialists, tell you that, apart from the money question, you will 
continue nonetheless to be workers, and the masters will still 
continue to be the masters, just as before. So no combination! No 
politics! For is not entering into combination engaging in politics? 
The economists want the workers to remain in society as it is 
constituted and as it has been signed and sealed by them in their 
manuals. 
The socialists want the workers to leave the old society alone, the 
better to be able to enter the new society which they have prepared 
for them with so much foresight. 
In spite of both of them, in spite of manuals and Utopias, 
combination has not ceased for an instant to go forward and grow 
with the development and growth of modern industry. It has now 
reached such a stage, that the degree to which combination has 
developed in any country clearly marks the rank it occupies in the 
hierarchy of the world market. England, whose industry has attained 
the highest degree of development, has the biggest and best 
organised combinations. 
In England they have not stopped at partial combinations which 
have no other objective than a passing strike, and which disappear 
with it. Permanent combinations have been formed, trades unions, 
which serve as bulwarks for the workers in their struggles with the 
employers. And at the present time all these local  trades  unions find a 
rallying point in the National Association of United Trades,90 the 
central committee of which is in London, and which already 
numbers 80,000 members. The organisation of these strikes, 
combinations, and trades unions went on simultaneously with the 
political struggles of the workers, who now constitute a large political 
party, under the name of Chartists. 
The first attempts of workers to  associate  among themselves always 
take place in the form of combinations. 
Large-scale industry concentrates in one place a crowd of people 
unknown to one another. Competition divides their interests. But 
the maintenance of wages, this common interest which they have 
against their boss, unites them in a common thought of resis­
tance—combination. Thus combination always has a double aim, that 
of stopping competition among the workers, so that they can carry 
on general competition with the capitalist. If the first aim of 

=====第239页=====
The Poverty  of Philosophy 211 
resistance  was  merely  the  maintenance  of wages, combinations,  at 
first isolated, constitute themselves into groups  as the  capitalists  in 
their turn unite  for the  purpose  of repression,  and in  face  of always 
united capital,  the  maintenance  of the  association becomes more 
necessary  to them than that  of wages. This  is so  true that English 
economists  are  amazed  to see the  workers sacrifice  a good part  of 
their wages  in favour  of associations, which,  in the  eyes  of these 
economists,  are  established solely  in favour  of wages.  In this 
struggle—a veritable civil war—all  the  elements necessary  for a 
coming battle unite  and  develop. Once  it has  reached this point, 
association takes  on a  political character. 
Economic conditions  had  first transformed  the  mass  of the  people 
of the  country into workers.  The  domination  of capital  has  created 
for this mass  a common situation, common interests. This mass  is 
thus already  a class  as against capital,  but not yet for itself. In the 
struggle,  of which  we have pointed  out  only  a few  phases, this mass 
becomes united,  and  constitutes itself  as a  class  for itself. The 
interests  it defends become class interests.  But the  struggle  of class 
against class  is a  political struggle. 
In the bourgeoisie  we have  two  phases  to distinguish: that  in which 
it constituted itself  as a  class under  the  regime  of feudalism  and 
absolute monarchy,  and  that  in which, already constituted  as a  class, 
it overthrew feudalism  and  monarchy  to make society into  a 
bourgeois society.  The  first  of these phases  was the  longer  and 
necessitated  the  greater efforts. This  too  began  by partial combina­
tions against  the  feudal lords. 
Much research  has been carried  out to  trace  the different historical 
phases that  the bourgeoisie  has  passed through, from  the  commune 
up to its  constitution  as a  class. 
But when  it is a  question  of making  a precise study  of strikes, 
combinations  and  other forms  in which  the  proletarians carry  out 
before  our  eyes their organisation  as a  class, some  are seized with real 
fear and  others display  a transcendental disdain. 
An oppressed class  is the  vital condition  for every society founded 
on the  antagonism  of classes.  The  emancipation  of the  oppressed 
class thus implies necessarily  the  creation  of a new  society.  For the 
oppressed class  to be  able  to emancipate itself  it is  necessary that  the 
productive powers already acquired  and the  existing social relations 
should  no longer  be capable  of existing side  by side.  Of all the 
instruments  of production,  the  greatest productive power91  is the 
revolutionary class  itself. The  organisation  of revolutionary elements 
as a class supposes  the  existence  of all the  productive forces which 
could  be engendered  in the  bosom  of the old  society. 

=====第240页=====
212 Karl Marx 
Does this mean that after the fall of the old society there will be a 
new class domination culminating in a new political power? No. 
The condition for the emancipation of the working class is the 
abolition of all classes, just as the condition for the emancipation of 
the third estate, of the bourgeois order, was the abolition of all 
estates* and all orders. 
The working class, in the course of its development, will substitute 
for the old civil society an association which will exclude classes and 
their antagonism, and there will be no more political power properly 
so-called, since political power is precisely the official expression of 
antagonism in civil society. 
Meanwhile the antagonism between the proletariat and the 
bourgeoisie is a struggle of class against class, a struggle which 
carried to its highest expression is a total revolution. Indeed, is it at 
all surprising that a society founded on the opposition of classes 
should culminate in brutal contradiction, the shock of body against 
body, as its final denouement? 
Do not say that social movement excludes political movement. 
There is never a political movement which is not at the same time 
social. 
It is only in an order of things in which there are no more classes 
and class antagonisms that social evolutions will cease to be political 
revolutions. Till then, on the eve of every general reshuffling of 
society, the last word of social science will always be: 
"Le combat ou la mort; la lutte sanguinaire ou le néant. C'est ainsi que la question 
est invinciblement posée." 
George  Sand. 3 
* Estates here in the historical sense of the estates of feudalism, estates with 
definite and limited privileges. The revolution of the bourgeoisie abolished the estates 
and their privileges. Bourgeois society knows only  classes.  It was, therefore, absolutely 
in contradiction with history to describe the proletariat as the "fourth estate".92  F. E. 
[Note to the German edition, 1885.] 
"Combat or death, bloody struggle or extinction. Thus the question is inexorably 
put." (George Sand, Jean Ziska. Episode de la guerre des hussites. Introduction.) — Ed. 

=====第241页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE DECLINE AND APPROACHING FALL OF GUIZOT.— 
POSITION OF THE FRENCH BOURGEOISIE 
The English stage had better give over playing The School for 
Scandal* for, indeed, the greatest school of this sort has been set up 
in Paris, in the Chamber of Deputies. The amount of scandalous 
matter collected and brought forward there during the last four or 
five weeks, is really unprecedented in the annals of parliamentary 
discussion. You recollect the inscription Mr. Duncombe once pro­
posed for your own glorious House of Commons, "The most  degrad­
ing and infamous proceedings take place within  these  walls". Well, here is 
a match for your own set of middle-class legislators; here are 
proceedings which will put British rascality to the blush. The honour 
of Old England is saved; Mr. Roebuck is outdone by M. de Girardin; 
Sir James Graham is beaten by M. Duchâtel. 
I shall not undertake to give you the whole list of scandalous 
affairs brought to the light within the last few weeks; I shall not say a 
word about the several dozen of bribery cases brought before the 
juries;  not a word about M. Gudin, the ordnance officer of the King, 
who,  not without some degree of cleverness, made an attempt to 
introduce the habits of the swell mob into the palace of the 
Tuileries 93; I shall not give you a lengthy report of the dirty affair of 
Gen. Cubières, peer of France, formerly Minister of War, who, 
under pretext of bribing the ministry into granting the concession of 
allowing the formation of a mining company, cheated the said 
company out of forty shares, which he coolly put into his own pocket, 
and on account of which he is now under trial before the Chamber of 
a R. Sheridan, The School for Scandal. A comedy in five acts.— Ed. 

=====第242页=====
214 Frederick Engels 
Peers.  No; I shall give you only a few choice bits—a few samples 
taken from two or three sittings of the Deputies, which will enable 
you to judge of the rest. 
M. Emile de Girardin, deputy and editor of the daily paper La 
Presse, supporting in both characters the new party of Progressive 
Conservatives, and for a considerable time past one of the most violent 
opponents of the Ministry, whom until lately he had supported, is a 
man of great talent and activity, but without any principles. From the 
beginning of his public career he unhesitatingly employed any 
means to make himself an important public character. It was he who 
forced Armand Carrel, the celebrated editor of the National, to a 
duel, and shot him, thus delivering himself from a dangerous 
competitor. The support of such a man, proprietor of an influential 
paper, and member of the Chamber of Deputies, was of course very 
important to the government; but M. de Girardin sold his support 
(for he always sold it) at a very high price. There was a deal of busi­
ness transacted between M. de Girardin and the Ministry, but not 
always to the complete satisfaction of both parties. In the meantime, 
M. de Girardin prepared himself for any turn which affairs might 
take.  Foreseeing the probability of a rupture with the Guizot Mini­
stry, he collected accounts of scandalous transactions, bribings, and 
traffickings, which he was in the best position to learn, and which 
were brought to him by his friends and agents in high places. The 
turn which party discussions took this session showed to him that the 
fall of Guizot and Duchâtel was approaching. He was one of the 
principal actors in the formation of the new "Progressive Conserva­
tive"  party, and repeatedly threatened the government with the full 
weight of his wrath, if they persisted in their course. M. Guizot 
refused, in pretty scornful terms, any compromise with the new 
party. These detached themselves from the majority, and annoyed 
the government by their opposition. The financial and other 
discussions of the Chamber unveiled so much scandal, that 
MM. Guizot and Duchâtel were obliged to throw several of their 
colleagues overboard in order to save themselves. The vacant places, 
however, were filled by such insignificant men, that no party was 
satisfied, and the Ministry were rather weakened than fortified. 
Then came Cubières' affair, which elicited some doubts, even in 
the majority, as to the possibility to keep M. Guizot in office. Now, at 
last, when he saw the Ministry totally disorganised and weakened, 
now M. de Girardin thought the moment had arrived when he might 
bring forth his Pandora's box of scandal, and achieve the ruin of a 
tottering government, by revelations fit to shake the faith even of the 
"belly" of the Chamber. 94 

=====第243页=====
The Decline and Approaching Fall of Guizot 215 
He commenced by accusing the Ministry of having sold a peerage 
for 80,000 francs, but of not having kept their promise, after 
pocketing the money! The House of Peers found themselves insulted 
by this assertion made in La Presse, and asked leave from the 
Deputies to bring M. de Girardin before their bar. This demand 
occasioned a discussion in the Deputies, in the course of which M. de 
Girardin fully maintained his assertion, declaring he was in 
possession of the proofs, but refusing to give any names, as he would 
not play the part of a delator. He said, however, that three times he 
had mentioned the matter privately to M. Guizot, who never denied 
the fact, and that once he spoke about it to M. Duchâtel, who 
replied—"It was done during my absence, and I afterwards 
disapproved of it; it was M. Guizot who did it." The whole of this was 
flatly denied by M. Duchâtel. "Then," said M. de Girardin, "I will 
give you the proof that the Ministry is quite in the habit of proposing 
such transactions"  ; and he read a letter from General Alexander de 
Girardin (the father, I believe, of M. Emile de Girardin; the latter is 
an illegitimate child) to the King. This letter expressed General de 
G.'s gratitude for the offer of a peerage made to him, but said at the 
same time, that M. Guizot having afterwards made it a condition of 
the grant that he (General de G.) should use his influence with M. 
Emile de G. to prevent him opposing the government, General de G. 
would be no party to such a transaction, and, therefore, declined the 
peerage. "O!" said M. Duchâtel, "if this is all, we will just mention 
that M. Emile de Girardin himself offered to us to cease his 
opposition if we would make him a peer, but we declined that offer." 
Hinc Mae  lacrimae!*  But Duchâtel replied not a word to the allegation 
contained in the letter. The Chamber then voted that M. Emile de G. 
should be delivered up to the peers for trial. He was tried, sustained 
the allegation, but declared, the sold peerages not having been made 
out, he could not have attacked the Chamber of Peers, but only the 
government. The peers then acquitted him. Girardin then brought 
forward another scandalous affair. There was got up last year a large 
paper, called the Epoque, which was to support the government, to 
beat all opposition papers out of the market, and to supersede the 
costly support of M. de Girardin's  Presse.  The experiment signally 
failed; partly, too, through the intrigues of M. de Girardin  himself, 
who has his finger in every pie of that sort. Now, M. Duchâtel had 
answered, when charged with bribing the press, that the government 
had never paid any subsidies to any paper. M. de Girardin, against 
this assertion, maintained the notorious fact, that M. Duchâtel, after 
a Hence these tears. (Terence, Andria, Act I, Scene 1.) — Ed. 

=====第244页=====
216 Frederick Engels 
a deal of begging on the part of the editors of the Epoque, had told 
them: "Well, gold and silver I have none; but what I have that will I 
give unto you"; and had given them the privilege for a third 
opera-house for Paris, which privilege the "gents" of the Epoque so\d 
for 100,000 f., of which sum 60,000 f. were spent in support of the 
paper, and the remaining 40,000 f. went nobody knows where to. 
This,  too, was flatly denied by M. Duchâtel; but the fact is notorious. 
There were, besides, some similar transactions brought forward by 
M. de Girardin, but these samples will be quite sufficient. 
Yesterday, in the Chamber of Deputies, M. de Girardin again got 
up and read some letters, from which it appeared that M. Duchâtel 
has caused the discussion in the above peerage affair to be printed at 
the public expense, and sent it to all town councils in the country; but 
that in this ministerial report neither M. de Girardin's nor M. 
Duchâtel's speeches were correctly reported; but, on the contrary, 
both of them were arranged so as to make M. de Girardin appear as a 
ridiculous calumniator, and M. Duchâtel in the light of the purest 
and most virtuous of men. As to the matter  itself,  he repeated all his 
assertions, and defied the government either to have them disproved 
by a parliamentary committee, or to bring him before a jury as a 
slanderer. In both cases, he said, he should be bound to give the 
names of the parties and all particulars, and thus be enabled to prove 
his accusations without placing himself in the position of a common 
informer. This excited a general storm in the Chamber. M. Duchâtel 
denied; M. de Girardin re-asserted; M. Duchâtel re-denied; M. de 
Girardin re-reasserted, and so on, the whole accompanied by the 
shouts and counter-shouts of the "choruses" of the Chamber. Other 
opposition members again defied the Ministry to have the matter 
looked into either by parliamentary inquiry, or by a trial. At last M. 
Duchâtel said,— 
"A Parliamentary inquiry, gentlemen, would presuppose a doubt in the 
integrity of the government on the part of the majority; and, therefore, the day this 
inquiry should be granted our places would be occupied by others than us; if you have 
any doubt tell us so plainly, and we shall resign immediately." 
"Then," said M. de Girardin, "there remains nothing but a trial. I am ready to 
undergo it; place me before a jury, if you dare." 
"No,"  said M. Hébert, Minister of Justice, "we shall not, because the majority of 
the Chamber will judge." 
"But," said M. Odilon Barrot, "this is not a political question; it is a legal one, and 
such a question is not within our competence, but of that of the public courts of law. If 
M. de Girardin has calumniated the government in his paper, why do you not have 
him tried for it?" 
"We won't!" 
"Well, but there is a plain allegation against other parties, too, of trafficking in 
peerages; why not bring them up? And this affair with the Epoque and the opera 

=====第245页=====
The Decline and Approaching Fall of Guizot 217 
privilege—if you are no parties to that, as you say, why do you not bring up those who 
are parties to such villainous traffic? Here are plain incriminations, and even partial 
proofs of crimes said to have been committed; why do not the lawyers of the Crown 
prosecute the alleged perpetrators of these crimes, as is their duty?" 
"We do not get up a prosecution," replied M. Hébert, "because the character of 
the allegations, and the character of those who bring them forward, is not such as to 
make the truth of these allegations anything like probable to the legal advisers of the 
Crown!" 
All this was every moment interrupted by groaning, shouting, 
knocking and all sorts of noises in general. This incomparable .sitting, 
which has shaken the Guizot Ministry to its very foundation, was 
concluded by a vote, which proves, that if the faith of the majority 
may be shaken, their system of voting is not! 
"The Chamber, after having heard the explanations of the Ministry, and found 
them satisfactory, passes to the order of the day!" 
What do you think of that? Which do you prefer, the ministry or 
the majority, the Deputies of France or your own Commons? M. 
Duchâtel or Sir James Graham? I dare say you will find the choice a 
difficult one. There is, however, one difference betwixt them. The 
English middle classes have, up to this day, to struggle against an 
aristocracy, which, although in a state of dissolution and decomposi­
tion, is not yet removed. The aristocracy of England always found 
some support in one fraction or the other of the middle classes 
themselves, and it was this division of the middle classes that saved 
the aristocracy from total ruin. At this moment the aristocracy is 
supported by the fund-holders, bankers, and owners of fixed 
incomes, and by a large part of the shipping trade against the 
manufacturers. The whole agitation for the repeal of the Corn Laws 
proves this. 95 The advanced fraction of the English middle classes, 
therefore (I mean the manufacturers) will yet be able to carry out 
some progressive political measures which will more and more 
decompose the aristocracy. They will even be obliged to do so; they 
must extend their markets, which they cannot do without reducing 
their prices, which reduction must be preceded by a reduced cost of 
production, which reduced cost of production is mainly obtained by 
reduced wages, for reducing which there is no safer means than 
reduced price of the necessaries of life; and, to obtain this, they have 
no other means but reducing the taxes. This is the logical chain 
which ties the manufacturers of England to the necessity of 
destroying the Established Church, and reducing, or "equitably 
adjusting", the National Debt. Both these measures, and others in 
the same spirit, they will be forced to carry out as soon as they find, 
which they must, the market of the world insufficient to continually 

=====第246页=====
218 Frederick Engels 
and regularly buy up their produce. Thus the English middle classes 
are, as yet, in a progressive direction; they have an aristocracy and a 
privileged clergy to overthrow; there are certain progressive 
measures which they will be forced to carry, and which they are the 
fit and proper persons to carry. But the French middle classes are in 
a different position. There is no aristocracy of birth, nor a landed 
aristocracy, in that country. The revolution has swept it entirely 
away. Neither is there a privileged or Established Church; but on the 
contrary, both Catholic and Protestant clergy receive their salaries 
from the government, and are upon a footing of perfect equality. 
There is no important struggle possible in France between the 
fund-holders, bankers, shippers, and manufacturers, because, of all 
fractions of the middle classes the fund-holders and bankers (who, at 
the same time, are the principal shareholders in the railway, mining, 
and other companies) are decidedly the strongest fraction, and have, 
with a few interruptions only, ever since 1830, held the reins of 
government. The manufacturers, kept down by foreign competition 
in the foreign market, and threatened in their own, have no chance 
of growing to such a degree of power, that they successfully might 
struggle against the bankers and fund-holders. On the contrary, 
their chance decreases every year; their party in the Deputies, 
formerly  one-half,  is now not more than a third part of the Chamber. 
It results from all this that neither a single fraction, nor the whole of 
the ruling middle classes, are in a position to carry out anything like 
"progress"; that the government of the bourgeoisie is so fully 
established in France since the revolution of 1830, that the ruling 
class could do nothing but wear themselves out. This they have done. 
Instead of progressing, they were obliged to go backwards, to 
restrain the liberty of the press; to take away the right of free 
association and meeting; to make all sorts of exceptional laws in 
order to keep down the working people. And the scandalous affairs 
brought forward within the last few weeks are the evident proof that 
the ruling bourgeoisie of France are entirely worn out, totally "used 
UP"-
Indeed, the high  bourgeoisie  are in an awkward position. They had 
found, at last, in Guizot and Duchâtel, the men to govern them. They 
kept them in office seven years, and sent them at every election 
larger and larger majorities. And now, when all opposing fractions 
had been reduced to the utmost impotency in the Chamber,—now 
when Guizot and Duchâtel's days of glory seemed to have arrived, at 
that very moment a mass of scandal is discovered in the doings of the 
Ministry, that makes it impossible for them to remain in office, even 
if supported unanimously by the Chambers. There can be no doubt 

=====第247页=====
The Decline and Approaching Fall of Guizot 219 
that Guizot and Duchâtel will, with their colleagues, resign very 
shortly; they may drag on their ministerial existence a few weeks 
longer, but their end is drawing nigh—very nigh. And who is to 
govern after them? God knows! They may say, as Louis XV, "after 
me the deluge, ruin, and confusion". Thiers is unable to bring 
together a majority. Mole is an old, worn-out, and insignificant man, 
who will meet all sorts of difficulties, and who, in order to secure the 
support of the majority, must commit similar scandalous actions, and 
therefore, end in the same way as Guizot. This is the principal 
difficulty. The present electors will always elect a majority like that 
now sitting; the present majority will always require a ministry like 
that of Guizot and Duchâtel, committing all sorts of scandal; any 
ministry doing so will be overthrown by the mere weight of public 
opinion. This is the vicious circle in which the present system moves. 
But to go on as heretofore is impossible. What, then, is to be done? 
There is no other course but to leave this circle, to pass a measure of 
Electoral Reform; and Electoral Reform means admission of the 
smaller tradesmen to the Suffrage, and this means, in France, "the 
beginning of the end". Rothschild and Louis Philippe know very 
well, both of them, that admission of the smaller "bourgeoisie" to the 
Suffrage means nothing but "LA RÉPUBLIQUE!" 
Paris,  June 26th, 1847 
First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper 
No. 506, July 3, 1847 
with an editorial note: 
"From our own correspondent 
in the French capital" 

=====第248页=====
Karl Marx 
THE COMMUNISM 
OF THE RHEINISCHER BEOBACHTERN 
Brussels, September  5.—In issue No. 70 of this newspaper an 
article from the Rheinischer] Beobachter is introduced with the words: 
"In issue No. 2t)6 the Rheinischer] Beobachter] preaches communism as follows." 
Whether or not this comment is intended ironically, Communists 
must protest against the idea that the Rheinischer Beobachter could 
preach "communism", and especially against the idea that the article 
communicated in issue No. 70 of the  D[eutsche]-B[russeler]-Z[eitung] is 
communist. 
If a certain section of German socialists has continually blustered 
against the liberal bourgeoisie, and has done so, in a manner which 
has benefited nobody but the German governments, and if at 
present government newspapers like the Rheinischer] Beobachter, 
basing themselves on the empty phrases of these people, claim that it 
is not the liberal bourgeoisie but the government which represents 
the interests of the proletariat, then the Communists have nothing in 
common with either the former or the latter. 
Certain people have admittedly wished to lay the responsibility for 
this on the German Communists, they have accused them of being in 
alliance with the government. 
This accusation is ludicrous. The government cannot unite with 
the Communists, nor the Communists with the government, for the 
simple reason that of all the revolutionary parties in Germany the 
Communists are by far the most revolutionary, and that the 
government knows this better than anyone else. 
Can Communists unite with a government which has pronounced 
them guilty of high treason and treats them as such? 

=====第249页=====
The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 221 
Can the government propagate in its press principles, which, in 
France, are considered to be anarchistic, incendiary and destructive 
of all social relations, and to which this same government continually 
ascribes the very same characteristics? 
It is inconceivable. Let us examine the so-called communism of the 
Rheinischer Beobachter, and we snail find that it is very innocent. 
The article begins: 
"If we examine our (!) social condition, then the greatest distress and the most 
pressing want reveal themselves everywhere (!), and we have to admit that much has 
been neglected. This is, indeed, a fact, and the only (!) question which arises, is what 
causes it. We are convinced that our constitution does not bear the responsibility for 
this, for (!) as far as social conditions are concerned matters are (!) still worse in France 
and England. Nevertheless (!) liberalism seeks the remedy in representation alone; if 
the people were represented, it would help  itself.  This is quite illusory to be sure, but 
nonetheless (!) extremely (!!) plausible." 
In this paragraph we see the Beobachter [observer] before us, in the 
flesh—the way he chews his pen, at a loss for an introduction, 
speculates, writes, crosses out, writes again, and then finally, after 
some considerable time, produces the above magnificent passage. In 
order to arrive at liberalism, his own inherited hobby-horse, he 
begins with "our social condition", that is, strictly speaking, the social 
condition of the Beobachter, which may very well have its ^un­
pleasantnesses. By means of the extremely trivial observation that 
our social condition is miserable and that much has been neglected, 
he arrives, by way of some very thorny sentences, at a point where 
the only question which arises for him, is what causes it. This 
question arises for him, however, only to disappear again at once. 
The Beobachter  does not, in fact, tell us what causes it, neither does he 
tell us what does not cause it, he tells us merely what he is convinced 
does not cause it, and that is, of course, the Prussian constitution. 
From the Prussian constitution, by means of a bold "for", he arrives 
at France and England, and from here to Prussian liberalism is for 
him of course only a trifling leap, which, supported by the least 
motivated "nevertheless" conceivable, he accomplishes with ease. 
And thus at last he has reached his favourite terrain, where he can 
exclaim, "This is quite illusory to be sure, but nonetheless extremely 
plausible." But nonetheless extremely!!! 
Is it possible that the Communists have sunk so low that the 
paternity of such utterances, such classical transitions, such ques­
tions,  arising and disappearing with ease, such remarkable Onlys, 
Fofs and Nevertheless' 's, and above all the phrase "but nonetheless 
extremely", should be ascribed to them? 

=====第250页=====
222 Karl Marx 
Besides the "Old General", Arnold Ruge, there are only a few 
men in Germany who can write in this way, and these few are all 
Consistorial Counsellors in Herr Eichhorn's ministry. 
We cannot be required to go into the contents of this introductory 
passage. It has no content other than the awkwardness of its form, it 
is merely the portal through which we step into the hall where our 
observing Consistorial Counsellor is preaching a crusade against 
liberalism. 
Let us listen: 
"Liberalism has above all the advantage that its approach to the people takes easier 
and more pleasant forms than does that of the bureaucracy." (Indeed, not even Herr 
Dahlmann or Gervinus writes such clumsy and angular prose.) "It speaks of the 
welfare and the rights of the people. In reality, however, it only pushes the people 
forward in order thereby to intimidate the government; it considers the people only as 
cannon fodder in the great onslaught against the power of the government. To Seize 
the power of the state—this is the true tendency of liberalism, the welfare of the 
people is only of secondary importance to it." 
Does the Herr Consistorial Counsellor believe he has told the 
people anything new with this? The people, and in particular the 
communist section of the people, knows very well that the liberal 
bourgeoisie is only pursuing its own interests and that little reliance 
should be placed on its sympathy for the people. If, however, the 
Consistorial Counsellor concludes from this that the liberal 
bourgeoisie exploits the people for its own ends in so far as the 
people participates in the political movement, then we must answer 
him: "That is quite plausible for a Consistorial Counsellor, to be 
sure,  but nonetheless extremely illusory." 
The people, or, to replace this broad and vague expression by a 
definite one, the proletariat, has quite another way of reasoning than 
the gentlemen of the ecclesiastical ministry permit themselves to 
imagine. The proletariat does not ask whether the welfare of the 
people is a matter of secondary or of primary importance to the 
bourgeoisie, or whether the bourgeoisie  wishes  to use proletarians as 
cannon fodder or not. The proletariat does not ask what the 
bourgeoisie merely wishes to do, but what it must do. It asks whether 
the present political system, the rule of the bureaucracy, or 
the one the liberals are striving for, the rule of the bourgeoisie, will 
offer it the means to achieve its own purposes. To this end it only has 
to compare the political position of the proletariat in England, 
France and America with that in Germany to see that the rule of the 
bourgeoisie does not only place quite new weapons in the hands of 
the proletariat for the struggle against the bourgeoisie, but that it also 
secures for it a quite different status, the status of a recognised party. 

=====第251页=====
3JjBS-S*^'  lui >m > t. wnwiiMt  'wZLZ£!**i 
n I«  MI in «a • •«nMIHMlMI 
temmmm£?msmmsmmm?mM ^ffTSSSX^SSXt 
Btlffel,  CtaiUg  km 11 eqKoutt 
??. ^_** ,'w!l"JÎ"*,,, "t **> **•»»•  »•»  $t«»ff«»,  «• »«  «t«ff»m«  »rr etluK  it enfin, S»»  f* tdhn  pi 50  Cnit.  im ««tea« 
aWt, M, nt  kMni,  »K »m«Maif*<<i.  m» t^tHtttnS^m, ttatrt »a* beta»«»*» «antra  u» an »r«  9ifnib<i(jn.etatioiHii  in »t«f 
Mttt» Stt»Ut«, M«.>tt»  •. (.• »tlffcl, 
3» ••ik.ii^L 
Tia M B>  »t«. 
. -_J _JM>  ftiïA *»*»»*» 
Illi wmtiJatniàH—mim.  MaHJMJ 
®E=? 
•TaSa  aTÎ.  Ummm  â. al » taV 
•M(ü<lliMM>uMMa>> 
•4Mta»jMM  (a a. w  kaki  IÉMII 
rc-ixss-  -. M. •J»*-.  fa*a_fcâaa  a» Md aa. Na 
eei »!••••«»••  in «»ci.ir«.. 
«••••«ut«. 
• »tlfftl.  «. taja.  - khlHW 
•MM  aa» * »a»  IN. g-JüÜ«"^  J 
a» iaä«M  ab  *•>-  _ „_ __ 
aa*.-
Sklaa  aa «iaa»aa Naaa  ak * 
"m ". •<•  »••«  «.lit«"«. 
51^tt^gg0>| £JUÄ.ÄaSysS 
9m IMIM  tartttM ItvjniPa «Mfc* 
ei* •»•» «iii m «a**. XTt*. 
•N *•» Mal*lWla*alaaila,  aa» 
aaa«  Um M ri« ak Ni Bakaal  «n» 
aa, a» Ma  lili.il  «aaN.  ai aTkaa» 
aiaai iiMHiiili i «aaaa Ba aMaa 
ui ML*  wa M wja 'jaa aat 
«Til  I laT^aajaalia».«». 
•Sa ma  m Iah* Maa*  aakal  " "" " 
Ça «V«lii—|  kâ k^kjiajPiaai Bnaj 
•aaaSBTaiS* Ma"«3SÄ«ClB» 
MMIE.jpa.jataaaajU  Wfc  »»»laa 
aaaa aaaaa«  M WliiaMia  0aV 
aaaTa»  ak Ma Ma, M| « ni ana<< 
""fea-a-a-a: 
.•a ak a. ft. «!| aatou tajjji nakiiii, 
«Tlalliilaai  Ca Hat «aMan »a.  a» 
a a«« ••• I»  a> tail, aa a Mat tjk a* II iiiiii ak «iiiia>.|  à a« e*a>  N» 
at aaHjTfc jaka  a»  »Ma»  MM.  fl 
a m aaaMidai  aia a» tat ana, k •Mt *M u Ma.  torn a MM Ha an» 
a«, an aa* I!) Hal i"l ilnlii-
yi aaaa  Km Ml aa la  Biiltaa  a* MkyTai pb.  ak fi  imya Ha» Irfaa  a 
awriN.  aa fi aa M aâ  NRMtUaa äa> 
laalaiHjai  -- • - -
BMalanai 
akiarn jtft~.^fhM aaa_ aaaaa 
faa kaa ai  anakaC  a H tl il i II i il. Ni aan  klkfe  ta. aauNI , aa N# Matai  «. a)aft  a a?  Na tkai ari> Ni foc maM CiN af a  Twkf  M. N M m k  8>IN  aHaa. aaff  a haaa. Cad »a  allai iaaci  an.  aMataMa 
- ••  ""alaïaiN 
liii|<a|l  l,M<a<  Ma, aa M * 
aalla  M piiaKki tjafafa«,  Ba Ni »• 
Ma «nMTiai auaa  n aiaadl  aal «ta« 
Ja- a* twkaa  -• tajua>,  aa a Ma 
|a a «aa  aaïaMilKiaaa 
Sa Mas  «rai  NI a,  NUN «loa 
BM NiaTaUlaw«.-  aa latajM  a«. 
Naa. m»  * * « aa)  mt kaa  Maa 
Zaua aaaajl,  a a  aanfa  ta Ca « 
MaM  ak M  haaa JaUaM.  af aa N*> 
Maa ttaUaa  »m  * Wail aaN lk «aN 
aa a.i.ln  aâa a  a.(Ml.»ala 
a a <a «a« B  Mka.  Ca/I  In najlaa» 
îktiTla» .« a», a» a.i  "»ïi*  *• 
iSaV "^"ASÎfJaTwî  N»»*|NT 
aaa »alia  aa. «a  liiaillaiCajkkaa 
M |, St ,|i°yS*! SaNJAaaaiTa« 
0 all Ma ail k aaa'  Oaki 
Mtakataai Haar  p. 4. 
tl • Maa.  at taM»  a »••• aaaa a n*a  a ».,, w. aaa m mm  Ma. 
•H fa m »a a  aa. (taaajata 
mm aa».  * aaaa»  a Ka  aflatVa 
ÎTkairéi  «aa. a  kjàW  Hba _a> 
IBIa-aai«. 
ÉarATaïAÏ*--
ETHM(|Mr lMi •• •_*•: 
laaa-.Va. 
»4Xaïlsv:wa-A: 
E5U.  Ma ad a  Maa»  «. Haff« »>!?itîafMU?!'i;*|'  "^^^ 
aa anMaaaaa  |taa.  aaja failli  «ai. 
fitaa aa »lil^atll. aaiiiaïamèaaW 
» a aaa) aSa'k fcafaua.  a k kV* 
lajka . ajMW Wnaa  »a fanaMta' 
WHMli  aa»  »mi lin  |li 1 l aaa 
aka. aaa aaa  lalaaaaaNa.  »i |a Maa 
M3at.  ara)  aaaa  ak a  wjaaiRaa,  a _^_ ._.»— »a«*itkka«)  a «naïai 
.Aara»1: 
i»wiiii-a«wé*«,> VitfUi  IM «MHMW  wl 
gR %m  wm m  MmtmtmtmH  m wijnfci Cmi  MM Mi  «nin-mi-iitt.  fit  •0toMt> 
m ftc «MM 3kH»tfft Mtfvijt,  M ••**"•  Cf» *|bai |tt< «Mt wmi|  |i hm  HI. Vnm Ai 
*«T *"»flt-Ti-irt iknM  ha Cab«  (Mn, 
•« IH •NMttl B»aT>WW  k«1 BtMt, iHMtt M  M 
«i I« nMHai Bnw«m« WArtij-, fût  l%n Etonfl 
w>l«iHrni,  ft MtfWn  an INM «wnrtttni  Cal it 
MU* |Mt  vl-nM«.  fit mv-  JlMTrjlMMltaA>,  a*" 
ZM «-«,  <*«,  MM M Ht «ta* M)fM  •«*• 
Mm, tu fTmiumm  r«fM«n  UN,  «•**«,  df 
•M ta 1-jElaV«  9aM«-MMi  M It.MM. lift. IN« tntrtttiai fr-*l  RtAi,  ^ »M 
•lattalW Witt»*!» »tW tlaUllèl  Nt t»  Pi Mt 
taM.  ri* 1>t»lrt-tvii ft«gt  atai,  MM ta ClMti 
^ttmtU»im»ntmt imUrmwm$Htm\mfUm.  9*fnM. 
•» ta KN>  vtattttt iURM».  Nt *mf*-fi  ta 
•MtwNhtat,  *ct M  M« tat (itadka trlnta. 
Ml «M,  ffta figura imtdt  w nrtién.  !«*• 
|j( rf M» MtM|,  ht HMiMt e*ta-|  M Ttta. 
iMiu« tai tN,)UM*, 8r4nftd*  wl Xnn«j «M  ta 
ta .NM&UM»  W «n}lfifltai . m tu (ctai,  M Nt 
$ttTftfca-ft  ta  P#*tfj«WfH  ta»  "PltlilaTUt lM*t Rit 
|düt ww BMfta  im. lMf( |t|t- Mt  »•«• 
«talic a Nt a>M» |ittt,  faataM  aMU «*-> laM §MU 
«*Rt*  t?ltlHU.  MM CltlaU tM JWInlMtt VnHaf. 
•trfMn. ttrrHS?» 
al. Ht Man af Nt  NaHa 3aa*>  Ha) 
•laaraaa  «M. 
.»< mmrn  m kkliianafai 3aaa 
«al Ni tjialaiaai naaait Caa^ 
•at aal N mmrn  NfflkNa  X-...r.~  ,. t. 
rÄ-HStts 
JBk Saa. aa.*aka «lal  (a «an 
»aaÄft*^ar£r' 
a) Ma a» a aa M» «akWj a^N. aa> 
aaJaïSai «aaaaa alaMIa,  al BaV 
Maa ka «ta»  f. a k > aa aja a. aa 
^Jl^?2^2 SSSl, 2?NMaa aa*àkkt «sn 
Ita ta «rttisM «talniMM , •• ta H». 
girtadW«  rwitat tat«. -M MM  •Hiwltnl»!  BM> 
Mm»,  M« frtatJtiH.  VM  |Mt_ tat n» 
•ttafftart rrtaat  |i MM.  MM«  MM ta»  IMfc 
kutta  »M «rtralMW»  In fyen  J(MMI«W(J*I 
M. .BrftMl"  M» (*Mta  fewJki  V^t ri«* 
Mt Mf tai tStM*  Mt.  MM tai a»*.'*-  9ttart> 
«Ma ta Utattm Dwt«MW. 
9M-AMVT  iNf  an«. Bwti*t- MtMtKHt: 
r« BIIÉII|M  Ct«*-t  M M  -»»-*-.  Mt 
Jtaflta_Mnta-«MMl tawIiiiR. fcty 
XNfft MltllrMMtal JUMttaTiatatlM, Ht M kl 
MT s« Mnk -w* Ck etUJét  M* «-WatMT 
faM  XtMMI Ml MI 
ftfMM  UffM.  Dk AMfWtMf  )_.. _. ___ . 
H. 3*1 MMift flMMM  -mm\1b<mCmm%  ktT tl» 
ta e*u-.'  M* 9tMhwt. tan» Mt kM* *c* 
MMMMM  «M«  ta toMta-nrt «ffttnt yfta>M  Mt 
Sa CIM»  M at«>t ta St»,  ftaktti  ta MM 
MI ïtWtrtetal. ». t. ta«StM»  M tttll«-«,  M*t 
• •«•'lin Xrtat*MR« ka»}!  m ta>  HiHfc 
•4 Ma 9tafeft«f( *n* Z««fftM  *. 9ta mfclMta 
SitMTMwta.  fa» fit tai  lm$m.tit  «tat Gtitv-« 
MiMfM»«, duf  ta r«Mt  «ta tab« te« Jtatam. 
INt <ta<iy  WMIMIC...  «MfM  ta ttatw 
MtN*M*t  itl ta, ta| fit  M*«*--  v «M« *. 
M» V»M  (»tW«  Wt XMrittMtalraH  »m. tm 
•ttaMfat imtaM ttrtfM.  w« tatM  Mtta UM» fe***«. 
_ tB«wf uWft «if»  M pa* •«*  M« k« 
•tetttttw, Mt St|ltnM|,  Mt ta ta  ffiM-M 
ta «*»-*•  M* W*Nt«*t liatM)  MM ta«  «rf 
Mottof Mttft  ta BtnhVmi  ta«,  itat |<lfc-
B** WMIII  trio,  ta 3tt|itnM| t«M  M ta 
tttar.MMMt.Mt  ta Jbtautvratahi.  «M «MM  Mt 
VMRfMtfit.  Ht «rtsfflbt aa-tv|f«n  M t4-MMM« 
Itat M AtaM*MM. 
IHt fftatlMMI«lMtt  Mart,  tlf* MT Mt «-
tafNH MtttaÜMft  (rt-. tl) M« ta  IwtlM MC 
laMmteièlwa«  tika 4b< Vawtrfmi. 
„ZSi ita fftléfrrl-  p. ti. 
An tataAita.  wn,  »«in  ^t  »MMC 
H. Mk Otriitrt.  ta«!, »a| n «it M»M> 
•fftrt  (MK. »M H»IM,  Mt ffMfftt »**>€. 
Jtit (IM Mttt*. UMêmtt grrtMH, 
BM> in*« 9Q3éZ  Nt MMmtaT-  f. H. 
*« M«f ta« |MfM  «SCI «JtMMM,  M 
- M*<  -tl «d| ta ta IMM^  fcta7«&Z 
iMMtfl  NIM  MMM Milkt« Cl.ftM.Mt . M M* 
ratatan  VÉM  «tatfKti.  XM  tatta Olr*|«  «i 
N M Mt «tMtt«.  ** 
tW Mt«t|t 2taM «mftBI  pi tlUfR. 
MM MM  M »rrt  «.ta  «*-*-* iUfli 
M. « M«tM tVMftMM  MMAR  ta 3aUnMfcy 
«M, ta. »ii -> >M>JMr  _, 
MU tMtM f-Utt, M^XtWkMM ItMt) ««•.' 
JHtaf  ta tankt frfta*  M« «M» 
«a ttM>«M^kf>«  taw-) t |^ 
- s*.*-.' -» »  «•>*. M« ta f« ta» 
ft^a.  au»  N la  «all.aaT.aa  IIIMUI 
M«*a.  aaaa aaaa anaaj  W Ma (Ma. 
S*lllt«l «a.aaaMtaMaVS: 
»a MaiaâSil  a a  aa»7B5»>" 
aa «äjaai aMNia«.  laa. Haa 
A page  of the  Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung with Marx's "Communism  of the  Rheinischer 
Beobachter"  and the  beginning  of Engels' essays "German Socialism 
in Verse  and  Prose" 

=====第252页=====

=====第253页=====
The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 225 
Does the Herr Consistorial Counsellor then believe that the 
proletariat, which is more and more adhering to the Communist 
Party, that the proletariat will be incapable of utilising the freedom 
of the press and the freedom of association? Let him just read the 
English and French working men's newspapers, let him just attend 
some time a single Chartist meeting! 
But in the ecclesiastical ministry, where the Rheinischer]  Beobachter 
is edited, they have queer ideas about the proletariat. They think 
they are dealing with Pomeranian peasants or with Berlin loafers. 
They think they have reached the greatest depths of profundity 
when they promise the people no longer panem et circenses, a but panem 
et religionem b instead. They delude themselves that the proletariat 
wishes to be helped, they do not conceive that it expects help from 
nobody but  itself.  They do not suspect that the proletariat sees 
through all these empty consistorial phrases about the "welfare of 
the people" and bad social conditions just as well as through the 
similar phrases of the liberal bourgeoisie. 
And why is the welfare of the people only of secondary importance 
to the bourgeoisie? The Rheinischer] Beobachter replies: 
"The United Diet has proved it, the perfidy of liberalism is exposed. The Income 
Tax was the acid test of liberalism, and it failed the test." 
These well-meaning Consistorial Counsellors, imagining in their 
economic innocence that they can use the Income Tax to throw dust 
in the eyes of the proletariat! 
The Slaughter and Milling Tax directly affects wages, the Income 
Tax affects the profit of capital. Extremely plausible, Herr Consis­
torial Counsellor, isn't it? But the capitalists will not and cannot 
allow their profits to be taxed with impunity. This follows from com­
petition  itself.  So within a few months after the introduction of the 
Income Tax, wages will therefore have been reduced to precisely 
the extent by which they were actually raise.d by the abolition of the 
Slaughter and Milling Tax and by the reduced food prices resulting 
from this. 
The level of wages expressed, not in terms of money, but in terms 
of the means of subsistence necessary to the working man, that is the 
level of real, not of nominal wages, depends on the relationship 
between demand and supply. An alteration in the mode of taxation 
may cause a momentary disturbance, but will not change anything in 
the long run. 
a Bread and games.— Ed. 
b Bread and religion.— Ed. 

=====第254页=====
226 Karl Marx 
The only economic advantage of the Income Tax is that it is 
cheaper to levy, and this the Consistorial Counsellor does not 
mention. Incidentally the proletariat gains nothing from this 
circumstance either. 
What, then, does all this talk about the Income Tax amount to? 
In the first place, the proletariat is not at all, or only momentarily, 
interested in the whole matter. 
In the second place, the government, which in levying the 
Slaughter and Milling Tax comes daily into direct contact with the 
proletariat and confronts it in a hateful fashion, the government 
remains in the background where the Income Tax is concerned, and 
forces the bourgeoisie to assume in full the odious business of 
pressing down wages. 
The Income Tax would thus be of benefit to the government 
alone, hence the anger of the Consistorial Counsellors at its rejection. 
But let us concede even for a moment that the proletariat has an 
interest in the matter; should this Diet have granted it? 
By no means. It ought not to have granted moneys at all, it should 
have left the financial system exactly as it was so long as the 
government had not fulfilled all its demands. The refusal of moneys 
is, in all parliamentary assemblies, the means by which the 
government is forced to yield to the majority. This consistent refusal 
of moneys was the only thing in which the Diet behaved energetical­
ly, and that is why the disappointed Consistorial Counsellors have to 
try and render it suspicious in the eyes of the people. 
"And yet," the Rheinischer] Beobachter] continues, "the organs of the liberal press 
quite appropriately raised the matter of the Income Tax." 
Quite correct, and it is indeed a purely bourgeois measure. For 
this very reason, though, the bourgeoisie is able to reject it when it is 
proposed to it at the wrong time by ministers whom it cannot trust an 
inch. 
We shall, incidentally, add this confession concerning the paternity 
of the Income Tax to the record; we shall find it useful later on. 
After some exceptionally vacuous and confused twaddle the 
Consistorial Counsellor suddenly stumbles over the proletariat in the 
following manner: 
"What is the proletariat?" (This is yet another of those questions which arise only to 
remain unanswered.) "It is no exaggeration when we" (that is, the Consistorial 
Counsellors of the Rheinischer] Beobachter], not, however, the other profane 
newspapers) "state that one-third of the people has no basis for its existence, and 
another third is on the decline. The problem of the proletariat is the problem of the 
great majority of the people, it is the cardinal question." 

=====第255页=====
The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 227 
How rapidly, indeed, these bureaucrats are brought to see reason 
by a single United Diet with a little opposition! How long is it since 
the government was prohibiting newspapers from maintaining such 
exaggerations as that we might have a proletariat in Prussia? Ever 
since the Trier'sche Zeitung among others—that innocent organ!— 
was threatened with closure because it maliciously wished to present 
the evil circumstances of the proletariat in England and France as 
existing also in Prussia? Be that as the government wishes. We shall 
similarly add to the record that the great majority of the people 
are proletarians. 
"The Diet," it is further declared, "considered the question of principle to be the 
cardinal question, that is, the question of whether or not this exalted assembly should 
receive state power. And what was the people to receive? No railway, no annuity 
banks,  no tax  relief!  Thrice happy people!" 
Observe how our sleek-pated Consistorial Counsellor is gradually 
beginning to show his fox's ears. "The Diet considered the question 
of principle to be the main question." The blessed simplicity of this 
amiable blind-worm! The question as to whether a loan of 30 
millions, an Income Tax providing a revenue not to be determined 
in advance, an annuity bank by means of which 400 to 500 millions 
can be raised on the domains—as to whether all this should be put at 
the disposal of the present dissolute and reactionary government, 
thus rendering it independent for an eternity, or whether it should 
be kept short, be rendered submissive to public opinion by the 
withdrawal of moneys, this our pussy-footing Consistorial Coun­
sellor calls the question of principle! 
"And what will the people receive?" asks the sympathetic 
Consistorial Counsellor. "No railway"—thus it will also avoid paying 
any taxes to cover the interest on the loan and the inevitable big 
losses in the running of this railway. 
"No annuity banks!" Our Consistorial Counsellor acts just as if the 
government wished to give annuities to the proletarians, doesn't he? 
But, on the contrary, it wanted to give annuities to the nobility, for 
which the people would have had to pay. In this way it was to be 
made easier for the peasants to buy themselves free from 
compulsory labour service. If the peasants wait a few years more they 
will probably no longer need to buy themselves free. When the lords 
of the manor come under the pitchforks of the peasants, and this 
could easily happen before very long, then corvée system will cease 
of its own accord. 
"No Income Tax. " But so long as the Income Tax brings no income 
to the people, this is a matter of utter indifference to it. 
9—1826 

=====第256页=====
228 Karl Marx 
"Thrice happy people," continues the Consistorial Counsellor, "you have at least 
won the question of principle! And if you do not understand what this is, then let your 
representatives explain it to you; perhaps you will forget your hunger in the course of 
their lengthy speeches!" 
Who still dares to claim that the German press is not free? The 
Rheinischer] Beobachter] employs here with complete impunity a 
turn of phrase which many a French provincial jury would without 
more ado declare to be an incitement of the various classes of society 
against one another and cause to be punished. 
The Consistorial Counsellor behaves, incidentally, in a terribly 
awkward manner. He wishes to flatter the people, and does not even 
credit it with knowing what a question of principle might be. Because 
he has to feign sympathy for the people's hunger, he takes his revenge 
by declaring it to be stupid and politically incompetent. The 
proletariat knows so well what the question of principle is that it does 
not reproach the Diet for having won it, but for not having won it. 
The proletariat reproaches the Diet for having stayed on the 
defensive, for not having attacked, for not having gone ten times 
further. It reproaches it with not having behaved decisively enough 
to make possible the participation of the proletariat in the 
movement. The proletariat was certainly incapable of showing any 
interest in the Privileges of the  Estates.  But a Diet demanding trial by 
jury, equality before the law, the abolition of the corvée system, 
freedom of the press, freedom of association and true representa­
tion, a Diet having once and for all broken with the past and 
formulating its demands according to the needs of the present 
instead of according to the old laws—such a Diet could count on the 
strongest support from the proletariat. 
The Beobachter continues: 
"And may God grant that this Diet should not absorb the power of the 
government, otherwise an insuperable brake will be put upon all social improve­
ments." 
The Herr Consistorial Counsellor may calm  himself.  A Diet that 
could not even get the better of the Prussian government will be 
given short shrift by the proletariat when the need arises. 
"It has been said," the Consistorial Counsellor observes further, "that the Income 
Tax leads to revolution, to communism. To revolution, to be sure, that is to say, to a 
transformation of social relations, to the removal of limitless poverty." 
Either the Consistorial Counsellor wishes to mock his readers and 
merely say that the Income Tax removes limitless poverty in order to 
replace it with limited poverty, and more of a similar kind of bad 
Berlin jokes—or he is the greatest and most shameless ignoramus in 

=====第257页=====
The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 229 
economic matters alive. He does not know that in England the 
Income Tax has been in existence for seven years and has not 
transformed a single social relation, has not removed the least hair's 
breadth of limitless poverty. He does not know that it is precisely 
where the most limitless poverty exists in Prussia, in the weaving 
villages of Silesia and Ravensberg, among the small peasants of 
Silesia, Posen, the Mosel and the Vistula, that the Class Tax, that is, 
the Income Tax, is in force. 
But who can reply seriously to such absurdities? It is further 
stated: 
"Also to communism, as it happens to be understood.... Where all relations have 
been so intertwined with one another and brought into flux by trade and industry that 
the individual loses his footing in the currents of competition, by the nature of the 
circumstances he is thrown upon the mercy of society which must compensate in respect of 
the particular for the consequences of the general fluctuations. Hence society has a duty 
of solidarity in respect of the existence of its members." 
And there we are supposed to have the communism of the 
Rh[einischer] Beobachter] Thus—in a society such as ours, where 
nobody is  secure  in his existence, in his position in life, society is duty 
bound to secure everybody's existence. First the Consistorial 
Counsellor admits that the existing society cannot do this, and then he 
demands of it that it should nevertheless perform this impossible 
feat. 
But it should compensate in respect of the particular for that for 
which it can show no consideration in its general fluctuations, this is 
what the Consistorial Counsellor means. 
"One-third of the people has no basis for its existence, and 
another third is on the decline." 
Ten million individuals, therefore, are to be individually compen­
sated for. Does the Consistorial Counsellor believe in all seriousness 
that the pauvre* Prussian government will be able to achieve this? 
To be sure, and what is more by means of the Income Tax, which 
leads to communism, as it happens to be understoodby the Rh[einischer] 
Beobachter. 
Magnificent. After bemusing us with confused balderdash about 
alleged communism, after declaring that society has a duty of 
solidarity in respect of the existence of its members, that it has  to care 
for them, although it cannot do so, after all these aberrations, 
contradictions and impossible demands, we are urged to accept the 
Income Tax as the measure which will resolve all contradictions, 
a Poor.— Ed. 

=====第258页=====
230 Karl Marx 
make all impossibilities possible and restore the solidarity of all 
members of society. 
We refer to Herr von Duesberg's memorandum on the Income 
Tax, which was presented to the Diet. a In this memorandum 
employment had already been found for the last penny of the 
revenue from the Income Tax. The hard-pressed government had 
not a farthing to spare for the compensation in respect of the 
particular for general fluctuations, for the fulfilment of society's 
duties of solidarity. And if, instead of ten million, only ten 
individuals had been through the nature of circumstances thrown 
upon Herr von Duesberg's mercy, Herr von Duesberg would have 
rejected all ten of them. 
But no, we are mistaken; besides the Income Tax the Herr 
Consistorial Counsellor has yet another means for introducing 
communism, as he happens to understand it: 
"What is the Alpha and Omega of the Christian faith? The dogma of original 
sin and redemption. And therein lies the association in solidarity of humanity in its 
highest potential: One for all and all for 6ne." 
Thrice happy people! The cardinal question is solved for all 
eternity! Under the double wings of the Prussian eagle and the Holy 
Ghost, the proletariat will find two inexhaustible springs of life: first, 
the surplus from the Income Tax above the ordinary and 
extraordinary needs of the state, which surplus equals zero, and 
second, the revenues from the heavenly domains of original sin and 
redemption, which likewise equal zero. These two zeroes provide a 
splendid basis for the one-third of the people which has no basis for 
its existence, a powerful support for the other third which is on the 
decline. Imaginary surpluses, original sin and redemption will 
undoubtedly satisfy the people's hunger in quite another way than 
the long speeches of liberal deputies! It is further stated: 
"We also pray, in the Lord's prayer: 'Lead us not into temptation.' And what we 
supplicate for ourselves we ought to practise with regard to our fellow human beings. 
Our social conditions undoubtedly tempt man, and the excess of poverty incites to 
crime." 
And we, gentlemen, we bureaucrats, judges and Consistorial 
Counsellors of the Prussian state, practise this consideration by 
having people broken on the wheel, beheaded, locked up and 
flogged to our heart's content, thereby "leading" the proletariat 
"into the temptation" to have us later similarly broken on the wheel, 
beheaded, locked up and flogged. Which will not fail to occur. 
a Duesberg, von. Denkschrift, betreffend die Aufhebung der Mahl- und Schlachtsteuer, 
die Beschränkung der Klassensteuer und die Erhebung einer Einkommensteuer. —IEd. 

=====第259页=====
The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 231 
"Such conditions," declares the Consistorial Counsellor, "must not be tolerated 
by a Christian state, it must remedy them." 
Indeed, with absurd blusterings about society's duties of solidarity, 
with imaginary surpluses and unacceptable bills of exchange on God 
the Father, Son and Company. 
"We can also save ourselves all this tedious talk of communism," opines our 
observing Consistorial Counsellor. "If only those who have the vocation for it develop 
the social principles of Christianity, then the Communists will soon fall silent." 
The social principles of Christianity have now had eighteen hun­
dred years to be developed, and need no further development by 
Prussian Consistorial Counsellors. 
The social principles of Christianity justified the slavery of antiq­
uity, glorified the serfdom of the Middle Ages and are capable, in 
case of need, of defending the oppression of the proletariat, even if 
with somewhat doleful grimaces. 
The social principles of Christianity preach the necessity of a 
ruling and an oppressed class, and for the latter all they have to offer 
is the pious wish that the former may be charitable. 
The social principles of Christianity place the Consistorial 
Counsellor's compensation for all infamies in heaven, and thereby 
justify the continuation of these infamies on earth. 
The social principles of Christianity declare all the vile acts of the 
oppressors against the oppressed to be either a just punishment for 
original sin and other sins, or trials which the Lord, in his infinite 
wisdom, ordains for the redeemed. 
The social principles of Christianity preach cowardice,  self-
contempt, abasement, submissiveness and humbleness, in short, all 
the qualities of the rabble, and the proletariat, which will not permit 
itself to be treated as rabble, needs its courage, its self-confidence, its 
pride and its sense of independence even more than its bread. 
The social principles of Christianity are sneaking and hypocritical, 
and the proletariat is revolutionary. 
So much for the social principles of Christianity. 
Further: 
"We have acknowledged social reform to be the most distinguished vocation of 
the monarchy." 
Have we? There has.not been a single word of this hitherto. 
However, let it stand. And what does the social reform of the 
monarchy consist in? In promulgating an Income Tax stolen from 
the liberal press, which is to provide surpluses the Minister of 
Finance knows nothing about, in the abortive Land Annuity Banks, 

=====第260页=====
232 Karl Marx 
in the Prussian Eastern Railway, and in particular in the profits from 
a vast capital of original sin and redemption! 
"The interests of the monarchy itself makes this advisable"—how 
low, then, the monarchy must have sunk! 
"The distress in society demands this"—for the moment it 
demands protective tariffs far more than dogmas. 
"The gospel recommends this"—this is recommended by every­
thing in general, only not by the terrifyingly barren condition of the 
Prussian State treasury, this abyss, which, within three years, will 
irrevocably have swallowed up the 15 Russian millions. The gospel 
recommends a great deal besides, among other things also castration 
as the beginning of social reform with oneself (Matth[ew] 19:12). 
"The monarchy," declares our Consistorial Counsellor, "is one with the people." 
This pronouncement is only another form of the old "l'état c'est 
raoi", a and precisely the same form, in fact, as was used by Louis XVI 
against his rebellious estates on June 23, 1789: "If you do not obey, 
then I shall send you back home"— "et seul je ferai le bonheur de mon 
peuple" . b 
The monarchy must indeed be very hard-pressed if it decides to 
make use of this formula, and our learned Consistorial Counsellor 
certainly knows how the French people thanked Louis XVI for its 
use on that occasion. 
"The throne," the Herr Consistorial Counsellor assures us further, "must rest on 
the broad foundation of the people, there it stands best." 
So long, that is, as those broad shoulders do not, with one powerful 
heave, throw this burdensome superstructure into the gutter. 
"The aristocracy," thus concludes the Herr Consistorial Counsellor, "leaves the 
monarchy its dignity and gives it a poetical adornment, but removes real power from 
it. The bourgeoisie robs it of both its power and its dignity, and only gives it a civil list. 
The people preserves to the monarchy its power, its dignity and its poetry." 
In this passage the Herr Consistorial Counsellor has unfortunately 
taken the boastful appeal To His  People,  made by Frederick William 
in his Speech from the Throne, 98 too seriously. Its last word 
is—overthrow of the aristocracy, overthrow of the bourgeoisie, 
creation of a monarchy drawing its support from the people. 
If these demands were not pure fantasies they would contain in 
themselves a complete revolution. 
We have not the slightest wish to argue in detail that the 
a "I am the state" (expression attributed to Louis XIV).— Ed. 
"And alone I shall create the happiness of my people." — Ed. 

=====第261页=====
The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter 233 
aristocracy cannot be overthrown in any other manner than by the 
bourgeoisie and the people together, that rule of the people in a 
country where the aristocracy and the bourgeoisie still exist side by 
side is a piece of sheer nonsense. One cannot reply to such 
yarn-spinnings from one of Eichhorn's Consistorial Counsellors with 
any serious development of ideas. 
We merely wish to make some well-intentioned comments to those 
gentlemen who would like to rescue the apprehensive Prussian 
monarchy by means of a somersault into the people. 
Of all political elements the people is by far the most dangerous 
for a king. Not the people of which Frederick William speaks, which 
offers thanks with moist eyes for a kick and a silver penny; this 
people is completely harmless, for it only exists in the king's 
imagination. But the real people, the proletarians, the small peasants 
and the plebs—this is, as Hobbes says, puer robustus, sed malitiosus,* 
a robust, but ill-natured youth, which permits no kings, be they lean or 
fat, to get the better of him. 
This people would above all else extort from His Majesty a 
constitution, together with a universal franchise, freedom of 
association, freedom of the press and other unpleasant things. 
And if it had all this, it would use it to pronounce as rapidly as 
possible on the power, the dignity and the poetry of the monarchy. 
The current worthy occupant of this monarchy could count 
himself fortunate if the people employed him as a public barker of 
the Berlin Artisans' Association with a civil list of 250 talers and a 
cool pale ale daily. 
If the Consistorial gentlemen now directing the destiny of the 
Prussian monarchy and the Rhein[ischer] Beobachter should doubt 
this, then let them merely cast a glance at history. History provides a 
quite different horoscopes for kings who appealed to their people. 
Charles I of England also appealed  to His People  against his estates. 
He called his people to arms against parliament. The people, 
however, declared itself to be against the king, threw all the members 
who did not represent the people out of parliament and finally 
caused parliament, which had thus become the real representative of 
the people, to behead the king. Thus ended the appeal of Charles I 
to his people. This occurred on January 30, 1649, and has its 
bicentenary in the year 1849. 
Louis XVI of France likewise appealed to His  People.  Three years 
long he appealed from one section of the people to another, he 
sought His people, the true people, the people filled with enthusiasm 
a Th. Hobbes, Elementa philosophica de cive.— Ed. 

=====第262页=====
234 Karl Marx 
for him, and found it nowhere. Finally he found it in the 
encampment of Koblenz, behind the ranks of the Prussian and 
Austrian army. This, however, was too much of a good thing for his 
people in France. On August 10, 1792 it locked up the appellant in 
the Temple and summoned the National Convention, which 
represented it in every respect. 
This Convention declared itself competent to judge the appeal of 
the ex-king, and after some consultation the appellant was taken to 
the Place de la Révolution, where he was guillotined on January 21, 
1793. 
That is what happens when kings appeal to Their  People.  Just what 
happens, however, when Consistorial Counsellors wish to found a 
democratic monarchy, we shall have to wait and see. 
Written on September 5, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Published in full in English for the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 73, first time 
September 12, 1847 

=====第263页=====
Frederick Engels 
GERMAN SOCIALISM  IN VERSE  AND  PROSE" 
1 
KARL BECK, LIEDER  VOM  ARMEN  MANN, 
OR THE  POETRY  OF  TRUE SOCIALISM 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung  No. 73,  September  12, 1847] 
Songs about the Poor  Man  begins with  a song  to a  wealthy house. 
TO THE  HOUSE  OF  ROTHSCHILD 
To prevent misunderstandings,  the  poet addresses  God as 
"LORD"  and the  house  of Rothschild  as Lord. 
Right  at the  beginning  he records his petty-bourgeois illusion that 
the "rule  of gold" obeys Rothschild's "whims";  an illusion which 
gives rise  to a  whole series  of fancies about the power  of the house of 
Rothschild. 
It is not the  destruction  of Rothschild's real power,  of the  social 
conditions  on which  it is  based, which  the  poet threatens;  he merely 
desires  it to be  humanely applied.  He  laments that bankers  are not 
socialist philanthropists,  not  enthusiasts  for an  ideal, not benefactors 
of mankind,  but  just—bankers. Beck sings  of the  cowardly petty-
bourgeois wretchedness,  of the  "poor man",  the  pauvre honteux with 
his poor, pious  and  contradictory wishes  of the  "little man"  in all his 
manifestations,  and  not of the proud, threatening, and revolutionary 
proletarian.  The  threats  and  reproaches which Beck showers  on the 
house  of Rothschild, sound,  for all his  good intentions, even more 
farcical  to the  reader than  a Capuchin's sermon. They  are  founded 
on the  most infantile illusion about  the  power  of the  Rothschilds,  on 
total ignorance  of the  connection between this power  and  existing 
conditions,  and on a  complete misapprehension about  the  means 
which  the  Rothschilds  had to use to  acquire power  and to  retain 
power. Pusillanimity  and  lack  of understanding, womanish senti­
mentality  and the  wretched, prosaically sober attitudes  of the  petty 
bourgeoisie, theSe  are the  muses  of this lyre,  and in  vain they  do 
violence  to themselves  in an  attempt  to appear terrible. They only 
appear ridiculous. Their forced bass  is constantly breaking into  a 
comic falsetto, their dramatic rendering  of the  titanic struggle  of an 

=====第264页=====
236 Frederick Engels 
Enceladus only succeeds in producing the farcical, disjointed jerks of 
a puppet. 
The rule of gold obeys your whims 
Oh, would your works could be as splendid 
And your heart as great as is your power! (p. 4). 
It is a pity that Rothschild has the power and our poet the heart. 
"Were but the two of them one, it had been too much for the earth." 
(Herr Ludwig of Bavaria.) 3 
The first figure with whom Rothschild is confronted is of course 
the minstrel  himself,  to be precise, the German minstrel who dwells in 
"lofty, heavenly garrets". 
Singing of justice, light and freedom, 
The one true GOD in trinity, 
The lute of the bards is with melody inspired: 
Now men with listening ears will follow 
The spirits (p. 5). 
This "GOD", borrowed from the Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitungs 
motto, 100 precisely because of his existence as a trinity, has no effect on 
the Jew Rothschild but produces quite magical effects on German 
youth. 
Restored to health, youth speaks a warning 
And the fertile seed of inspiration 
Sprouts up in myriad splendid names (p.[p. 5-]6). 
Rothschild's verdict on the German poets is different: 
The song the spirits had us sing, 
You call it hunger for fame and food [p. 6]. 
Although youth is speaking a warning and its myriad splendid 
names are sprouting up, their splendour consisting in the very fact 
that they never get further than mere inspiration, although "the 
bugles bravely sound for battle" and "the heart beats so loud at 
night", 
The foolish heart, it feels the stress 
Of a celestial impregnation (p. 7). 
That foolish heart, that Virgin Mary!—although 
Youth like a sombre Saul (by Karl Beck,b published 
by Engelmann, Leipzig, 1840), 
At odds with GOD and with itself [p. 8.], 
for all that and all that, Rothschild maintains the armed peace which, 
as Beck believes, depends on him alone. 
a Free rendering of two lines from Ludwig I of Bavaria's, "Florenz". —Ed. 
An allusion to Karl Beck's tragedy  Saul.—Ed. 

=====第265页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 237 
The newspaper report that the Holy See has sent Rothschild the 
Order of the Redeemer provides our poet with the chance to 
demonstrate that Rothschild is no redeemer; similarly it could just as 
well have been the occasion for the equally interesting proof that 
Christ, Redeemer though he was, was nevertheless not a knight of 
the Order of the Redeemer. 
You, a redeemer? (p. 11). 
And he then proves to him that unlike Christ he never  wrestled  in 
bitter night, he never sacrificed proud earthly power 
For a merciful gladdening mission 
To you entrusted by the great SPIRIT (p. 11). 
It must be said of the great SPIRIT that it does not exhibit much 
spiritual sagacity in its choice of missionaries and has approached the 
wrong man for acts of  mercy.  The only great thing about it is its block 
capitals. 
Rothschild's paucity of talent as a redeemer is amply demonstrated 
to him by means of three examples: how he reacted towards the July 
Revolution, the Poles and the Jews. 
Up rose the dauntless scion of the Franks (p. 12), 
in a word, the July Revolution broke out. 
Were you prepared? Did your gold resound 
Happy as the twittering of larks in welcome 
To the springtime stirring in the world? 
Which made young again those yearning hopes 
Sleeping deeply buried in our breasts, 
And brought them back into the living world? (p. 12). 
The springtime that was stirring was the springtime of the 
bourgeoisie, to whom gold, Rothschild's gold as much as any other, 
does indeed resound happy as the twittering of larks. To be sure, the 
hopes which at the time of the Restoration were sleeping deeply 
buried not only in the breast but also in the Carbonari Ventes 101 were 
at that time made young again and brought back into the living 
world, and Beck's poor man was left to pick up the crumbs. But as 
soon as Rothschild had convinced himself that the new government 
had firm foundations, he was happy enough to set his larks 
twittering—at the usual interest rates, of course. 
Just how completely Beck is entangled in petty-bourgeois illusions 
is shown by the saintly status Laffitte is accorded in comparison with 
Rothschild: 
Close-nestling beside your much-coveted halls 
Is a burgher's dwelling of holy repute (p. 13), 

=====第266页=====
238 Frederick Engels 
in other words, Laffitte's dwelling. The inspired petty bourgeois is 
proud of the bourgeois character of his house compared with the 
much-coveted halls of the Hotel Rothschild. His ideal, the Laffitte of 
his imagination, must naturally also live in true bourgeois simplicity; 
the Hotel Laffitte shrinks into a German burgher's dwelling. Laffitte 
himself is depicted as a virtuous householder, a man pure in heart, 
he is compared with Mucius Scaevola and is said to have sacrificed his 
fortune in order to put mankind and the century (is Beck perhaps 
thinking of the Paris  Siècle?})  back on their feet again. He is called a 
youthful dreamer and finally a beggar. His funeral is touchingly 
described: 
Accompanying the funeral cortège 
Marched with muffled tread the Marseillaise (p. 14). 
Alongside the Marseillaise went the carriages of the royal family, 
and right behind them M. Sauzet, M. Duchâtel and all the ventrue 02 
and loups-cerviers*  of the Chamber of Deputies. 
How the Marseillaise really must have muffled her tread, though, 
when Laffitte led his  compère, c the Duke of Orléans, in triumph to the 
Hôtel de Ville after the July revolution and made the striking 
statement that from now on the bankers would rule? 
In the case of the Poles, criticism goes no further than that 
Rothschild did not show enough charity to the emigres. The attack 
on Rothschild is here reduced to the level of a small-town anecdote 
and quite loses the appearance of an attack on the power of money in 
general which is represented by Rothschild. We all know how the 
bourgeoisie has welcomed the Poles with open arms and even with 
enthusiasm wherever it is in power. 
An example of this compunction: enter a Pole, begging and 
praying. Rothschild gives him a silver coin, the Pole 
Trembling with joy accepts the silver coin 
And speaks his blessing on you and your line [p. 1(5], 
a predicament from which the Polish Committee in Paris has so far 
on Lie whole saved the Poles. The whole episode with the Pole only 
serves to permit our poet to strike an attitude: 
But I hurl back that beggar's happiness 
Contemptuously into your money-bag, 
Avenging thus mankind offended! (p. 16), 
a Century.—Ed. 
Pot-bellies and profiteers.—Ed. 
c The French word has a double meaning: firstly, kinsman; secondly, accom­
plice.—Ed. 

=====第267页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 239 
such a bull's-eye at the money-bag requiring much practice and skill 
in throwing. Finally Beck insures himself against proceedings for 
assault and battery by acting not in his own name but in that of 
mankind. 
As early as p. 9 Rothschild is taken to task for accepting a patent of 
citizenship from Austria's fat imperial city, 
Where your much-harassed fellow-Jews 
Pay for their daylight and their air. 
Beck really believes that with this Viennese patent of citizenship 
Rothschild has obtained the blessings of freedom. 
Now, on p. 19, he is asked: 
Have you set your own people free 
That ever hopes and meekly suffers? 
Rothschild ought then to have become the redeemer of the Jews. 
And how ought Rothschild to have set about this? The Jews had 
chosen him as king because his gold weighed the heaviest. He should 
have taught them how to despise gold, "how to suffer deprivation 
for the world's sake" (p. 21). 
He ought to have wiped their memories clean of selfishness, 
cunning and the practice of usury, in short, he ought to have 
appeared in sackcloth and ashes as a preacher of morality and 
atonement. Our poet's daring demand is the equivalent of requiring 
Louis-Philippe to teach the bourgeoisie of the July revolution to 
abolish property. If either were so insane, they would lose their 
power forthwith, but the Jews would not wipe their memories clean 
of haggling, nor the bourgeoisie theirs of property. 
On p. 24 Rothschild is criticised for bleeding the bourgeoisie 
white, as though it were not desirable that the bourgeoisie should be 
bled white. 
On p. 25 he is said to have led the princes astray. Ought they not to 
be led astray? 
We have already evidence enough of the fabulous power Beck 
attributes to Rothschild. But he goes on in a crescendo. Having 
indulged on p. 26 in fantasies as to all the things he (Beck) would do 
if he were propriétaire of the sun, that  is, not even the hundredth part of 
what the sun is doing without him—it suddenly occurs to him that 
Rothschild is not the only sinner, but that other wealthy men exist be­
sides him. However: 
You occupied in eloquence the teacher's chair, 
Attentively the rich sat as your pupils; 
Your task: to lead them out into the world, 
Your role: to be their conscience. 
They have gone wild—and you looked on, 
They are corrupted—and yours is the blame (p. 27). 

=====第268页=====
240 Frederick Engels 
So Lord Rothschild could have prevented the development of 
trade and industry, competition, the concentration of property, the 
national debt and agiotage, in short, the whole development of 
modern bourgeois society, if only he had had somewhat more 
conscience. It really requires toute la désolante naïveté de la poésie 
allemande*  for one to dare to publish such nursery tales. Rothschild is 
turned into a regular Aladdin. 
Still not satisfied, Beck confers on Rothschild 
The dizzy grandeur of the mission 
The whole world's sufferings to assuage [p. 28], 
a mission which all the capitalists in the whole world are not remotely 
capable of fulfilling. Does our poet not realise then that the more 
sublime and awe-inspiring he attempts to appear, the more 
ridiculous he becomes? that all his criticisms of Rothschild are 
transmuted into the most slavish flattery? that he is extolling 
Rothschild's power as the most cunning panegyrist could not have 
extolled it? Rothschild must congratulate himself when he sees what 
a monstrous form his puny personality assumes as reflected in the 
mind of a German poet. 
After our poet has so far versified the romantic and ignorant 
fantasies of a German petty bourgeois concerning what is within the 
power of a big capitalist if only he were a man of good will, after he 
has puffed up the fantasy of this power as far as it will go in the 
puffed-up dizzy grandeur of his mission, he gives vent to the moral 
indignation of a petty bourgeois at the discrepancy between ideal 
and reality, in an emotional paroxysm which would give rise to fits of 
laughter even in a Pennsylvanian Quaker: 
Alas,  alack, when in long night (December 21) 
I pondered with a fevered brow 
Then did my locks rear up on end, 
Methought I was at GOD's own heartstrings tugging, 
A bellman at the fire-bell (p. 28), 
which must surely have been the last nail in the old man's coffin. He 
thinks the "spirits of history" have thus entrusted him with ideas, 
which he is not permitted either to whisper or proclaim aloud. In fact 
he comes to the desperate decision to dance the cancan in his grave: 
But when in mouldering shroud I lie, 
My corse shall shake with joyful tremors, 
When down to me (the corse) the tiding comes 
That victims on the altars smoke (p. 29). 
a All the utterly depressing naivety of German poetry.—Ed. 

=====第269页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 241 
I begin to find young Karl disturbing.3 
Thus ends the song about the House of Rothschild. There now 
follows, as is customary with modern lyric poets, a rhymed reflection 
on this canto and the role the poet has played in it. 
I know your mighty arm 
Can chastise me till the blood does flow (p. 30), 
in other words, he can give him fifty of the best. The Austrian never 
forgets the birch. In the face of this danger, a feeling of exaltation 
gives him strength: 
At GOD's command and without fear 
I sang full freely what I knew [p. 30]. 
The German poet always sings to command. Of course, the master 
is responsible and not the servant, and so Rothschild has to face up to 
GOD and not to Beck, his servant. It is indeed the general practice of 
modern lyric poets: 
1. To boast of the danger they think they are exposing themselves 
to in their harmless songs; 
2. to take a thrashing and then commend themselves to God. 
The song "To the House of Rothschild" closes with a few stirring 
sentiments about the aforementioned song, which is here slander­
ously described in the following terms: 
Free it is and proud, it may command you, 
Tell you the things by which in faith it swears (p. 32), 
that is, by its own excellence, as instanced in this conclusion. We fear 
that Rothschild may take Beck to court, not on account of the song, 
but on account of this piece of perjury. 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 74, September 16, 1847] 
O, SCATTER THE GOLDEN BLESSING! 
The rich are called upon to give support to those in  need, 
Until your industry for wife and child 
Security ensured [p. 35]. 
a Quoted ironically from Schiller's tragedy Don Carlos, Act I, Scene 6.— Ed. 

=====第270页=====
242 Frederick Engels 
And all this is to happen 
That you may keep your virtue 
As a burgher and a man [p. 35], 
summa summarum, a good philistine.* Beck is thereby reduced to his 
ideal. 
SERVINGMAN AND MAID 
The poet takes as his theme two souls most pleasing to God and 
describes in an exceptionally dull fashion how they only come to 
share a chaste marriage-bed only after many years of cheese-paring 
and moral living. 
To kiss? Shame would o'ercome them! To dally? O so discreetly! 
Flowers there were indeed—the flowers on the frosted pane; 
A dance on crutches, O God!, a poor butterfly in winter, 
Half in the bloom of childhood, half in withered age [p. 50]. 
Instead of concluding with this, the one good verse in the whole 
poem, he then sets them crowing and quivering, and all for joy over 
their few chattels, that "at their own hearth their own settles stand", a 
cliché uttered not ironically but with heartfelt tears of pathos. Nor 
will he have done at that: 
God alone is their Lord, who bids the stars shine in the darkness 
And observes with a kindly eye the slave who breaks his chains [p. 50]. 
And with this any point in the ending is happily blunted. Beck's 
indecision and lack of self-confidence constantly reveal themselves in 
the fact that he spins out every poem for as long as he can, and can 
never complete it until some piece of sentimentality has betrayed his 
petty-bourgeois outlook. The Kleistian hexameters appear to be 
deliberately chosen so as to subject the reader to the same boredom 
as the two lovers bring upon themselves by their craven morality 
during their long period of trial. 
THE JEWISH SECOND-HAND DEALER 
There are some naive, appealing bits in the description of the 
Jewish second-hand dealer, e.g.: 
The week flies by, five days only 
The week allows you for your work. 
Bestir  yourself,  don't pause for breath, 
a In German there is a pun on the words: Bürger —burgher, Mann—man, 
Bürgersmann —philistine.—Ed. 

=====第271页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 243 
Earn, earn your daily bread. 
Saturdays the Father does forbid you, 
Sundays are forbidden by the Son [p. 55]. 
But later Beck succumbs completely to that kind of blathering 
about the Jews which is typical of the liberal Young Germans.103 The 
poetry dries, up so entirely that one might think one was listening to a 
scrofulous speech in the scrofulous Saxon Assembly of Estates: You 
cannot become a craftsman, nor an "alderman of the mercers' 
guild", nor tiller of the soil, nor professor, but a career in medicine is 
open to you. This finds poetical expression as follows: 
A working trade they would deny you, 
Deny you too a field to till. 
You may not from the teacher's chair 
Offer discourse to the young; 
You may heal the country's sick [p. 57]. 
Could one not in the same way versify the Collected Statutes of 
Prussia and set Herr Ludwig of Bavaria's verse to music? 
Having declaimed to his son: 
You must labour and be grasping, 
Always covetous of property and gold [p. 57], 
the Jew consoles him with: 
Your honesty endures for ever [pp. 57-58]. 
LORELEI 
This Lorelei is none other than Gold. 
Then did turpitude flood in 
Upon all purity of spirit, 
Drowning all things sound [p. 64]. 
This Deluge of the spirit and drowning of all things sound is a 
most depressing mixture of the banal and the bombastic. There 
follow petty tirades against the evil and immorality of money. 
Its (love's) quest is money and precious stones 
And never hearts nor parity of souls, 
No simple hut for dwelling [p. 67]. 
If money had done no more than discredit this German quest for 
hearts and parity of souls and Schiller's meanest hut with its space for a 
happy loving pair,3 its revolutionary effects would deserve recogni­
tion. 
a An allusion to Schiller's poem "Der Jüngling am Bache". — Ed. 

=====第272页=====
244 Frederick Engels 
DRUM-SONG 
In this poem our socialist poet once more shows how through 
being trapped in the German petty-bourgeois misery, he is 
constantly obliged to spoil what little effect he achieves. 
A regiment marches off with its band playing. The people call 
upon the soldiers to make common cause with them. The reader is 
glad that the poet is at last summoning up courage. But oh dear! We 
finally discover that the occasion is merely the Emperor's name-day 
and the people's words are only the improvised and unspoken 
reverie of a youth watching the parade. Probably a gymnasium boy: 
Thus dreams a youth with burning heart [p. 76]. 
Whilst in the hands of Heine the same material, with the same 
point, would contain the most bitter satire on the German people, in 
Beck's case all that emerges is a satire on the poet  himself,  who 
identifies himself with the powerlessly rapturous youth. In Heine's 
case,  the raptures of the bourgeoisie are deliberately high-pitched, so 
that they may equally deliberately then be brought down to earth 
with a bump; in Beck's case it is the poet himself who is associated 
with these fantasies and who naturally also suffers the consequences 
when he comes crashing down to earth. In the case of the one the 
bourgeoisie feels indignation at the poet's impertinence, in the case 
of the other reassurance at the attitudes of mind they have in 
common. The Prague uprising104 in any case presented him with an 
opportunity to work up material of a quite different character from 
this farce. 
THE EMIGRANT 
I broke a bough from off a tree, 
The keeper made complaint, 
The master bound me to a post 
And dealt me this grave injury [p. 86]. 
The only thing missing here is the complaint delivered in similarly 
versified form. 
THE WOODEN LEG 
Here the poet tries his hand at narrative and fails in a really 
pathetic fashion. This complete inability to tell a story and create a 
situation, which is evident throughout the book, is characteristic of 
the poetry of true socialism. True socialism, in its vagueness, 
provides no opportunity to relate the individual facts of the narrative 

=====第273页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 245 
to general conditions and thus bring out what is striking or 
significant about them. That is why the true socialists shy away from 
history in their prose as well. Where they cannot avoid it, they 
content themselves either with philosophical constructions or with 
producing an arid and boring catalogue of isolated instances of 
misfortune and social  cases.  Furthermore, they all lack the necessary 
talent for narrative, both in prose and poetry, and this is connected 
with the vagueness of their whole outlook. 
THE POTATO 
Tune: Morgenrot, Morgenrot! 
Sacred bread! 
You that came in our distress, 
You that came at heaven's bidding 
Into the world, that men might eat— 
Farewell, for now you are dead! [p. 105]. 
In the second verse he calls the potato 
...that little relic 
Left to us from Eden, 
and describes potato-blight: 
Among angels the plague rampages. 
In the third verse Beck advises the poor to put mourning on: 
You, the poor! 
Go and put mourning on. 
You now have need of nought, 
Alas,  all you own is gone, 
Weep, who still have tears to  shed! 
Dead in the sand 
Lies your God, o melancholy land. 
Yet let these words speak comfort to you: 
Never did redeemer perish 
Who did not later rise again! [p. 106]. 
Weep, who still have tears to shed, with the poet! Were he not as 
bereft of energy as his poor man is of wholesome potatoes, he would 
have rejoiced at the substance acquired last autumn by that 
bourgeois god, the potato, one of the pivots of the existing bourgeois 
society. The landowners and burghers of Germany would have done 
themselves no harm by having this poem sung in the churches. 
For this effort Beck deserves a garland of potato-blossom. 

=====第274页=====
246 Frederick Engels 
THE OLD MAID 
We shall not look more closely at this poem since it drags on 
interminably, extending over full ninety pages with unspeakable 
boredom. The old maid, who in civilised countries is mostly only a 
nominal occurrence, is in Germany admittedly a significant "social 
case". 
The most common kind of socialist self-complacent reflection is to 
say that all would be well if only it were not for the poor on the other 
side.  This argument may be developed with any conceivable 
subject-matter. At the heart of this argument lies the philanthropic 
petty-bourgeois hypocrisy which is perfectly happy with the positive 
aspects of existing society and laments only that the negative aspect 
of poverty exists alongside them, inseparably bound up with present 
society, and only wishes that this society may continue to exist without 
the conditions of its existence. 
Beck develops this argument in this poem often in the most trivial 
possible way, for example, in connection with Christmas: 
O day that gently edifies men's hearts, 
You would be gentler still and doubly dear— 
Did there not lodge in poor children's hearts 
Whose orphan gaze surveys the festive 
Rooms of their rich playmates, 
Envy and the seeds of sin, 
Along with rabid blasphemy! 
Yes 
... more sweetly would the children's merry cheer 
Sound to my ears in the Christmas candlelight, 
If only in damp caverns destitution 
Were not shivering on putrid straw [p. 149]. 
There are, by the way, occasional fine passages in this amorphous 
and interminable poem, for example the description of the lumpen 
proletariat: 
Who day by day unwearyingly 
Hunt garbage in the fetid gutters; 
Who flit like sparrows after food, 
Mending pans and grinding knives, 
Starching linen with stiff fingers, 
Pushing breathless at the heavy cart, 
Laden with but scarcely ripened fruits, 
Crying piteously: Who'll buy, who'll buy? 
Who fight over a copper in the dirt; 
Who at the corner-stones each day 
Sing praise to the God in whom they believe, 
But scarcely dare hold out their hands, 
Begging being against the law; 
Who with deaf ears, beset by hunger, 

=====第275页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 247 
Pluck the harp and blow upon the flute, 
Year in, year out, the same old tune— 
Beneath each window, at each gate— 
Setting the nursemaid's feet adance 
But hearing not the melody themselves; 
Who after dusk illuminate the city 
But have no light for their own home; 
Who shoulder burdens and split firewood, 
Who have no master, and who have too many; 
Who dash to pray, procure and steal 
And drown with drink the vestige of a soul [pp. 158-160]. 
Beck here rises for the first time above the usual morality of the 
German bourgeoisie by putting these lines in the mouth of an old 
beggar whose daughter is asking for his permission to go to a 
rendezvous with an officer. In the above lines he gives her an 
embittered picture of the classes to which her child would then 
belong, he derives his objections from her immediate social position 
and does not preach morality to her, and for this he deserves credit. 
THOU SHALT NOT STEAL 
The virtuous servant of a Russian, whom the servant himself 
characterises as a worthy master, robs his apparently sleeping master 
during the night in order to maintain his old father. The Russian 
follows him surreptitiously and looks over his shoulder just as he is 
penning the following note to the same old man: 
Take this money! I have stolen! 
Father, pray to our Redeemer 
That he may one day from his throne 
Allow forgiveness to his servant! 
I will labour and earn money, 
And from my palliasse chase fatigue, 
Till I can pay my worthy master 
Back the money I have stolen [p. 241]. 
The virtuous servant's worthy master is so moved by these awful 
revelations that he cannot speak, but places his hand on the servant's 
head in blessing. 
But the latter's life had left him— 
And his heart had broken with terror [p. 242]. 
Can anything more comical be committed to paper? Beck here 
descends lower than Kotzebue and Iffland, the servant's tragedy 
surpasses even the middle-class tragedy. 

=====第276页=====
248 Frederick Engels 
NEW GODS AND OLD SORROWS 
In this poem, Ronge, the Friends of Light, 105 the New Jews, the 
barber, the washerwoman and the Leipzig citizen with his modicum 
of liberty are often effectively lampooned. At the end, the poet 
defends himself against the philistines who will criticise him for it, 
although he too 
The song of light 
Sang out into the storm and night [p. 298]. 
He then himself propounds a doctrine of brotherly love and 
practical religion, modified by socialism and founded on a kind of 
nature-deism, and thus enlists one aspect of his opponents against 
the other. So Beck can never let matters rest until he has spoilt his 
own case, because he is himself too much entangled in German 
misery and gives too much thought to  himself,  to the poet, in his 
verse. With the modern lyrical poets in general, the bard has reverted 
to a fabulously trimmed, heroically posturing figure. He is not an 
active person situated in real society, who writes poetry, but "the 
poet", hovering in the clouds, these clouds being none other than the 
nebulous fantasies of the German bourgeoisie.—Beck constantly 
drops from the most heroical bombast into the soberest of bourgeois 
prose styles, and from a petty warlike wit against present conditions 
into a sentimental acceptance of them. It is constantly occurring to 
him that it is he himself de quo fabula narratur.* That is why his songs 
are not revolutionary in effect, but resemble 
Three doses of salts 
To calm the blood (p. 293). 
The conclusion to the whole volume is therefore most approp­
riately provided by the following weak wail of resignation: 
When will life upon this earth 
Be bearable, O God? 
In longing I am doubly strong 
And hence in patience doubly wearied [p. 324]. 
Beck has incontestably more talent and at the outset more energy 
too than most of the German scribbling fraternity. His great lament 
is the German misery, amongst whose theoretical manifestations also 
belong Beck's pompously sentimental socialism and Young German 
reminiscences. Until social conflicts in Germany are given a more 
acute form by a more distinct differentiation between classes and a 
momentary acquisition of political power by [the] bourgeoisie, there 
a About whom the story is being told.— Ed. 

=====第277页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 249 
can be little hope for a German poet in Germany  itself.  On the one 
hand, it is impossible for him to adopt a revolutionary stance in 
German society because the revolutionary elements themselves are 
not yet sufficiently developed, and on the other, the chronic misery 
surrounding him on all sides has too debilitating an effect for him to 
be able to rise above it, to be free of it and to laugh at it, without 
succumbing to it again  himself.  For the present the only advice we 
can give to all German poets who still have a little talent is to emigrate 
to civilised countries. 
2 
KARL GRÜN, ÜBER GGTHE VOM MENSCHLICHEN STANDPUNKTE, 
DARMSTADT, 1846 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 93, November 21, 1847] 
Herr Grün relaxes after the exertions of his "Soziale Bewegung in 
Frankreich und Belgien" by glancing at the lack o/social movement in 
his native land. For the sake of variety, he decides to take a look at 
"the human aspect" of the elderly Goethe. He has exchanged his 
seven-league boots for carpet-slippers, donned his dressing-gown 
and stretches  himself,  full of self-satisfaction, in his arm-chair: 
"We are not writing a commentary, we are only picking out what is there for all to 
see'' (p. 244). 
He has made things really snug for  himself: 
"I had put some roses and camellias in my room, and mignonette and violets by the 
open window" (p. III). "And above all, no commentaries! ...But here, the complete 
works on the table and a faint scent of roses and mignonette in the room! Let us just 
see where we get  to....  Only a rogue offers more than he has!" (pp. IV, V). 
For all his nonchalance, Herr Grün nevertheless performs deeds 
of the stoutest heroism in this book. But this will not surprise us 
when we have heard him himself say that he is the man who "was on 
the point of despairing at the triviality of public and private affairs" 
(p. Ill), who "felt Goethe's restraining hand whenever he was in 
danger of being submerged by extravagance and lack of form" 
(ibid.),  whose heart is "full with the sense of human destiny", "who 
has listened to the soul of man—though it should mean descending 
into hell!" (p. IV). Nothing will surprise us any more after learning 
that previously he had "once addressed a question to Feuerbachiart 
a In German there is a pun on the words Bewegung —movement and Still-
stand—  lack of movement.— Ed. 

=====第278页=====
250 Frederick Engels 
man" which was indeed "easy to answer" but which nevertheless 
appears to have been too difficult for the man in question (p. 277); 
and when we see how Herr Grün on p. 198 "leads self-awareness out 
of a cul de sac", on p. 102 even plans to visit "the court of the Russian 
Emperor" and on p. 305 cries out to the world with a voice of 
thunder: "Anathema upon any man who would proclaim new and 
permanent social relations by law!" We are prepared for anything 
when Herr Grün undertakes on p. 187 "to take a closer look at 
idealism" and "show it up for the guttersnipe it is", when he 
speculates on "becoming a man of property", 
a "rich, rich man of property, to be able to pay the property tax, to obtain a seat in 
the Chamber of Representatives of mankind, to be included in the list of jurymen who 
judge between what is human and what is not". 
How could he fail to achieve this, standing as he does, "on the 
nameless ground of the universally human"? (p. 182). He does not 
even tremble before "the night and its  horrors''''  (p. 312), such as mur­
der, adultery, robbery, whoring, licentiousness and puffed-up pride. 
It is true that on p. 99 he confesses he has also "known the infinite 
pang of man as he discovers himself at the very point of his own 
insignificance", it is true he "discovers" himself before the public eye 
at this "point" on the occasion of the lines: 
You compare but with the spirit in your mind, 
Not mea 
to be precise, as follows: 
"These words are as when thunder and lightning occur together, with the earth 
opening up at the same time. These words are like the veil of the temple being rent in 
twain and the graves being opened ... the twilight of the Gods is upon us and the chaos 
of old is come again ... the stars collide, in an instant a single comet tail incinerates our 
little earth, and all that exists is henceforth but billowing smoke and vapour. And if 
one imagines the most atrocious destruction, ... it is all but as nothing against the 
annihilation contained in these eleven words!" (pp. 235, 236). 
It is true, "at the furthermost frontier of theory", namely on p. 
295, Herr Grün has a sensation "of icy water running down his back, 
real terror quivers through his limbs"—but he overcomes all this 
with ease, for after all he is a member of the "great order of 
freemasons of mankind"! (p. 317). 
Take it all in all,b  with such qualities Herr Grün will perform 
valiantly on any field of battle. Before we proceed to his productive 
a J. W. Goethe, Faust, Part I, Scene 1 ("Night").— Ed. 
b Engels gives this phrase in English. (Shakespeare, Hamlet, Act I, Scene 2 
[paraphrased]).—Ed. 

=====第279页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 251 
examination of Goethe, let us accompany him to some of the 
secondary areas of his activity. 
Firstly to the field of the natural sciences, for according to p. 247 
"the understanding of nature" is "the sole positive science" and at 
the same time "nonetheless the fulfilment of humanistic" (vulgo: 
human) "man". Let us carefully collate the positive pronouncements 
Herr Grün makes concerning this sole positive science. He does not 
actually go into the subject at all extensively, he merely lets fall a few 
remarks while pacing his room, so to speak, in the interval between 
daylight and darkness, but the miracles he performs are "nonethe­
less"  the "most positive" for that. 
In connection with the Systeme de la Nature 106 ascribed to Holbach, 
he reveals: 
"We cannot here expound how the System of Nature breaks off half-way, how it 
breaks off at the point where freedom and self-determination had to break out from the 
necessity of the cerebral system" (p. 70). 
Herr Grün could indicate the precise point at which this or that 
"breaks out" "from the necessity of the cerebral system" and man 
would thus be slapped on the inside of his skull as well. Herr Grün 
could give the most certain and most detailed information on a point 
which has hitherto escaped all observation, in other words the pro­
ductive processes of consciousness in the brain. But alas! In a book 
on the human aspect of Goethe we "cannot expound this in detail". 
Dumas, Playfair, Faraday and Liebig have hitherto innocently 
subscribed to the view that oxygen is a gas which has neither taste nor 
smell. Herr Grün, however, who of course knows that the prefix 
"oxy-" means sharp to the taste, declares on p. 75 that "oxygen" is 
"sharp-tasting". In the same way, on p. 229 he contributes new facts 
to acoustics and optics; by postulating a "purifying uproar and 
brightness", he places the purificatory power of sound and light 
beyond all doubt. 
Not content with such dazzling contributions to the "sole positive 
science", not content with the theory of inward slaps, on p. 94 Herr 
Grün discovers a new bone: 
"Werther is the man who has no vertebra, who has not yet developed as subject." 
Until now it had been mistakenly thought that man had some two 
dozen vertebrae. Herr Grün reduces these numerous bones not just 
to the normal singular form but goes on to discover that this one and 
only vertebra has the remarkable property of making man "subject". 
The "subject" Herr Grün deserves an extra vertebra for this 
discovery. 

=====第280页=====
252 Frederick Engels 
Finally our casual naturalist summarises his "sole positive science" 
of nature as follows: 
"Is not the core of nature 
Mankind at heart?3 
"The core of nature is mankind at heart. At the heart of mankind is the core of 
nature. Nature has its core at mankind's heart" (p. 250). 
To which we would add, with Herr Grün's permission: Mankind at 
heart is the core of nature. At heart the core of nature is mankind. At 
the heart of mankind nature has its core. 
With this eminently "positive" piece of enlightenment we leave the 
field of natural science, and turn to  economics,  which unfortunately, 
according to the above, is not a "positive science". Regardless of this, 
Herr Grün, hoping for the best, proceeds extremely "positively" 
here too. 
"Individual set himself against individual, and thus universal competition arose" 
(p. 211). 
In other words, that obscure and mysterious conception German 
socialists have of "universal competition" came into being, "and thus 
competition arose". No reasons are indicated, no doubt, because 
economics is not a positive science. 
"In the Middle Ages base metal was still bound by fealty, courtly love and piety; the 
sixteenth century burst this fetter, and money was set free" (p. 241). 
MacCulloch and Blanqui, who have hitherto been under the 
misapprehension that money was "bound in the Middle Ages" by 
deficient communications with America and the granite masses that 
covered the veins of "base metal" in the Andes,b  MacCulloch and 
Blanqui will be addressing a vote of thanks to Herr Grün for this 
revelation. 
Herr Grün seeks to give a positive character to History, which is 
likewise not a "positive science", by juxtaposing the traditional facts 
and a series of facts of his imagination. 
On p. 91, "Addison's Cato stabbed himself on the English stage a 
century before Werther", thereby testifying to a remarkable 
weariness of life. For by this account, he "stabbed" himself when his 
author, who was born in 1672, was still a babe in arms. 107 
On p. 175 Herr Grün corrects Goethe's Tag- und Jahreshefte  to the 
effect that the freedom of the press was by no means "declared" by 
the German governments in 1815 but only "promised". So the 
a J. W. Goethe, "Ultimatum" (Zyklus "Gott und  Welt").— Erf. 
The reference is to the books: J. R. MacCulloch, The Principles of Political 
Economy and A. Blanqui, Histoire de  l'économie  politique en Europe.— Ed. 

=====第281页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 253 
horrors retailed to us by the philistines of the Sauerland and 
elsewhere concerning the four years of press freedom from 1815 to 
1819,  are all just a dream: how at that time the press exposed all their 
dirty linen and petty scandals to the light of day and how finally the 
Federal Decrees of 1819 108 put an end to this reign of terror by 
public opinion. 
Herr Grün goes on to tell us that the Free Imperial City of 
Frankfurt was not a state at all but "no more than a piece of civil 
society" (p. 19). Germany, he says, has no states of any kind, and 
people are at last beginning "to realise increasingly the peculiar 
advantages of this stateless condition of Germany" (p. 257), which 
advantages consist especially in the cheapness of flogging. The 
German autocrats will thus be obliged to say: "la société civile, c'est 
moï' a—although they fare badly in this, for according to p. 101, civil 
society is only "an abstraction". 
If, however, the Germans have no state, they have instead "a 
massive bill-of-exchange on truth, and this bill-of-exchange must be 
realised, paid up and changed for jingling coin" (p. 5). This 
bill-of-exchange is no doubt payable at the same office where Herr 
Grün pays his "property tax", "to obtain a seat in the Chamber of 
Representatives of mankind". 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 94, November 25, 1847] 
The most important "positive" things he enlightens us about 
concern the French Revolution, on whose "significance" he delivers 
a special "digression". He begins with the oracular utterance that the 
contradiction between historical law and rational law is indeed 
important, for both are of historical origin. Without wishing in any 
way to belittle Herr Grün's discovery, which is as new as it is 
important, that rational law too arose in the course of history, we 
would diffidently venture the observation that a quiet encounter in 
the quiet of his chamber with the first volumes of Buchez's Histoire 
parlementaire should show him what part this contradiction played in 
the Revolution. 
Herr Grün, however, prefers to give us an extensive proof of the 
evil nature of the Revolution which eventually boils down to the one, 
ponderously massive complaint against it: that it "did not examine 
the concept of man" [p. 195]. Indeed such a grievous sin of omission 
is unforgivable. If only the Revolution had examined the concept of 
man, there would have been no question of.a ninth Thermidor or an 
eighteenth Brumaire 109; Napoleon would have contented himself 
a J am civil society.— Ed. 

=====第282页=====
254 Frederick Engels 
with his general's commission and maybe in his old age written 
drilling regulations "from the human aspect".—We further learn, in 
the course o*f our enlightenment, "about the significance of the 
Revolution", that basically there is no difference between deism and 
materialism, and why not. From this we see with some pleasure that 
Herr Grün has not yet quite forgotten his Hegel. Cf. for example 
Hegel's Geschichte der Philosophie, III, pp. 458, 459 and 463, second 
edition.—Then, likewise to enlighten us "about the significance of 
the Revolution", a number of points about competition are made, of 
which we anticipated the most important above; further, long 
excerpts from the writings of Holbach are given, in order to prove 
that he explained crime as having its origin in the state; "the 
significance of the Revolution" is similarly elucidated by a generous 
anthology from Thomas More's Utopia, which Utopia is in turn 
elucidated to the effect that in the year of 1516 it prophetically 
portrayed no less than—"present-day England" (p. 225), down to the 
most minute details. And at last, after all these vues and considérants, 
on which he digresses at length over 36 pages, the final verdict 
follows on p. 226: "The Revolution is the realisation of Machiavel­
lianism." An example which is a warning to all those who have not 
yet examined the concept of "man"! 
By way of consolation for the unfortunate French, who have 
achieved nothing but the realisation of Machiavellianism, on p. 73 
Herr Grün dispenses one little drop of balm: 
"In the eighteenth century the French people was like a Prometheus among the 
nations, who asserted human rights a^ against those of the gods." 
Let us not dwell on the fact that it must presumably have 
"examined the concept of man" after all, nor on the fact that it 
"asserted" human rights not "as against those of the gods" but those 
of the king, the aristocracy and the clergy, let us pass over these 
trifles and veil our heads in silent  grief:  for something "human" has 
happened to Herr Grün himself here. 
Herr Grün, you see, has forgotten that in previous publications (cf. 
for instance the article in Volume I of the Rheinische Jahrbücher* "Die 
soziale Bewegung" etc.) he had not merely expatiated upon and 
"popularised" a certain argument concerning human rights that is to 
be found in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, h but with the truest 
plagiaristic zeal had even carried it to nonsensical extremes. He has 
forgotten that there he had pilloried human rights as the rights of 
a K. Grün, "Politik und Socialismus". — Ed. 
See Marx's "On the Jewish Question" (present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 160-68).—Ed. 

=====第283页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 255 
the épicier, 3 the philistine, etc.; here he suddenly transforms them 
into "human rights", the rights of "man". The same thing happens to 
Herr Grün on pp. 251 and 252, where "the right with which we were 
born and which, alas, is universally ignored", from Faust, is turned 
into "your natural right, your human right, the fight to translate 
one's ideas into practice and enjoy the fruits of one's labours"; 
although Goethe opposes it directly to "law and rights", which "are 
passed on from generation to generation like an everlasting disease", 0 in 
other words the traditional law of the ancien régime, with which only 
the " innate, ageless and inalienable human rights" of the Revolution, 
but by no means the rights of "man" conflict. This time, it is true, 
Herr Grün had to forget his previous point, so that Goethe should 
not forfeit his human aspect. 
Herr Grün has however not yet completely forgotten what he 
learned from the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher and other publica­
tions of the same tendency. On p. 210 he defines the freedom in 
France at that time, for example, as "the freedom of unfree (!), 
common (!!) beings (!!!)". This non-being has arisen from the 
common being on pp. 204 and 205 of the Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher 0 and from the translations of these pages into the 
current language of German socialism of that time. Arguments 
which make abstract of philosophy and contain expressions from 
law, economics, etc., are incomprehensible to the true socialists, who 
therefore have the general habit of condensing them in the twinkling 
of an eye into a single brief catchphrase, studded with philosophical 
expressions and then committing this nonsense to memory for use 
on any conceivable occasion. In this way, the legal "common being" 
in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher has been transformed into the 
above philosophico-nonsensical "general being"; political liberation, 
democracy, has acquired its philosophical short formula in "libera­
tion from the unfree general being", and this the true socialist can 
put in his pocket without having to fear that his erudition will prove 
too heavy for him. 
On p. XXVI Herr Grün exploits what is said in the Holy Family 
about sensationism and materialism 0 in a manner similar to that 
which he uses in respect of the above-mentioned quotations from 
Holbach and their socialist interpretation, the hint contained in that 
publication that links with the socialist movement of the present day 
a Grocer, shopkeeper.—Ed. 
b J. W. Goethe, Faust, Act I, Scene 4 ("Faust's Study").—Ed. 
c K. Marx, "On the Jewish Question" (see present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 165-66).— 
Ed. 
d See present edition, Vol. 4, pp. 124-34.—Ed. 

=====第284页=====
256 Frederick Engels 
are to be found in the materialists of the eighteenth century, 
including Holbach. 
Let us pass on to philosophy. For which Herr Grün has a 
thorough-going contempt. As early as p. VII he informs us that he 
"has no further use for religion, philosophy and politics", that these 
three "have existed and will never rise again from their dissolution" 
and that from all of them and from philosophy in particular he "will 
retain nothing more than man himself and the social being capable of 
social activity". The social being capable of social activity and the 
above-mentioned human man are, it is true, sufficient to console us 
for the irreversible downfall of religion, philosophy and politics. But 
Herr Grün is far too modest. He has not only "retained" 
"humanistic man" and various "beings" from philosophy, but he is 
also the proud possessor of a considerable, if confused, mass of 
Hegelian tradition. How could it be otherwise, when several years 
ago he knelt in reverence on a number of occasions before the bust 
of Hegel? We shall be asked not to introduce such scurrilous and 
scandalous personal details; but Herr Grün himself confided this 
secret to the man from the press. We shall not at this juncture say 
where. We have already quoted Herr Grün's sources with chapter 
and verse so frequently that we may for once request a like service of 
Herr Grün. To give him at once further proof of our kind intentions 
towards him, we will confide to him the fact that he took his final 
verdict in the free-will controversy, which he gives on p. 8, from 
Fourier's Traité de l'Association, section "du libre arbitre". Only 
the idea that the theory of free will is an "aberration of the German 
mind" is a peculiar "aberration" on the part of Herr Grün  himself. 
We are at last getting closer to Goethe. On p. 15 Herr Grün allows 
Goethe the right to exist. For Goethe and Schiller are the resolution 
of the contradiction between "pleasure without activity", i. e., 
Wieland, and "activity without pleasure", i. e., Klopstock. "Lessing 
first based man on  himself."  (One wonders whether Herr Grün can 
emulate him in this acrobatic feat.)—In this philosophic construc­
tion, we have all of Herr Grün's sources together. The form of the 
construction, the basis of the whole thing is Hegel's world-famous 
stratagem for the reconciliation of contradictions. "Man based on 
himself"  is Hegelian terminology applied to Feuerbach. "Pleasure 
without activity" and "activity without pleasure", this contradiction 
on which Herr Grün sets Wieland and Klopstock to play the above 
variations, is borrowed from the Complete Works of M[oses] Hess. 
The only source which we miss is literary history  itself,  which has not 
the remotest inkling of the above hotch-potch and is therefore 
rightly ignored by Herr Grün. 

=====第285页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 257 
Whilst we are on the subject of Schiller, the following observation 
of Herr Grün's should be apposite: "Schiller was everything one can 
be, insofar as one is not Goethe" (p. 311). Beg pardon, one can also 
be Herr Grün. —Incidentally, our author is here ploughing the same 
furrow as Ludwig of Bavaria: 
Rome, thou art lacking in Naples' gifts, she in those 
that thou layst claim to; 
Were but the two of you one, it had been too much for the earth.3 
This historical construction prepares the way for Goethe's entry 
into German literature. "Man based on  himself"  by Lessing can 
continue his evolution only in Goethe's hands. For to Herr Grün 
belongs the credit of having discovered "man" in Goethe, not 
natural man, begotten by man and woman in the pleasures of the 
flesh, but man in the higher sense, dialectical man, the caput 
mortuum h in the crucible, in which God the Father, Son and Holy 
Ghost have been calcined, the cousin germain of Homunculus in 
Faust—in short, not man as Goethe speaks of him, but man  as such,  as 
Herr Grün speaks of him. Who is "man as such", then, of whom 
Herr Grün speaks? 
"There is nothing in Goethe that is not human content" (p. XVI).—On p. XXI we 
hear "that Goethe so portrayed and conceived of man as such as we wish to realise him 
today".—On p. XXII: "Goethe today, and that means his works, is a true compendium 
of humanity."—Goethe "is humanity fulfilled" (page  XXV).—  "Goethe's literary 
works are (!) the ideal of human society" (p. 12).—"Goethe could not become a 
national poet because he was destined to be the poet of all that is human" (p. 25).—Yet, 
according to p. 14, "our nation"—that is, the Germans—is nevertheless supposed to 
"discern its own essence transfigured" in Goethe. 
This is the first revelation about "the essence of man", and we may 
trust Herr Grün all the more in this matter because he has no doubt 
"examined the concept of man" with the utmost thoroughness. 
Goethe portrays "man" as Herr Grün wishes to realise him, and at 
the same time he portrays the German nation transfigured—"man" 
is thus none other than "the German transfigured". We have 
confirmation of this throughout. Just as Goethe is not "a national 
poet" but "the poet of all that is human", so too the German nation is 
not a "national" nation, but the nation "of all that is human". For 
this reason we read on p. XVI again: "Goethe's literary works, 
emanating from life, ... neither had nor have anything to do with 
reality." Just like "man", just like "the Germans". And on p. 4: "At 
this very time French socialism aims to bring happiness to France, 
a Ludwig I of Bavaria, "Florenz" (paraphrased).— Ed. 
b Distillation product, distillate.— Ed. 

=====第286页=====
258 Frederick Engels 
German writers have their eyes on the human race." (While "the 
human race" is for the most part accustomed to "having" them 
not before "their eyes" but before a somewhat opposite part of the 
anatomy.) On innumerable occasions Herr Grün therefore expresses 
his pleasure at the fact that Goethe wanted "to liberate man from 
within" (e. g., p. 225), which truly Germanic form of liberation has so 
far refused to emerge from '"within"! 
Let us duly note this first revelation then: "Man" is the German 
"transfigured". 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 95, November 28, 1847] 
Let us now observe how Herr Grün pays homage to "the poet of 
all that is human", the "human content in Goethe". We shall thereby 
best discover who "man" is, of whom Herr Grün is speaking. We 
shall find that Herr Grün here reveals the most secret thoughts of 
true socialism, which is typical of the way his general craving to 
outshout all his cronies leads him rashly to trumpet out to the world 
matters which the rest of the band prefer to keep to themselves. His 
transformation of Goethe into "the poet of all that is human" was 
incidentally facilitated for him by the fact that Goethe himself had a 
habit of using the words "man" and "human" with a special kind of 
emphasis. Goethe, it is true, used them only in the sense in which 
they were applied in his own day and later also by Hegel, for instance 
the attribute "human" was bestowed on the Greeks in particular as 
opposed to heathen and Christian barbarians, long before these 
expressions acquired their mystically philosophical meaning through 
Feuerbach. With Goethe especially they usually have a most 
unphilosophical and flesh-and-blood meaning. To Herr Grün 
belongs the credit of being the first to have turned Goethe into a 
disciple of Feuerbach and a true socialist. 
We cannot of course speak of Goethe himself in any detail here. 
We would just draw attention to one point. In his works Goethe's 
attitude to contemporary German society is a dual one. Sometimes 
he is hostile towards it; he attempts to escape from what he finds 
repulsive in it, as in Iphigenie and above all throughout the Italian 
journey; he rebels against it as Götz, Prometheus and Faust, he 
lashes it with his bitterest satire as Mephistopheles. But then 
sometimes he is on friendly terms with it, "accommodates" himself 
to it, as in the majority of the Zahme Xenien and many prose writings; 
he celebrates it, as in the Maskenzüge, even defends it against the 
oncoming movement of history, as particularly in all the writings in 
which he comes to speak of the French Revolution. It is not just some 

=====第287页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 259 
aspects of German life which Goethe accepts in contrast to others 
which are repugnant to him. More frequently it is a question of the 
different moods he is in; there is a continuing battle within him 
between the poet of genius who feels revulsion at the wretchedness 
of his environment, and the cautious offspring of the Frankfurt 
patrician or the Weimar privy-councillor who finds himself com­
pelled to come to terms with and accustom himself to it. Goethe is 
thus at one moment a towering figure, at the next petty; at one mo­
ment an obstinate, mocking genius full of contempt for the world, at 
the next a circumspect, unexacting, narrow philistine. Not even 
Goethe was able to conquer the wretchedness of Germany; on the 
contrary,  it, conquered him, and this victory of wretchedness over the 
greatest of Germans is the most conclusive proof that it cannot be 
surmounted at all "from within". Goethe was too universal, too 
active a nature, too much a man of flesh and blood to seek refuge 
from this wretchedness in a Schillerian flight to the Kantian ideal; he 
was too keen-sighted not to see how ultimately such a flight 
amounted to no more than the exchange of a prosaic form of 
wretchedness for a grandiloquent one. His temperament, his 
energies, his whole mental attitude disposed him to the practical life, 
and the practical life he found around him was wretched. This 
dilemma of having to exist in an environment which he could only 
despise, and yet being bound to this environment as the only one in 
which he could be active, this dilemma always faced Goethe, and the 
older he became, the more the mighty poet withdrew de guerre  lasse* 
behind the insignificant Weimar minister. Unlike Börne and Menzel, 
we do not criticise Goethe for not being liberal b but for being capable 
of occasional philistinism as well, not for being unsusceptible to any 
enthusiasm for German freedom but for sacrificing his spasmodical­
ly erupting and truer aesthetic instinct to a petty-bourgeois fear of all 
major contemporary historical movements, not for being a man of 
the court but for being capable of attending with such solemn gravity 
to the pettiest affairs and menus plaisir? of one of the pettiest of the 
little German courts, at the time when a Napoleon was flushing out 
the great Augean stable that was Germany. We criticise him not from 
a moral or from a party point of view, but at the very most from the 
aesthetic and historical point of view; we measure Goethe neither by 
moral nor by political nor by "human" standards. We cannot here 
involve ourselves in a description of Goethe's relationship to his 
a Tired of the struggle.—Ed. 
b L. Börne, Pariser Briefe; W. Menzel, Die deutsche Literatur. —Ed. 
c Little entertainments (involving supplementary expenditure).—Ed. 
II—IH'Jti 

=====第288页=====
260 Frederick Engels 
whole age, his literary precursors and contemporaries, his process of 
development and his station in life. We therefore restrict ourselves 
simply to noting the facts. 
We shall see in respect of which of these aspects Goethe's works are 
a "true compendium of humanity", "humanity fulfilled" and the 
"ideal of human society". 
Let us first of all take Goethe's critique of the existing society and 
then move on to the positive description of the "ideal of human 
society". In view of the wealthy content of Grün's book, it goes 
without saying that in either area we are only highlighting a few 
points of characteristic brilliance. 
As a critic of society Goethe does indeed perform miracles. He 
"condemns civilisation" (pp. 34-36) by giving voice to a few romantic 
complaints that it blurs everything that is characteristic and 
distinctive about man. He "prophesies the world of the bourgeoisie" 
(p. 78) by depicting in Prometheus tout bonnement the origin of private 
property. On p. 229 he is "judge over the world..., the Minos of civil­
isation". But all these things are mere trifles. 
On p. 253 Herr Grün quotes Catechisation: 
Reflect, my child! From whom have you these talents? 
You cannot have them from  yourself,  you know.— 
Why, father gave me everything.— 
And who gave them to him?—My grandfather.— 
No, no! From whom could he, your grandfather, receive them? — 
Well, he just took them. 
Hurrah! trumpets Herr Grün at the top of his voice, la propriété, 
c'est le voP —Proudhon in person! 0 
Leverrier can go back home with his planet and surrender his 
medal to Herr Grün —for this is something greater than Leverrier, 
this is something greater even than Jackson and his sulphuric ether 
fumes. For the man who condensed Proudhon's theft thesis, which is 
indeed disquieting for many peaceful members of the bourgeoisie, to 
the innocuous dimensions of the above epigram by Goethe—the only 
reward for him is the grand cordon of the Legion of Honour. 
The Bürgergeneral presents more difficulties. Herr Grün gazes at it 
for a while from every side, makes a few doubtful grimaces, which is 
unusual for him, and begins to cogitate: "true enough ... somewhat 
wishy-washy ... this does not amount to a condemnation of the 
Revolution" (p. 150).... Wait! now he has it! What is the object at 
a Quite simply.—Ed. 
b Property is  theft.—Ed. 
c An allusion to P. J. Proudhon, Qu'est-ce que la propriété? —Ed. 

=====第289页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 261 
issue? A jug of  milk 110 and so: "Let us not ... forget that here once 
again ... it is the property question that is being brought to the fore" 
(p. 151). 
If two old women are quarrelling beneath Herr Grün's window 
over the head of a salted herring, may Herr Grün never find it too 
much trouble to descend from his room with its fragrance of "roses" 
and mignonette to inform them that for them too "it is the property 
question that is being brought to the fore". The gratitude of all 
right-thinking people will be the best reward for him. 
[Deutsche-Briisseler-ZeitungNo. 96, December 2, 1847] 
Goethe performed one of the greatest feats of criticism when he 
wrote Werther. Werther is not by any means merely a sentimental 
love-story, as those who have hitherto read Goethe "from the human 
aspect" believed. 
In Werther "the human content has found so fitting a form that nothing can be 
found in any of the literatures of the world which might even remotely deserve 
to be set beside it" (p. 96). "Werther's love for Lotte is a mere instrument, a 
vehicle for the tragedy of the radical pantheism of emotion.... Werther is the man 
who has no vertebra, who has not yet become a subject" (p. 93 [p. 94]). Werther 
shoots himself not from infatuation but "because he, that unhappy pantheistic spirit, 
could not come to terms with the world" (p. 94). " Werther depicts the whole rotten 
condition of society with artistic mastery, it seizes the wrongs of society by their 
deepest roots, by their philosophico-religious basis" (which "basis" everybody knows 
to be of more recent origin than the "wrongs"), "by the vague and nebulous 
understanding.... Pure, well-ventilated conceptions of true human nature" (and above 
all vertebra, Herr Grün, vertebra!) "would be the death of that state of wretchedness, 
those worm-eaten, crumbling conditions which we call bourgeois life!" [p. 95]. 
An example of how " Werther depicts the rotten condition of society 
with artistic mastery". Werther writes: 
"Adventures? Why do I use this silly word ... our false bourgeois relationships, they 
are the real adventures, they are the real monstrosities!"3 
This cry of lamentation from a lachrymose emotionalist at the 
discrepancy between bourgeois reality and his no less bourgeois 
illusions about this reality, this faint-hearted sigh which derives solely 
from a lack of the most ordinary experience, is given out by Herr 
Grün on p. 84 as incisive social criticism. Herr Grün even asserts that 
the "despairing agony of life" which the above words express, "this 
a J. W. Goethe, "Briefe aus der Schweiz" (written in the form of excerpts from 
letters supposedly found among the papers of the main character of Die Leiden des 
jungen Werthers). — Ed. 
10* 

=====第290页=====
262 Frederick Engels 
unhealthy urge to turn things on their heads so that they should at 
least acquire a different appearance" (!) "ultimately dug for itself the 
burrow of the French Revolution". The Revolution, previously the 
realisation of Machiavellianism, here becomes merely the realisation 
of the sufferings of young Werther. The guillotine of the Place de la 
Révolution is only a pale imitation of Werther's pistol. 
By the same token it is self-evident, according to p. 108, that in 
Stella too Goethe is dealing with "social material", although here only 
"the most disreputable circumstances" (p. 107) are depicted. True 
socialism is much more broad-minded than our Lord Jesus. For 
where two or three are forgathered—they need not even do so in its 
name—then it is in the midst of them and there is "social material". 
Like its disciple Herr Grün, it generally bears a striking resemblance 
to "that kind of dull-witted, self-satisfied nosey-parker who makes 
everything his business but gets to the bottom of nothing" (p. 47). 
Our readers will perhaps remember a letter Wilhelm Meister 
writes to his brother-in-law 3 in the last volume of the Lehrjahre, in 
which, after a few rather trite comments on the advantages of 
growing up in well-to-do circumstances, the superiority of the 
aristocracy over the narrow-minded bourgeoisie is acknowledged 
and the subordinate position of the latter as well as of all other 
non-aristocratic classes is sanctioned on the grounds that it is not 
possible to change it for the present. It is said that only the individual 
is able in certain circumstances to attain a level of equality with the 
aristocracy> Herr Grün remarks apropos of this: 
"What Goethe says of the pre-eminence of the upper classes of society is absolutely 
true if one takes upper class as identical with educated class, and in Goethe's case this is 
so" <p[p].  264[-65]). 
And there let the matter rest. 
Let us come to the much-discussed central point: Goethe's attitude 
to politics and to the French Revolution. Here Herr Grün's book 
provides an object lesson in what it means to endure through thick 
and thin; here Herr Grün's devotion gives a good account of  itself. 
So that Goethe's attitude towards the Revolution may appear 
justified, Goethe must of course be above the Revolution and have 
transcended it even before it took place. As early as p. XXI we 
therefore learn: 
"Goethe had so far outstripped the practical development of his age that he felt he 
could only adopt towards it an attitude of rejection, a defensive attitude." 
a Werner.—Ed. 
J. W. Goethe, Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre, Buch 5, Kap.  3.—Ed. 

=====第291页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 263 
And on p. 84, apropos of Werther, who, as we saw already, 
embodies the whole Revolution in nuc&\ "History shows 1789, 
Goethe shows 1889." Similarly on pp. 28 and 29 Goethe is obliged in 
a few brief words "radically to dispose of all the shouting about 
liberty" since back in the seventies he had an article b printed in the 
Frankfurter Gelehrte Anzeigen which does not at all discuss the liberty 
which the "shouters" are demanding, but only engages in a few 
general and fairly sober reflections on liberty as such, the concept of 
liberty. Furthermore: because in his doctoral dissertation 0 Goethe 
propounded the thesis that it was actually the duty of every legislator 
to introduce a certain form of worship—a thesis which Goethe 
himself treats merely as an amusing paradox, inspired by all manner 
of small-town clerical bickering in Frankfurt (which Herr Grün 
himself quotes)—because of this "the student Goethe discarded 
the whole dualism of the Revolution and the present French 
state like an old pair of shoes" (pp. 26 an'd 27). It would appear as if 
Herr Grün has inherited "the student Goethe's worn-out shoes" and 
used them to sole the seven-league boots of his "social movement" 
with. 
This of course now sheds a new light for us on Goethe's statements 
about the Revolution. It is now clear that being high above it, having 
"disposed of it" as long as fifteen years previously, having "discarded 
it like an old pair of shoes" and being a hundred years in 
advance of it, he could have no sympathy with it and could take no 
interest in a nation of "shouters for liberty", with whom he had 
settled his accounts way back in the year seventy-three. Herr Grün 
now has an easy time of it. Goethe may turn as much trite inherited 
wisdom into elegant distiches, he may philosophise upon it with as 
much philistine narrow-mindedness, he may shrink with as much 
petty-bourgeois horror from the great ice-floes which threaten his 
peaceable poet's niche, he may behave with as much pettiness, 
cowardice and servility as he will, but he cannot carry things too far 
for his patient gloss-writer. Herr Grün lifts him up on his tireless 
shoulders and carries him through the mire; indeed he transfers the 
whole mire to the account of true socialism, just to ensure that 
Goethe's boots stay clean. From the Campagne in Frankreich to the 
Natürliche Tochter, Herr Grün takes on responsibility (pp. 133-170) 
for everything, everything without exception, he shows a devotion 
a In the germ.— Ed. 
J. W. Goethe, "Alexander von Joch über Belohnung und Strafen nach 
türkischen Gesetzen". — Ed. 
c J. W. Goethe, "De Legislatoribus". —Ed. 

=====第292页=====
264 Frederick Engels 
which might move a Buchez to tears. And if all this does not help, if 
the mire is just too deep, then a higher social exegesis is harnessed to 
the task, then Herr Grün [p. 137] paraphrases as follows: 
The sad destiny of France, let the mighty think on it, 
But verily the lowly should ponder it more. 
The mighty perished; but who defends the multitude 
From the multitude? The multitude was tyrant to  itself.3 
"Who defends", shouts Herr Grün for all he is worth, with italics, 
question marks and all the "vehicles of the tragedy of the radical 
pantheism of emotion" [p. 93], "who, in particular, defends the 
unpropertied multitude, the so-called rabble, against the propertied 
multitude, the legislating rabble?" (p. 137). "Who in particular 
defends" Goethe against Herr Grün? 
In this way Herr Grün explains the whole series of worldly-wise 
bourgeois precepts contained in the Venetian Epigramme: 
they "are like a slap in the face delivered by the hand of Hercules which only now" 
(after the danger is past for the philistine) "appear to us to smack home really 
tolerably now that we have a great and bitter experience" (bitter indeed for the 
philistine) "behind us" (p. 136). 
From the Belagerung von Mainz Herr Grün 
"would not wish to pass over the following passage for anything in the world: "On 
Tuesday ... I hastened ... to pay homage to his Highness, and had the great good fortune to 
wait upon the Prince ... my ever gracious  Lord",  etc. [p. 147]. 
The passage in which Goethe lays his humble devotion at the feet 
of Herr Rietz, the King of Prussia's b Gentleman, Cuckold and Pimp 
of the Bedchamber, Herr Grün does not think fit to quote. 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 97, December 5, 1847] 
Apropos of the Bürgergeneral and the Ausgewanderte we read: 
"Goethe's whole antipathy towards the Revolution, whenever it was expressed in 
literary form, was concerned with the eternal lament at seeing people driven out from 
circumstances of well-deserved and well-accustomed property, which intriguers and 
envious men, etc., then usurped ... this same injustice of  robbery.  ...His peaceful, 
domesticated nature became indignant at this violation of the right of property, which, 
being arbitrarily inflicted, made destitute refugees of whole masses of people" 
(p. 151). 
Let us without more ado put this passage to the account of "man" 
whose "peaceful, domesticated nature" feels so much at ease in 
a J. W. Goethe, "Venezianische Epigramme". — Ed. 
b Frederick William  II.—Ed. 

=====第293页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 265 
"well-deserved and well-accustomed", to put it blundy, well-earned 
"circumstances of property" that it declares the tempest of the 
Revolution which sweeps away these circumstances sans façon to be 
"arbitrary" and the work of "intriguers and envious men", etc. 
In the light of this it does not surprise us that Herr Grün "finds 
the purest pleasure" (p. 165) in the bourgeois idyll Hermann und 
Dorothea, its timid, worldly-wise small-townsfolk and lamenting 
peasants who take to their heels in superstitious fear before the sans­
culotte army and the horrors of war. Herr Grün 
"even accepts with relief the pusillanimous role which is assigned at the end ... to 
the German people: 
It befits not a German to be at the head of a movement 
Fleeing in terror, nor to waver first this way, then that."a 
Herr Grün is right to shed tears of sympathy for the victims of 
cruel times and to raise his eyes to heaven in patriotic despair at such 
strokes of fate. There are enough ruined and degenerate people 
anyway, who have no "human" heart in their bosoms, who prefer to 
join in singing the Marseillaise in the Republican camp and perhaps 
even make lewd jokes in Dorothea's deserted bedchamber. Herr 
Grün is a decent fellow who waxes indignant at the lack of feeling 
with which for instance a Hegel looks down on the "little, dumb 
flowers" which have been crushed underfoot by the onrush of 
history and mocks at the "litany of private virtues of modesty, 
humility, love of one's fellow-men and charity" which is held out 
"against the deeds of world history and those who perform them".»> 
Herr Grün is right to do this. He will no doubt receive his reward in 
heaven. 
Let us conclude these "human" remarks on the Revolution with 
the following: "A real humorist might well take the liberty of finding 
the Convention itself infinitely ridiculous", and until this "real 
humorist" is found, Herr Grün meanwhile provides the necessary 
instructions (pp. 151, 152). 
Herr Grün similarly sheds some surprising light upon Goethe's 
attitude towards politics after the Revolution. Just one example. We 
already know of the profound resentment "man" feels in his heart 
towards the liberals. The "poet of all that is human" must of course 
not be allowed to go to his rest without having specifically had it out 
with them, without having pinned an explicit memorandum on 
Messrs Welcker, Itzstein and .their cronies. This memorandum our 
a J. W. Goethe, Hermann und Dorothea, 9. Gesang ("Urania").— Ed. 
b G. W. F. Hegel, Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der Geschichte, Einleitung. —Ed. 

=====第294页=====
266 Frederick Engels 
"self-satisfied nosey-parker" unearths in the following of the Zahme 
Xenien (p. 319): 
All that is just the same old tripe, 
Do acquire some savvy! 
Don't be forever just marking time, 
But make some progress! 
Goethe's verdict: "Nothing is more repulsive than the majority, for 
it consists of a few strong leaders, of rogues who accommodate 
themselves, of weaklings who adapt themselves, and the mass 
jogging along behind without having the faintest idea what it 
wants"3 —this verdict so typical of the philistine, whose ignorance 
and short-sightedness are only possible within the narrow bounds of 
a petty German principality, appears to Herr Grün as "the critique 
of the later" (i.e. modern) "constitutional  state"  .b How important it is 
one may discover "for instance in any Chamber of Deputies you care 
to choose" (p. 268). According to this, it is only out of ignorance that 
the "belly" of the French Chamber looks after itself and its like in 
such an excellent manner. A few pages later, on p. 271, Herr Grün 
finds "the July Revolution" "misbegotten", and as early as p. 34 the 
Customs Union 111 is sharply criticised because it "makes yet more 
expensive the rags the unclothed and the shivering need to cover their 
nakedness, in order to make the pillars of the throne (!!), the 
liberal-minded money-masters" (whom everyone knows to be 
opposed to "the throne" throughout the Customs Union) "some­
what more resistant to decay". Everyone knows how in Germany the 
philistines always bring out the "unclothed" and "shivering" when­
ever it is a question of combating protective tariffs or any other 
progressive bourgeois measure, and "man" joins their number. 
What light does Goethe's critique of society and the state, as seen 
through Herr Grün's eyes, now shed on "the essence of man' 1? 
Firstly, "man", according to p. 264, exhibits a most marked respect 
for "the educated estates" in general and a seemly deference 
towards a high aristocracy in particular. And then he is distinguished 
by a mighty terror of any great mass movement and any determined 
social action, at the approach of which he either scuttles timidly back 
into his fireside corner or takes to his heels with all his goods and 
chattels. As long as it lasts, such a movement is "a bitter experience" 
for him; scarcely is it over than he takes up a dominant position at 
the front of the stage and with the hand of Hercules delivers slaps in 
a J. W. Goethe, Über Naturwissenschaft im Allgemeinen, einzelne Betrachtungen und 
Aphorismen. — Ed. 
b The German original has: "Gesetzesstaat". —Ed. 

=====第295页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 267 
the face which only now appear to him to smack home really 
tolerably, and finds the whole business "infinitely ridiculous". And 
throughout he remains wholeheartedly attached to "circumstances 
of well-deserved and well-accustomed property"  ; apart from that he 
has a very "peaceful and domesticated nature", is undemanding and 
modest and does not wish to be disturbed in his quiet little pleasures 
by any storms. "Man is happy within a restricted sphere" (p. 191, as 
the first sentence of Part Two has it); he envies no one and gives 
thanks to his maker if he is left in peace. In short, "man", who, as we 
have already seen, is German by birth, is gradually beginning to turn 
into the spit image of a German petty bourgeois. 
What actually does Goethe's critique of society as conveyed by 
Herr Grün amount to? What does "man" find in society to take 
exception to? Firstly that it does not correspond to his illusions. But 
these illusions are precisely the illusions of an ideologising philistine, 
especially a young one, and if philistine reality does not correspond 
to these illusions, this is only because they are illusions. For that very 
reason they correspond all the more fully to philistine reality. They 
differ from it only as the ideologising expression of a condition in 
general differs from that condition, and there can therefore be no 
further question of them being realised. A striking example of this is 
provided by Herr Grün's commentary on Werther. 
Secondly "man's" polemic is directed against everything that 
threatens Germany's philistine régime. His whole polemic against 
the Revolution is that of a philistine. His hatred of the liberals, the 
July Revolution and protective tariffs is the absolutely unmistak­
able expression of the hatred an oppressed, inflexible petty bourgeois 
feels for the independent, progressive bourgeois. Let us give two 
further examples of this. 
Every one knows that the guild system marked the period of 
efflorescence of the petty bourgeoisie. On p. 40 Herr Grün says, 
speaking on behalf of Goethe, in other words, of "man": "In the 
Middle Ages the corporation brought together one strong man in 
defensive alliance with other strong men." The guildsmen of those 
days are "strong men" in the eyes of "man". 
But in Goethe's day the guild system was already in decay, 
competition was bursting in from all sides. As a true philistine, 
Goethe gives voice to a heart-rending wail at one point in his 
memoirs3  which Herr Grün quotes on p. 88, about the rot setting 
among the petty bourgeoisie, the ruination of well-to-do families, the 
decay of family life associated with this, the loosening of domestic 
a J. W. Goethe, "Aus meinem Leben", Teil 2, Buch  7.—Ed. 

=====第296页=====
268 Frederick Engels 
bonds and other petty-bourgeois lamentations which in civilised 
countries are treated with well-deserved contempt. Herr Grün, who 
scents a capital criticism of modern society in this passage, can so 
little moderate his delight that he has its whole "human content" 
printed in italics. 
Let us now turn to the positive "human content" in Goethe. We 
can proceed more quickly now that we are on the track of "man". 
Before all else let us report the glad tidings that "Wilhelm Meister 
deserts his parental home" and that in Egmont "the citizens of 
Brussels are demanding privileges and liberties" for no other reason 
than to "become men" (p. XVII). 
Herr Grün has detected affinities with Proudhon in the elderly 
Goethe once before. On p. 320 he has this pleasure once again: 
"What he wanted, what we all want, to save our personalities, anarchy in the true 
sense of the word, on this topic Goethe has the following to say: 
Now why should anarchy have for me 
Such attraction in modern times? 
Each lives according to his lights 
And that is profit for me as well",3 etc. 
Herr Grün is beside himself with joy at finding in Goethe that 
truly "human" social anarchy which was first proclaimed by 
Proudhon and adopted by acclamation by the German true socialists. 
This time he is mistaken however. Goethe is speaking of the already 
existing "anarchy in modern times", which already "is" profit for 
him and by which each lives according to his lights, in other words of 
the independence in sociable intercourse which has been brought 
about by the dissolution of the feudal system and the guilds, by the 
rise of the bourgeoisie, and the exclusion of patriarchalism from the 
social life of the educated classes. Simply for grammatical reasons 
there can therefore be no question of the Herr Grün's beloved future 
anarchy in the higher sense. Goethe is here not talking at all about 
"what he wanted" but about what he found around him. 
But such a little slip should not disturb us. For we do have the 
poem: Eigentum. 
I know that nothing is mine own 
Save the idea that peacefully 
Secretes itself from my spirit, 
And every instant of happiness 
Which destiny beneficent 
Gives me to savour fully. 
a J. W. Goethe, Zahme Xenien,  IV.—Ed. 

=====第297页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 269 
If it is not clear that in this poem "property as it has existed up to 
now vanishes into smoke" (p. 320), Herr Grün's comprehension has 
come to a standstill. 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 98, December 9, 1847] 
But let us leave these entertaining little exegetical diversions of 
Herr Grün's to their fate. They are in any case legion and each 
invariably leads on to others still more surprising. Let us rather 
resume our search for "man". 
"Man is happy within a restricted sphere," as we have read. So is 
the philistine. 
"Goethe's early works were of purely  social?'  (i.e. human) "character.... Goethe 
clung to what was most immediate, smallest, most domesticated" (p. 88). 
The first positive thing we discover about "man" is his delight in 
the "smallest, domesticated" still-life of the petty bourgeoisie. 
"If we can find a place in the world," says Goethe, as summarised by Herr Grün, 
"where to rest with our possessions, a field to provide us with food, a house to shelter 
us—is that not a Fatherland for us?" 
And, exclaims Herr Grün, 
"How these words express our deepest thoughts today!" (p. 32). 
Essentially "man" is dressed in a redingote à la propriétaire and by 
that too reveals himself as a thoroughbred épicier. 3 
The German bourgeois, as everyone knows, is a fanatic for 
freedom at most for a brief moment, in his youth. That is 
characteristic of "man" too. Herr Grün mentions with approval how 
in his later years Goethe "damns" the "urge for freedom" which still 
haunts Götz, that "product of a free and ill-bred boy", and even 
quotes this cowardly recantation in extenso on p. 43. What Herr 
Grün understands by freedom can be deduced from the fact that in 
the same passage he identifies the freedom of the French Revolution 
with that of the free Switzers at the time of Goethe's Swiss journey, in 
other words, modern, constitutional and democratic freedom with 
the dominance of patricians and guilds in medieval Imperial Cities 
and especially with the early Germanic barbarism of cattle-rearing 
Alpine tribes. The montagnards of the Bernese Oberland even have 
the same name as the Montagnards of the National Convention!  »> 
a Grocer.— Ed. 
Play on words: "montagnards" — literally "mountain-dwellers"; this was also the 
name taken by the Jacobins, the representatives of the Mountain Party in the 
Convention during the French Revolution.— Ed. 

=====第298页=====
270 Frederick Engels 
The respectable bourgeois is a sworn enemy of all frivolity and 
mockery of religion: "man" likewise. If Goethe on various occasions 
expressed himself in a truly bourgeois manner on this topic, Herr 
Grün takes this as another aspect of the "human content in Goethe". 
And to make the point quite credible, Herr Grün assembles not 
merely these grains of gold, but on p. 62 even adds a number of 
meritorious sentiments of his own, to the effect that "those who 
mock religion ... are empty vessels and simpletons", etc. Which does 
much credit to his feelings as "man" and bourgeois. 
The bourgeois cannot live without a "king he loves", a father to his 
country whom he holds dear. Nor can "man". That is why on p. 129 
Karl August is for Goethe a "most excellent Prince". Stout old Herr 
Grün, still enthusing for "most excellent Princes" in the year 1846! 
An event is of interest to the bourgeois insofar as it impinges 
directly on his private circumstances. 
"To Goethe even the events of the day become alien objects which either add to or 
detract from his  bourgeois comforts  and which may arouse in him an aesthetic or human 
but never a political interest" (p. 20). 
Herr Grün "thus finds a human interest in a thing" if he notices 
that it "either adds to or detracts from his bourgeois comforts". Herr 
Grün here confesses as openly as possible that bourgeois comforts 
are the chief thing for "man". 
Faust and Wilhelm Meister provide Herr Grün with an occasion for 
special chapters. Let us take Faust first. 
On p. 116 we are told: 
"Only the fact that Goethe came upon a clue to the mystery of the organisation of 
plants" enabled him "to complete his delineation of humanistic man" (for there is no 
way of escaping "human" man) "Faust. For Faust is brought to the peak of his own 
nature (!) just as much as by natural science." 
We have already had examples of how that "humanistic man", 
Herr Grün, "is brought to the peak of his own nature by natura! 
science". We observe that this is inherent in the race. 
Then on p. 231 we hear that the "bones of brute and human 
skeletons" in the first scene signifies "the abstraction of our whole 
life"—and Herr Grün treats Faust in general exactly as though he 
had the Revelation of St. John the Theologian before him. The 
macrocosm signifies "Hegelian philosophy", which at the time when 
Goethe was writing this scene (1806) happened to exist only in 
Hegel's mind or at most in the manuscript of the Phänomenologie 
which Hegel was then working on. What has chronology to do with 
"human content"? 
The depiction of the moribund Holy Roman Empire in the Second 
Part of Faust Herr Grün (p. 240) imagines without more ado to be a 

=====第299页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 271 
depiction of the monarchy of Louis XIV, "in which," he adds, "we 
automatically have the Constitution and the Republic!" "Man" 
naturally "of himself has" everything that other people first have to 
provide for themselves by dint of toil and exertion. 
On p. 246 Herr Grün confides to us that the Second Part of Faust 
has become, with regard to its scientific aspect, "the canon of 
modern times, just as Dante's Divine Comedy was the canon of the 
Middle Ages". We would commend this to natural scientists who 
have hitherto sought very little in the Second Part of Faust, and to 
historians, who have sought something quite other than a "canon of 
the Middle Ages" in the Florentine's pro-Ghibelline poem! 112 It 
seems as though Herr Grün is looking at history with the same eyes 
as Goethe, according to p. 49, looked at his own past: "In Italy 
Goethe surveyed his past with the eyesoi the Belvedere Apollo", eyes 
which pour comble de malheur* do not even have eyeballs. 
Wilhelm Meister is "a Communist", i.e. "in theory, on the basis of 
aesthetic outlook" (!!) (p. 254). 
On nothing does he set great store, 
And yet the whole wide world is hisb (p. 257). 
Of course, he has enough money, and the world belongs to him, as 
it belongs to every bourgeois, without his needing to go to the 
trouble of becoming "a communist on the basis of aesthetic 
outlook".—Under the auspices of this "nothing" on which 
Wilhelm Meister sets great store and which, as we see from p. 256, is 
indeed an extensive and most substantial "nothing", even hangovers 
are eliminated. Herr Grün "drains every cup to the lees, without ill 
effect, without a headache". So much the better for "man" who may 
now quietly worship Bacchus with impunity. For the day when all 
these things shall come to pass, Herr Grün has meanwhile already 
discovered the drinking song for "true man" in On nothing do I set 
great store—"this song will be sung when mankind has arranged its 
affairs in a manner worthy of  itself"  ; but Herr Grün has reduced it 
to three verses and expunged those parts unsuitable for youth and 
"man". 
In W[ilhelm] M[eister] Goethe sets up 
"the ideal of human society". "Man is not a teaching but a living, acting and 
creating being." "Wilhelm Meister is this man." "The essence of man is activity" 
(an essence he shares with any flea) pp. 257, 258, 261. 
Finally the Wahlverwandtschaften. This novel, moral enough in  itself, 
is moralised even more by Herr Grün, so that it almost seems as 
a As the final misfortune.— Ed. 
b J. W. Goethe, "Vanitas! Vanitatum vanitas!" (paraphrased).—Ed. 

=====第300页=====
272 Frederick Engels 
though he were concerned to recommend the Wahlverwandtschaften 
as a suitable text-book for schools for young ladies. Herr Grün 
explains that Goethe 
"distinguished between love and marriage, so that for him love was a  search  ofmar-
riage and marriage was love found and fulfilled" (p. 286). 
By this token, then, love is the searchoi "love that has been found". 
This is further elucidated to the effect that after "the freedom of 
youthful love", marriage must come about as "the final relationship 
of love" (p. 287). Exactly as in civilised countries a wise father first 
allows his son to sow his wild oats for a few years and then finds him a 
suitable wife as a "final relationship". However, whilst people in 
civilised countries have long passed the stage of regarding this "final 
relationship" as something morally binding, whilst on the contrary in 
those countries the husband keeps mistresses and his wife retaliates 
by cuckolding him, the philistine once again rescues Herr Grün: 
"If man has had a really free choice, ... if two people base their union on their 
mutual rational wishes" (there is no mention here of passion, flesh and blood) "it 
would require the outlook of a libertine to regard the upsetting of this relationship as a 
trifle, as not so fraught with suffering and unhappiness as Goethe did. But there can 
be no question of libertinism with Goethe" (p. 288). 
This passage qualifies the timid polemic against morality which 
Herr Grün permits himself from time to time. The philistine has 
arrived at the realisation that there is all the more reason for having 
to turn a blind eye to the behaviour of the young since it is precisely 
the most dissolute young men who afterwards make the best 
husbands. But if they should misbehave themselves again after the 
wedding—then no mercy, no pity on them; for that "would require 
the outlook of a libertine". 
"The outlook of a libertine!" "Libertinism!" One can just picture 
"man" as large as life before one, as he places his hand on his heart, 
and overflowing with pride exclaims: No! I am pure of all frivolity, 
of "fornication and licentiousness", I have never deliberately ruined 
the happiness of a contented marriage, I have always practised 
fidelity and honesty and have never lusted after my neighbour's 
wife—I am no "libertine"! 
"Man" is right. He is not made for amorous affairs with beautiful 
women, he has never turned his mind to seduction and adultery, he 
is no "libertine", but a man of conscience, an honourable, virtuous, 
German philistine. He is 
...l'épicier pacifique, 
Fumant sa pipe au fond de sa boutique; 
Il craint sa femme et son ton arrogant; 

=====第301页=====
German Socialism in Verse and Prose 273 
De la maison il lui laisse l'empire, 
Au moindre signe obéit sans mot dire 
Et vit ainsi cocu, battu, content.3 
(Parny, Goddam, chant III.) 
There remains just one observation for us to make. If above we 
have only considered one aspect of Goethe, that is the fault of Herr 
Grün alone. He does not present Goethe's towering stature at all. He 
either skims hurriedly over all works in which Goethe was really 
great and a genius, such as the Römische Elegieen of Goethe the 
"libertine", or he inundates them with a great torrent of trivialities, 
which only proves that he can make nothing of them. On the other 
hand, with what is for him uncommon industry he seeks out every 
instance of philistinism, petty priggery and narrow-mindedness, 
collates them, exaggerates them in the manner of a true literary 
hack, and rejoices every time he is able to find support for his own 
narrow-minded opinions on the authority of Goethe, whom he 
furthermore frequently distorts. 
History's revenge on Goethe for ignoring her every time she 
confronted him face to face was not the yapping of Menzel nor the 
narrow polemic of Börne. No, 
Just as Titania in the land of fairy magic 
Found Nick Bottom in her arms,b 
so one morning Goethe found Herr Grün in his arms. Herr Grün's 
apologia, the warm thanks he stammers out to Goethe for every 
philistine word, that is the bitterest revenge which offended history 
could pronounce upon the greatest German poet. 
Herr Grün, however, "can close his eyes in the awareness that he 
has not disgraced his destiny of being a man" (p. 248). 
Written in 1846 and early 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung Nos. 73, 74, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97 and time 
98; September 12 and 16, November 21, 
25 and  28, -December 2, 5 and 9, 1847 
a ... the peaceful tradesman, 
Smoking his pipe at the back of his shop; 
He fears his wife and her domineering tone; 
He leaves to her the government of the house, 
Without a word he obeys her slightest signal; 
Thus he lives, cuckolded, beaten and content.— Ed. 
b J. W. Goethe, Warnung (Zyklus "Epigrammatisch"). —Ed. 

=====第302页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE ECONOMIC CONGRESS 113 
It is well known that here there are several lawyers, officials, 
doctors, rentiers, merchants, etc., who, under pretence of an 
Association pour le libre échange (à l'instar de Paris), 3 give one 
another instruction in the elements of political economy. For the last 
three days of the past week these gentlemen were swimming in bliss. 
They held their great congress of the greatest economists of all 
countries, they enjoyed the ineffable delights of hearing the truths of 
economics expounded, no longer from the mouths of a M[onsieur] 
Jules Bartels, a Le Hardy de ßeaulieu, a Faider or Fader b or other 
unknown celebrities, no, but from the mouths of the leading masters 
of the science. They were enraptured, enchanted, divinely happy, 
transported to the seventh heaven. 
Less enraptured, however, were the masters of the science 
themselves. They had come prepared for an easy battle, and the 
battle was very hard for them; they believed that they had only to 
come, see and conquer, and they conquered only in the voting, 
whereas they were decisively defeated in the discussion on the 
second day, and only by means of intrigues did they avoid a new and 
still more decisive defeat on the third dav. Even if their divinelv 
happy public noticed nothing of all this, they themselves could not 
but feel it painfully. 
We attended the congress. From the very beginning we had no 
particular respect for these masters of science, whose principal 
a Association for Free Trade (after the example of Paris).— Ed. 
Pun —  Fader,  from "fade" (dull, insipid), Faider, name of a participant in the 
economic congress.— Ed. 

=====第303页=====
The Economic Congress 275 
learning consists in continually contradicting one another and 
themselves with the greatest equanimity. But we confess that this 
congress robbed us of the last tiny vestige of respect we might have 
had for those with whose writings and speeches we were less well 
acquainted. We confess that we were astounded to have to hear such 
platitudes and insipidities, such universally familiar trivialities. We 
confess that we had not expected these men of science to be 
incapable of telling us anything more valuable than the first ele­
ments of economics, which might well be new for children of seven 
or eight, but which must be presumed to be common knowl­
edge for adults, and in particular for members of Associations pour 
le libre échange. However, the gentlemen knew their public better 
than we. 
The Englishmen comported themselves best at the congress. They 
had the greatest interest in the matter; they have the opening up of 
the continental markets at heart; for them the question of free trade 
is a matter of life and death. They showed this clearly enough, too; 
they, who nowhere speak anything but their English, condescended, 
in the interest of their beloved free trade,3  to speak French. One 
could clearly see how powerfully the matter affected their purses. 
The Frenchmen performed in the manner of pure ideologists and 
scientific dreamers. They did not even distinguish themselves by any 
French esprit or originality of conception. But at least they spoke 
good French, and that is something one seldom hears in Brus­
sels.—The Dutchmen were tedious and professorial. The Dane, 
Herr David, was quite incomprehensible. The Belgians for the most 
part played the role of passive listeners, or at any rate never 
transcended the limits of their national industry— contrefaçon.* 1 And 
finally the Germans, with the exception of Weerth, who, however, 
spoke more as an Englishman than a German, formed the partie 
honteuse of the whole congress. The palm would have fittingly 
been theirs, if a Belgian had not after all conquered it for his 
nation. 
First day. General discussion. Belgium opened it with M. Faider, 
who,  in his entire behaviour, in his deportment and language, 
brought before us the whole of that strutting foppishness which gives 
itself such repulsive airs in the streets and promenades of Brussels. 
M. Faider peddled nothing but empty phrases, and hardly raised 
himself to the most elementary economic truths. Let us not detain 
a English in the original.— Ed. 
b Imitation.—Ed. 

=====第304页=====
276 Frederick Engels 
ourselves with him for as long as he detained us with his outpourings 
of dishwater soup. 
M. Wolowski, Professor etc. in Paris, mounted the rostrum. A 
smug, rhetorical, superficial, Frenchified Polish Jew, who has 
managed to combine in himself the bad qualities of all three nations 
with none of the good. M. Wolowski whipped up huge enthusiasm by 
means of a previously arranged, sophistically surprising speech. 
Unfortunately, however, this speech was not M. Wolowski's proper­
ty, it was patched together from the Sophismes économiques of M. 
Frédéric Bastiat. This was naturally something the Brussels claqueurs 
could not know.—M. Wolowski regretted that a German protectionist 
would be opposing him and that the French protectionists had 
allowed the initiative to be taken from them in this way. For this he 
was punished. When concluding his speech M. Wolowski became 
comical in the highest degree. He came to speak of the working 
classes, to whom he promised golden mountains from free trade, 
and in whose name he made a hypocritically furious attack on the 
protectionists. Yes! He exclaimed, .working himself up into a 
rhetorical falsetto, yes, these protectionists, "ces gens qui n'ont rien là 
qui batte  pour  les classes  laborieuses" 3—here he pounded himself on his 
round little belly—these protectionists are the people who prevent us 
from fulfilling our most heartfelt wishes and help the workers out of 
their poverty! Unfortunately, his whole fury was too artificial to 
make any impression on the few workers who were present in the 
gallery. 
Herr Rittinghausen from Cologne, the representative of the 
German fatherland, read out an infinitely tedious essay in defence of 
the protective system. He spoke as a true German. With the most 
pitiful grimaces in the world he lamented Germany's sorry condition 
and its industrial impotence, and he downright beseeched the 
Englishmen that they might, after all, allow Germany to protect itself 
against their superior competition. Why, he said, gentlemen, you 
wish to give us freedom of trade, you wish us to compete freely with 
all nations, when we still have guilds almost everywhere, when we 
may not even compete freely among ourselves} 
M. Blanqui, Professor, Deputy, and Progressive Conservative from 
Paris,  author of a wretched economic history1 * and other inferior 
books, principal pillar of the so-called École française of economics, 
answered Herr Rittinghausen. A well-fed, stand-offish man with a 
face in which hypocritical severity, unctuousness and philanthropy 
a "These people with nothing here which beats for the toiling classes." — Ed. 
b A. Blanqui, Histoire de l'économie politique en Europe.— Ed. 

=====第305页=====
The Economic Congress 277 
are repulsively blended. Knight of the Legion of Honour,  cela va sans 
dire. 3 M. Blanqui spoke with the greatest possible volubility and the 
least possible wit, and this, naturally, was just the thing to impress the 
Brussels Free Traders. What he said is moreover ten times less 
significant than what he has previously written. Let us not detain 
ourselves with these empty phrases. 
Then came Dr. Bowring, radical Member of Parliament and heir 
to the wisdom of Bentham, whose skeleton he owns.114  He is himself 
a kind of Bentham skeleton. It was noticeable that the elections were 
over; Mr. Bowring no longer found it necessary to make concessions 
to the people, but spoke instead in the manner of a genuine 
bourgeois. He spoke fluent and correct French, with a strong English 
accent, and emphasised the effect of his words with the most 
vehement and droll gesticulations that we recall ever having seen. 
Mr. Bowring, the representative of the highly interested English 
bourgeoisie, declared that at last the time had come for all egoism to 
be cast aside and for each to establish his own prosperity on that of 
the others. Naturally the old economic "truth" cropped up that one 
can do more business with a millionaire and therefore make more 
out of him than out of the possessor of a mere thousand 
talers. —Finally, there was yet another inspired hymn to cet envoyé du 
ciel,**  the smuggler. 
After him spoke M. Duchateau, President of the Valenciennes 
Association pour la protection du travail national, 0 defending, as a 
result of M. Wolowski's provocation, the French protective system. 
He repeated, with great calm and lucidity, the well-known principles 
of the protectionists, in the quite correct opinion that these were 
sufficient to make the whole congress bitter for the free-trade 
gentlemen. He was undoubtedly the best speaker of the day. 
Mr. Ewart, Member of Parliament, answered him, in almost 
incomprehensible French, with the stalest and most platitudinous 
shibboleths of the Anti-Corn-Law League, long since known by heart 
to almost every street urchin in England. 
We mention M. Campan, a delegate from the Free Trade Society 
of Bordeaux, merely for the sake of the record. What he said was so 
insignificant that we can no longer recall a single word of it. 
Colonel Thompson, Member of Parliament, reduces the question 
to a simple story—in a certain town there exist cab-drivers who make 
a journey for 1V2 francs. Now an omnibus is introduced, which 
a That goes without saying.—Ed. 
b This ambassador from heaven.—Ed. 
c Association for the protection of national labour.—Ed. 

=====第306页=====
278 Frederick Engels 
makes the same trip for 1 franc. Thus the cab-driver would say that 
V2 franc per trip is withdrawn from trade. But is that true? Where 
does the 72 franc go to? Aha! the passenger will buy something else 
for it, perhaps pies, cakes or the like. Thus the half franc enters trade 
after all, and the consumer gets more satisfaction from it. Here we 
have the case of the protectionists, who defend the cab-driver, and 
that of the Free Traders, who wish to introduce the omnibus. The 
only thing that the good Colonel Thompson forgets is that 
competition soon eliminates this advantage of the consumer, and 
takes from him for one thing exactly what he gains on another. 
The final speaker was^M. Dunoyer, a Counsellor of State in Paris, 
author of several books, among others De la  liberté  du travail, in which 
he accuses the workers of producing far too many children. He 
spoke with the vehemence proper to a Counsellor of State, and 
moreover very insignificantly. M. Dunoyer is a well-nourished ventru 3 
with a bald skull and the red, forward-thrusting face of a dog, he is 
evidently accustomed to brook no contradictions, but  is by no means as 
terrifying as he would like to  be. M. Blanqui said of his cheap invective 
against the proletariat: "M. Dunoyer dit aux peuples  les mêmes vérités au­
stères  qu'au dernier  siècle les  Voltaire et Rousseau disaient aux  princes.  "b 
With this the general discussion was closed. We shall report on the 
discussion of the individual questions on the second and third days in 
the next issue.115 
Written between September 19 and 22, Printed according to the newspaper 
1847 
Published in English for the first 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- time 
Zeitung No. 76, September 23, 1847 
a Belly, paunch.—Ed. 
"M. Dunoyer tells the same hard truths to the people as did the Voltaires and 
Rousseaus to the princes in the last century."—Ed. 

=====第307页=====
Karl Marx 
THE PROTECTIONISTS, THE FREE TRADERS 
AND THE WORKING CLASS116 
The protectionists have never protected small industry, handicraft 
proper. Have Dr. List and his school in Germany by any chance 
demanded protective tariffs for the small linen industry, for hand 
loom-weaving, for handicraft production? No, when they demanded 
protective tariffs they did so only in order to oust handicraft 
production with machines and patriarchal industry with modern 
industry. In a word, they wish to extend the dominion of the 
bourgeoisie, and in particular of the big industrial capitalists. They 
went so far as to proclaim aloud the decline and fall of small industry 
and the petty bourgeoisie, of small farming and the small peasants, 
as a sad but inevitable and, as far as the industrial development of 
Germany is concerned, necessary occurrence. 
Besides the school of Dr. List there exists in Germany, the land of 
schools, yet another school, which demands not merely a system of 
protective tariffs, but a system of import prohibition proper. The 
leader of this school, Herr v. Gülich, has written a very scholarly 
history of industry and trade, 3 which has also been translated into 
French. Herr v. Gülich is a sincere philanthropist; he is in earnest 
with regard to protecting handicraft production and national labour. 
Well now! What did he do? He began by refuting Dr. List, proved 
that in List's system the welfare of the working class is only a sHam 
and a pretence, a ringing piece of hollow rhetoric, and then, for his 
part, he made the following proposals: 
1. To prohibit the importation of foreign manufactured products; 
a G. Gülich, Geschichtliche Darstellung  des Handels, der  Gewerbe  und des Ackerbaus der 
bedeutendsten handeltreibenden Staaten unserer  Zeit. —Ed. 

=====第308页=====
280 Karl Marx 
2. to place very heavy import duties on raw materials originating 
abroad, like cotton, silk etc., etc., in order to protect wool and 
nationally produced linen; 
3. likewise on colonial products, in order to replace sugar, coffee, 
indigo, cochineal, valuable timbers etc., etc., with national 
products; 
4. to place high taxes on nationally produced machines, in order 
to protect handicraft production against the machine. 
It is evident that Herr v. Gülich is a man who accepts the system 
with all its consequences. And what does this lead to? Not merely 
preventing the entry of foreign industrial products, but also 
hindering the progress of national industry. 
Herr List and Herr v. Gülich form the limits between which the 
system moves. If it wishes to protect industrial progress, then it at 
once sacrifices handicraft production, labour; if it wishes to protect 
labour, then industrial progress is sacrificed. 
Let us return to the protectionists proper, who do not share the 
illusions of Herr v. Gülich. 
If they speak consciously and openly to the working class, then 
they summarise their philanthropy in the following words: It is 
better to be exploited by one's fellow-countrymen than by foreigners. 
I do not think the working class will be for ever satisfied with this 
solution, which, it must be confessed, is indeed very patriotic, but 
nonetheless a little too ascetic and spiritual for people whose only 
occupation consists in the production of riches, of material wealth. 
But the protectionists will say: "So when all is said and done we at 
least preserve the present state of society. Good or bad, we guarantee 
the labourer work for his hands, and prevent his being thrown on to 
the street by foreign competition." I shall not dispute this statement, 
I accept it. The preservation, the conservation of the present state of 
affairs is accordingly the best result the protectionists can achieve in 
the most favourable circumstances. Good, but the problem for the 
working class is not to preserve the present state of affairs, but to 
transform it into its opposite. 
The protectionists have one last refuge. They say that their system 
makes no claim to be a means of social reform, but that it is 
nonetheless necessary to begin with social reforms in one's own 
country, before one embarks on economic reforms internationally. 
After the protective system has been at first reactionary, then 
conservative, it finally becomes conservative-progressive. It will 
suffice to point out the contradiction lurking in this theory, which at 
first sight appears to have something seductive, practical and rational 
to it. A strange contradiction! The system of protective tariffs 

=====第309页=====
The Protectionists, the Free Traders and the Working Class 281 
places in the hands of the capital of one country the weapons which 
enable it to defy the capital of other countries; it increases the 
strength of this capital in opposition to foreign capital, and at the 
same time it deludes itself that the very same means will make that 
same capital small and weak in opposition to the working  class.  In the 
last analysis that would mean appealing to the philanthropy of capi­
tal, as though capital as such could be a philanthropist. In general, 
social reforms can never be brought about by the weakness of the 
strong; they must and will be called to life by the strength of the 
weak. 
Incidentally, we have no need to detain ourselves with this matter. 
From the moment the protectionists concede that social reforms 
have no place in their system and are not a result of it, and that they 
form a special question—from this moment on they have already 
abandoned the social question. I shall accordingly leave the 
protectionists aside and speak of Free Trade in its relationship to the 
condition of the working class. 
Written in the second half Printed according to the 1848 
of September 1847 edition 
First published in Zwei Reden über die Published in English for the first 
Freihandels- und Schutzzollfrage von Karl time 
Marx, Hamm, 1848 

=====第310页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE FREE TRADE CONGRESS AT BRUSSELS 
On the 16th, 17th, and 18th of September, there was held here 
(Brussels) a congress of political economists, manufacturers, trades­
men, etc., to discuss the question of Free Trade. There were present 
about 150 members of all nations. There assisted, on the part of the 
English Free Traders, Dr. Bowring, M. P., Col. Thompson, M. P., 
Mr. Ewart, M. P., Mr. Brown, M. P., James Wilson, Esq., editor of the 
Economist, etc.; from France had arrived M. Wolowski, professor of 
jurisprudence; M. Blanqui, deputy, professor of political economy, 
author of a history of that science, 3 and other works; M. Horace Say, 
son of the celebrated economist5 ; M. Ch. Dunoyer, member of the 
Privy Council, author of several works upon politics and economy, 
and others. From Germany there was no Free Trader present, but 
Holland, Denmark, Italy, etc., had sent representatives. Senor 
Ramon de la Sagra, of Madrid, intended to come, but came too late. 
The assistance of a whole host of Belgian Free Traders need hardly 
be mentioned, it being a matter of course. 
Thus the celebrities of the science had met to discuss the important 
question—whether Free Trade would benefit the world? You will 
think the discussions of such a splendid assembly—discussions 
carried on by economical stars of the first magnitude—must have 
been interesting in the highest degree. You will say that men like Dr. 
Bowring, Colonel Thompson, Blanqui and Dunoyer, must have 
pronounced speeches the most striking, must have produced 
arguments the most convincing, must have represented all questions 
under a light the most novel and surprising imaginable. Alas! Sir, if 
you had been present, you would have been piteously undeceived. 
a A. Blanqui, Histoire de  l'économie  politique en Europe.—Ed. 
Jean Baptiste Say.— Ed. 

=====第311页=====
The Free Trade Congress at Brussels 283 
Your glorious expectations, your fond illusions would have vanished 
within less than an hour. I have assisted at innumerable public 
meetings and discussions. I heard the League pour forth their 
Anti-Corn-Law117  arguments more than a hundred times, while I was 
in England, but never, I can assure you, never did I hear such dull, 
tedious, trivial  stuff,  brought forward with such a degree of 
self-complacency. I was never before so disappointed. What was 
carried on did not merit the name of a discussion—it was mere 
pot-house talk. The great scientific luminaries never ventured 
themselves upon the field of political economy, in the strict sense of 
the word. I shall not repeat to you all the worn-out stuff which was 
brought forward on the first two days. Read two or three numbers of 
the League or the Manchester Guardian, and you will find all that was 
said, except, perhaps, a few specious sentences brought forward by 
M. Wolowski, which he, however, had stolen from M. Bastiat's (chief 
of the French Free Traders) pamphlet of Sophismes  économiques.  Free 
Traders did not expect to meet with any other opposition, but that of 
M. Rittinghausen, a German Protectionist, and generally an insipid 
fellow. But up got M. Duchateau, a French manufacturer and 
Protectionist—a man who spoke for his purse, just as Mr. Ewart or 
Mr. Brown spoke for theirs, and gave them such a terrible 
opposition, that on the second day of the discussion, a great number, 
even of Free Traders, avowed that they had been beaten in 
argument. They took, however, their revenge at the vote—the 
resolutions passed, of course, almost unanimously. 
On the third day, a question was discussed which interests your 
readers. It was this: "Will the carrying out of universal Free Trade 
benefit the working classes?" The affirmative was supported by Mr. 
Brown, the South Lancashire Free Trader, in a lengthy speech, in 
English; he and Mr. Wilson were the only ones who spoke that 
language, the remainder all spoke French—Dr. Bowring, very 
well—Colonel Thompson, tolerably—Mr. Ewart, dreadfully. He 
repeated a part of the old League documents, in a whining tone, very 
much like a Church-of-England parson. 
After him got up Mr. Weerth, of Rhenish Prussia. You know, I 
believe, this gentleman—a young tradesman whose poetry is well 
known and very much liked throughout Germany, and who, during 
several years' stay in Yorkshire, was an eye-witness of the condition 
of the working people. He has a great many friends amongst them 
there, who will be glad to see that he has not forgotten them. As his 
speech will be to your readers the most interesting feature of the 
whole Congress, I shall report it at some length. He spoke as 
follows118: 

=====第312页=====
284 Frederick Engels 
"Gendemen—You are discussing the influence of Free Trade upon the condition 
of the working classes. You profess the greatest possible sympathy for those classes. I 
am very glad of it, but yet I am astonished not to see a representative of the working 
classes amongst you! The monied classes of France are represented by a peer—those 
of England by several M.P.s.—those of Belgium by an ex-minister—and even those of 
Germany by a gentleman who gave us a faithful description of the state of that 
country. But where, I ask you, are the representatives of the working men? I see them 
nowhere; and, therefore, gentlemen, allow me to take up the defence of their 
interests. I beg to speak to you on behalf of the working people, and principally on 
behalf of those five millions of English working men, amongst whom I spent several of 
the most pleasant years of my life, whom I know and whom I cherish. (Cheers.) 
Indeed, gentlemen, the working people stand in need of some generosity. Hitherto 
they have not been treated like men, but like beasts of burden, nay—like merchandise, 
like machines; the English manufacturers know this so well, that they never say, we 
employ so many workmen, but so many hands. The monied classes, acting upon this 
principle, have never hesitated a moment to profit by their services as long as they 
require them, and then turn them out upon the streets, as soon as there is no longer 
any profit to be squeezed out of them. Thus the condition of these outcasts of modern 
society has become such, that it cannot be made worse. Look wherever you like; to the 
banks of the Rhone; into the dirty and pestilential lanes of Manchester, Leeds, and 
Birmingham; on the hills of Saxony and Silesia, or the plains of Westphalia; 
everywhere you will meet with the same pale starvation, the same gloomy despair, in 
the eyes of men who in vain claim their rights and their position in civilised society." 
(Great sensation.) 
Mr. Weerth then declared his opinion to be, that the protective 
system in reality did not protect the working people, but that Free 
Trade—and he told it them plainly and distinctly, although he 
himself was a Free Trader—that Free Trade would never change 
their miserable condition. He did not at all join in the delusions of 
the Free Traders, as to the beneficial effects of the carrying out of 
their system upon the working classes. On the contrary, Free Trade, 
the full realisation of free competition, would force the working 
people as much into a keener competition amongst themselves as it 
would make capitalists compete more selfishly against each other. 
The perfect freedom of competition would inevitably give an 
enormous impulse to the invention of new machinery, and thus 
supersede more workmen than even now were daily superseded. It 
would stimulate production in every way, but for this very reason it 
would stimulate overproduction, overstocking of markets, and 
commercial revulsions, just in the same measure. The Free Traders 
pretended that those terrible revulsions would cease under a system 
of commercial freedom; why, just the contrary would be the case, 
they would increase and multiply more than ever. Possible, nay 
certain it was, that at first the greater cheapness of provisions would 
benefit the workpeople,—that a lessened cost of production would 
increase consumption and the demand for labour, but that 

=====第313页=====
The Free Trade Congress at Brussels 285 
advantage very soon would be turned into misery, the competition of 
the working people amongst themselves would soon reduce them to 
the former level of misery and starvation. After these and other 
arguments (which appeared to be quite novel to the meeting, for 
they were listened to with the greatest attention, although The Times 
reporter deigns to rid himself of them with the impudent but 
significant sneer—"Chartist commonplace"3), Mr. Weerth concluded 
as follows: 
"And do not think, gentlemen, that these are but my individual opinions; they are 
the opinions, too, of the English working men, a class whom I cherish and respect, 
because they are intelligent and energetic men, indeed, (cheers, "by courtesy") I shall 
prove that by a few facts. During full six years, the gentlemen of the League, whom we 
see here, courted the support of the working people, but in vain. The working men 
never forgot that the capitalists were their natural enemies; they recollected the 
League riots of 1842,119  and the masters' opposition against the Ten Hours Bill. It was 
only towards the end of 1845, that the Chartists, the élite of the working classes, 
associated for a moment with the League, in order to crush their common enemy, the 
landed aristocracy. But it was for a moment only, and never were they deceived by the 
delusive promises of Cobden, Bright and Co., nor did they hope the fulfilment of 
cheap bread, high wages, and plenty to do. No, not for a moment did they cease to 
trust in their own exertions only; to form a distinct party, led on by distinct chiefs, by 
the indefatigable Duncombe, and by Feargus O'Connor, who, in spite of all 
calumnies,—(here Mr. Weerth looked at Dr. Bowring, who made a quick, convulsive 
movement)—who, in spite of all calumnies, within a few weeks will sit upon the same 
bench with you in the House of Commons. In the name, then, of those millions who 
do not believe that Free Trade will do wonders for them, I call upon you to seek for 
some other means to effectively better their condition. Gentlemen, I call upon you for 
your own interests. You have no longer to fear the Emperor of all the Russias; you 
dread not an invasion of Cossacks, but if you do not take care you will have to fear the 
irruption of your own workmen, and they will be more terrible to you than all the 
Cossacks in the world. Gentlemen, the workpeople want no more words from you, 
they want deeds. And you have no reason to be astonished at that. They recollect very 
well, that in 1830 and 31, when they conquered the Reform Bill for you in London, 
when they fought for you in the streets of Paris and Brussels, that then they were 
courted, shaken hands with, and highly praised; but that when a few years after they 
demanded bread, then they were received with grape shot and the bayonet. ("Oh! no, 
no! yes, yes! Buzançais, Lyons.") I repeat, therefore, to you, carry your Free Trade, 
it will be well; but think, at the same time, about other measures for the working 
classes, or you will repent it." (Loud cheers.) 
Immediately after Mr. Weerth, up got Dr. Bowring to reply. 
"Gentlemen," said he, "I can tell you that the hon. member who has just sat down 
has not been elected by the English working people to represent them in this 
Congress. On the contrary, the English people generally have given us their suffrages 
for this purpose, and, therefore, we claim our places as their true representatives." 
He then went on to show the beneficial effects of Free Trade, as 
proved by the increased importation of articles of food into England 
a "Free Trade Congress in Brussels" in The Times, September 20, 1847.— Ed. 

=====第314页=====
286 Frederick Engels 
since the introduction of last year's  tariff.3  So many eggs, so many 
cwt. of butter, cheese, ham, bacon, so many heads of cattle, etc., etc.; 
who could have eaten all that if not the working people of England? 
He quite forgot, however, telling us what quantities of the same 
articles have been produced less in England since foreign competi­
tion has been admitted. He took it for granted that increased 
importation was a decisive proof of increased consumption. He 
never mentioned wherefrom the working people of Manchester, 
Bradford, and Leeds, who now walk the streets and cannot get work, 
wherefrom these men got the money to pay for this supposed 
increase of consumption and Free Trade comforts, for we never 
heard of the masters making them presents of eggs, butter, cheese, 
ham, and meat, for not working at all. He never said a word about 
the present depressed state of the trade, which in every public paper 
is represented as really unexampled. He seemed not to know that all 
the predictions of the Free Traders since the carrying of the 
measures have proved just the reverse of reality. He had not a word 
of sympathy for the sufferings of the working classes, but, on the 
contrary, represented their present gloomy condition as the bright­
est, happiest, and most comfortable they could reasonably desire. 
The English working people, now, may choose betwixt their two 
representatives. A host of others followed, who spoke about every 
imaginable subject upon earth, except upon the one under 
discussion. Mr. M'Adam, M. P. for Belfast (?), spun an eternally long 
yarn upon flax-spinning in Ireland, and almost killed the meeting 
with statistics. Mr. Ackersdijk, a Dutch professor, spoke about Old 
Holland and Young Holland, the university of Liège, Walpole, and 
De Witt. M. Van de Casteele spoke about France, Belgium, and the 
ministry. M. Asher, of Berlin, about German patriotism and some 
new article he called spiritual manufacture. M. Den Tex, a 
Dutchman, about God knows what. At last, the whole meeting being 
half asleep, was awakened by M. Wolowski, who returned to the 
question and replied to Mr. Weerth. His speech, like all speeches 
delivered by Frenchmen, proved how much the French capitalists 
dread the fulfilment of Mr. Weerth's prophecies; they speak with 
such pretended sympathy, such canting and whining of the 
sufferings of the working classes, that one might take it all for good 
earnest, were it not too flagrantly contradicted by the roundness of 
their bellies, by the stamp of hypocrisy deeply imprinted on their 
faces,  by the pitiful remedies they propose and by the unmistakeably 
striking contrast between their words and their deeds. Nor have they 
a i.e., the lifting of heavy duties on imported corn in 1846.— Ed. 

=====第315页=====
The Free Trade Congress at Brussels 287 
ever succeeded in deceiving one single working man. Then, up got 
the Due d'Harcourt, peer of France, and claimed, too, for the French 
capitalists, deputies, etc., present the right of representing the 
French working people. They do so in the same way as Dr. Bowring 
represents the English Chartists. Then spoke Mr. James Wilson, 
repeating most brazen-facedly the most worn-out League argu­
ments, in the drowsy tone of a Philadelphia quaker. 
You see from this, what a nice discussion it was. Dr. Marx, of 
Brussels, whom you know as by far the most talented representative 
of German Democracy, had also claimed his turn to speak. He had 
prepared a speech, which, if it had been delivered, would have made 
it impossible for the congressional "gents" to vote upon the question. 
But Mr. Weerth's opposition had made them shy. They resolved to 
let none speak, of whose orthodoxy they were not quite sure. Thus, 
Messrs Wolowski, Wilson, and the whole precious lot spoke against 
time,  and when it was four o'clock, there were still six or seven 
gentlemen who wanted to speak, but the chairman3  closed the 
discussion abruptly, and the whole set of fools, ignorants, and knaves 
called a congress of political economists, voted all votes against one 
(the poor German fool of a Protectionist aforesaid)—the Democrats 
did not vote at all—that Free Trade is extremely beneficial to the 
working people, and will free them from all misery and distress. 
As Mr. Marx's speech, although not delivered, contains the very 
best and most striking refutation of this barefaced lie, which can be 
imagined, and as its contents, in spite of so many hundred pages 
having been written pro and con upon the subject, will yet read quite 
novel in England, I enclose you some extracts from it. 
SPEECH OF DR. MARX ON PROTECTION, FREE TRADE, 
AND THE WORKING CLASSES 
There are two sects of protectionists. The first sect, represented in 
Germany by Dr. List, who never intended to protect manual labour, 
on the contrary, they demanded protective duties in order to crush 
manual labour by machinery, to supersede patriarchal manufacture 
by modern manufacture. They always intended to prepare the reign 
of the monied classes (the bourgeoisie), and more particularly that of 
the large manufacturing capitalists. They openly proclaimed the 
ruin of petty manufacturers, of small tradesmen, and small farmers, 
as an event to be regretted, indeed, but quite inevitable, at the same 
time.  The second school of protectionists, required not only 
a Charles de Brouckère.— Ed. 

=====第316页=====
288 Frederick Engels 
protection, but absolute prohibition. They proposed to protect 
manual labour against the invasion of machinery, as well as against 
foreign competition. They proposed to protect by high duties, not 
only home manufactures, but also home agriculture, and the 
production of raw materials at home. And where did this school 
arrive at? At the prohibition, not only of the importation of foreign 
manufactured produce, but of the progress of the home manufac­
ture itself.  Thus the whole protective system inevitably got upon the 
horns of this dilemma. Either it protected the progress of home 
manufactures, and then it sacrificed manual labour, or it protected 
manual labour, and then it sacrificed home manufactures. Protec­
tionists of the first sect, those who conceived the progress of 
machinery, of division of labour, and of competition, to be 
irresistible, told the working classes, "At any rate if you are to be 
squeezed out, you had better be squeezed by your own countrymen, 
than by foreigners." Will the working classes for ever bear with this? 
I think not. Those who produce all the wealth and comforts of the 
rich, will not be satisfied with that poor consolation. They will 
require more substantial comforts in exchange for substantial 
produce. But the protectionists say, "After all, we keep up the state 
of society as it is at present. We ensure to the working man, somehow 
or other, the employment he wants. We take care that he shall not be 
turned out of work in consequence of foreign competition." So be it. 
Thus,  in the best case, the protectionists avow that they are unable to 
arrive at anything better than the continuation of the status quo. 
Now the working classes want not the continuation of their actual 
condition, but a change for the better. A last refuge yet stands open 
to the protectionist. He will say that he is not at all adverse to social 
reform in the interior of a country, but that the first thing to ensure 
their success will be to shut out any derangement which might be 
caused by foreign competition. "My system," he says, "is no system 
of social reform, but if we are to reform society, had we not better do 
so within our own country, before we talk about reforms in our 
relations with other countries?" Very specious, indeed, but under 
this plausible appearance, there is hid a very strange contradiction. 
The protectionist system, while it gives arms to the capital of a 
country against the capital of foreign countries, while it strengthens 
capital against foreigners, believes that this capital, thus armed, thus 
strengthened, will be weak, impotent, and feeble, when opposed to 
labour. Why, that would be appealing to the mercy of capital, as if 
capital, considered as such, could ever be merciful. Why, social 
reforms are never carried by the weakness of the strong, but always 
by the strength of the weak. But it is not at all necessary to insist on 

=====第317页=====
The Free Trade Congress at Brussels 289 
this point. From the moment the protectionists agree that social 
reforms do not necessarily follow from, and that they are not part 
and parcel of their system, but form quite a distinct question, from 
that moment they abandon the question, which we discuss. We may, 
therefore, leave them in order to review the effects of Free Trade 
upon the condition of the working classes. The problem: What will 
be the influence of the perfect unfettering of trade upon the 
situation of the working classes, is very easy to be resolved. It is not 
even a problem. If there is anything clearly exposed in political 
economy, it is the fate attending the working classes under the reign 
of Free Trade. All those laws developed in the classical works on 
political economy, are strictly true under the supposition only, that 
trade be delivered from all fetters, that competition be perfectly free, 
not only within a single country, but upon the whole face of the 
earth. These laws, which A. Smith, Say, and Ricardo have developed, 
the laws under which wealth is produced and distributed—these laws 
grow more true, more exact, then cease to be mere abstractions, in 
the same measure in which Free Trade is carried out. And the 
master of the science, when treating of any economical subject, tells 
us every moment that all their reasonings are founded upon the 
supposition that all fetters, yet existing, are to be removed from 
trade. They are quite right in following this method. For they make 
no arbitrary abstractions, they only remove from their reasoning a 
series of accidental circumstances. Thus it can justly be said, that the 
economists— Ricardo and others—know more about society as it will 
be, than about society as it is. They know more about the future than 
about the present. If you wish to read in the book of the future, open 
Smith, Say, Ricardo. There you will find described, as clearly as 
possible, the condition which awaits the working man under the 
reign of perfect Free Trade. Take, for instance, the authority of 
Ricardo, authority than which there is no better. What is the natural 
normal price of the labour of, economically speaking, a working 
man? Ricardo replies, "Wages reduced to their minimum—their 
lowest level." Labour is a commodity as well as any other 
commodity. 123 Now the price of a commodity is determined by the 
time necessary to produce it. What then is necessary to produce the 
commodity of labour? Exactly that which is necessary to produce 
the sum of commodities indispensable to the sustenance and the 
repairing of the wear and tear of the labourer, to enable him to live 
and to propagate, somehow or other, his race. We are, however, not 
to believe that the working man will never be elevated above this 
lowest level, nor that he never will be depressed below it. No, 
according to this law, the working classes will be for a time more 

=====第318页=====
290 Frederick Engels 
happy, they will have for a time more than the minimum^ but this 
surplus will be the supplement only for what they will have less than 
the minimum at another time, the time of industrial stagnation. That 
is to say, that during a certain space of time, which is always 
periodical, in which trade passes through the circle of prosperity, 
overproduction, stagnation, crisis—that, taking the average of what 
the labourer received more, and what he received less, than the 
minimum, we shall find that on the whole he will have received 
neither more or less than the minimum; or, in other words, that the 
working class, as a class, will have conserved  itself,  after many 
miseries, many sufferings, and many corpses left upon the industrial 
battle field. But what matters that? The class exists, and not only it 
exists,  but it will have increased. This law, that the lowest level of 
wages is the natural price of the commodity of labour, will realise 
itself in the same measure with Ricardo's supposition that Free 
Trade will become a reality. We accept every thing that has been said 
of the advantages of Free Trade. The powers of production will 
increase, the tax imposed upon the country by protective duties will 
disappear, all commodities will be sold at a cheaper price. And what, 
again, says Ricardo? "That labour being equally a commodity, will 
equally sell at a cheaper price"—that you will have it for very little 
money indeed, just as you will have pepper and salt. And then, in the 
same way as all other laws of political economy will receive an 
increased force, a surplus of truth, by the realisation of Free 
Trade—in the same way the law of population, as exposed by 
Malthus, will under the reign of Free Trade develop itself in as fine 
dimensions as can possibly be desired. Thus you have to choose: 
Either you must disavow the whole of political economy as it exists at 
present, or you must allow that under the freedom of trade the 
whole severity of the laws of political economy will be applied to the 
working classes. Is that to say that we are against Free Trade? No, we 
are for Free Trade, because by Free Trade all economical laws, with 
their most astounding contradictions, will act upon a larger scale, 
upon a greater extent of territory, upon the territory of the whole 
earth; and because from the uniting of all these contradictions into a 
single group, where they stand face to face, will result the struggle 
which will itself eventuate in the emancipation of the proletarians. 
Written at the end of September 1847 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 520, October 9, 1847 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our German Correspondent" 

=====第319页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE COMMUNISTS AND KARL HEINZEN 124 
FIRST ARTICLE 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 79, October 3, 1847] 
Brussels, September 26. Today's number of the D[eutsche]-
Br[iisseler]-Z[ei]t[un]g contains an article by Heinzen3 in which under 
the pretext of defending himself against a trivial accusation by the 
editors, he embarks on a long polemic against the Communists. 
The editors advise both sides to drop the polemic. In that case 
however they ought only to reproduce that part of Heinzen's article 
in which Heinzen really defends himself against the accusation of 
having attacked the Communists first. Even if "Heinzen has no 
paper at his disposal", that is no reason for placing one at his disposal 
for the publication of attacks which the editors of the paper 
themselves consider stupid. 
Incidentally, no greater service could have been rendered to the 
Communists than has been rendered through the publication of this 
article. Sillier and more narrow-minded criticisms than those 
Heinzen here makes of the Communists have never been made of 
any party. The article is the most dazzling vindication of the 
Communists. It proves that if they had not already attacked Heinzen, 
they would be obliged to do so at once. 
At the very outset Herr Heinzen presents himself as the 
representative of all the non-communist German radicals; his 
intention is to debate with the Communists as one party with 
another. He "is entitled to demand", he announces with the greatest 
assurance what "must be expected of" the Communists, what "must 
be demanded of them", what the "duty of real Communists is". He 
a Published as a statement in the Polemik column with a note by the editors 
entitled "Karl Heinzen und die Kommunisten". — Ed. 
1 1 — 1826 

=====第320页=====
292 Frederick Engels 
identifies his differences with the Communists in all respects with 
those "the German republicans and democrats" have with them and 
speaks of "we" in the name of these republicans. 
Who is Herr Heinzen, then, and what does he represent? 
Herr Heinzen is a former liberal, lower-ranking civil servant who 
in 1844 was still enthusiastic about legitimate progress and the 
wretched German Constitution, and who at best confessed in a 
confidential whisper that a republic might be desirable and possible, 
of course in the far distant future. Herr Heinzen was wrong however 
about the possibility of legal resistance in Prussia. The bad book he 
wrote on the bureaucracy 3 (even Jacob Venedey wrote a far better 
book about Prussia years agob ) compelled him to flee the country. 
Now the truth dawned on him. He declared legal resistance to be 
impossible, became a revolutionary and naturally a republican as 
well. In Switzerland he made the acquaintance of that savant sérient 
Rüge, who taught him the little philosophy he has, consisting of a 
confused hotch-potch of Feuerbachian atheism and humanism, 
reminiscences of Hegel and rhetorical phrases from Stirner. Thus 
equipped, Herr Heinzen considered himself mature and inaugu­
rated his revolutionary propaganda, leaning on Ruge to the right 
and Freiligrath to the left. 
We are most certainly not criticising Herr Heinzen for his 
transition from liberalism to bloodthirsty radicalism. But we do 
maintain that he has made this transition as a result of merely 
personal circumstances. As long as Herr Heinzen was able to put up 
legal resistance, he attacked all those who admitted the necessity of a 
revolution. Scarcely was legal resistance rendered impossible for him 
when he declared it to be impossible absolutely, without taking into 
account that for the present this resistance is still perfectly possible 
for the German bourgeoisie, which is constantly putting up a highly 
legal resistance. Scarcely had the way back been cutoff for him when 
he declared the necessity of an immediate revolution. Instead of 
studying conditions in Germany, taking overall stock of them and 
deducing from this what progress, what development and what steps 
were necessary and possible, instead of obtaining for himself a clear 
picture of the complex situation of the individual classes in Germany 
with regard to each other and to the government and concluding 
from this what policy was to be followed, instead, in a word, of 
accommodating himself to the development of Germany, Herr 
a K. Heinzen, Die  Preussische  Bureaukratie.—Ed. 
J. Venedey, Preussen und Preussenthum.— Ed. 
c Serious scholar.— Ed. 

=====第321页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 293 
Heinzen quite unceremoniously demands that the development of 
Germany should accommodate itself to him. 
Herr Heinzen was a violent opponent of philosophy as long as it 
remained progressive. Scarcely had it become reactionary, scarcely 
had it become the refuge of all waverers, weaklings and literary 
hacks,  when Herr Heinzen did himself the disservice of joining it. 
And worse still, fate would have it that Herr Rüge, who himself has 
been a mere proselyte all his life, has found his only proselyte in 
Herr Heinzen. Herr Heinzen is thus condemned to provide Herr 
Rüge with the consolation that at least one person believed he had 
penetrated his verbal edifices. 
For what end is Herr Heinzen actually working then? For the 
instant establishment of a German republic combining American 
and 1793 traditions with a few measures borrowed from the 
Communists, and looking very black, red and gold. 125 As a result of 
its industrial lethargy, Germany occupies such a wretched position in 
Europe that it can never seize an initiative, never be the first to 
proclaim a great revolution, never establish a republic on its own 
account without France and England. Any German republic that is 
supposed to be created independently of the development of the 
civilised countries, any German revolution that is supposed to be 
carried out on its own and, as happens in Herr Heinzen's case, leaves 
the real development of classes in Germany totally out of considera­
tion, any such republic or revolution is nothing but black, red and 
gold day-dreaming. And in order to make this glorious German 
republic even more glorious, Herr Heinzen garnishes it with 
Feuerbachian, Rugified humanism, and proclaims it as the kingdom 
"of man" which is almost at hand. And the Germans are supposed to 
make something of all this topsy-turvy day-dreaming? 
But how does the great "agitator" Herr Heinzen conduct his 
propaganda? He declares the princes to be the chief authors of all 
poverty and distress. This assertion is not only ridiculous but 
exceedingly damaging. Herr Heinzen could not flatter the German 
princes, those impotent and feeble-minded puppets, more than by 
attributing to them fantastic, preternatural, daemonic omnipotence. 
If Herr Heinzen asserts that the princes can do so much evil, he is 
thereby also conceding them the power to perform as many good 
works. The conclusion this leads to is not the necessity of a revolution 
but the pious desire for a virtuous prince, for a good Emperor 
Joseph. In any case, the people know far better than Herr Heinzen 
who their oppressors are. Herr Heinzen will never transfer to the 
princes the hatred which the serf feels for the feudal lord and the 
worker for his employer. But of course Herr Heinzen is working in 

=====第322页=====
294 Frederick Engels 
the interests of the landowners and capitalists when he puts the 
blame for the exploitation of the people by these two classes not on 
them but on the princes; and the exploitation by the landowners and 
capitalists is after all surely responsible for nineteen-twentieths of all 
the misery in Germany! 
Herr Heinzen calls for an immediate insurrection. He has leaflets 
printed 3 to this effect and attempts to distribute them in Germany. 
We would ask whether blindly lashing out with such senseless 
propaganda is not injurious in the highest degree to the interests of 
German democracy. We would ask whether experience has not 
proved how useless it is. Whether, at a time of far greater unrest, in 
the thirties, hundreds of thousands of such leaflets, pamphlets, etc., 
were not distributed in Germany and whether a single one of them 
had any success whatever. We would ask whether any person who is 
in his right mind at all can imagine that the people will pay any 
attention whatever to political sermonising and exhortations of this 
kind. We would ask whether Herr Heinzen has ever done anything 
else in his leaflets except exhort and sermonise. We would ask 
whether it is not positively ridiculous to trumpet calls for revolution 
out into the world in this way, without sense or understanding, 
without knowledge or consideration of circumstances. 
What is the task of a party press? To debate, first and foremost, 
to explain, to expound, to defend the party's demands, to rebut and 
refute the claims and assertions of the opposing party. What is the 
task of the German democratic press? To demonstrate the necessity 
for democracy by the worthlessness of the present government, 
which by and large represents the nobility, by the inadequacy of the 
constitutional system that brings the bourgeoisie to the helm, by the 
impossibility of the people helping itself so long as it does not have 
political power. Its task is to reveal the oppression of the 
proletarians, small peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie, for in 
Germany these constitute the "people", by the bureaucracy, the 
nobility and the bourgeoisie; how not only political but above all 
social oppression has come about, and by what means it can be 
eliminated; its task is to show that the conquest of political power 
by the proletarians, small peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie is the 
first condition for the application of these means. Its task is further 
to examine the extent to which a rapid realisation of democracy may 
be expected, what resources the party can command and what other 
parties it must ally itself with as long as it is too weak to act 
alone.—Well, and has Herr Heinzen done even one of these things? 
a K. Hein^en, "Teutsche Revolution. Gesammelte Flugschriften".. — Ed. 

=====第323页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 295 
No. He has not put himself to so much trouble. He has revealed 
absolutely nothing to the people, in other words to the proletarians, 
small peasants and urban petty bourgeoisie. He has never examined 
the position of the classes and parties. He has done nothing but play 
variations on the one theme: Fight'em, fight'em, fight'em! 
And to whom does Herr Heinzen address his revolutionary 
sermonising? First and foremost to the small peasants, to that class 
which in our day and age is least of all capable of seizing a 
revolutionary initiative. For 600 years, all progressive movements 
have issued so exclusively from the towns that the independent 
democratic movements of country people (Wat Tyler, Jack Cade, 
the Jacquerie, the Peasants' War 126) were firstly always reactionary 
manifestations and were secondly always crushed. The industrial 
proletariat of the towns has become the vanguard of all modern 
democracy; the urban petty bourgeoisie and still more the peasants 
depend on its initiative completely. The French Revolution of 1789 
and the most recent history of England, France and the eastern states 
of America prove this. And Herr Heinzen hopes the peasants will 
fight now, in the nineteenth century? 
But Herr Heinzen also promises social reforms. Of course, the 
indifference of the people towards his appeals has gradually forced 
him to. And what kind of reforms are these? They are such as the 
Communists themselves suggest in preparation for the abolition of 
private property. The only point Herr Heinzen makes that deserves 
recognition he has borrowed from the Communists, the Communists 
whom he attacks so violently, and even that is reduced in his hands to 
utter nonsense and mere day-dreaming. All measures to restrict 
competition and the accumulation of capital in the hands of 
individuals, all restriction or suppression of the law of inheritance, all 
organisation of labour by the state, etc., all these measures are not 
only possible as revolutionary measures, but actually necessary. They 
are possible because the whole insurgent proletariat is behind them 
and maintains them by force of arms. They are possible, despite all 
the difficulties and disadvantages which are alleged against them by 
economists, because these very difficulties and disadvantages will 
compel the proletariat to go further and further until private 
property has been completely abolished, in order not to lose again 
what it has already won. They are possible as preparatory steps, 
temporary transitional stages towards the abolition of private 
property, but not in any other way. 
Herr Heinzen however wants all these measures as permanent, 
final measures. They are not to be a preparation for anything, they 
are to be definitive. They are for him not a means but an end. They 

=====第324页=====
296 Frederick Engels 
are not  designed  for a  revolutionary  but for a  peaceful, bourgeois 
condition.  But  this makes them impossible  and at the  same time 
reactionary.  The  economists  of the  bourgeoisie  are  quite right  in 
respect  of Herr Heinzen when they present these measures  as 
reactionary compared with free competition. Free competition  is the 
ultimate, highest  and  most developed form  of existence  of private 
property.  All  measures, therefore, which start from  the  basis  of 
private property  and  which  are  nevertheless directed against free 
competition,  are  reactionary  and  tend  to restore more primitive 
stages  in the  development  of property,  and for  that reason they must 
finally  be defeated once more  by competition  and  result  in the 
restoration  of the  present situation. These objections  the bourgeoisie 
raises,  which lose  all their force  as soon  as one  regards  the  above 
social reforms  as pure mesures  de salut public,  as revolutionary  and 
transitory measures, these objections  are  devastating  as far as  Herr 
Heinzen's peasant-socialist black,  red and  gold republic  is concerned. 
Herr Heinzen  of course imagines that property relations,  the law 
of inheritance, etc.,  can at  will be altered  and  trimmed  to shape. Herr 
Heinzen—one  of the  most ignorant  men of  this century—may,  of 
course,  not know that  the property relations  of any  given  era are the 
necessary result  of the  mode  of production  and  exchange  of that  era. 
Herr Heinzen  may not  know that  one  cannot transform large-scale 
landownership into small-scale without  the  whole pattern  of 
agriculture being transformed,  and  that otherwise large-scale 
landownership will very rapidly re-assert  itself.  Herr Heinzen  may 
not know what  a close relationship exists between today's large-scale 
industry,  the  concentration  of capital  and the  creation  of the 
proletariat. Herr Heinzen  may not  know that  a country  as 
industrially dependent  and  subservient  as Germany  can  never 
presume  to undertake  on its own  account  a transformation  of its 
property relations other than  one  that  is in the  interests  of the 
bourgeoisie  and of  free competition. 
In short: with  the  Communists these measures have sense  and 
reason because they  are not  conceived  as arbitrary measures  but as 
consequences which will necessarily  and of  themselves ensue from 
the development  of industry, agriculture, trade  and  communica­
tions,  from  the  development  of the  class struggle between 
bourgeoisie  and  proletariat which  is dependent  on these; which will 
ensue  not as  definitive measures  but as  transitory ones, mesures  de 
salut public arising from  the  transitory struggle between  the  classes 
itself. 
With Herr Heinzen, they have neither sense  nor  reason, because 
they take  the form  of quite arbitrarily conceived, obtusely bourgeois 

=====第325页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 297 
visions of putting the world to rights; because there is no mention of 
a connection between these measures and historical development; 
because Herr Heinzen is not in the least concerned about the 
material feasibility of his proposals; because it is not his aim to 
formulate industrial necessities but on the contrary to overturn them 
by decree. 
The same Herr Heinzen who is only able to adopt the demands of 
the Communists after he has so cruelly confused them and 
transformed them into pure fantasies, that same Herr Heinzen 
criticises the Communists for "confusing the minds of the unedu­
cated", for "chasing fantasies" and for "failing to keep their feet on 
the ground (!) of reality"! 
There we have Herr Heinzen in all his activity as an agitator, and 
we make no bones about our opinion that it brings nothing but harm 
and discredit upon the whole German radical party. A party writer 
requires quite different qualities from those possessed by Herr 
Heinzen, who, as we said, is one of the most ignorant men of our 
century. Herr Heinzen may have the best will in the world, he may be 
the most steadfast man in his convictions in the whole of Europe. We 
also know that he is personally a man of honour and has courage and 
endurance. But all that does not make him a party writer. To be that, 
one requires more than convictions, good will and a stentorian voice, 
to be that, one requires a little more intelligence, a little more 
lucidity, a better style and more knowledge than Herr Heinzen 
possesses and, as long experience has proved, than he is capable of 
acquiring. 
Herr Heinzen's flight has faced him with the necessity of becoming 
a party writer nevertheless. He was compelled to try to form a party 
of his own among the radicals. Thus he got into a situation he was 
not equal to, in which through his unsuccessful efforts to meet the 
demands of this situation he only makes himself ridiculous. He 
would make the German radicals look equally ridiculous if they 
left him the pretence that he was representing them, that he was 
making himself ridiculous in their name. 
But Herr Heinzen does not represent the German radicals. They 
have quite other representatives, e.g., Jacoby and others. Herr 
Heinzen represents no one and is recognised by no one as their 
representative, apart perhaps from some few German bourgeois 
who sent him money for the purposes of agitation. But we are 
mistaken: one class in Germany recognises him as its representative, 
adores him and roars its head off for him, outshouts whole tables 
of drinkers in the taverns for him (just as, according to Herr 
Heinzen, the Communists "outshouted the whole literary opposi-

=====第326页=====
298 Frederick Engels 
tion").  This class is the numerous, enlightened, noble-minded and 
influential class of commis-voyageurs.* 
And this Heir Heinzen demands that the Communists should 
recognise him as representative of the radical bourgeoisie and debate 
with him in that capacity? 
For the moment, these are reasons enough to justify the polemic 
the Communists are conducting against Herr Heinzen. In the next 
issue we shall investigate the criticisms which Herr Heinzen makes of 
the Communists in No. 77 of the paper. 
If we were not completely convinced that Herr Heinzen is utterly 
incompetent as a party writer, we would advise him to subject Marx's 
Misere de la Philosophie to close study. But as things are, in response to 
his advice to us to read Fröbel's Neue  Politik,**  we can only give him 
the alternative advice to maintain absolute silence and wait quietly 
until "the fighting starts". We are convinced that Herr Heinzen will 
prove as good a batallion commander as he is a bad writer. 
So that Herr Heinzen cannot complain about anonymous attacks, 
we are signing this article. 
F. Engels 
SECOND ARTICLE 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 80, October 7, 1847] 
The Communists—this we established in the first article—are 
attacking Heinzen not because he is no Communist, but because 
he is a bad democratic party writer. They are attacking him not in 
their capacity as Communists but in their capacity as democrats. It is 
purely coincidental that it is precisely the Communists who have 
opened the polemic against him; even if there were no Communists 
at all in the world, the democrats would still have to take the field 
against Heinzen. In this whole controversy it is only a question of: 
1. whether Herr Heinzen as a party writer and agitator is capable of 
serving German democracy, which we deny; 2. whether Herr 
Heinzen's manner of agitation is a correct one, whether it is merely 
tolerable, which we likewise deny. It is therefore a question neither 
of communism nor of democracy, but just of Herr Heinzen's person 
and his personal eccentricities. 
a Commercial travellers.—Ed. 
b J. Frobel, "System der socialen Politik", zweite Auflage der Neuen Politik, 
Th. I-II (the first edition entitled Neue Politik appeared under the pen-name 
"Junius").—Ed. 

=====第327页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 299 
Far from starting futile quarrels with the democrats, in the present 
circumstances, the Communists for the time being rather take the 
field as democrats themselves in all practical party matters. In all 
civilised countries, democracy has as its necessary consequence the 
political rule of the proletariat, and the political rule of the 
proletariat is the first condition for all communist measures. As long 
as democracy has not been achieved, thus long do Communists and 
democrats fight side by side, thus long are the interests of the 
democrats at the same time those of the Communists. Until that time, 
the differences between the two parties are of a purely theoretical 
nature and can perfectly well be debated on a theoretical level 
without common action being thereby in any way prejudiced. In­
deed, understandings will be possible concerning many measures 
which are to be carried out in the interests of the previously op­
pressed classes immediately after democracy has been achieved, 
e.g. the running of large-scale industry and the railways by the 
state,  the education of all children at state expense, etc. 
Now to Herr Heinzen. 
Herr Heinzen declares the Communists had begun a quarrel with 
him, not he with them. The well-known argument of the street-
porter, then, which we will readily concede to him. He calls his 
conflict with the Communists "the absurd split which the Commu­
nists have provoked in the camp of the German radicals". He says 
that as long as three years ago he had been concerned to prevent the 
approaching split as far as his powers and circumstances might 
permit. These fruitless exertions were followed, he says, by attacks 
on him by the Communists. 
Herr Heinzen, as everyone perfectly well knows, was not yet in the 
radical camp three years ago. At that time Herr Heinzen was 
progressive-within-the-law and liberal. A split with him was there­
fore by no means a split in the camp of the radicals. 
Herr Heinzen met some Communists here in Brussels at the 
beginning of 1845. Far from attacking Herr Heinzen for his 
ostensible political radicalism, they rather took the greatest trouble to 
bring the then liberal Herr Heinzen over to just this radicalism. But 
in vain. Herr Heinzen only became a democrat in Switzerland. 
"I later became more and more convinced (!) of the need for a 
vigorous struggle against the Communists"—in other words, of the 
need for an absurd split in the radical camp! We ask the German 
democrats whether someone who contradicts himself so absurdly is 
fitted to be a party writer? 
But who are the Communists by whom Herr Heinzen claims he 
was attacked? The above innuendoes and particularly the ensuing 

=====第328页=====
300 Frederick Engels 
reproaches against the Communists show who it was clearly. The 
Communists, we read, 
"were outshouting the whole camp of the literary opposition, confusing the minds 
of the uneducated, decrying even the most radical men in the most uninhibited 
manner, ... they were intent on paralysing the political struggle as far as possible, ... 
indeed, they were finally positively allying themselves ... even with reaction. Further­
more they often descended, obviously as a result of their doctrine, to  base  and false in-
triguesin practical life...." 
Out of the fog and vagueness of these criticisms looms an easily 
recognisable figure: that of the literary hack, Herr Karl Grün. Three 
years ago Herr Grün had some personal dealings with Herr 
Heinzen, whereupon Herr Grün attacked Herr Heinzen in the 
Trier'sche Zeitung, Herr Grün attempted to outshout the whole camp 
of the literary opposition, Herr Grün strove to paralyse the political 
struggle as far as possible, etc. 
But since when has Herr Grün been a representative of 
communism? If he thrust himself on the Communists three years 
ago, he has never been recognised as a Communist, he has never 
openly declared himself to be a Communist, and more than a year 
ago he thought it proper to inveigh against the Communists. 
Moreover, even at that time, for Herr Heinzen's benefit, Marx 
repudiated Herr Grün, just as he later publicly showed him up in his 
true colours at the first opportunity. 3 
Concerning Herr Heinzen's final "base and false" insinuation 
about the Communists, one incident which occurred between Herr 
Grün and Herr Heinzen, and nothing more, lies behind this. This 
incident concerns the two gentlemen in question and not the 
Communists at all. We are not even so exactly acquainted with this 
incident as to be able to pass judgment on it. But let us assume Herr 
Heinzen is in the right. If he then, after Marx and other Communists 
have repudiated his adversary, after it has been shown beyond all 
doubt that his adversary was never a Communist, if Herr Heinzen 
then still presents the incident as a necessary consequence of 
communist doctrine, it is monstrously perfidious of him. 
And furthermore, if in his above reproaches Herr Heinzen has in 
mind persons other than Herr Grün, he can only mean those true 
socialists whose admittedly reactionary theories have long ago been 
repudiated by the Communists. All members of this now completely 
a The reference is apparently to the "Declaration Against Karl Grün" (see this vol­
ume,  pp. 72-74) and Chapter IV of Volume II of The German  Ideology  published in Au­
gust-September 1847 in the journal Das Westphälische  Dampfboot  as an article under the 
title "KarlGrün: Die Soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien (Darmstadt, 1845)orthe 
Historiography of True Socialism".—Ed. 

=====第329页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 301 
dissolved movement who are capable of learning anything have come 
over to the Communists and are now themselves attacking true 
socialism wherever it still shows  itself.  Herr Heinzen is thus again 
speaking with his customary crass ignorance when he once more 
disinters these superannuated visions in order to lay them at the 
Communists' door. Whilst Herr Heinzen here reproaches the true 
socialists, whom he confuses with the Communists, he subsequently 
makes the same nonsensical criticisms of the Communists as the true 
socialists did. He thus has not even the right to attack the true 
socialists, he belongs, in one respect, to them  himself.  And whilst the 
Communists were writing sharp attacks on these socialists, the same 
Herr Heinzen was sitting in Zurich being initiated by Herr Rüge into 
those fragments of true socialism which had found a niche for 
themselves in the latter's confused brain. Herr Rüge had indeed 
found a pupil worthy of him! 
But what of the real Communists then? Herr Heinzen speaks of 
honourable exceptions and talented men, of whom he foresees that 
they will reject communist solidarity (!). The Communists have 
already rejected solidarity with the writings and actions of the true 
socialists. Of all the above reproaches, not a single one applies to the 
Communists, unless it be the conclusion of the whole passage, which 
reads as follows: 
"The Communists ... in the arrogance of their imagined superiority laughed to 
scorn everything which is indispensable for forming the basis of an association of 
honourable people." 
Herr Heinzen appears to be alluding here to the fact that 
Communists have made fun of his sternly moral demeanour anc 1 
mocked all those sacred and sublime ideas, virtue, justice, morality, 
etc., which Herr Heinzen imagines form the basis of all society. We 
accept this reproach. The Communists will not allow the moral 
indignation of that honourable man Herr Heinzen to prevent them 
from mocking these eternal verities. The Communists, moreover, 
maintain that these eternal verities are by no means the basis, but on 
the contrary the product, of the society in which they feature. 
If, incidentally, Herr Heinzen foresaw that the Communists would 
reject solidarity with those people he takes it into his head to 
associate with them—what is the point of all his absurd reproaches 
and lying insinuations? If Herr Heinzen only knows the Com­
munists from hearsay, as almost appears to be the case, if he 
knows so little who they are that he demands they should designate 
themselves more closely, and so to speak introduce  themselves  to him, 
what brazenness is this he exhibits in polemicising against them? 

=====第330页=====
302 Frederick Engels 
"A designation of those ... who ... actually represent communism or manifest it in 
its pure fo'rm would ... probably have to exclude completely the vast majority of those 
who base themselves upon communism and are used for it, and it would hardly be the 
people from the Trier'sche Zeitung alone who would protest against the assertion of 
such a claim." 
And a few lines later: 
"Those who are really Communists now must  be allowed  the consistency and honesty" 
(what a decent philistine speaks here!) "of coming forward and openly professing 
their doctrine and declaring their dissociation from those who are not Communists.... 
They are under the moral obligation" (how typical of the philistine these expressions 
are) "not to maintain unscrupulously (!) the confusion which is created in the minds of a 
thousand suffering, uneducated minds by the impossibility (!!), dreamt of or falsely 
advertised as a possibility, of finding a way, based on real conditions, to implement 
that doctrine (!). It is the duty" (the philistine again) "of the real Communists either 
completely to clarify things for all their unenlightened adherents and to lead them to a 
definite goal, or else to detach themselves from them and not to use them." 
If Herr Rüge had produced these last three periods, he could have 
been well pleased. Entirely matching the philistine demands is the 
philistine confusion of thought, which is concerned only with the 
matter and not with the form and for that very reason says the exact 
opposite of what it wants to say. Herr Heinzen demands that the real 
Communists should detach themselves from the merely seeming 
ones.  They should put an end to the confusion which (that is what he 
wants to say) arises from the mixing up of two different trends. But as 
soon as the two words "Communists" and "confusion" collide in his 
mind, confusion arises there too. Herr Heinzen loses the thread; his 
constantly reiterated formula, that the Communists in general are 
confusing the minds of the uneducated, trips him up, he forgets the 
real Communists and the unreal Communists, he stumbles with 
farcical clumsiness over a host of impossibilities dreamt of or falsely 
advertised as possibilities, and finally falls flat on his face on the solid 
ground of real conditions, where he regains his faculty of reflection. 
Now he is reminded that he meant to talk about something quite 
different, that it was not a question of whether this or that was 
possible. He returns to his theme, but is still so dazed that he does 
not even cross out that magnificent sentence in which he executed 
the somersault just described. 
So much for the style. Regarding the matter, we repeat that, 
honest German that he is, Herr Heinzen comes too late with his 
demands, and that the Communists repudiated those true socialists 
long ago. But then we see here once again that the application 
of sly insinuations is by no means irreconcilable with the character of 
a decent philistine. For Herr Heinzen gives it clearly enough to be 

=====第331页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 303 
understood that the communist writers are only using the commun­
ist workers. He says in almost as many words that if these writers 
were to come forward openly with their intentions, the vast majority 
of those who are being used for communism would be excluded 
completely. He regards the communist writers as prophets, priests or 
preachers who possess a secret wisdom of their own but deny it to the 
uneducated in order to keep them on leading-strings. All his decent 
philistine demands that things be clarified for the unenlightened and 
that these persons must not be  used,  obviously proceed from the 
assumption that the literary representatives of communism have an 
interest in keeping the workers in the dark, as though they were, 
merely using them, just as the Illuminati127  wished to use the 
common people in the last century. This insipid idea also causes 
Herr Heinzen to burst forth with always inopportune talk about 
confusion in the minds of the uneducated, and compels him, as a 
penalty for not speaking his mind plainly, to perform stylistic 
somersaults. 
We merely take note of these insinuations, we do not take issue 
with them. We leave it to the communist workers to pass judgment 
on them themselves. 
At last, after all these preliminaries, diversions, appeals, insinua­
tions and somersaults by Herr Heinzen, we come to his theoretical 
attacks on and reflections about the Communists. 
Herr Heinzen 
"discerns the core of the communist doctrine simply in ... the abolition of private 
property (including that earned through labour) and in the principle of the communal 
utilisation of the earth's riches which follows inescapably from that abolition." 
Herr Heinzen imagines communism is a certain doctrine which 
proceeds from a definite theoretical principle as its  core  and draws 
further conclusions from that. Herr Heinzen is very much mistaken. 
Communism is not a doctrine but a movement; it proceeds not from 
principles but from facts. The Communists do not base themselves on 
this or that philosophy as their point of departure but on the whole 
course of previous history and specifically its actual results in the 
civilised countries at the present time. Communism has followed 
from large-scale industry and its consequences, from the establish­
ment of the world market, of the concomitant uninhibited competi­
tion, from the ever more violent and more universal trade crises, 
which have already become full-fledged crises of the world market, 
from the creation of the proletariat and the concentration of capital, 
from the ensuing class struggle between proletariat and bourgeoisie. 
Communism, insofar as it is a theory, is the theoretical expression of 

=====第332页=====
304 Frederick Engels 
the position of the proletariat in this struggle and the theoretical 
summation of the conditions for the liberation.of the proletariat. 
Herr Heinzen will now no doubt realise that in assessing 
communism he has to do rather more than discern its core simply in 
the abolition of private property; that he would do better to 
undertake certain studies in political economy than to gabble wildly 
about the abolition of private property; that he cannot know the first 
thing about the  consequences  of the abolition of private property if he 
does not also know its conditions. 
However, in this respect, Herr Heinzen labours under such gross 
ignorance that he even says "the communal utilisation of the earth's 
riches" (another fine expression) is the  consequence  of the abolition of 
private property. Precisely the contrary is the case. Because 
large-scale industry, the development of machinery, communica­
tions and world trade are assuming such gigantic proportions that 
their exploitation by individual capitalists is becoming daily more 
impossible; because the mounting crises of the world market are the 
most striking proof of this; because the productive forces and the 
means of exchange which characterise the present mode of 
production and exchange are daily becoming increasingly more than 
individual exchange and private property can manage; because, in a 
word, the moment is approaching when communal management of 
industry, of agriculture and of exchange will become a material 
necessity for industry, agriculture and exchange themselves—for 
this reason private property will be abolished. 
So when Herr Heinzen forcibly separates the abolition of private 
property, which is of course the condition for the liberation of the 
proletariat, from the conditions that attach to it, when he considers it 
quite out of all connection with the real world simply as an 
ivory-tower fantasy, it becomes a pure cliché about which he can only 
talk platitudinous nonsense. This he does as follows: 
"By its above-mentioned casting-off of all private property..., communism 
necessarily also abolishes individual existence." (So Herr Heinzen is reproaching us for 
wanting to turn people into Siamese twins.) "The consequence of this is once more ... 
the incorporation of each individual into a perhaps (!!) communally organised 
barracks ... economy." (Would the reader kindly note that this is avowedly only the 
consequence of Herr Heinzen's own absurd remarks about individual existence.) "By 
these means communism destroys ... individuality ... independence ... freedom." (The 
same old twaddle as we had from the true socialists and the bourgeoisie. As though 
there was any individuality to be destroyed in the individuals whom the division of 
labour has today turned against their will into cobblers, factory workers, bourgeois, 
lawyers, peasants, in other words, into slaves of a particular form of labour and of the 
mores, way of life, prejudices and blinkered attitudes, etc., that go with that form of 
labour!) "It sacrifices the individual person with its necessary attribute or basis" (that 
"or" is marvellous) "of earned private property to the 'phantom of the community or 

=====第333页=====
The Communists and Karl Heinzen 305 
society' " (is Stirner here as well?), "whereas the community cannot and should not" 
(should not!!) "be the aim but only the means for each individual person." 
Herr Heinzen attaches particular importance to earned private 
property and in so doing once again proves his crass unfamiliarity 
with the matter on which he is speaking. Herr Heinzen's philistine 
justice, which allows to each man what he has earned, is unfortunate­
ly frustrated by large-scale industry. As long as large-scale industry is 
not so far advanced that it frees itself completely from the fetters of 
private property, thus long does it permit no other distribution of its 
products than that at present occurring, thus long will the capitalist 
pocket his profit and the worker increasingly know by practice just 
what a minimum wage is. M. Proudhon attempted to develop a 
system for earned property which would relate it to existing 
conditions, and, we all know, he failed spectacularly. Herr Heinzen, 
it is true, will never risk a similar experiment, for in order to do so 
he would need to study, and he will not do that. But let the example 
of M. Proudhon teach him to expose his earned property less to 
public scrutiny. 
And if Herr Heinzen reproaches the Communists for chasing 
fantasies and failing to keep their feet on the ground of reality—to 
whom does this reproach properly apply? 
Herr Heinzen goes on to say a number of other things which we 
need not enter into. We merely observe that his sentences get worse 
and worse the further he proceeds. The clumsiness of his language, 
which can never find the right word, would of itself suffice to 
discredit any party which acknowledged him as its literary represen­
tative. The solidity of his conviction constantly makes him say 
something quite different from what he intends to say. Thus each of 
his sentences contains a twofold nonsense: firstly the nonsense he 
intends to say, and secondly the one he doesn't intend to say but 
nevertheless says. We gave an example of it above. It only remains 
for us to observe that Herr Heinzen repeats his old superstition 
about the power of the princes when he says that the power which 
must be overthrown and which is none other than the power of the 
State, is and always has been the progenitor and'preserver of all 
injustice, and that his aim is to establish a State  really based  on justice (!) 
and within this fantasy structure 
"to undertake all those social reforms which have emerged in the course of events 
in general (!), as correct (!) in theory and possible (!) in practice"!!! 
His intentions are as good as his style is bad, and that is the fate of 
the well-meaning in this bad world. 

=====第334页=====
306 Frederick Engels 
From seduction by the Zeitgeist, 
Nature-nurtured sansculotte, 
Dancing badly, but yet bearing 
Good intentions in a bosom rough; 
Void of talent, yet a character.3 
Our articles will fill Herr Heinzen with all the righteous indigna­
tion of an outraged honest philistine, but for all that he is not going 
to give up either his style of writing or his discreditable and 
ineffectual manner of agitation. We found his threat to string us 
up on the nearest lamp-post when the day for action and decision 
comes most entertaining. 
In short: the Communists must co-operate with the German 
radicals and desire to do so. But they reserve the right to attack any 
writer who discredits the entire party. This, and no other, was our 
intention in attacking Heinzen. 
Brussels, October 3, 1847 ^ _ 
l. Engels 
N. B. We have just received a pamphlet written by a workerb : Der 
Heinzen'sche Staat, eine Kritik von Stephan, Bern, Rätzer. If Herr 
Heinzen wrote half so well as this worker, he might be well satisfied. 
From this pamphlet Herr Heinzen can see clearly enough, amongst 
other things, why the workers want nothing to do with his peasant 
republic. We also observe that this pamphlet is the first written by a 
worker which does not adopt a moral attitude but attempts to trace 
the political struggles of the present back to the struggle of the 
various classes of society with one another. 
Written on September 26 and October 3, 
1847 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung Nos. 79 and 80, October 3 and 7, 
1847 
Signed: F. Engels Printed according to the newspaper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a H. Heine, Atta Troll, ch.  24.—Ed. 
b Stephan Born.— Ed. 

=====第335页=====
•ardl M Oetefcrc IMf. 
m • L'iMmBT! numnwiiH, 
?yif LA REFORME z£J 
Frederick Engels 
[THE COMMERCIAL CRISIS IN ENGLAND.— 
THE CHARTIST MOVEMENT.—IRELAND]128 
The commercial crisis to which England finds itself exposed at the 
moment is, indeed, more severe than any of the preceding crises. 
Neither in 1837 nor in 1842 was the depression as universal as at the 
present time. All the branches of England's vast industry have been 
paralysed at the peak of its development; everywhere there is 
stagnation, everywhere one sees nothing but workers thrown out on 
the streets. It goes without saying that such a state of affairs gives rise 
to extreme unrest among the workers who, exploited by the 
industrialists during the period of commercial prosperity, now find 
themselves dismissed en masse and abandoned to their fate. 
Consequently meetings of discontented workers are rapidly increas­
ing. The Northern Star, the organ of the Chartist workers, uses more 
than seven of its large columns to report on meetings held in the past 
week3; the list of meetings announced for the present week fills 
another three columns. The same newspaper mentions a brochure 
published by a worker, Mr. John Noakes,b in which the author makes 
an open and direct attack on the right of the aristocracy to own its 
lands. 
"English soil," he says, "is the property of the people, from whom our aristocrats 
seized it either by force or by trickery. The people must see that their inalienable right 
to property prevails; the proceeds of the land should be public property and used in 
the interest of the public. Perhaps I shall be told that these are revolutionary remarks. 
a Reports on the Chartist meetings in The Northern Star No. 521, October 16, 
1847.—Ed. 
b John Noakes, The Right of the Aristocracy to the Soil, considered. The report on its 
publication appeared in The Northern Star No. 522, October 23, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第336页=====
308 Frederick Engels 
Revolutionary or not, it is of no concern; if the people cannot obtain that which they 
need in a law, they must get it without law." 
It will not seem surprising that in these circumstances the Chartists 
should have recourse to most unusual measures; their leader, the 
famous Feargus O'Connor, has just announced that he is shortly to 
leave for Scotland, where he will call meetings in all the towns and 
collect signatures for the national petition for the People's Charter, 
which will be sent to the next Parliament. At the same time, he 
announced that before the opening of Parliament, the Chartist press 
is to be increased by the addition of a daily newspaper, the 
Democrat.129 
It will be recalled that at the last elections Mr. Harney, 
editor-in-chief of The Northern Star, was put forward as the Chartist 
candidate for Tiverton, a borough which is represented in Parlia­
ment by Lord Palmerston, the Foreign Secretary. Mr. Harney, who 
won on the show of hands, decided to retire when Lord Palmerston 
demanded a poll.130 Now something has happened which shows how 
the feelings of the inhabitants of Tiverton differ from those of the 
small number of parliamentary electors. There was a vacancy to fill 
on the borough council; the municipal electors, a far more numerous 
class than that of the parliamentary electors, gave the vacant seat to 
Mr. Rowcliffe, the person who had proposed Mr. Harney at the 
elections. Moreover, the Chartists are preparing all over England for 
the municipal elections which will take place throughout the country 
at the beginning of November. 
But let us turn now to England's greatest manufacturing district, 
Lancashire, a part of the country which has suffered under the 
burden of industrial stagnation more than any other. The situation 
in Lancashire is alarming in the highest degree. Most of the factories 
have already stopped work entirely, and those which are still 
operating employ their workers for only two or at the most three 
days a week. But this is still not all: the industrialists of Ashton, a very 
important town for the cotton industry, have announced to their 
workers that in a week's time they are going to reduce wages by 10 
per cent. This news, which is causing alarm among the workers, is 
spreading across the country. A few days later a meeting of workers' 
delegates from all over the county was held in Manchester; this 
meeting resolved to send a deputation to the owners to induce them 
not to carry out the threatened reduction and, if this deputation 
achieved no results, to announce a strike of all workers employed in 
the Lancashire cotton industry. This strike, together with the strike 
of the Birmingham iron-workers and miners which has already 

=====第337页=====
The Commercial Crisis in England 309 
started, would not fail to assume the same alarming dimensions 
which signalled the last general strike, that of 1842.131 It could quite 
well become even more menacing for the government. 
In the meantime starving Ireland is writhing in the most terrible 
convulsions. The workhouses are overflowing with beggars, the 
ruined property owners are refusing to pay the Poor Tax, and the 
hungry people gather in their thousands to ransack the barns and 
cattle-sheds of the farmers and even of the Catholic priests, who 
were still sacred to them a short time ago. 
It looks as though the Irish will not die of hunger as calmly next 
winter as they did last winter. Irish immigration to England is getting 
more alarming each day. It is estimated that an average of 50,000 
Irish arrive each year; the number so far this year is already over 
220,000. In September, 345 were arriving daily and in October this 
figure increased to 511. This means that the competition between 
the workers will become stronger, and it would not be at all 
surprising if the present crisis caused such an uproar that it 
compelled the government to grant reforms of a most important 
nature. 
Written on October 23, 1847 Printed according to the news­
paper 
First published in La Réforme, 
October 26, 1847 Translated from the French 

=====第338页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE MASTERS AND THE WORKERS IN ENGLAND 132 
TO THE WORKER EDITORS OF L'ATELIER 
Gentlemen, 
I have just read in your October issue an article entitled: Les 
maîtres et  les- ouvriers en Angleterre; this article mentions a meeting 
reported by la Presse  of so-called delegates of workers employed in 
the Lancashire cotton industry, a meeting which took place on 
August 29 last in Manchester. The resolutions passed at this meeting 
were such as to prove to la Presse that there is perfect harmony 
between capital and labour in England. 
You did quite well, gentlemen, to reserve your judgment on the 
authenticity of a report which a newspaper of the French bourgeoisie 
has published, based on newspapers of the English bourgeoisie. The 
report is accurate, it is true; the resolutions were adopted just as la 
Presse gives them; there is only one small statement lacking in 
accuracy, but it is precisely this small inaccuracy that is the crux of 
the matter: the meeting which la Presse  describes was not a meeting of 
workers, but a meeting of foremen. 
Gentlemen, I spent two years in the heart of Lancashire  itself,  and 
these two years were spent among the workers; I saw them both at 
their public meetings and in their small committees, I knew their 
leaders and their speakers, and I think I can assure you that in no 
other country in the world will you find men more sincerely devoted 
to democratic principles or more firmly resolved to cast off the yoke 
of the capitalist exploiters, under which they find themselves 
suffering at present, than these Lancashire cotton factory workers. 
How, gentlemen, could these same workers whom I have seen with 
my own eyes throw several dozen factory owners off a meeting hall 
platform, whom I have seen, their eyes glinting and fists raised, cast 

=====第339页=====
The Masters and the Workers in England 311 
terror into the ranks of the bourgeois gathered on this platform, 
how, I repeat, could these same workers today pass a vote of thanks 
to their masters because the latter were kind enough to prefer a 
reduction in working hours to a reduction in wages? 
But let us take a slightly closer look at the matter. Does not the 
reduction in work mean precisely the same thing for the worker as a 
reduction in wages? Evidently it does; in both cases the worker's 
position deteriorates to an equal extent. There was therefore no 
possible reason for the workers to thank their masters for having 
preferred the first method of reducing the worker's income to the 
second. However, gentlemen, if you study the English newspapers 
for late August, you will see that the cotton manufacturers had good 
reason to prefer a reduction in working hours to one in wages. At 
that time the price of raw cotton was rising; the same issue of the 
London Globe which reports the meeting in question3  also says that 
the Liverpool speculators were going to take over the cotton market to 
produce an artificial rise in price. What do the Manchester 
manufacturers do in such cases? They send their foremen to 
meetings and make them pass resolutions like those which la Presse 
communicated to you. This is a tried and tested device which is used 
each time the speculators try to raise the price of cotton. It is a 
warning to the speculators to be careful not to attempt to raise the 
price too high; for in that case the manufacturers would reduce 
consumption and in so doing, inevitably produce a drop in price. So 
the meeting which gives la Presse  grounds for so much rejoicing and 
acclamation is nothing but one of those foremen's assemblies which 
do not fool anyone in England. 
In order to give you further proof of the extent to which this 
meeting was the exclusive work of the capitalists, it should suffice to 
tell you that the only newspaper to which the resolutions were sent, 
the newspaper from which all the other newspapers borrowed them, 
was the Manchester Guardian, the organ of the manufacturers. The 
democratic workers' paper, The Northern Star, also gives them; but 
adds that it has taken them from this capitalist newspaper, a 
damning observation in the eyes of the workers.b 
Yours, etc. 
Written about October 25, 1847 Printed according to the journal 
First published in the journal Translated from the French 
l'Atelier No. 2, November 1847 
a "General Suspension of Labour in Cotton Factories", in The  Globe,  September 2, 
1847.—  Ed. 
b The Northern Star  No. 515, September 4, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第340页=====
Karl Marx 
MORALISING CRITICISM 
AND CRITICAL MORALITY133 
A CONTRIBUTION TO GERMAN CULTURAL HISTORY 
CONTRA KARL HEINZEN 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 86, October 28, 1847] 
Shortly before and during the period of the Reformation there 
developed amongst the Germans a type of literature whose very 
name is striking—grobian literature. In our own day we are 
approaching an era of revolution analogous to that of the sixteenth 
century. Small wonder that among the Germans grobian literature is 
emerging once more. Interest in historical development easily 
overcomes the aesthetic revulsion which this kind of writing 
provokes even in a person of quite unrefined taste and which it 
provoked back in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. 
Flat, bombastic, bragging, thrasonical, putting on a great show of 
rude vigour in attack, yet hysterically sensitive to the same quality in 
others; brandishing the sword with enormous waste of energy, lifting 
it high in the air only to let it fall down flat; constantly preaching 
morality and constantly offending against it; sentiment and turpi­
tude most absurdly conjoined; concerned only with the point at 
issue, yet always missing the point; using with equal arrogance petty-
bourgeois scholarly semi-erudition against popular wisdom, and 
so-called "sound common sense" against science; discharging itself 
in ungovernable breadth with a certain complacent levity; clothing a 
philistine message in a plebeian form; wrestling with the literary 
language to- give it, so to speak, a purely corporeal character; 
willingly pointing at the writer's body in the background, which is 
itching in every fibre to give a few exhibitions of its strength, to 
display its broad shoulders and publicly to stretch its limbs; 
proclaiming a healthy mind in a healthy body; unconsciously 
infected by the sixteenth century's most abstruse controversies 
and by its fever of the body; in thrall to dogmatic, narrow 
thinking and at the same time appealing to petty practice in the face 

=====第341页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 313 
of all real thought; raging against reaction, reacting against progress; 
incapable of making the opponent seem ridiculous, but ridiculously 
abusing him through the whole gamut of tones; Solomon and 
Marcolph, Don Quixote and Sancho Panza, a visionary and a phi-
listine in one person; a loutish form of indignation, a form of indig­
nant loutishness; and suspended like an enveloping cloud over it all, 
the self-satisfied philistine's consciousness of his own virtue—such was 
the grobian literature of the sixteenth century. If our memory does 
not deceive us, the German folk anecdote has set up a lyrical monu­
ment to it in the song of Heineke, der starke  Knecht. To Herr Heinzen 
belongs the credit of being one of the re-creators of grobian 
literature and in this field one of the German swallows healding the 
coming springtime of the nations. 
Heinzen's manifesto against the Communists in No. 84 of the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung has been our most immediate instigation in 
studying that degenerate variety of literature whose historically 
interesting aspect for Germany we have indicated. We shall describe 
the literary species represented by Herr Heinzen on the basis of his 
manifesto, exactly as literary historians characterise the writers of the 
sixteenth century from the surviving writings of the sixteenth 
century, for instance the "goose-preacher". 3 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 87, October 31, 1847]* 
Biron. Hide thy head, Achilles: here comes Hector in arms. 
King. Hector was but a Troyan in respect of this. 
Boyet. But is this Hector? 
Dumain. I think Hector was not so clean-timbered. 
Biron. This cannot be Hector. 
Dumain. He's a god or a painter; for he makes faces.** 
But that Herr Heinzen is Hector, of that there is no doubt. 
"I have long been visited," he confesses to us, "by a premonition that I would fall 
by the hand of a communist Achilles. Now that I have been attacked by a Thersites, 
the danger thus averted makes me bold once more," etc. 
Only a Hector can have a premonition that he will fall by the hand 
of an Achilles. 
* My reason for answering Herr Heinzen is not to rebut the attack on Engels. Herr 
Heinzen's article does not need a rebuttal. I am answering because Heinzen's 
manifesto furnishes entertaining material for analysis. K. M. 
** Shakespeare, Love's Labour Lost [Act V, Scene  l]. 135 
a Thomas Murner.—Ed. 

=====第342页=====
314 Karl Marx 
Or did Herr Heinzen derive his picture of Achilles and Thersites 
not from Homer but from Schlegel's translation of Shakespeare? 
If that is so, he assigns to himself the part of Ajax. 
Let us look at Shakespeare's Ajax. 
Ajax. I will beat thee into handsomeness. 
Thersites. I shall sooner rail thee into wit; but thy horse will sooner con an oration 
than thou learn a prayer without book. Thou canst strike, canst thou? a red murrain o' 
thy jade's tricks! 
Ajax. Toadstool, learn me the proclamation. 
Thersites. Thou art proclaimed a fool, I think. 
Ajax. You whoreson cur. 
Thersites. Do, do. 
Ajax. Thou stool for a witch! 
Thersites. Ay, do, do;... thou scurvy-valiant  ass!  thou art here but to thrash Trojans; 
and thou art bought and sold among those of any wit, like a barbarian slave ... a great 
deal of your wit too lies in your sinews, or else there be liars. 
Thersites. A wonder! 
Achilles. What? 
Thersites. Ajax goes up and down the field, asking for  himself. 
Achilles. How so? 
Thersites. He must fight singly tomorrow, and is so prophetically proud of an 
heroical cudgelling that he raves in saying nothing. 
Achilles. How can that be? 
Thersites. Why, he stalks up and down like a peacock, a stride and a stand; 
ruminates like a hostess that hath no arithmetic but her brain to set down her 
reckoning; bites his lip with a politic regard, as who would say "There were wit in this 
head, an 'twould out"... I had rather be a tick in a sheep than such a valiant 
ignorance.* 
Whichever character-mask Herr Heinzen now appears wear­
ing—Hector or Ajax —scarcely has he entered the arena when he 
proclaims to the spectators in a mighty voice that his adversary has 
not dealt him the "coup de grâce". With all the composure and epic 
breadth of an ancient Homeric hero, he expounds the reasons for his 
escape. "I owe my escape," he tells us, "to an error on nature'spart." 
"Nature" has not "fitted" me for my adversary's level. He towers 
over him, the taller by two heads, and that is why the two "swinging 
blows" of his "little executioner" could not reach his "literary neck". 
Herr Engels, it is stressed most emphatically and repeatedly, Herr 
Engels is "little", a "little executioner", a "little person". He then 
says,  with one of those turns of phrase such as we only come across in 
the old heroic lays, or in the puppet play of the giant Goliath and the 
small David: "If you were hanging that high"—from a lamp-
* Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida [Act II, Scene 1 and Act III, Scene 3]. 

=====第343页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 315 
post—"nobody would ever find you again". That is the giant's 
humour, at once whimsical and spine-chilling. 
It is not just his "neck", but his whole "nature", his whole body for 
which Herr Heinzen thus finds "literary" application. He has put his 
"little"  adversary beside him in order to set off his own physical 
perfection in fitting contrast. The deformed  "dwarf"  carries an 
executioner's axe under his tiny arm, perhaps one of those little 
guillotines which were given to children as toys in 1794. He, the 
terrible warrior on the other hand, wields no other weapon in his 
furious-playful arrogance than the—"birch-rod", of which, he 
informs us, he has long made use to "chastise" the "naughtiness" of 
those bad "boys", the Communists. The giant is content to confront 
his "insect-sized foe" as a  pedagogue,  instead of crushing the  rash  little 
fellow underfoot. He is content to speak to him as the  children's  friend, 
to teach him a lesson in morality and reprimand him with the utmost 
severity for vicious wickedness, especially "lying", "silly, puerile 
lying", "insolence", his "boyish tone", lack of respect and other 
shortcomings of youth. And if in the process the schoolmasterly 
warrior's rod sometimes swishes cruelly about the pupil's ears, if 
from time to time over-vigorous language interrupts his moral 
sentences and even partially destroys their effect, one should not for 
a moment forget that a warrior cannot impart moral instruction in 
the same way as ordinary schoolmasters, for example a Quintus 
Fixlein, and that nature comes in again by the window if one chases 
her out of the door. One should furthermore reflect that what would 
repel us as obscenity from the mouth of an elf like Engels, has for ear 
and heart the splendid resonance of nature herself when it comes 
from the mouth of a colossus like Heinzen. And are we to measure 
the language of heroes by the restricted linguistic standards of the 
common citizen? No more so than we should think Homer descends 
to the level of, for instance, grobian literature, when he calls one of 
his favourite heroes, Ajax, "as stiff-necked as an ass". 
The giant's intentions were honest when he showed the Commu­
nists his birch-rod in No. 77 of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. a And 
the "little" wretch for whose opinion he did not even ask—several 
times he expresses his warrior-like astonishment at the incom­
prehensible audacity of the pigmy—repaid him so unkindly. "It was 
not intended as a piece of advice," he complains. "Herr Engels 
wants to kill me, he wants to murder me, the wicked man." 
And what of his own part? As when he faced the Prussian 
government, here too he had "enthusiastically begun a battle, in 
a An article by Heinzen published as a statement in the Polemik column.— Ed. 

=====第344页=====
316 Karl Marx 
which he bore peace proposals, a heart of humane reconciliation 
between the opposing forces of the age, beneath his warlike coat".* 
But: "Enthusiasm was dowsed with the acid-sharp water of malice."** 
Isegrim showing his rage and fury, stretched out his paws and 
Came at him with wide-gaping jaws and with powerful leaping. 
Reineke, lighter than he, escaped his raging opponent, 
And then hastily wetted his coarse-haired tail-brush with his 
Acid-sharp water and trailed it through dust to load it with sand-grains. 
Isegrim thought, now he had him at bay! But sly Reineke struck him 
Over the eyes with his tail, preventing him seeing and hearing. 
He had used such a strategem often, many a creature 
Had to his cost felt the noxious force of his acid-sharp water.*** 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 90, November 11, 1847] 
"I have been a republican, Herr Engels, as long as I have concerned myself with 
politics, and my convictions have not been turning about, they have been without 
wavering and fickleness unlike what has gone on in the heads of so many Com­
munists.**** 
"It is true I have only just  become  a revolutionary. It is part of the Communists' tactics 
that, aware of their own incorrigibility, they criticise their adversaries as soon as they cor­
rect themselves."***** 
Herr Heinzen never  became  a republican, he has  been  one since his 
political birth. On his side, therefore, immutability, the immobility of 
a final state, consistency. On the side of his adversaries, wavering, 
fickleness, turning about. Herr Heinzen has not always been a 
revolutionary, he has  become  one. Now, of course, the turning  about  is 
on Herr Heinzen's side, but then the immoral character of turning 
about has been turned about too; it is now known as "correcting 
themselves". On the Communists' side, on the other hand, 
immutability has lost its character of high morality. What has become of 
it? "Incorrigibility." 
Remaining constant or turning about, both are moral, both are 
immoral; moral on the side of the philistine, immoral on the side of 
his adversary. For the art of the philistine as critic consists in calling 
out rouge et noir» at the right time, the right word at the right time. 
* Karl Heinzen, [Ein]  Steckbrief. 
** Ibid. 
*** Goethe, Reineke Fuchs [Canto Twelve]. 
**** Heinzen's Manifesto, Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 84. 
***** Ibid. 
a Red and black (as at the gaming table) was given in the errata in the November 
18 issue instead of the original "wohl und weh" — good and bad.— Ed. 

=====第345页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 317 
Ignorance is generally considered a fault. We are accustomed to 
regard it as a negative quantity. Let us observe how the magic wand of 
the philistine as critic converts a minus quantity of intelligence into a 
plus quantity of morality. 
Herr Heinzen reports amongst other things that he is still just as 
ignorant of philosophy as in 1844. Hegel's "language" he has 
"continued to find indigestible". 
So much for the facts of the matter. Now for the moral processing 
of them. 
Because Herr Heinzen has always found Hegel's language "indi­
gestible", he has not, like "Engels and others", succumbed to the 
immoral arrogance of ever priding himself on that same Hegelian 
language, any more than, by all accounts so far, Westphalian 
peasants "pride themselves" on the Sanskrit language. However, 
true moral behaviour consists in avoiding the motivation for immoral 
behaviour, and how can one better secure oneself against immoral 
"priding  oneself"  on a language than by taking good care not to 
understand that language! 
Herr Heinzen, who knows nothing of philosophy, has for that 
reason, as he thinks, not attended the philosophers' "school" either. 
His school was "sound common sense" and the "fulness of life". 
"At the same time," he exclaims with the modest pride of the just, "this has 
preserved me from the danger of denying my school." 
There is no more proven remedy for the moral danger of denying 
one's school than not going to school! 
Any development, whatever its substance may be, can be 
represented as a series of different stages of development that are 
connected in such a way that one forms the negation of the other. If, 
for example, a people develops from absolute monarchy to 
constitutional monarchy, it negates its former political being. In no 
sphere can one undergo a development without negating one's 
previous mode of existence. Negating translated into the language of 
morality means: denying. 
Denying! With this catchword the philistine as critic can condemn 
any development without understanding it; he can solemnly set up 
his undevelopable undevelopment beside it as moral immaculate-
ness.  Thus the religious phantasy of the nations has by and large 
stigmatised history, by transposing the age of innocence, the golden 
age, into pre-history, into the time when no historical development at 
all took place, and hence no negating and no denying. Thus in noisy 
eras of revolution, in times of strong, passionate negation and denial, 
as in the 18th century, there emerge honest, well-meaning men, 

=====第346页=====
318 Karl Marx 
well-bred, respectable satyrs like  Gessner,  who oppose the undevelop­
able state of the idylls to the corruption of history. It should 
nevertheless be observed to the credit of these idyll-poets, who were 
also critical moralists and moralising critics of a kind, that they 
conscientiously waver as to who should be accorded the palm of 
morality, the shepherd or the sheep. 
But let us leave our worthy philistine undisturbed to pasture on 
his own diligence! Let us follow him to where he fancies he attacks 
the "heart of the matter". Throughout we shall find the same 
method. 
"I cannot help it if Herr Engels and other Communists are too blind to realise that 
power also controls property and that injustice in  property  relations is only maintained by 
power.—I call any man a fool and a coward who bears the bourgeois malice on account 
of his acquisition of money and lets a king be on account of his acquisition of power." * 
"Power also controls property!" 
Property, at all events, is also a kind of power. Economists call 
capital, for instance, "power over the labour of others". 
We are therefore faced with two kinds of power, on the one hand 
the power of property, in other words, of the property-owners, on 
the other hand political power, the power of the state. "Power also 
controls property" means: property does not control the political 
power but rather it is harassed by it, for example by arbitrary taxes, 
by confiscations, by privileges, by the disruptive interference of the 
bureaucracy in industry and trade and the like. 
In other words: the bourgeoisie has not yet taken political shape as 
a class. The power of the state is not yet its own power. In countries 
where the bourgeoisie has already conquered political power and 
political rule is none other than the rule, not of the individual 
bourgeois over his workers, but of the bourgeois class over the whole 
of society, Herr Heinzen's dictum has lost its meaning. The 
propertyless of course remain untouched by political rule insofar as 
it directly affects property. 
Whilst, therefore, Herr Heinzen fancied he was expressing a truth 
as eternal as it was original, he has only expressed the fact that the 
German bourgeoisie must conquer political power, in other words, 
he says what Engels says, but unconsciously, honestly thinking he is 
saying the opposite. He is only expressing, with some emotion, a 
transient relationship between the German bourgeoisie and the 
German state power^ as an eternal truth, and thereby showing how to 
make a "solid core" out of a "movement". 
* Heinzen's Manifesto, No. 84 of the D[eutsche]-B[rvsseler]-Z[eitung]. 

=====第347页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 319 
"Injustice in property relations," continues Herr Heinzeri, "is only 
maintained by power." 
Either Herr Heinzen here understands "injustice in property 
relations" as the above-mentioned pressure to which the absolute 
monarchy still subjects the bourgeoisie even in its "most sacred" 
interests, in which case he is only repeating what has just been 
said—or he understands "injustice in property relations" as the 
economic conditions of the workers, in which case his pronounce­
ment has the following meaning: 
The present  bourgeois  property relations are "maintained" by the 
state power which the bourgeoisie has organised for the protection 
of its property relations. The proletariat must therefore overthrow 
the political power where it is already in the hands of the 
bourgeoisie. It must itself become a power, in the first place a 
revolutionary power. 
Again, Herr Heinzen is unconsciously saying the same thing as 
Engels is saying, but again in the steadfast conviction that he is saying 
the opposite. What he says he does not mean, and what he means he 
does not say. 
Incidentally, if the bourgeoisie is politically, that is, by its state 
power, "maintaining injustice in property relations", it is not creating 
it. The "injustice in property relations" which is determined by the 
modern division of labour, the modern form of exchange, competi­
tion, concentration, etc., by no means arises from the political rule of 
the bourgeois class, but vice versa, the political rule of the bourgeois 
class arises from these modern relations of production which 
bourgeois economists proclaim to be necessary and eternal laws. If 
therefore the proletariat overthrows the political rule of the 
bourgeoisie, its victory will only be temporary, only an element in the 
service of the bourgeois revolution  itself,  as in the year 1794, as long as 
in the course of history, in its "movement", the material conditions 
have not yet been created which make necessary the abolition of the 
bourgeois mode of production and therefore also the definitive 
overthrow of the political rule of the bourgeoisie. The terror in 
France could thus by its mighty hammer-blows only serve to spirit 
away, as it were, the ruins of feudalism from French soil. The timidly 
considerate bourgeoisie would not have accomplished this task in 
decades. The bloody action of the people thus only prepared the way 
for it. In the same way, the overthrow of the absolute monarchy 
would be merely temporary if the economic conditions for the rule 
of the bourgeois class had not yet become ripe. Men build a new 
world for themselves, not from the "treasures of this earth", as 
grobian superstition imagines, but from the historical achievements 

=====第348页=====
320 Karl Marx 
of their declining world. In the course of their development they 
first have to produce the material conditions of a newa society  itself,  and 
no exertion of mind or will can free them from this fate. 
It is characteristic of the whole grobianism of "sound common 
sense", which feeds upon the "fulness of life" and does not stunt its 
natural faculties with any philosophical or other studies, that where it 
succeeds in seeing differences, it does not see unity, and that where it 
sees unity, it does not see differences. If it propounds differentiated 
determinants, they at once become fossilised in its hands, and it can see 
only the most reprehensible sophistry when these wooden concepts 
are knocked together so that they take fire. 
When Herr Heinzen, for instance, says that money and power, 
property  and rule, theacquisition of  money  and the acquisition of power are 
not the same, he is committing a  tautology  inherent in the mere words 
themselves, and this merely verbal differentiation he considers an 
heroic deed which with all the faculties of a clairvoyant he brings into 
play against the Communists, who are so "blind" as not to stop in 
their tracks at this childlike first perception. 
How "acquisition of money" turns into "acquisition of power", 
how "property" turns into "political rule", in other words, how 
instead of the rigid difference to which Herr Heinzen gives the force 
of dogma, there are rather effective relations between the two forces 
up to the point where they merge, of this he may swiftly convince 
himself by observing how the serfs bought their freedom, how the 
communes 136 bought their municipal rights, how the townspeople on 
the one hand, by trade and industry, attracted the money out of the 
pockets of the feudal lords and vaporised their landed property into 
bills of exchange, and on the other hand helped the absolute 
monarchy to its victory over the thus undermined feudal magnates, 
and bought privileges from it; how they later themselves exploited the 
financial crises of the absolute monarchy  itself,  etc., etc.; how the 
most absolute monarchies become dependent on the stock-exchange 
barons through the system of state debts—a product of modern 
industry and modern trade; how in international relations between 
peoples, industrial monopoly turns directly into political rule, as for 
instance, the Princes of the Holy Alliance in the "German war of 
liberation" were merely the hired mercenaries of England,137 etc., 
etc. 
This self-important grobianism of "sound common sense", 
however, by fixing such distinctions as between acquisition of money 
a The word "new" was given in the errata in the November 18 issue instead of the 
original "more developed".— Ed. 

=====第349页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 321 
and acquisition of power in the form of eternal truths whose nature is 
"acknowledged by all" to be "such and such", in the form of 
unshakeable dogmas, creates for itself the desired position for 
pouring out its moral indignation about the "blindness", "foolish­
ness"  or "wickedness" of the opponents of such articles of faith—an 
act of self-indulgence which in its blustering expectorations inevita­
bly yields up a mess of rhetoric in which float a few meagre, bony 
truths. 
Herr Heinzen will live to see the power of property even in Prussia 
achieve a mariage forcé 3 with political power. Let us hear what he says 
next: 
"You are trying to make social questions the central concern of our age, and you fail 
to see that there is no more important social question than that of monarchy or republic."* 
A moment ago, Herr Heinzen saw only the distinction between the 
power of money and political power; now he sees only the unity of 
the political question and the  social  question. Of course he continues 
to see the "ridiculous blindness" and "cowardly ignominy" of his 
antagonists. 
The political relationships of men are of course also social, societal 
relationships, like all relations between men and men. All questions 
that concern the relations of men with each other are therefore also 
social questions. 
With this view, which belongs in a catechism for eight-year-old 
children, this grobian naivety believes it has not only said something 
but has affected the balance in the conflicts of modern times. 
It so happens that the "social questions" which have been "dealt 
with in our own day" increase in importance in proportion as we leave 
behind us the realm of absolute monarchy. Socialism and commun­
ism did not emanate from Germany but from England, France and 
North America. 
The first manifestation of a truly active communist party is 
contained within the bourgeois revolution, at the moment when the 
constitutional monarchy is eliminated. The most consistent republi­
cans, in England the Levellers,138  in France  Babeuf,  Buonarroti, etc., 
were the first to proclaim these "social questions". The Babeuf 
Conspiracy, by Babeufs friend and party-comrade Buonarroti, b 
shows how these republicans derived from the "movement" of 
* Heinzen's Manifesto, No. 84 [of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung]. 
d Forced marriage.—Ed. 
b Ph. Buonarroti, Conspiration pour l'égalité dite de  Babeuf. — Ed. 

=====第350页=====
322 Karl Marx 
history the realisation that the disposal of the social question of rule  by 
princes and republic did not mean that even a single "social question" 
has been solved in the interests of the proletariat. 
The question of property as it has been raised in "our own day" is 
quite unrecognisable even formulated as a question in the form 
Heinzen gives it: "whether it is just that one man should possess 
everything and another man nothing..., whether the individual  should 
be permitted to possess anything at all" and similar simplistic questions 
of conscience and clichés about justice. 
The question of property assumes different forms according to 
the different levels of development of industry in general and 
according to its particular level of development in the different 
countries. 
For the Galician peasant, for instance, the question of property is 
reduced to the transformation of feudal landed property into small 
bourgeois landownership. For him it has the same meaning as it had 
for the French peasant before 1789, the English agricultural day 
labourer on the other hand has no relationship with the landowner 
at all. He merely has a relationship with the tenant farmer, in other 
words, with the industrial capitalist who is practising agriculture in 
factory fashion. This industrial capitalist in turn, who pays the 
landowner a rent, has on the other hand a direct relationship with 
the landowner. The abolition of landed property is thus the most 
important question of property as it exists for the English industrial 
bourgeoisie, and their struggle against the Corn Laws139 had no 
other significance. The abolition of capital on the other hand is the 
question of property as it affects the English agricultural day 
labourer just as much as the English factory worker. 
In the English as well as the French revolution, the question of 
property presented itself in such a way that it was a matter of 
asserting free competition and of abolishing all feudal property 
relations, such as landed estates, guilds, monopolies, etc., which had 
been transformed into fetters for the industry which had developed 
from the 16th to the 18th century. 
In "our own day", finally, the significance of the question of 
property consists in it being a matter of eliminating the conflicts 
which have arisen from large-scale industry, the development of the 
world market and free competition. 
The question of property, depending on the different levels of 
development of industry, has always been the vital question for a 
particular class. In the 17th and 18th centuries, when the point at 
issue was the abolition of feudal property relations, the question 
of property was the vital question for the bourgeois class. In the 

=====第351页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 323 
19th century, when it is a matter of abolishing bourgeois property 
relations, the question of property is a vital question for the working 
class. 
The question of property, which in "our own day" is a question of 
world-historical significance, has thus a meaning only in modern 
bourgeois  society.  The more advanced this society is, in other words, 
the further the bourgeoisie has developed economically in a country 
and therefore the more state power has assumed a bourgeois 
character, the more glaringly does the  social  question obtrude  itself, 
in France more glaringly than in Germany, in England more 
glaringly than in France, in a constitutional monarchy more glaringly 
than in an absolute monarchy, in a republic more glaringly than in a 
constitutional monarchy. Thus, for example, the conflicts of the 
credit system, speculation, etc., are nowhere more acute than in 
North America. Nowhere, either, does  social  inequality obtrude itself 
more harshly than in the eastern states of North America, because 
nowhere is it less disguised by political inequality. If pauperism has 
not yet developed there as much as in England, this is explained 
by economic circumstances which it is not our task to elucidate 
further here. Meanwhile, pauperism is making the most gratifying 
progress. 
"In this country, where there are no privileged orders, where all  classes  of society 
have equal rights" (the difficulty however lies in the existence of  classes)  "and where our 
population is far from ... pressing on the means of subsistence, it is indeed alarming to 
find the increase of pauperism progressing with such rapidity." (Report by Mr. 
Meredith to the Pennsylvania Congress. ) 
"It is proved that pauperism in Massachusetts has increased by three-fifths within 
25 years." (From Niles' Register, Niles being an American.3) 
One of the most famous North American political economists, 
Thomas Cooper, who is also a radical, proposes: 
1. To prohibit those without property from marrying. 
2. To abolish universal suffrage, 
for, he exclaims: 
"Society was instituted for the protection of property.... What reasonable claim can 
they have, who by eternal economic laws will eternally be without property of their 
own, to legislate on the property of others? What common motive and common 
interest is there between these two  classes  of inhabitants? 
"Either the working class is not revolutionary, in which case it represents the 
interests of the employers, on whom their livelihood depends. At the last election in 
New England, the master-manufacturers, to ensure votes for themselves, had the 
candidates' names printed on calico, and each of their workers wore such a piece of 
calico on their trouser-fronts. 
a Niles' Weekly Register.— Ed. 
IL>—ISL'6 

=====第352页=====
324 Karl Marx 
"Or the working class becomes revolutionary, as a consequence of communal living 
together, etc., and then the political power of  the country  will sooner or later fall into its 
hands,  and no property will be safe any more under this system."* 
Just as in England the workers form a political party under the 
name of the Chartists, so do the workers in North America under the 
name of the National Reformers142 and their batde-cry is not at all rule  of 
the princes or the republic, but rule of  the working  class  or the rule of  the 
bourgeois  class. 
Since therefore it is precisely in modern bourgeois society with its 
corresponding forms of state, the constitutional or republican 
representative state, that the "question of property" has become the 
most important "social question", it is very much the narrow need of 
the German bourgeois that interjects: the question of the monarchy is 
the most important "socialquestion of the time". It is in a very similar 
way that Dr. List, in the foreword to his Nationalökonomie* expresses 
his so naïve irritation that pauperism and not protective tariffs should 
have been "misconstrued" as the most important social question of 
our time. 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 92, November 18, 1847] 
The ^distinction between money and power was at the same time a 
personal distinction between die two combatants. 
The "litde" one appears as a kind of cut-purse who only takes on 
enemies who have "money". The daring muscle-man by contrast 
fights with the "mighty" of this earth. 
Indosso la corazza, e l'elmo in testa.** 
And, he mutters, 
"and incidentally, you are better off than I".*** 
But best off of all are the "mighty" of the earth who visibly heave a 
sigh of relief whilst Herr Heinzen lashes out at his pupil: 
"Like all Communists, you have now lost the capacity to  recognise  the connection be­
tween  politics and  social  conditions."**** 
We have just been present at a moral lesson, in which the great 
man revealed with surprising simplicity the connection between 
* Thomas Cooper, Lectures on  [the  Elements of] Political  Economy,  Columbia, 
pp. 361 &  365.141 
** Ariost[o, L'lOrlando Furioso [Canto I, 11]: Harness on his back and helmet on 
his head. 
*** Heinzen's Manifesto, Deutsche-Brüsseler-ZeitungNo. 84. 
**** Ibid. 
a F. List, Das nationale System der politischen Oekonomie. — Ed. 

=====第353页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 325 
politics and social conditions in general. In the rule of  the princeshe now 
provides his pupil with a tangible application. 
The princes, or the rule of the princes, he tells us, are the "chief 
authors of all poverty and distress". Where the rule of the princes is 
eliminated, this kind of explanation is of course eliminated too, and 
the slave-economy, which caused the downfall of the republics of 
antiquity, the slave-economy, which will provoke the most fearful 
conflicts in the southern states of republican North America,* the 
slave-economy can exclaim, like John  Falstaff,  "if reasons were as 
plenty as blackberries!"3 
And in the first place, who or what has created the princes or the 
rule of the princes} 
Once upon a time, the people had to place the most eminent 
personalities at their head to conduct general affairs. Later, this 
position became hereditary within families, etc. And eventually the 
stupidity and depravity of men tolerated this abuse for centuries. 
If one were to summon a congress of all the most primitive 
would-be politicians in Europe, they would be able to give no other 
answer. And if one were to open all Herr Heinzen's works, they 
would provide no other answer. 
Doughty "sound common sense" believes it explains the rule of 
princes by declaring itself opposed to it. The difficulty, from the 
standpoint of this norm of common sense, would, however, seem to 
consist in explaining how the opponent of sound common sense and 
of the moral dignity of man was born and how he dragged out his 
remarkably tenacious life for centuries. Nothing is simpler. The cen­
turies did without sound common sense and the moral dignity of 
man. In other words, the sense and morality of centuries were in ac­
cordance with the rule of the princes instead of contradicting it. And 
it is precisely this sense and morality of past centuries which today's 
"sound common sense" does not understand. It does not understand 
it, but despises it. It takes refuge from history in morality, and 
now it can allow free rein to the whole armoury of its moral indig­
nation. 
In the same way as political "sound common sense" here explains 
the origin and continued existence of the rule of the princes as the 
work of unreason, in the same way does religious "sound common 
sense" explain heresy and unbelief as works of the devil. In the same 
* Cf. on this topic the memoirs of Jefferson, who was one of the group of 
founders of the American Republic and was twice president. 
a Shakespeare, Henry IV, Part One, Act II, Scene 4.— Ed. 
12* 

=====第354页=====
326 Karl Marx 
way, irreligious "sound common sense" explains religion as the work 
of the devils, the priests. 
However, once Herr Heinzen has by means of moral platitudes 
proved the origin of the rule of the princes, the "connection between 
the rule of the princes and social conditions" follows quite naturally 
from this. Listen: 
"An individual man takes possession of the state for  himself,  sacrifices a whole 
nation, more or less, not just materially, but morally too, to his own person and its 
entourage; institutes within it a scale of humiliation by degrees, classifies it variously 
into estates  like so many fat and lean cattle, and basically just for the benefit of his own, 
individual person makes each member of the state society officially the enemy of the 
other."* 
Herr Heinzen sees the princes at the peak of the social structure in 
Germany. He does not for a moment doubt that they have created its 
social foundation and are re-creating it each day. What simpler 
explanation could there be for the connection between the monarchy 
and social conditions, whose official political expression it is, than by 
having the princes create this connection! What is the connection 
between the representative assemblies and modern bourgeois society 
which they represent? They created it. The political deity with its 
apparatus and gradations has thus created the secular world, whose 
most sacred object it is. In the same way the religious deity will have 
created earthly conditions, which are fantastically and in deified 
form reflected in it. 
The grobianism which retails such homespun wisdom with 
appropriate sentiment cannot of course fail to be equally astonished 
and morally outraged at the opponent who toils to demonstrate to it 
that the apple did not create the apple-tree. 
Modern histories have demonstrated that absolute monarchy ap­
pears in those transitional periods when the old feudal estates are 
in decline and the medieval estate of burghers is evolving into the 
modern bourgeois class, without one of the contending parties 
having as yet finally disposed of the other. The elements on which 
absolute monarchy is based are thus by no means its own product; 
they rather form its social prerequisite, whose historical origins are 
too well known to be repeated here. The fact that absolute monarchy 
took shape later in Germany and is persisting longer, is explained 
solely by the stunted pattern of development of the German 
bourgeois class. The answers to the puzzles presented by this pattern 
of development are to be found in the history of trade and industry. 
The decline of the philistine German free cities, the destruction 
of the knightly estate, the defeat of the peasants143—the resulting 
* Heinzen's Manifesto, loc. cit. 

=====第355页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 327 
territorial sovereignty of the princes—the decay of German industry 
and German trade, which were founded entirely on medieval 
conditions, at the very moment when the modern world market is 
opening up and large-scale manufacturing is arising—the depopula­
tion and the barbaric conditions which the Thirty Years War144  had 
left behind—the character of the national branches of industry 
which are now rising again—as of the small linen industry—to which 
patriarchal conditions and relations correspond, the nature of 
exported goods which for the most part derived from agriculture, 
and which therefore went almost exclusively to increase the material 
sources of wealth of the rural aristocracy and therefore its relative 
power vis-à-vis the townspeople—Germany's lowly position in the 
world market in general, as a result of which the subsidies paid by 
foreigners to the princes became a chief source of the national 
income, the dependence of the townspeople upon the court 
consequent upon this—etc., etc., all these relationships, within which 
the structure of German society and a political organisation in 
keeping with it were taking shape become, in the eyes of 
sound-common-sensical grobianism, just a few pithy utterances, 
whose pith however consists in the statement that the "rule of the 
princes in Germany" has created "German society" and is "re­
creating" it each day. 
The optical illusion, which enables sound common sense to 
"discern" the springhead of German society in the rule of the 
princes instead of the springhead of the rule of the princes in 
German society, is easily explained. 
It perceives at first glance—and it always considers its first glance 
to be particularly perceptive—that the German princes are pre­
serving and maintaining control over the old social conditions in 
Germany with which their political existence stands and falls, and 
that they react violently against the elements of decomposition. 
Equally, it sees on the other hand the elements of decomposition 
fighting against the power of the princes. The five sound senses thus 
unanimously testify that the rule of the princes is the  basis  of the old 
society, of its gradations, its prejudices and its contradictions. 
When looked at more closely, these appearances however only 
refute the crude opinion of which they are the innocent occasion. 
The violently reactionary role played by the rule of the princes 
only proves that in the pores of the old society a new society has 
taken shape, which furthermore cannot but feel the political 
shell—the natural covering of the old society—as an unnatural fetter 
and blow it sky-high. The more primitive these new elements of 
social decomposition, the more conservative will even the most 

=====第356页=====
328 Karl Marx 
vigorous reaction by the old political power appear. The more 
advanced these new elements of social decomposition, the more 
reactionary will even the most harmless attempt at conservation by 
the old political power appear. The reaction of the rule of the 
princes, instead of proving that it creates the old society, proves 
rather that its day is over as soon as the material conditions of the old 
society have become obsolete. Its reaction is at the same time the 
reaction of the old society which is still the official society and 
therefore also still in official  possession  of power or in possession of 
official power. 
Once society's material conditions of existence have developed so 
far that the transformation of its official political form has become a 
vital necessity for it, the whole physiognomy of the old political 
power is transformed. Thus absolute monarchy now attempts, not to 
centralise, which was its actual progressive function, but to decentralise. 
Born from the defeat of the feudal estates and having the most active 
share in their destruction  itself,  it now seeks to retain at least the 
semblance of feudal distinctions. Formerly encouraging trade and 
industry and thereby at the same time the rise of the bourgeois class, 
as necessary conditions both for national strength and for its own 
glory, absolute monarchy now everywhere hampers trade and 
industry, which have become increasingly dangerous weapons in the 
hands of an already powerful bourgeoisie. From the town, the 
birth-place of its rise to power, it turns its alarmed and by now dull 
glance to the countryside which is fertile with the corpses of its old 
powerful opponents. 
But by "the connection between politics and social conditions" 
Herr Heinzen actually understands only the connection between the 
rule of the princes in Germany and the distress and misery in 
Germany. 
The monarchy, like every other form of state, is a direct burden on 
the working class on the material side only in the form of  taxes.  Taxes 
are the existence of the state expressed in economic terms. Civil 
servants and priests, soldiers and ballet-dancers, schoolmasters and 
police constables, Greek museums and Gothic steeples, civil list and 
services list—the common seed within which all these fabulous beings 
slumber in embryo is taxation. 
And what reasoning citizen would not have referred the starving 
people to taxes, to the ill-gotten gains of the princes, as the source of 
its misery? 
The German princes and Germany's distress! In other words, 
taxes on which the princes gorge themselves and which the people 
pay with their sweat and blood! 

=====第357页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 329 
What inexhaustible material for speechifying saviours of mankind! 
The monarchy is the cause of great expenditure. No doubt. Just 
consider the North American national budget and compare what our 
38 petty fatherlands have to pay in order to be governed and 
disciplined! It is not the Communists who answer the thunderous 
outbursts of such self-important demagogy, no, it is the bourgeois 
economists such as Ricardo, Senior, etc., in just two words. 
The economic existence of the state is taxes. 
The economic existence of the worker is wages. 
To be ascertained: the relationship between taxes and wages. 
Competition necessarily reduces the average wage to the minimum, 
that is to say, to a wage which permits the workers penuriously to eke 
out their lives and the lives of their race. Taxes form a part of this 
minimum, for the political calling of the workers consists precisely in 
paying taxes. If all taxes which bear on the working class were 
abolished root and branch, the necessary consequence would be the 
reduction of wages by the whole amount of taxes which today goes 
into them. Either the employers' profit would rise as a direct 
consequence by the same quantity, or else no more than an alteration 
in the form of tax-collecting would have taken place. Instead of the 
present system, whereby the capitalist also advances, as part of 
the wage, the taxes which the worker has to pay, he [the capitalist] 
would no longer pay them in this roundabout way, but directly to 
the state. 
If in North America wages are higher than in Europe, this is by no 
means the consequence of lower taxes there. It is the consequence of 
the territorial, commercial and industrial situation there. The 
demand for workers in relation to the supply of workers is 
significantly greater than in Europe. And any novice knows the truth 
of this already from Adam Smith. 
For the bourgeoisie on the other hand both the way in which taxes 
are distributed and levied, and the use to which they are put, are a 
vital question, both on account of its influence on trade and industry 
and because taxes are the golden cord with which to strangle the 
absolute monarchy. 
Having provided such profound insights into "the connection 
between politics and social conditions" and between "class relations" 
and the power of the state, Herr Heinzen cries out in triumph: 
"The 'narrow-minded communist view' which only treats people in terms of 
'classes' and incites them against one another according to their 'craft', is something I 
must confess I have been innocent of in my revolutionary propaganda, because I 
make allowance for the 'possibility' that 'humanity' is not always determined by 'class' 
or the 'size of one's purse'." 

=====第358页=====
330 Karl Marx 
"Grobianist" common sense transforms the distinction between 
classes into the "distinction between the size of purses" and class 
contradictions into "craft-bickering". The size of one's purse is a 
purely quantitative distinction whereby any two individuals of the 
same class may be incited against one another at will. That the 
medieval guilds opposed each other "according to their craft" is 
common knowledge. But it is equally common knowledge that 
modern class distinctions are by no means based upon "craft" but 
rather that the division of labour brings about very different modes of 
work within the same class. 
And this, his own "narrow-minded view", derived entirely from 
his very own "fulness of life" and his very own "sound common 
sense" is what Herr Heinzen humorously calls a "narrow-minded 
communist view". 
But let us for a moment assume that Herr Heinzen knows what he 
is talking about, that he is therefore not talking about "the distinction 
between the size" of purses and "craft-bickering". 
It is perfectly "possible" that what individual persons do is not "al­
ways"  determined by the class to which they belong, although this is 
no more crucial to the class struggle than an aristocrat going over to 
the tiers-état was crucial to the French Revolution. And then these 
aristocrats at least joined a specific class, the revolutionary class, the 
bourgeoisie. But for Herr Heinzen all classes melt away before the 
solemn concept of "humanity". 
However, if Herr Heinzen believes that whole  classes  which are 
based on economic conditions independent of their own will and are 
forced into the most virulent contradiction by these conditions, can 
by means of the quality of "humanity", which attaches to all men, 
shed their real relationships, how easy must it be for one particular 
prince to rise by the power of "humanity" above his "princely 
condition", above his "princely craft"? Why then does he resent it 
when Engels discerns a "good Emperor Joseph" behind his 
revolutionary phrases? 
But if on the one hand Herr Heinzen obliterates all differences, by 
addressing himself vaguely to the "humanity" of the Germans, 
which would oblige him to include the princes in his exhortations 
too, on the other hand he nevertheless finds himself compelled to 
acknowledge the existence of one difference amidst German humanity, 
for without a difference there can be no contradiction and without a 
contradiction there can be no material for political sermonising. 
So Herr Heinzen divides German humanity into princes and 
subjects.  The perception and expression of this contradiction is on his 
part an exhibition of moral strength, a proof of personal daring, 

=====第359页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 331 
political understanding, outraged human feeling, serious-minded 
perspicacity and laudable bravery. And it would be a sign of 
intellectual blindness, of a policeman's mentality, to point out that 
there are privileged and unprivileged subjects; that the former by no 
means see humiliating gradations in the political hierarchy, but an 
elevating, upward line; that finally amongst the subjects whose 
subjection is considered a fetter, it is however considered a fetter in 
very different ways. 
Along come the "narrow-minded" Communists now and see not 
only the political difference between prince and subject but also the 
social difference between classes. 
Whereas Herr Heinzen's moral greatness a moment before 
consisted in perceiving and expressing the difference, his greatness 
now consists rather in overlooking it, averting his eyes from it and 
hushing it up. Expression of the contradiction ceases to be the 
language of revolution and becomes the language of reaction and 
the malicious "incitement" of brothers, united in their humanity, 
against one another. 
It is common knowledge that shortly after the July revolution, the 
victorious bourgeoisie, in the September Laws, made the "incitement 
of the various classes of the nation against each other" a serious 
political offence, probably for reasons of "humanity" too, with 
penalties of imprisonment, fines, etc.145 It is also common knowledge 
that the English bourgeois journals know no better way of 
denouncing the Chartist leaders and Chartist writers than by 
accusing them of inciting the various classes of the nation against 
each other. It is even common knowledge that German writers are 
lying in deep dungeons for this incitement of the various classes of 
the nation against each other. 
Is not Herr Heinzen now speaking the language of the French 
September Laws, of the English bourgeois papers and the Prussian 
criminal code? 
Not a bit of it. The well-meaning Herr Heinzen fears only that the 
Communists "were seeking to ensure the princes a revolutionary 
fontanel". 146 
Thus the Belgian liberals assure us that the radicals have a 
secret understanding with the Catholics; the French liberals assure 
us that the democrats have an understanding with the legitimists; 
the English free traders assure us that the Chartists have an 
understanding with the Tories. And the liberal Herr Heinzen 
assures us that the Communists have an understanding with the 
princes. 
Germany, as I already made clear in the Deutsch-Französische 

=====第360页=====
332 Karl Marx 
Jahrbücher,3  has its own Christian-Germanic brand of bad luck. Its 
bourgeoisie has got so very far behind the times that it is beginning 
its struggle against absolute monarchy and seeking to create the 
foundation for its own political power at the moment when in all 
advanced countries the bourgeoisie is already engaged in the most 
violent struggle with the working class and when its political illusions 
are already antiquated in the European mind. In this country, where 
the political wretchedness of the absolute monarchy still persists with 
its whole appendage of run-down, semi-feudal estates and relation­
ships,  there also already partially exist, on the other hand, as a 
consequence of industrial development and Germany's dependence 
on the world market, the modern contradictions between bour­
geoisie and working class and the struggle that results from 
them—examples are the workers' uprisings in Silesia and Bohe­
mia. 147 The German bourgeoisie therefore already finds itself in 
conflict with the proletariat even before being politically constituted 
as a class. The struggle between the "subjects" has broken out even 
before princes and aristocracy have been chased out of the country, 
all the songs sung at Hambach148 notwithstanding. 
Herr Heinzen can think of no other explanation for these 
contradictory circumstances, which of course are also reflected in 
German literature, except by laying them on his opponents' 
consciences  and interpreting them as a consequence of the counter­
revolutionary activity of the Communists. 
The German workers meanwhile know very well that the absolute 
monarchy does not waver for a moment, nor can it do so, in greeting 
them, in the service of the bourgeoisie, with cannon-balls and 
whip-lashes. Why, then, should they prefer the brutal harassment of 
the absolute government with its semi-feudal retinue to direct 
bourgeois rule?  The workers know very well that it is not just politically 
that the bourgeoisie will have to make broader concessions to them 
than the absolute monarchy, but that in serving the interests of its 
trade and industry it will create, willy-nilly, the conditions for the 
uniting of the working class, and the uniting of the workers is the 
first requirement for their victory. The workers know that the 
abolition of bourgeois property relations is not brought about by 
preserving those of feudalism. They know that the revolutionary 
movement of the bourgeoisie against the feudal estates and the 
absolute monarchy can only accelerate their own revolutionary 
movement. They know that their own struggle against the bourgeoi-
a See K. Marx, "Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law". 
Introduction (present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 175-87).—Ed. 

=====第361页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 333 
sie can only dawn with the day when the bourgeoisie is victorious. De­
spite all this they do not share Herr Heinzen's bourgeois illusions. 
They can and must accept the  bourgeois  revolutions a precondition for 
the workers'  revolution. However, they cannot for a moment regard it as 
their ultimate goal. 
That the workers really react in this way has been magnificently 
exemplified by the English Chartists in the most recent Anti-Corn 
Law League movement. Not for a moment did they believe the lies 
and inventions of the bourgeois radicals, not for a moment did they 
abandon the struggle against them, but quite consciously helped 
their enemies to victory over the Tories, and on the day after the 
abolition of the Corn Laws they were facing each other at the 
hustings, no longer Tories and free traders, but free traders and 
Chartists. And they won seats in parliament, in opposition to these 
bourgeois radicals.149 
No more than Herr Heinzen understands the workers does he 
understand the bourgeois liberals, for all that he is unconsciously 
working in their service. He thinks it is necessary to repeat, where 
they are concerned, the old warnings against the "easy-going ways 
and submissiveness of the Germans". He, the philistine, takes in 
absolute earnest the obsequious expressions that were served up by a 
Camphausen or a Hansemann. The bourgeois gentlemen would 
smile at such naivety.They know better where the shoe pinches. They 
are aware that in revolutions the  rabble  gets insolent and lays hands 
on things. The bourgeois gentlemen therefore seek as far as possible 
to make the change from absolute to bourgeois monarchy without a 
revolution, in an amicable fashion. 
But the absolute monarchy in Prussia, as earlier in England and 
France, will not let itself be amicably changed into a bourgeois 
monarchy. It will not abdicate amicably. The princes' hands are tied 
both by their personal prejudices and by a whole bureaucracy of 
officials, soldiers and clerics—integral parts of absolute monarchy 
who are far from willing to exchange their ruling position for a 
subservient one in respect of the bourgeoisie. Then the feudal estates 
also hold back; for them it is a question of life or death, in other 
words, of property or expropriation. It is clear that the absolute 
monarch, for all the servile homage of the bourgeoisie, sees his true 
interest on the side of these estates. 
The siren-songs of a Camphausen or a Hansemann will no more 
convince Frederick William IV, therefore, than the honeyed lan­
guage of a Lally-Tollendal, a Mounier, a Malouet or a Mirabeau could 
talk a Louis XVI into casting in his lot with the bourgeoisie rather 
than with the feudal lords and remnants of the absolute monarchy. 

=====第362页=====
334 Karl Marx 
But Herr Heinzen is concerned neither with the bourgeoisie nor 
with the proletariat in Germany. His party is the "party of men", in 
other words, of worthy and generous-minded dreamers who 
advocate "bourgeois" interests in the guise of "human" ends, 
without however clearly understanding the connection between the 
idealistic phrase and its real substance. 
[Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 94, November 25, 1847] 
To this party, the party of men, or to humanity resident in 
Germany, the founder of states Karl Heinzen offers the "best 
republic", the best republic he himself has hatched, the "federal 
republic with social institutions". Rousseau once designed a "best" 
political world for the Poles3 as did Mably for the Corsicans.150 The 
great citizen of Geneva has found an even greater successor. 
"I am contented"—what modesty!—"to claim that just as I can assemble.a flower 
only from petals, so also I can assemble a republic only from republican elements."* 
A man who knows how to assemble a flower from petals, even 
though it were only a daisy, cannot fail in the construction of the 
"best republic", let the wicked world think of it what it will. 
Despite all slanderous tongues, the valiant founder of states takes 
as a model the charters of republican North America. Whatever 
seems offensive to him, he paints out with his grobian brush. Thus 
he brings about an amended edition—in usum delphini,h in other 
words for the use and edification of "German man". And having 
thus "outlined the features of the republic, that is, of a specific 
republic", he hoists his "little" disrespectful pupil up into the air "by 
his communist ears" and dashes him down with the question whether 
he too could "create" a world, and indeed a "best world"? And he 
does not desist from hoisting the "little one" up "into the air" by his 
"communist ears" until he has "banged" his "nose" against the 
gigantic picture of the "new" world, the best republic. For with his 
very own hands he has hung a colossal picture of the world, devised 
by himself,  on the highest peak of the Swiss Alps. 
* Heinzen's Manifesto, Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 84. 
a J. J. Rousseau, Considérations sur le gouvernement de Pologne, et sur sa réformation 
projettée. — Ed. 
For the use of the Dauphin. (These words were used in the second half of the 
seventeenth century to mark the edition of Latin works intended for the heir to the 
French throne, from which "offensive" material had been removed.) — Ed. 

=====第363页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 335 
"Cacatum non est pictum,"* hisses the voice of the impenitent "little" 
snake. 
And horrified, the republican Ajax drops the communist Ther-
sites to the ground and out of his shaggy bosom heaves the— 
terrible words: 
"You are carrying absurdity to extremes, Herr Engels!" 
And really, Herr Engels! Do you not believe "that the American 
federal system" is the "best political form" "which the art of politics 
has yet devised"? You shake your little head? What? You deny 
absolutely that the "American federal system" has been devised by 
"the art of politics"? And that "best political forms of society" exist in 
abstracto?  That's going a bit too far! 
You are at the same time so "devoid of shame and conscience" as 
to suggest to us that the honest German who wishes his faithful 
fatherland to enjoy the benefits of the North American Constitu­
tion—embellished and improved at that, that he resembles that idiotic 
merchant who copied his rich competitor's accounts and then 
imagined that having possession of this copy, he had also taken 
possession of the coveted wealth! 
And you threaten us with the "executioner's axe" under your little 
arm, with the miniature guillotine which you were given as a toy in 
1794? Barbaroux, you mumble, and other persons of impressive 
height and girth, were shortened by a full head in those days when 
we used to play guillotine because they happened to proclaim "the 
American federal system" to be "the best political form".151  And 
such will be the fate of all other Goliaths, to whom it occurs in any 
democratic revolution in Europe and especially in Germany, which is 
still quite feudally fragmented, to wish to put the "American federal 
system" in place of the one indivisible republic and its levelling 
centralisation. 
But good God! The men of the Comité de salut public 152 and those 
bloodhounds of Jacobins behind them were monsters, and Heinzen's 
"best republic" has been "devised" by the "statecraft of heretofore" 
as the "best political form" for "men", for good men, for human 
humans! 
Really! "You are carrying absurdity to the extreme, Herr Engels!" 
And what is more, this Herculean founder of states does not copy 
the North American "federal republic" in every detail. He adorns it 
with "social institutions", he will "regulate property relations 
according to rational principles", and the seven great "measures" 
with which he disposed of the "evils" of the old bourgeois society are 
a "To shit is not to paint." — Ed. 

=====第364页=====
336 Karl Marx 
by no means wretched, insubstantial garbage begged at the doors 
of—abominable modern socialist and communist soup-kitchens. It is 
to the "Incas" and "Campe's Books for Children"153  that the great 
Karl Heinzen owes his recipes for the "humanisation of society", just 
as he owes the latter profound slogan not to the Pomeranian 
philosopher Ruge but rather to some "Peruvian" grown old in 
wisdom. And Herr Engels describes all this as arbitrarily concocted 
philistine dreams of world improvement! 
We live of course in an age when "the better people are 
increasingly passing away" and the "best" are not even understood 
at all. 
Take, for instance, any well-meaning citizen and ask his honest 
opinion as to what is wrong with present "property relations"? And 
the decent fellow will put his index finger to the tip of his nose, twice 
draw deep and pensive breath and then express his "humble" view 
that it is a shame that many people have "nothing", not even the 
barest necessities, and that others, to the detriment not only of 
propertyless wretches but also of honest citizens, are with aristocratic 
brazenness accumulating millions! Aurea mediocritas! Golden medioc­
rity! the honest member of the middle class will exclaim! It is just a 
matter of avoiding extremes! What rational political constitution 
would be compatible with these extremes, these oh so abominable 
extremes! 
And now take a look at Heinzen's "federal republic" with "social 
institutions" and its seven measures for the "humanisation of 
society". We find that each citizen is assured a "minimum" of wealth 
below which he cannot fall, and a maximum of wealth is prescribed 
which he may not exceed. 
Has not Herr Heinzen solved all the difficulties, then, by 
reiterating in the form of state decrees the pious desire of all good 
citizens that no person should have too little and none, indeed, too 
much, and simply by so doing made it reality? 
And in the same manner, which is as simple as it is splendid, Herr 
Heinzen has resolved all economic conflicts. He has regulated 
property according to the rational principles corresponding to an 
honest bourgeois equity. And please do not object that the "rational 
rules"  of property are precisely the "economic laws" on whose 
cold-blooded inevitability all well-meaning "measures" will necessar­
ily founder, though they be recommended by Incas and Campe's 
Books for Children and cherished by the stoutest patriots! 
How unfair to bring economic considerations into play against a 
man who, unlike some people, does not "boast of studies in political 
economy", but has from modesty managed so far in all his works 

=====第365页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 337 
rather to preserve the virginal appearance of still having before him 
his first study of political economy! It must be accounted very much 
to the credit of the man's primitive level of education that with 
solemn countenance he serves up to his little communist foe all the 
considerations which already in 1842 had penetrated to the German 
fulness of life through the channels of the Augsburg Allgemeine 
Zeitung, 154 such as those concerning "acquired" property, "personal 
freedom and individuality" and the like. It really does show how low 
the communist writers have fallen that they seek out opponents who 
are schooled in economics and philosophy, but on the other hand 
provide no answer to the "unpresuming" fancies of grobianist sound 
common sense, to which they would first have to teach the elements 
of the economic relations in existing bourgeois society, in order to be 
able subsequently to enter into debate with it. 
Since private  property,  for instance, is not a simple relation or even 
an abstract concept, a principle, but consists in the totality of the 
bourgeois relations of production—for it is not a question of 
subordinate or extinct but of existing bourgeois private proper­
ty—since all these bourgeois relations of production are class 
relations, an insight which any novice must have acquired from his 
Adam Smith or Ricardo —, a change in, or even the abolition of, 
these relations can only follow from a change in these classes and 
their relationships with each other, and a change in the relationship 
of classes is a historical change, a product of social activity as a whole, 
in a word, the product of a specific "historical movement". 
The writer may very well serve a movement of history as its 
mouthpiece, but he cannot of course create it. 
For example, in order to explain the elimination of feudal 
property relations, modern historians have had to describe how the 
bourgeoisie evolved to the point where it had developed its 
conditions of life sufficiently to be able to eliminate all the feudal 
estates and its own feudal mode of existence and hence also feudal 
production relations, which were the economic foundation of these 
feudal estates. The elimination of feudal property relations and the 
foundation of modern bourgeois society were thus by no means the 
product of a particular doctrine based upon and elaborated from a 
specific principle as its core. It was much more the case that the 
principles and theories put forward by the writers of the bourgeoisie 
during its struggle against feudalism were nothing but the theoreti­
cal expression of a series of real events; indeed one can see that the 
extent to which this expression was more or less Utopian, dogmatic or 
doctrinaire corresponded exactly to the degree of advancement of 
the phase of real historical development. 

=====第366页=====
338 Karl Marx 
And in this respect Engels was rash enough to talk to his terrible 
opponent, the Herculean founder of states, about communism, 
insofar as it is theory, as the theoretical expression of a "movement". 
But, expostulates the mighty man in honest indignation: "My 
purpose was to urge the practical consequences, to get the 'represen­
tatives' of communism to acknowledge those consequences", 
that is, those absurd consequences which, for a man who has 
only fantastic conceptions of bourgeois private property, are 
necessarily linked with its abolition. He thus wanted to compel 
Engels "to defend the whole absurdity" which according to Herr 
Heinzen's worthy scheme "he would have dug up". And Reineke 
Engels has so bitterly disappointed the honest Isegrim that he no 
longer finds in communism itself even a "core" to "bite on" and thus 
asks himself in wonderment "how this phenomenon is to be served 
up, so that it can be eaten"! 
And in vain the honest fellow seeks to calm himself with ingenious 
turns of phrase, for example, by asking whether a historical 
movement is a "movement of the emotions", etc., and even conjures 
up the spirit of the great "Ruge" to interpret this riddle of nature for 
him! 
"After what has happened," the disappointed man exclaims, "my heart is beating 
in a Siberian fashion, after what has happened I smell only treachery and dream of 
malice."* 
And really he explains the affair to himself finally by saying that 
Engels "denies his school", "beats a retreat that is as cowardly as it is 
ridiculous", "compromises the whole human race just so as to save 
his own person from being compromised", "denies the party or 
deserts it at the crucial moment", and a host of similar moralising 
outbursts of fury. Likewise Engels' distinctions between "true 
socialism" and "communism", between the Utopian communist 
systems and critical communism—are all nothing but "treachery and 
malice". Indeed nothing but Jesuitical "after-thought" distinctions, 
because they appear not to have been put at least so far to Herr 
Heinzen, nor to have been blown his way by the tempest of the 
fulness of life! 
And how ingeniously Herr Heinzen manages to interpret these 
contradictions to  himself,  insofar as they have found literary 
expression! 
"Then there is Weitling, who is cleverer than you, and yet can certainly be 
considered a Communist." 
* Karl Heinzen,  Steckbrief. 

=====第367页=====
Moralising Criticism and Critical Morality 339 
Or else: 
"What if Herr Grün claimed to be a Communist and were to expel Herr Engels?" 
Arrived at this point, it goes without saying, the honest fellow, who 
could not "emancipate himself to the extent of considering loyalty 
and faith, outmoded though they might be, to be superfluous 
amongst rational beings"—serves up the most absurd lies, for 
example, that Engels also intended to write about a "social 
movement in Belgium and France". But K[arl] Grün had 
"forestalled him". And then he had been "unable to find a 
publisher for his boring repetition" and other such fabrications 
Herr Heinzen has derived as "conclusions" from a "certain 
principle". 
That moralising criticism has turned out to be so wretched is due 
to its "nature" and is by no means to be regarded as a personal 
shortcoming of the Telamonian Ajax. For all his stupidities and 
baseness, this St. Grobian has the moral satisfaction of being stupid 
and base with conviction and thus being a fellow with some stuffing 
in him. 
Whatever the "facts" may do, which even the great Karl Heinzen 
allows to "run their course" unimpeded: 
"I," he proclaims, thrice beating his honest bosom, "I, meanwhile, bear my 
principle unflinchingly about with me and do not ditch it when a person asks me 
about it." 
Heinrich LXXII of Reuss-Schleitz-Ebersdorf has also been parad­
ing his "principle" some 20 years now. 
N.B.  We would recommend Stephan 'sa critique, Der Heinzen'sche 
Staat, to the readers of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. The author has 
of course only used Herr Heinzen as a peg, he could just as well have 
seized upon any other literary nonentity in Germany to confront the 
reasoning and grumbling petty bourgeois with the viewpoint of the 
really revolutionary worker. Herr Heinzen knows of no other way of 
answering Stephan than by first of all asserting that what he has 
written is rubbish; so much for objective criticism. As he does 
not know Stephan personally, he resorts simply to calling him names 
like gamin and commis-voyageur. h But he has not yet blackened his 
opponent enough, he finally turns him into a policeman. One can see 
incidentally how just this last accusation is, since the French police, 
a Stephan Born.— Ed. 
b Guttersnipe and commercial traveller.— Ed. 

=====第368页=====
340 Karl Marx 
presumably in league with Herr Heinzen, have confiscated 100 
copies of Stephan's pamphlet. 
Having given the worker Stephan a practical moral lesson as 
described above, he apostrophises him in the following ingenuous 
terms: 
"For my own part, gladly though I would have engaged in discussions with a 
worker, I fail to see in insolence a fit substitute for competence."3 
The German workers will feel elated at the prospect of the 
democrat Karl Heinzen engaging in discussions with them as soon as 
they approach the great man with due modesty. Herr Heinzen is 
seeking to conceal his incompetence concerning Herr Stephan by the 
insolence of his outburst. 
K. M. 
Written at the end of October 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in full in English for the 
Zeitung Nos. 86, 87, 90,92 and 94; first time 
October 28 and 31; November 11, 18 
and 25, 1847 
a K. Heinzen, "Ein 'Représentant' der Kommunisten". —Ed. 

=====第369页=====
Frederick Engels 
PRINCIPLES OF COMMUNISM 155 
Question 1: What is communism? 
Answer: Communism is the doctrine of the conditions for the 
emancipation of the proletariat. 
Question 2: What is the proletariat? 
Answer: The proletariat is that class of society which procures its 
means of livelihood entirely and solely from the sale of its labour156 
and not from the profit derived from any capital; whose weal and 
woe,  whose life and death, whose whole existence depend on the 
demand for labour, hence, on the alternation of times of good and 
bad business, on the fluctuations resulting from unbridled competi­
tion. The proletariat, or class of proletarians, is, in a word, the 
working class of the nineteenth century. 
Question 3: Then there have not always been proletarians? 
Answer: No. Poor folk and working classes have always existed,157 
and the working classes have for the most part been poor. But such 
poor, such workers who live under the conditions just stated, that is, 
proletarians, have not always existed, any more than competition has 
always been free and unbridled. 
Question 4: How did the proletariat arise? 
Answer: The proletariat arose as a result of the industrial 
revolution which took place in England in the latter half of the last 
century and which has repeated itself since then in all the civilised 
countries of the world. This industrial revolution was brought about 
by the invention of the steam-engine, of various spinning machines, 
of the power-loom, and of a great number of other mechanical 
devices. These machines which were very expensive and, consequent­
ly, could only be purchased by big capitalists, changed the entire 

=====第370页=====
342 Frederick Engels 
hitherto existing mode of production and supplanted the former 
workers because machines produced cheaper and better commodi­
ties than could the workers with their imperfect spinning-wheels and 
hand-looms. Thus, these machines delivered industry entirely into 
the hands of the big capitalists and rendered the workers' scanty 
property (tools, looms, etc.) quite worthless, so that the capitalists 
soon had their hands on everything and the workers were left with 
nothing. In this way the factory system was introduced into the ma­
nufacture of clothing materials.—Once the impetus had been given 
to the introduction of machinery and the factory system, this system 
was soon applied to all the other branches of industry, notably the 
calico and book-printing trades, pottery, and hardware industry. 
There was more and more division of labour among the individual 
workers, so that the worker who formerly had made a whole article 
now produced only a part of it. This division of labour made it 
possible to supply products more speedily and therefore more 
cheaply. It reduced the activity of each worker to a very simple, 
constantly repeated mechanical operation, which could be performed 
not only just as well but even much better by a machine. In this 
way, all these branches of industry came one after another under the 
domination of steam-power, machinery, and the factory system, just 
like spinning and weaving. But they thus fell at the same time 
completely into the hands of the big capitalists, and here too the 
workers were deprived of the last shred of independence. Gradually, 
in addition to actual manufacture, the handicrafts likewise fell 
increasingly under the domination of the factory system, for here 
also the big capitalists more and more supplanted the small 
craftsmen by the establishment of large workshops, in which many 
savings on costs can be made and there can be a very high division of 
labour. Thus we have now reached the point when in the civilised 
countries almost all branches of labour are carried on under the 
factory system, and in almost all branches handicraft and manufac­
ture have been ousted by large-scale industry.—As a result, the 
former middle classes, especially the smaller master handicraftsmen, 
have been increasingly ruined, the former position of the workers 
has been completely changed, and two new classes which are 
gradually swallowing up all other classes have come into being, 
namely: 
I. The class of big capitalists who already now in all civilised 
countries almost exclusively own all the means of subsistence and the 
raw materials and instruments (machinery, factories, etc.), needed 
for the production of these means of subsistence. This class is the 
bourgeois class or the bourgeoisie. 

=====第371页=====
Principles of Communism 343 
II. The class of the completely propertyless, who are compelled 
therefore to sell their labour to the bourgeois in order to obtain the 
necessary means of subsistence in exchange. This class is called the 
class of the proletarians or the proletariat. 
Question 5: Under what conditions does this sale of the labour of 
the proletarians to the bourgeois take place? 
Answer: Labour is a commodity like any other and its price is 
determined by the same laws as that of any other commodity. The 
price of a commodity under the domination of large-scale industry 
or of free competition, which, as we shall see, comes to the same 
thing, is on the average always equal to the cost of production of that 
commodity. The price of labour is, therefore, likewise equal to the 
cost of production of labour. The cost of production of labour 
consists precisely of the amount of the means of subsistence required 
for the worker to maintain himself in a condition in which he is 
capable of working and to prevent the working class from dying out. 
Therefore, the worker will not receive for his labour any more than 
is necessary for that purpose; the price of labour, or wages, will be 
the lowest, the minimum required for subsistence. Since business is 
now worse, now better, the worker will receive now more, now less, 
just as the factory owner receives now more, now less for his 
commodity. But just as on the average between good times and bad 
the factory owner receives for his commodity neither more nor less 
than the cost of its production, so also the worker will on the average 
receive neither more nor less than this minimum. This economic law 
of wages will come to be more stringently applied the more all 
branches of labour are taken over by large-scale industry. 
Question 6: What working classes existed before the industrial 
revolution? 
Answer: Depending on the different stages of the development of 
society, the working classes lived in different conditions and stood in 
different relations to the possessing and ruling classes. In ancient 
times the working people were the  slaves  of their owners, just as they 
still are in many backward countries and even in the southern part of 
the United States. In the Middle Ages they were the serfs of the 
landowning nobility, just as they still are in Hungary, Poland, and 
Russia. In the Middle Ages and up to the industrial revolution there 
were in the towns also journeymen in the service of petty-bourgeois 
craftsmen, and with the development of manufacture there gradual­
ly emerged manufactory workers, who were already employed 
by the bigger capitalists. 
Question 7: In what way does the proletarian differ from the slave? 
Answer: The slave is sold once and for all, the proletarian has to sell 

=====第372页=====
344 Frederick Engels 
himself by the day and by the hour. Being the property of one 
master, the individual slave has, since it is in the interest of this 
master, a guaranteed subsistence, however wretched it may be; the 
individual proletarian, the property, so to speak, of the whole 
bourgeois class, whose labour is only bought from him when some­
body needs it, has no guaranteed subsistence. This subsistence is 
guaranteed only to the proletarian  class  as a whole. The slave stands 
outside competition, the proletarian stands within it and feels all its 
fluctuations. The slave is accounted a thing, not a member of civil 
society; the proletarian is recognised as a person, as a member of civil 
society. Thus, the slave may have a better subsistence than the 
proletarian, but the proletarian belongs to a higher stage of 
development of society and himself stands at a higher stage than the 
slave. The slave frees himself by abolishing, among all the private 
property relationships, only the relationship of slavery and thereby 
only then himself becomes a proletarian; the proletarian can free 
himself only by abolishing private property in general. 
Question 8: In what way does the proletarian differ from the serf? 
Answer: The serf has the possession and use of an instrument of 
production, a piece of land, in return for handing over a portion of 
the yield or for the performance of work. The proletarian works 
with instruments of production belonging to another person for the 
benefit of this other person in return for receiving a portion of the 
yield. The serf gives, to the proletarian is given. The serf has a 
guaranteed subsistence, the proletarian has not. The serf stands 
outside competition, the proletarian stands within it. The serf frees 
himself either by running away to the town and there becoming a 
handicraftsman or by giving his landlord money instead of labour 
and products and becoming a free tenant; or by driving out his 
feudal lord and himself becoming a proprietor, in short, by entering 
in one way or another into the possessing class and competition. The 
proletarian frees himself by doing away with competition, private 
property and all class distinctions. 
Question 9: In what way does the proletarian differ from the 
handicraftsman  P3 
Question 10: In what way does the proletarian differ from the 
manufactory worker? 
Answer: The manufactory worker of the sixteenth to the 
eighteenth centuries almost everywhere still owned an instrument of 
production, his loom, the family spinning-wheels, and a little plot of 
Half a page is left blank by Engels in the manuscript. The answer is in the "Draft 
of a Communist Confession of Faith" (see this volume, p.  101).—Ed. 

=====第373页=====
Principles of Communism 345 
land which he cultivated in his leisure hours. The proletarian has 
none of these things. The manufactory worker lives almost always 
in the country and in more or less patriarchal relations with his 
landlord or his employer; the proletarian lives mostly in large towns, 
and stands to his employer in a purely money relationship. The 
manufactory worker is torn up from his patriarchal relations by 
large-scale industry, loses the property he still has and thereby only 
then himself becomes a proletarian. 
Question 11: What were the immediate results of the industrial 
revolution and the division of society into bourgeois and proletari­
ans? 
Answer: Firstly, owing to the continual cheapening of the price of 
industrial products as a result of machine labour, the old system of 
manufacture or industry founded upon manual labour was com­
pletely destroyed in all countries of the world. All semi-barbarian 
countries, which until now had been more or less outside historical 
development and whose industry had until now been based on 
manufacture, were thus forcibly torn out of their isolation. They 
bought the cheaper commodities of the English and let their own 
manufactory workers go to ruin. Thus countries that for thousands 
of years had made no progress, for example India, were revolution­
ised through and through, and even China is now marching towards 
a revolution. It has reached the point that a new machine invented 
today in England, throws millions of workers in China out of work 
within a year. Large-scale industry has thus brought all the peoples 
of the earth into relationship with one another, thrown all the small 
local markets into the world market, prepared the way everywhere 
for civilisation and progress, and brought it about that everything 
that happens in the civilised countries must have its repercussions on 
all other countries. So if now in England or France the workers 
liberate themselves, this must lead to revolutions in all other 
countries, which sooner or later will also bring about the liberation of 
the workers in those countries. 
Secondly, wherever large-scale industry replaced manufacture, the 
industrial revolution developed the bourgeoisie, its wealth and its 
power, to the highest degree and made it the first class in the land. 
The result was that wherever this happened, the bourgeoisie 
obtained political power and ousted the hitherto ruling classes—the 
aristocracy, the guild-burghers and the absolute monarchy represent­
ing both. The bourgeoisie annihilated the power of the aristocracy, 
the nobility, by abolishing entails or the ban on the sale of landed 
property, and all privileges of the nobility. It destroyed the power of 
the guild-burghers by abolishing all guilds and craft privileges. In 

=====第374页=====
346 Frederick Engels 
place of both it put free competition, that is, a state of society in 
which everyone has the right to engage in any branch of industry he 
likes,  and where nothing can hinder him in carrying it on except lack 
of the necessary capital. The introduction of free competition is 
therefore the public declaration that henceforward the members of 
society are only unequal in so far as their capital is unequal, that 
capital has become the decisive power and therefore the capitalists, 
the bourgeois, have become the first class in society. But free 
competition is necessary for the beginning of large-scale industry 
since it is the only state of society in which large-scale industry can 
grow. The bourgeoisie having thus annihilated the social power of 
the nobility and the guild-burghers, annihilated their political power 
as well. Having become the first class in society, the bourgeoisie 
proclaimed itself also the first class in the political sphere. It did 
this by establishing the representative system, which rests upon 
bourgeois equality before the law and the legal recognition of free 
competition, and which in European countries was introduced in the 
form of constitutional monarchy. Under these constitutional 
monarchies those only are electors who possess a certain amount of 
capital, that is to say, the bourgeois; these bourgeois electors elect 
the deputies, and these bourgeois deputies, by means of the right to 
refuse taxes, elect a bourgeois government. 
Thirdly, the industrial revolution built up the proletariat in the 
same measure in which it built up the bourgeoisie. In the same 
proportion in which the bourgeois became wealthier, the proletari­
ans became more numerous. For since proletarians can only be 
employed by capital and since capital only increases when it employs 
labour, the growth of the proletariat keeps exact pace with the 
growth of capital. At the same time it concentrates the bourgeois as 
well as the proletarians in large cities, in which industry can most 
profitably be carried on, and through this throwing together of great 
masses in one place it makes the proletarians conscious of their 
power. Further, the more it develops, the more machines are 
invented which displace manual labour, the more large-scale 
industry, as we already said, depresses wages to their minimum, and 
thereby makes the condition of the proletariat more and more 
unbearable. Thus, through the growing discontent of the proletariat, 
on the one hand, and through its growing power, on the other, the 
industrial revolution prepares a social revolution by the proletariat. 
Question 12: What were the further results of the industrial 
revolution ? 
Answer: In the steam-engine and the other machines large-scale 
industry created the means of increasing industrial production in a 

=====第375页=====
Principles of Communism 347 
short time and at slight expense to an unlimited extent. With this 
facility of production the free competition necessarily resulting from 
large-scale industry very soon assumed an extremely intense 
character; numbers of capitalists launched into industry, and very 
soon more was being produced than could be used. The result was 
that the goods manufactured could not be sold, and a so-called trade 
crisis ensued. Factories had to stand idle, factory owners went 
bankrupt, and the workers lost their bread. Everywhere there was 
the greatest misery. After a while the surplus products were sold, the 
factories started working again, wages went up, and gradually 
business was more brisk than ever. But before long too many 
commodities were again produced, another crisis ensued, and ran 
the same course as the previous one. Thus since the beginning of this 
century the state of industry has continually fluctuated between 
periods of prosperity and periods of crisis, and almost regularly 
every five to seven years a similar crisis has occurred,158 and every 
time it has entailed the greatest misery for the workers, general 
revolutionary ferment, and the greatest danger to the entire existing 
system. 
Question 13: What conclusions can be drawn from these regularly 
recurring trade crises? 
Answer: Firstly, that although in the initial stages of its develop­
ment large-scale industry itself created free competition, it has now 
nevertheless outgrown free competition; that competition and in 
general the carrying on of industrial production by individuals have 
become a fetter upon large-scale industry which it must and will 
break; that large-scale industry, so long as it is conducted on its 
present basis, can only survive through a general confusion 
repeating itself every seven years which each time threatens all 
civilisation, not merely plunging the proletarians into misery but also 
ruining a great number of bourgeois; therefore that either 
large-scale industry itself must be given up, which is utterly 
impossible, or that it absolutely necessitates a completely new 
organisation of society, in which industrial production is no longer 
directed by individual factory owners, competing one against the 
other, but by the whole of society according to a fixed plan and 
according to the needs of all. 
Secondly, that large-scale industry and the unlimited expansion of 
production which it makes possible can bring into being a social 
order in which so much of all the necessities of life will be produced 
that every member of society will thereby be enabled to develop and 
exercise all his powers and abilities in perfect freedom. Thus, 
precisely that quality of large-scale industry which in present society 

=====第376页=====
348 Frederick Engels 
produces all misery and all trade crises is the very quality which 
under a different social organisation will destroy that same misery 
and these disastrous fluctuations. 
Thus it is most clearly proved: 
1. that from now on all these ills are to be attributed only to the 
social order which no longer corresponds to the existing conditions; 
2. that the means are available to abolish these ills completely 
through a new social order. 
Question 14: What kind of new social order will this have to be? 
Answer: Above all, it will have to take the running of industry and 
all branches of production in general out of the hands of separate 
individuals competing with each other and instead will have to 
ensure that all these branches of production are run by society as a 
whole, i.e., for the social good, according to a social plan and with the 
participation of all members of society. It will therefore do away with 
competition and replace it by association. Since the running of 
industry by individuals had private ownership as its necessary 
consequence and since competition is nothing but the manner in 
which industry is run by individual private owners, private 
ownership cannot be separated from the individual running of 
industry and competition. Hence, private ownership will also have to 
be abolished, and in its stead there will be common use of all the 
instruments of production and the distribution of all products by 
common agreement, or the so-called community of property. The 
abolition of private ownership is indeed the most succinct and 
characteristic summary of the transformation of the entire social 
system necessarily following from the development of industry, and 
it is therefore rightly put forward by the Communists as their main 
demand. 
Question 15: The abolition of private property was therefore not 
possible earlier? 
Answer: No. Every change in the social order, every revolution in 
property relations, has been the necessary result of the creation of 
new productive forces which would no longer conform to the old 
property relations. Private property itself arose in this way. For 
private property has not always existed, but when towards the end of 
the Middle Ages a new mode of production appeared in the form of 
manufacture which could not be subordinated to the then existing 
feudal and guild property, manufacture, having outgrown the old 
property relations, created a new form of ownership—private 
ownership. For manufacture and the first stage of development of 
large-scale industry, no other form of ownership was possible than 
private ownership and no other order of society than that founded 

=====第377页=====
Principles of Communism 349 
upon private ownership. So long as it is not possible to produce so 
much that not only is there enough for all, but also a surplus for the 
increase of social capital and for the further development of the 
productive forces, so long must there always be a ruling class 
disposing of the productive forces of society, and a poor, oppressed 
class.  How these classes are composed will depend upon the stage of 
development of production. In the Middle Ages, which were 
dependent upon agriculture, we find the lord and the  serf;  the towns 
of the later Middle Ages show us the master guildsman and the 
journeyman and day labourer; the seventeenth century has the 
manufacturer and the manufactory worker; the nineteenth century 
the big factory owner and the proletarian. It is obvious that hitherto 
the productive forces had not yet been so far developed that enough 
could be produced for all or to make private property a fetter, 
a barrier, to these productive forces. Now, however, when the 
development of large-scale industry has, firstly, created capital 
and productive forces on a scale hitherto unheard of and the 
means are available to increase these productive forces in a short 
time to an infinite extent; when, secondly, these productive forces 
are concentrated in the hands of a few bourgeois whilst the 
great mass of the people are more and more becoming prole­
tarians, and their condition more wretched and unendurable in 
the same measure in which the riches of the bourgeois increase; 
when, thirdly, these powerful productive forces that can easily 
be increased have so enormously outgrown private property 
and the bourgeois that at every moment they provoke the most 
violent disturbances in the social order—only now has the abolition 
of private property become not only possible but even absolutely 
necessary. 
Question 16: Will it be possible to bring about the abolition of 
private property by peaceful methods? 
Answer: It is to be desired that this could happen, and Communists 
certainly would be the last to resist it. The Communists know only 
too well that all conspiracies are not only futile but even harmful. 
They know only too well that revolutions are not made deliberately 
and arbitrarily, but that everywhere and at all times they have been 
the necessary outcome of circumstances entirely independent of the 
will and the leadership of particular parties and entire classes. But 
they also see that the development of the proletariat is in nearly 
every civilised country forcibly suppressed, and that thus the 
opponents of the Communists are working with all their might 
towards a revolution. Should the oppressed proletariat in the end 
be goaded into a revolution, we Communists will then defend 

=====第378页=====
350 Frederick Engels 
the cause of the proletarians by deed just as well as we do now 
byword. 
Question 17: Will it be possible to abolish private property at one 
stroke? 
Answer: No, such a thing would be just as impossible as at one 
stroke to increase the existing productive forces to the degree 
necessary for instituting community of property. Hence, the 
proletarian revolution, which in all probability is impending, will 
transform existing society only gradually, and be able to abolish 
private property only when the necessary quantity of the means of 
production has been created. 
Question 18: What will be the course of this revolution? 
Answer: In the first place it will inaugurate a democratic constitution 
and thereby, directly or indirectly, the political rule of the 
proletariat. Directly in England, where the proletariat already 
constitutes the majority of the people. Indirectly in France and in 
Germany, where the majority of the people consists not only of 
proletarians but also of small peasants and urban petty bourgeois, who 
are only now being proletarianised and in all their political interests 
are becoming more and more dependent on the proletariat and there­
fore soon will have to conform to the demands of the proletariat. This 
will perhaps involve a second fight, but one that can end only in the 
victory of the proletariat. 
Democracy would be quite useless to the proletariat if it were not 
immediately used as a means of carrying through further measures 
directly attacking private ownership and securing the means of 
subsistence of the proletariat. Chief among these measures, already 
made necessary by the existing conditions, are the following: 
1. Limitation of private ownership by means of progres­
sive taxation, high inheritance taxes, abolition of inheritance by 
collateral lines (brothers, nephews, etc.), compulsory loans and so 
forth. 
2. Gradual expropriation of landed proprietors, factory owners, 
railway and shipping magnates, partly through competition on the 
part of state industry and partly directly through compensation in 
assignations. 
3. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels against 
the majority of the people. 
4. Organisation of the labour or employment of the proletarians 
on national estates, in national factories and workshops, thereby 
putting an end to competition among the workers themselves and 
compelling the factory owners, as long as they still exist, to pay the 
same increased wages as the State. 

=====第379页=====
Principles of Communism 351 
5. Equal liability to work for all members of society until complete 
abolition of private ownership. Formation of industrial armies, 
especially for agriculture. 
6. Centralisation of the credit and banking systems in the hands of 
the State by means of a national bank with state capital and the 
suppression of all private banks and bankers. 
7. Increase of national factories, workshops, railways, and ships, 
cultivation of all uncultivated land and improvement of land already 
cultivated in the same proportion in which the capital and workers at 
the disposal of the nation increase. 
8. Education of all children, as soon as they are old enough to do 
without the first maternal care, in national institutions and at the 
expense of the nation. Education combined with production. 
9. The erection of large palaces on national estates as common 
dwellings for communities of citizens engaged in industry as well as 
agriculture, and combining the advantages of both urban and rural 
life without the one-sidedness and disadvantages of either. 
10. The demolition of all insanitary and badly built dwellings and 
town districts. 
11. Equal right of inheritance to be enjoyed by illegitimate and 
legitimate children. 
12. Concentration of all means of transport in the hands of the 
nation. 
Of course, all these measures cannot be carried out at once. But 
one will always lead on to the other. Once the first radical onslaught 
upon private ownership has been made, the proletariat will see itself 
compelled to go always further, to concentrate all capital, all 
agriculture, all industry, all transport, and all exchange more and 
more in the hands of the State. All these measures work towards such 
results; and they will become realisable and will develop their 
centralising consequences in the same proportion in which the 
productive forces of the country will be multiplied by the labour of 
the proletariat. Finally, when all capital, all production, and all 
exchange are concentrated in the hands of the nation, private 
ownership will automatically have ceased to exist, money will have 
become superfluous, and production will have so increased and men 
will be so much changed that the last forms of the old social relations 
will also be able to fall away. 
Question 19: Will it be possible for this revolution to take place in 
one country alone? 
Answer: No. Large-scale industry, already by creating the world 
market, has so linked up all the peoples of the earth, and especially 
the civilised peoples, that each people is dependent on what happens 

=====第380页=====
352 Frederick Engels 
to another. Further, in all civilised countries large-scale industry has 
so levelled social development that in all these countries the 
bourgeoisie and the proletariat have become the two decisive classes 
of society and the struggle between them the main struggle of the 
day. The communist revolution will therefore be no merely national 
one;  it will be a revolution taking place simultaneously in all civilised 
countries, that is, at least in England, America, France and 
Germany.159 In each of these countries it will develop more quickly 
or more slowly according to whether the country has a more 
developed industry, more wealth, and a more considerable mass of 
productive forces. It will therefore be slowest and most difficult to 
carry out in Germany, quickest and easiest in England. It will also 
have an important effect upon the other countries of the world, and 
will completely change and greatly accelerate their previous manner 
of development. It is a worldwide revolution and will therefore be 
worldwide in scope. 
Question 20: What will be the consequences of the final abolition of 
private ownership? 
Answer: Above all, through society's taking out of the hands of the 
private capitalists the use of all the productive forces and means of 
communication as well as the exchange and distribution of products 
and managing them according to a plan corresponding to the means 
available and the needs of the whole of society, all the evil 
consequences of the present running of large-scale industry will be 
done away with. There will be an end of crises; the extended 
production, which under the present system of society means 
overproduction and is such a great cause of misery, will then not 
even be adequate and will have to be expanded much further. 
Instead of creating misery, overproduction beyond the.immediate 
needs of society will mean the satisfaction of the needs of all, create 
new needs and at the same time the means to satisfy them. It will be 
the condition and the cause of new advances, and it will achieve these 
advances without thereby, as always hitherto, bringing the order of 
society into confusion. Once liberated from the pressure of private 
ownership, large-scale industry will develop on a scale that will make 
its present level of development seem as paltry as seems the 
manufacturing system compared with the large-scale industry of our 
time.  This development of industry will provide society with a 
sufficient quantity of products to satisfy the needs of all. Similarly 
agriculture, which is also hindered by the pressure of private 
ownership and the parcelling of land from introducing the 
improvements already available and scientific advancements, will 
be given a quite new impulse, and place at society's disposal an 

=====第381页=====
Principles of Communism 353 
ample quantity of products. Thus society will produce enough 
products to be able so to arrange distribution that the needs of all 
its members will be satisfied. The division of society into various 
antagonistic classes will thereby become superfluous. Not only will it 
become superfluous, it is even incompatible with the new social 
order. Classes came into existence through the division of labour and 
the division of labour in its hitherto existing form will entirely 
disappear. For in order to bring industrial and agricultural 
production to the level described, mechanical and chemical aids 
alone are not enough; the abilities of the people who set these aids in 
motion must also be developed to a corresponding degree. Just as in 
the last century the peasants and the manufactory workers changed 
their entire way of life, and themselves became quite different 
people when they were drawn into large-scale industry, so also will 
the common management of production by the whole of society and 
the resulting new development of production require and also 
produce quite different people. The common management of 
production cannot be effected by people as they are today, each one 
being assigned to a single branch of production, shackled to it, 
exploited by it, each having developed only  one  of his abilities at the 
cost of all the others and knowing only  one  branch, or only a branch 
of a branch of the total production. Even present-day industry finds 
less and less use for such people. Industry carried on in common and 
according to plan by the whole of society presupposes moreover 
people of all-round development, capable of surveying the entire 
system of production. Thus the division of labour making one man a 
peasant, another a shoemaker, a third a factory worker, a fourth a 
stockjobber, which has already been undermined by machines, will 
completely disappear. Education will enable young people quickly to 
go through the whole system of production, it will enable them to 
pass from one branch of industry to another according to the needs 
of society or their own inclinations. It will therefore free them from 
that one-sidedness which the present division of labour stamps on 
each one of them. Thus the communist organisation of society will 
give its members the chance of an all-round exercise of abilities that 
have received all-round development. With this, the various classes 
will necessarily disappear. Thus the communist organisation of 
society is, on the one hand, incompatible with the existence of classes 
and, on the other, the very establishment of this society furnishes the 
means to do away with these class differences. 
It follows from this that the antagonism between town and country 
will likewise disappear. The carrying on of agriculture and industrial 
production by the same people, instead of by two different classes, is 

=====第382页=====
354 Frederick Engels 
already for purely material reasons an essential condition of 
communist association. The scattering of the agricultural population 
over the countryside, along with the crowding of the industrial 
population into the big towns, is a state which corresponds only to an 
undeveloped stage of agriculture and industry, an obstacle to all 
further development which is already now making itself very keenly 
felt. 
The general association of all members of society for the common 
and planned exploitation of the productive forces, the expansion of 
production to a degree where it will satisfy the needs of all, the 
termination of the condition where the needs of some are satisfied at 
the expense of others, the complete annihilation of classes and their 
antagonisms, the all-round development of the abilities of all the 
members of society through doing away with the hitherto existing 
division of labour, through industrial education, through change of 
activity, through the participation of all in the enjoyments provided 
by all, through the merging of town and country—such are the main 
results of the abolition of private property. 
Question 21: What influence will the communist order of society 
have upon the family? 
Answer: It will make the relation between the sexes a purely private 
relation which concerns only the persons involved, and in which 
society has no call to interfere. It is able to do this because it abolishes 
private property and educates children communally, thus destroying 
the twin foundation of hitherto existing marriage—the dependence 
through private property of the wife upon the husband and of the 
children upon the parents. Here also is the answer to the outcry of 
moralising philistines against the communist community of women. 
Community of women is a relationship that belongs altogether to 
bourgeois society and is completely realised today in prostitution. 
But prostitution is rooted in private property and falls with it. Thus 
instead of introducing the community of women, communist 
organisation puts an end to it. 
Question 22: What will be the attitude of the communist 
organisation towards existing nationalities? 
—remains3 
Question 23: What will be its attitude towards existing religions? 
—remains0 
a Apparently this means that the answer remains the same as to Question 21 of the 
"Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith". See this volume, p.  103.—Ed. 
b See answer to Question 22 of the "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith", 
this volume, p.  103.—Ed. 

=====第383页=====
Principles of Communism 355 
Question 24: In what way do Communists differ from socialists? 
Answer: The so-called socialists fall into three groups. 
The first group consists of adherents of feudal and patriarchal 
society which has been or is still being daily destroyed by large-scale 
industry, world trade and the bourgeois society they have both 
brought into existence. From the ills of present-day society this 
group draws the conclusion that feudal and patriarchal society 
should be restored because it was free from these ills. Directly or 
deviously, all its proposals make for this goal. Despite all its profes­
sions of sympathy and its bewailing the misery of the proletariat, this 
group of reactionary socialists will be strongly opposed by the Com­
munists, because 
1. it is striving after something utterly impossible; 
2. it seeks to establish the rule of the aristocracy, the guild-masters 
and the manufacturers, with their retinue of absolute or feudal 
monarchs, officials, soldiers and priests, a society which was indeed 
free from the vices of present society, but brought at least as many 
other evils in its train and did not even hold out the prospect of the 
emancipation of the oppressed workers through a communist 
organisation; 
3. it always gives away its real intentions every time the proletariat 
becomes revolutionary and communist, when it immediately allies 
itself with the bourgeoisie against the proletarians. 
The second group consists of adherents of present society in 
whom the evils inseparable from it have awakened fears for its 
survival. They therefore endeavour to preserve present society but 
to remove the evils bound up with it. With this end in view, some of 
them propose measures of mere charity, and others grandiose 
systems of reform which, under the pretext of reorganising society, 
would retain the foundations of present society, and thus present 
society  itself.  These  bourgeois socialists  will also have to be continuous­
ly fought by the Communists, since they work for the enemies of the 
Communists and defend the society which it is the Communists' aim 
to destroy. 
Finally, the third group consists of democratic socialists, who in the 
same way as the Communists desire part of the measures listed in 
Question ...a not, however, as a means of transition to communism 
but as measures sufficient to abolish the misery of present society 
and to cause its evils to disappear. These democratic socialists are 
either proletarians who are not yet sufficiently enlightened regard­
ing the conditions of the emancipation of their class, or they are 
a The manuscript has a blank space here. See answer to Question  18.—Ed. 
! .'J— 1826 

=====第384页=====
356 Frederick Engels 
members of the petty bourgeoisie, a class which, until the winning of 
democracy and the realisation of the socialist measures following 
upon it, has in many respects the same interest as the proletariat. 
At moments of action the Communists will, therefore, have to reach 
an understanding with these democratic socialists, and in general for 
the time being pursue as much as possible a common policy with 
them, insofar as these democratic socialists do not enter the service 
of the ruling bourgeoisie and attack the Communists. It is obvious 
that this common action does not exclude the discussion of differences 
with them. 
Question 25: What is the attitude of the Communists towards the 
other political parties of our day? 
Answer: This attitude differs from country to country.—In 
England, France, and Belgium, where the bourgeoisie rules, the 
Communists still have for the time being a common interest with the 
various democratic parties, which is all the greater the more in the 
socialist measures they are now everywhere advocating the demo­
crats approach the aims of the Communists, that is, the more clearly 
and definitely they uphold the interests of the proletariat and the 
more they rely on the proletariat. In England, for instance, the 
Chartists, who are all workers, are incalculably nearer to the 
Communists than are the democratic petty bourgeois or so-called 
radicals. 
In America, where a democratic constitution has been introduced, 
the Communists must make common cause with the party that will 
turn this constitution against the bourgeoisie and use it in the interest 
of the proletariat, that is, with the national agrarian reformers.160 
In Switzerland the radicals, although still a very mixed party, are 
yet the only people with whom the Communists can have anything to 
do, and, further, among these radicals those in the cantons of Vaud 
and of Geneva are the most advanced. 
Finally, in Germany the decisive struggle between the bourgeoisie 
and the absolute monarchy is still to come. Since, however, the 
Communists cannot count on the decisive struggle between them­
selves and the bourgeoisie until the bourgeoisie rules, it is in the 
interests of the Communists to help bring the bourgeoisie to power 
as soon as possible in order as soon as possible to overthrow them 
again. The Communists must therefore always take the side of the 
liberal bourgeois against the governments but they must ever be on 
their guard against sharing the self-deceptions of the bourgeois or 
believing their false assurances about the benefits which the victory 
of the bourgeoisie will bring to the proletariat. The only advantages 
which the victory of the bourgeoisie will provide for the Communists 

=====第385页=====
Principles of Communism 357 
will be: 1. various concessions which make easier for the Communists 
the defence, discussion and spreading of their principles and thus 
the unification of the proletariat into a closely knit, militant and 
organised class, and 2. the certainty that from the day when the 
absolute governments fall, comes the turn for the fight between 
bourgeois and proletarians. From that day onwards the party policy 
of the Communists will be the same as in the countries where the 
bourgeoisie already rules. 
Written at the end of October 1847 Printed according to the manu­
script First published separately in 1914 

=====第386页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE AGRARIAN PROGRAMME OF THE CHARTISTS] 161 
About two years ago the Chartist workers founded an association 
with the object of buying land and dividing it among its members 
into small holdings.162 It was hoped in this way to diminish the 
excessive competition between factory workers themselves, by 
keeping from the labour market some of these workers to form a 
quite new and essentially democratic class of small peasants. This 
project, whose author is none other than Feargus O'Connor  himself, 
has had such success that the Chartist Land Company already num­
bers from two to three hundred thousand members,3 that it disposes 
of social funds of £60,000 (a million and a half francs), and that its 
receipts, announced in The Northern Star, exceed £2,500 per week. 
In fact, the Company, of which I propose to give you later a more 
detailed account, has grown to such a size that it is already 
disquieting the landed aristocracy; for it is evident that this 
movement, if it continues to grow at the same rate as up to now, will 
end by becoming transformed into a national agitation for taking 
possession of the nation's land by the people. The bourgeoisie 
does not find this Company to its taste either; it sees it as a lever in 
the hands of the people which will allow the latter to free themselves 
without needing the help of the middle class. It is particularly the 
small bourgeoisie, more or less liberal, which looks askance at the 
Land Company because it already finds the Chartists much more 
independent of its support than before the founding of the 
association. Moreover, these same radicals, unable to explain the 
a The Northern Star No. 524, November 6, 1847 has "consists of a vast number of 
members" instead of "already numbers from two to three hundred thousand 
members".—Ed. 

=====第387页=====
The Agrarian Programme of the Chartists 359 
indifference which the people show them and which is the inevitable 
consequence of their own lukewarm attitude, insist on attacking Mr. 
O'Connor continually as the sole obstacle to a reunion of the Chartist 
and radical parties. It was therefore enough that the Land Company 
should be the work of O'Connor to draw upon it all the hatred of the 
more or less radical bourgeois. At first they ignored it; when the 
conspiracy of silence could no longer be maintained they tried to 
prove that the Company was so organised as to end inevitably in the 
most scandalous bankruptcy; finally, when these means did not 
prevent the Company from prospering, they returned to the tactic 
that for ten years they had constantly used always without the least 
success against Mr. O'Connor. They sought to cast suspicions upon 
his character, to throw doubts on his disinterestedness, to destroy the 
right he claimed to call himself the incorruptible and unpaid 
administrator for the workers. When, therefore, some time ago, Mr. 
O'Connor published his annual report,3 six more or less radical 
papers, which appear to have had a clandestine meeting, joined in 
attacking him. These papers were the Weekly Dispatch, the Globe, the 
Nonconformist, the Manchester Examiner, Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper and 
the Nottingham Mercury. They accused Mr. O'Connor of the most 
shameless thefts and misappropriations, which they sought to prove 
or to make probable by the figures of the report  itself.  Far from 
being satisfied with that, they pried into the private life of the 
celebrated agitator: a mountain of accusations, each graver than the 
other, was heaped on him, and his adversaries could well believe that 
he would be overwhelmed by it. But O'Connor, who for ten years has 
not ceased to fight the so-called radical press, did not flinch under 
these calumnies. He published in The Northern Star of the 23rd of this 
month a reply to the six papers.b This reply, a polemical masterpiece 
which recalls the best pamphlets of William Cobbett, refutes one 
accusation after another and, in its turn taking the offensive, 
launches against the six editors very severe attacks, full of superb 
disdain. This was enough completely to justify O'Connor in the 
people's eyes. The Northern Star of the 30th of this month contains 
the votes of complete confidence in O'Connor passed at public 
meetings of Chartists in more than fifty localities. But O'Connor 
wanted to give his adversaries the opportunity to attack him in front 
of the people. He invited them to maintain their charges at public 
a F. O'Connor, "To the Members of the National Land Company" and 
"O'Connor, F., Esq. (Treasurer) in Account with the National Land Company".—Ed. 
b F. O'Connor, "To the Editors of the Nottingham Mercury, the Nonconformist, the 
Dispatch, the  Globe,  the Manchester Examiner and Lloyds' Trash".—Ed. 

=====第388页=====
360 Frederick Engels 
meetings at Manchester and Nottingham. Not one of them turned 
up. At Manchester, O'Connor spoke for four hours before more 
than ten thousand men, who applauded him thunderously and 
unanimously confirmed their confidence in him. The crowd was so 
great that, besides the great meeting where O'Connor defended 
himself personally, it was necessary to hold another meeting in the 
public square, where ten to fifteen thousand other people, who 
were not able to enter the indoor meeting, were harangued by 
several other speakers. 
When the meetings had ended, O'Connor declared that he would 
receive the contributions and subscriptions of the members of the 
Land Company, and the sum paid to him that evening exceeded 
il,000 (25,000 francs). 
At Nottingham, where O'Connor on the next day drew one of the 
greatest meetings which had ever taken place there, the same 
popular enthusiasm was caused by his speech. 
This was at least the hundredth time that Mr. O'Connor has 
triumphed in this brilliant way over the calumnies of the bourgeois 
press.  Imperturbable amidst all these attacks, the indefatigable 
patriot continues his work, and the unanimous confidence of the 
English people is the best proof of his courage, his energy, his 
incorru ptibility. 
Written on October 30, 1847 Printed according to the text 
in La Réforme First published in La Réforme, 
November 1, 1847 and Translated from the French 
The Northern Star No. 524, 
November 6, 1847 

=====第389页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE CHARTIST BANQUET 
IN CONNECTION WITH THE ELECTIONS OF 1847] «» 
In a letter of the day before yesterday I was concerned to defend 
the Chartists and their leader Feargus O'Connor against the attacks 
of the radical bourgeois press.3 Today, to my great satisfaction, I can 
tell you something which confirms what I suggested about the spirit 
of the two parties. You will judge for yourselves to whom French 
democracy ought to give its sympathy: to the Chartists, sincere 
democrats without ulterior motives, or to the radical bourgeois who 
so carefully avoid using the words people's charter, universal suffrage, 
and limit themselves to proclaiming that they are partisans of 
complete  suffragel 164 
Last month a banquet took place in London to celebrate the 
triumph of democratic opinion at the last elections. Eighteen radical 
members of Parliament were invited, but since the Chartists had 
initiated the banquet all these gentlemen defaulted, with the 
exception of O'Connor. The radicals, as we see, are behaving in a 
way which makes it quite predictable how they will honour their 
pledges made at the last elections. 
One dispensed with their presence the more readily as they had 
sent one of their worthy representatives—Doctor Epps, a timid man 
and a petty reformer, conciliatory towards everybody except the 
active and energetic men of our opinions; a philanthropic bourgeois 
who burns, he says, to free the people, but who does not want the 
people to free themselves without him; in fact, a worthy partisan of 
bourgeois radicalism. 
Doctor Epps proposed a first toast to the sovereignty of the people, 
a See previous article.—Ed. 

=====第390页=====
362 Frederick Engels 
but so generally lukewarm apart from a few slightly livelier passages 
that several times it aroused murmurs among the assembly. 
"I do not think," he said, "that the sovereignty of the people can be obtained 
through a revolution. The French fought three days 65; they have been cheated out of 
national sovereignty. Nor do I think that it can be obtained by long speeches. Those 
who speak least do most. I do not like men who make a lot of noise; big words do not 
make big deeds." 
These indirect sallies against the Chartists were received with 
numerous marks of disapproval. It could not be otherwise, above all 
when Doctor Epps added: 
"The bourgeoisie has been slandered among the workers; as if the bourgeoisie was 
not the very class which alone can obtain political rights for the workers. ("No! No!") 
No? Is it not the bourgeois who are the electors? And is it not only the electors who can 
give the vote to those who do not have it? Is there anyone among you who would not 
become a bourgeois if he could? Ah! If the workers would give up their pots and their 
pipes,  they would have money to support their political agitation, they could do much 
to contribute towards their freedom," etc., etc. 
Such is the language of the men who reject O'Connor and the 
Chartists! 
The speakers who succeeded Dr. Epps energetically rebutted the 
strange doctrines of the radical doctor, amid much applause by the 
assembly. 
Mr. MacGrath, member of the executive committee of the Chartist 
Association,166 recalled that the people ought not to have confidence 
in the bourgeoisie, that they had to win their own rights by 
themselves; it was not proper to the dignity of the people to beg for 
what really belonged to them. 
Mr. Jones reminded the assembly that the bourgeoisie had always 
forgotten the people; and now that the bourgeoisie sees the growth 
of democracy, he said, it wants to use it to overthrow the landed 
aristocracy, and crush the democrats as soon as it has attained its 
objective. 
Mr. O'Connor, replying still more directly to Dr. Epps, asked him 
who had crushed the country with an enormous debt, if it were not 
die bourgeoisie? Who had deprived the workers of their political 
and social rights if not the bourgeoisie? Who had, that very 
evening, refused to respond to the people's invitation, if it were not 
the seventeen honourable bourgeois to whom the democrats had so 
unfortunately given their votes? No, no, capital never represents 
labour! The lion and the lamb would lie down together before 
capitalists and workers were united by interests and feelings! 
Mr. Harney, editor of The Northern Star, gave the last toast: "Our 
democratic brethren throughout the  world!  May their present struggle for 

=====第391页=====
The Chartist Banquet in Connection with the Elections of 1847 363 
liberty and equality be crowned with success!" Kings, aristocrats, priests 
and capitalists of all countries, he said, are allied together. May 
democrats of all lands follow the same example! Everywhere 
democracy marches forward. In France, banquet follows banquet in 
favour of electoral reform; and the movement is developing on such 
a scale that it must lead to a happy result. Let us hope that the 
masses, this time, will profit from this agitation, that the reform won 
by the French will be worth more than what we won in  1831.167 
There can be no true reform as long as sovereignty does not 
wholly belong to the nation; there is no national sovereignty as long 
as the principles of the constitution of  1793 168 are not a reality. 
Mr. Harney then gave a picture of the progress of democracy in 
Germany, Italy and Switzerland, and ended by disavowing, for his 
part, in the most energetic terms, the strange doctrines of Dr. Epps 
about the rights of the bourgeoisie. 
Written on November 1, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
November 6, 1847 ... . .... 
Published m English for the first 
time 

=====第392页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE MANIFESTO OF M. DE LAMARTINE 
You recently published this curious piece of workmanship.169 It 
consists of two very distinct parts: political measures and social 
measures. Now the political measures are, one and all, taken from the 
Constitution of  1791,170  with almost no alteration; that  is, they are the 
return to the demands of the middle classes in the beginning of the 
revolution. At that time the whole of the middle classes, including 
even the smaller tradesmen, were invested with political power, while 
at present the participation in it is restrained to the large capitalists. 
What, then, is the meaning of the political measures proposed by M. 
de Lamartine? To give the government into the hands of the inferior 
bourgeoisie, but under the semblance of giving it to the whole people 
(this,  and nothing else, is the meaning of his universal suffrage, with 
his double system of elections). And his social measures? Why, they 
are either things which presuppose that a successful revolution has 
already given the political power to the people—such as gratuitous 
education for all; or measures of pure charity, that is, measures to 
soften down the revolutionary energies of the proletarians; or mere 
high-sounding words without any practical meaning, such as 
extinction of mendicity by order in council, abolition of public 
distress by law, a ministry of the people's life, etc. They are, 
therefore, either totally useless to the people, or calculated to benefit 
them in such a degree only as will assure some sort of public 
tranquillity, or they are mere empty promises, which no man can 
keep—and in these two last cases they are worse than useless. In 
short, M. de Lamartine proves  himself,  both under a social and a 
political point of view, the faithful representative of the small 
tradesman, the inferior bourgeoisie, and [one] who shares in the 
illusion particular to this class: that he represents the working 

=====第393页=====
The Manifesto of M. De Lamartine 365 
people. And, in the end he is foolish enough to address himself to 
the government with the demand of their support for his measures. 
Why, the present government of the great capitalists will do anything 
but that. The Réforme, therefore, is perfectly right in attacking, 
though with a deal of good will, and recognising his good intentions, 
the practicability both of his measures, and his mode of setting about 
having them carried. 3 
"Certainly," says the Réforme, "these are high words, revealing a mighty heart, a 
spirit sympathising with the cause of right. The fraternal feeling is panting visibly 
under the cloak of words, and our poets and philosophers will be excited by them into 
enthusiasm similar to that produced upon Periclean Greece by the sentence of Plato. 
But we have not now anything to do with Pericles, we live under the reign of Messrs 
Rothschild, Fulchiron and Duchâtel, that is under the triple incarnation of Money, 
blockheaded Fear, and Police; we have for a government, profits, privilege, and the 
municipal guard. Now, hopes M. de Lamartine that the league of consolidated 
interests, that the Sonderbund b of dollars, place and monopoly, will surrender and lay 
down arms at his appeal to national sovereignty and social fraternity? Why, for good 
as for evil, all things in this world are connected—one keeps up the other, nothing is 
isolated—and that is the reason why the most generous programme of the deputy for 
Mâcon c will pass like perfumed zephyrs of summer, will die like empty trumpet 
sounds, as long as they shall bear the motherstain of all monopoly—feudal violation of 
Right and of Equality. And this league of the privileged classes is particularly closely 
united at this very moment, when the governmental system is the prey of convulsive 
fear. 
"As to the institutions he proposes, the official country and its leaders call such 
things the sweet meats of philosophy: Messrs Duchâtel and Guizot will laugh at them, 
and if the deputy for Mâcon does not look out elsewhere for arms and soldiers to 
defend his ideas, he will pass all his life at making fine words and no progress! And if 
he addresses himself to the million instead of the government, we tell him that he 
follows a false route, and never will win over to his system of graduated election, poor 
rate,  and philanthropic charity, neither the Revolution, nor thinking men, nor the 
people. The principles, indeed, of social and political regeneration have been found 
fifty years ago. Universal suffrage, direct election, paid representation—these are the 
essential conditions of political sovereignty. Equality, liberty, fraternity—these are the 
principles which ought to rule all social institutions. Now, the poor rate is far from 
being based upon fraternity, whilst at the same time it is an insolent and very impotent 
denial of equality. What we want is not English middle-class expediency, but quite a 
new system of social economy, to realise the right and satisfy the wants of all." 
A few days after appeared the second manifesto of M. de 
Lamartine upon the foreign policy of France. In this he maintains 
that the peace system followed by the French government after 1830, 
was the only convenient mode of action. He covers by pompous 
a There follows a free translation of extracts from an article by Louis Blanc 
analysing Lamartine 's "Déclaration de principes". —Ed. 
b The allusion is to the Swiss Sonderbund, a separatist union of seven Catholic 
cantons.—Ed. 
c Lamartine. —Ed. 

=====第394页=====
366 Frederick Engels 
sentences the infamous manner in which the French government 
first excited Italy and other countries to rebellion, and afterwards 
abandoned them to their fate. Here is the forcible reply of the 
Réforme* to this buttermilk manifesto: 
"M. de Lamartine sacrifices the legitimate and only instrument of freeing us—the 
holy war of principle—to a theory of peace which will be a mere weakness, a lie, and 
even an act of treason, as long as the relations from people to people are based upon 
the policy of diplomatists, and the egotism of governments. No doubt, peace is the 
ultimate necessity of civilisation; but what is peace with Nicholas of Russia? The 
disemboweller of whole nations, the hangman who nails infants to the gallows, who 
carries on a deadly war against even hope and recollection, who drowns in her tears 
and her blood a great, a glorious country! For mankind, for civilisation, for France 
herself,  peace with this madman of a Jack Ketch is cowardice; for justice, for right, for 
the revolution, it is a crime! What is peace with Metternich, who hires hosts of 
assassins, who confiscates for the benefit of crowned epilepsy , b the liberties of nations? 
What is peace with all those little Caesars of Europe, ruined debauchees, or villainous 
bigots who reign, to-day for the Jesuits, to-morrow for the courtezan? What is peace 
with the aristocratic and money-mongering English government, which tyrannises the 
seas,  which kills liberty in Portugal, which squeezes money even out of the rags of its 
people? Peace with these Jews, these poison-mongers, we repeat it, is, for a country in 
revolution, cowardice, shame, crime, moral desertion, bankruptcy not only of interest, 
but of right and honour." 
The other Paris papers have equally expressed their dissent from 
M. de Lamartine's programme in different respects. 171 He continues, 
however, illustrating its principles in his paper, the Bien Public of 
Mâcon. We shall in a few months be enabled to judge what effect his 
new move will make upon the Chamber of Deputies. 
Written at the beginning Reprinted from the newspaper 
of November 1847 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 525, November 13, 1847 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our Paris Correspondent" 
a "Programme de M. Lamartine". —Ed. 
b Ferdinand L—-Ed. 

=====第395页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE CIVIL WAR IN SWITZERLAND 172 
At last the ceaseless bombast about the "cradle of freedom", about 
the "grandsons of William Tell and Winkelried", about the heroic 
victors of Sempach and Murten 178 is being brought to an end. At last 
it has been revealed that the cradle of freedom is nothing but the 
centre of barbarism and the nursery of Jesuits, that the grand­
sons of Tell and Winkelried can only be brought to reason by 
cannon-balls, and that the heroism at Sempach and Murten was 
nothing but the desperation of brutal and bigoted mountain tribes, 
obstinately resisting civilisation and progress. 
It is really very fortunate that European democracy is finally 
getting rid of this t/r-Swiss, puritan and reactionary ballast. As long 
as the democrats concentrated on the virtue, the happiness and the 
patriarchal simplicity of these Alpine shepherds, they themselves still 
appeared in a reactionary light. Now that they are supporting the 
struggle of civilised, industrial, modern-democratic Switzerland 
against the crude, Christian-Germanic democracy of the primitive, 
cattle-breeding cantons, they represent progress everywhere, now 
the last reactionary glimmer disappears, now they show that they are 
learning to understand the meaning of democracy in the 19th 
century. 
There are two regions in Europe where old Christian-Germanic 
barbarism has retained its most primitive form, almost down to 
acorn-eating—Norway and the High Alps, especially Ur-
Switzerland.174 Both Norway and t/r-Switzerland still provide us with 
genuine examples of that breed of men who once beat the Romans to 
death in good Westphalian style with clubs and flails in the 
Teutoburg Forest.175 Both Norway and l/r-Switzerland are demo­
cratically organised. But there are many varieties of democracy and 

=====第396页=====
368 Frederick Engels 
it is very necessary that the democrats of the civilised countries should 
at last decline responsibility for the Norwegian and l/r-Swiss forms of 
democracy. 
The democratic movement in all civilised countries is, in the last 
analysis, striving for the political domination of the proletariat. It 
therefore presupposes that a proletariat exists, that a ruling 
bourgeoisie exists, that an industry exists which gives birth to the 
proletariat and which has brought the bourgeoisie to power. 
There is nothing of all this either in Norway or in L/r-Switzerland. 
In Norway, we have the very famous peasant regiment (bonde-
regimente);  in L/r-Switzerland a number of rough shepherds who, 
despite their democratic constitution, are ruled by a few big 
landowners, Abyberg, etc., in patriarchal fashion. A bourgeoisie only 
exists in exceptional cases in Norway, and not at all in Ur-
Switzerland. The proletariat is practically non-existent. 
The democracy prevailing in civilised countries, modern democra­
cy, has thus nothing whatever in common with Norwegian or 
L/r-Swiss democracy. It does not wish to bring about the Norwegian 
and l/r-Swiss state of affairs but something absolutely different. Let 
us nevertheless look a little closer at this primitive-Germanic 
democracy and deal first with L/r-Switzerland, which is what above all 
concerns us here. 
Is there a German philistine who does not rave about William Tell, 
the liberator of his Fatherland; a schoolmaster who does not 
celebrate Morgarten, Sempach and Murten along with Marathon, 
Plataea and Salamis 176; a hysterical old maid who does not go into 
raptures over the strong leg calves and sturdy thighs of the chaste 
Alpine youths? The glory of L/r-Swiss valour, freedom, skill and 
strength has been endlessly praised in verse and prose from Aegidius 
Tschudi to Johannes von Müller, from Florian to Schiller. The 
carbines and cannons of the twelve cantons now provide a 
commentary on these enthusiastic panegyrics. 
The L/r-Swiss have drawn attention to themselves twice during the 
course of history. The first time, when they freed themselves 
gloriously from Austrian tyranny; the second at the present time, 
when they march off to fight in God's name for the Jesuits and the 
Fatherland. 
On closer examination, the glorious liberation from the talons of 
the Austrian eagle does not look at all good. The House of Austria 
was progressive just once in the whole of its career; this was at the 
beginning of its existence when it allied itself with the urban petty 
bourgeoisie against the nobility, and sought to found a German 
monarchy. It was progressive in the most philistine of ways but it was 

=====第397页=====
The Civil War in Switzerland 369 
progressive nonetheless. And who opposed it most resolutely? The 
L/r-Swiss. The struggle of the LV-Swiss against Austria, the glorious 
oath on the Grütli, 177 Tell's heroic shot, the eternally memorable 
victory at Morgarten, all this was the struggle of stubborn shepherds 
against the onward march of historical development, the struggle of 
obstinate, rooted local interests against the interests of the whole 
nation, the struggle of crude ignorance against enlightenment, of 
barbarism against civilisation. They won their victory over the 
civilisation of the time, and as a punishment they were excluded 
from all further civilisation. 
As if this were not enough, these simple, stiff-necked shepherds 
were soon punished in a quite different way. They escaped the 
domination of the Austrian nobility only to come under the yoke of 
the petty bourgeois of Zurich, Lucerne, Berne and Basel. These had 
already noted that the L/r-Swiss were just as strong and as stupid as 
their oxen. They agreed to join the Swiss Confederation and stayed 
peacefully at home behind their counters while the thick-headed 
Alpine shepherds fought out all their battles with the nobility and the 
princes for them. This is what happened at Sempach, Granson, 
Murten and Nancy.178 In return, these people were allowed to 
arrange their internal affairs as they wished and so they remained in 
blissful ignorance of how they were being exploited by their dear 
fellow-Confederationists. 
Since then nothing much has been heard of them. They busied 
themselves in all piety and propriety with milking the cows, with 
cheese-making, chastity and yodelling. From time to time they had 
folk assemblies at which they divided into horn-men, claw-men and 
other animal-like groups, and these gatherings never ended without 
a hearty, Christian-Germanic fight. They were poor but pure in 
heart, stupid but pious and well-pleasing to the Lord, brutal but 
broad-shouldered and had little brain but plenty of brawn. From 
time to time there were too many of them and then the young men 
went off on their "travels", i.e., enlisted in foreign armies where they 
displayed the most steadfast loyalty to the flag no matter what 
happened. One can only say of the Swiss that they let themselves be 
killed most conscientiously for their pay. 
The greatest boast of these burly L/r-Swiss was that from time 
immemorial they had never deviated by a hair's breadth from the 
customs of their forefathers, that they had retained the simple, 
chaste, upright and virtuous customs of their fathers unsullied 
throughout the centuries. And this is true. Every attempt at 
civilisation was defeated by the granite walls of their mountains and 
of their heads. From the days when Winkelried's first ancestor led his 

=====第398页=====
370 Frederick Engels 
cow, with the inevitable little pastoral bell round its neck, on to the 
virgin pastures of the Vierwaldstätter Lake, up to the present day, 
when the latest descendant of Winkelried has his gun blessed by the 
priest, all houses have been built in the same way, all cows milked in 
the same way, all pigtails plaited in the same way, all cheeses 
prepared according to the same recipe, all children made in the same 
way. Here, in the mountains, is Paradise, here the Fall of Man has 
not yet come to pass. And should some innocent Alpine lad happen 
to find his way to the great outside world and allow himself to be 
tempted for a moment by the seductions of the big cities, by the 
artificial charms of a decadent civilisation, by the vices of sinful 
countries, which have no mountains and where corn thrives—his 
innocence is so deep-rooted that he can never quite succumb. A 
sound strikes his ear, just two of those notes of the Alpine cowherd's 
call that sound like a dog's howling, and he falls on his knees, 
weeping and overwhelmed with remorse, and at once tears himself 
from the arms of seduction and will not rest until he lies at the feet 
of his old father! "Father, I have sinned against my ancient moun­
tains and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy 
son." 3 
In recent times two invasions against these artless customs and 
primitive power have been attempted. The first was by the French in 
1798.  But these French, who spread a little civilisation everywhere 
else, failed with these Ur-Swiss. No trace of their presence has 
remained, they were unable to eliminate one single jot of the old 
customs and virtues. The second invasion took place about twenty 
years later and did at least bear a little fruit. This was the invasion of 
English travellers, of London lords and squiresb and the hordes of 
chandlers, soap-manufacturers, grocers and bone merchants who 
followed them. This invasion at least ended the old hospitality and 
transformed the honest inhabitants of the Alpine huts, who 
previously hardly knew what money was, into the most mean and 
rascally swindlers anywhere to be found. But this advance made no 
impact at all on the old simple customs. This not so very virtuous 
chicanery fitted in perfectly with the patriarchal virtues of chastity, 
skill, probity and loyalty. Even their piety suffered no injury; the 
priests were delighted to give them absolution for all the deceptions 
practised on British heretics. 
But it now looks as if all this moral purity is about to be thoroughly 
stirred up. It is to be hoped that the punitive detachments will do 
a Luke 15:21 (paraphrased).—Ed. 
In the original the words "lords" and "squires" are in English.—Ed. 

=====第399页=====
The Civil War in Switzerland 371 
their best to finish off all the probity, primitive power and simplicity. 
Then moan, you philistines! For there will be no more poor but 
contented shepherds whose carefree peace of mind you might wish 
for yourselves on Sundays after you have made your cut out of 
selling coffee made of chicory and tea made of sloe leaves during the 
other six days of the week. Then weep, you schoolmasters, for there 
will be an end to your hopes for a new Sempach-Marathon and other 
classical feats. Then mourn, you hysterical virgins over thirty, for 
those six-inch leg calves, the thought of which solaced your solitary 
dreams, will soon be gone—gone the Antinous-like beauty of the 
powerful "Swiss peasant lads", gone the firm thighs and tight 
trousers which attract you so irresistibly to the Alps. Then sigh, 
tender and anaemic boarding-school misses, who when reading 
Schiller's works delighted in the chaste but oh so powerful love of the 
agile chamois hunters, for all your fond illusions are lost and now 
there is nothing left for you but to read the works of Henrik Steffens 
and fall for the frigid Norwegians. 
But no more of that. The L/r-Swiss must be fought with weapons 
quite different from mere ridicule. Democracy has to settle accounts 
with them about matters quite different from their patriarchal 
virtues. 
Who defended the Bastille on July 14, 1789 against the people 
who were storming it? Who shot down the workers of the Faubourg 
St. Antoine with grape-shot and rifle bullets from behind safe walls? 
—L/r-Swiss from the Sonderbund, grandsons of Tell, Stauffâcher 
and Winkelried. 
Who defended the traitor Louis XVI on August 10, 1792 from the 
just wrath of the people, in the Louvre and the Tuileries? —L/r-Swiss 
from the Sonderbund. 
Who suppressed the Neapolitan revolution of 1798 with the help 
of Nelson?—L/r-Swiss from the Sonderbund. 
Who re-established the absolute monarchy in Naples—with the 
help of Austrians—in 1823?—L/r-Swiss from the Sonderbund. 
Who fought to the last on July 29, 1830, again for a treacherous 
king3  and again shot Paris workers down from the windows and 
colonnades of the Louvre?—L/r-Swiss from the Sonderbund. 
Who suppressed the insurrections in Romagna in 1830 and 1831, 
again along with the Austrians, with a brutality which achieved world 
notoriety?—L/r-Swiss from the Sonderbund. 
In short, who holds the Italians down, to this day, forcing them to 
bow to the oppressive domination of their aristocrats, princes and 
a Charles  X.—Ed. 

=====第400页=====
372 Frederick Engels 
priests; who was Austria's right hand in Italy, who enables the 
bloodhound Ferdinand of Naples to keep a tight rein on his 
anguish-stricken people to this very moment, who has been acting as 
his executioners to this day carrying out the mass shootings 
he orders? Always, again and again, l/r-Swiss from the Sonder­
bund, again and again, the grandsons of Tell, Stauffacher and 
Winkelried! 
In one word, wherever and whenever a revolutionary movement 
broke out in France either directly or indirectly advantageous to 
democracy, it was always t/r-Swiss mercenaries who fought it to the 
last, with the utmost resolution. And especially in Italy these Swiss 
mercenaries were always the most devoted servants and handy men 
of" Austria. A just punishment for the glorious liberation of 
Switzerland from the talons of the two-headed eagle! 
One should not think that these mercenaries were the refuse of 
their country, or that they were disavowed by their fellow-
countrymen. Have not the people of Lucerne had a statue hewn out 
of the rock at their city gates by the pious Icelander Thorvaldsen, 
depicting a huge lion, bleeding from an arrow wound, covering the 
Bourbon fleur-de-lis with his paw, faithful unto death, in memory of 
the Swiss who died at the Louvre on August 10, 1792? This is the way 
Sonderbund honours the venal loyalty of its sons. It lives by the trade 
in human beings and glorifies it. 
Can the English, French and German democrats have had 
anything in common with this kind of democracy? 
Through its industry, its commerce and its political institutions, 
the bourgeoisie is already working everywhere to drag the small, 
self-contained localities which only live for themselves out of their 
isolation, to bring them into contact with one another, to merge their 
interests, to expand their local horizons, to destroy their local habits, 
strivings and ways of thinking, and to build up a great nation with 
common interests, customs and ideas out of the many hitherto 
mutually independent localities and provinces. The bourgeoisie is 
already carrying out considerable centralisation. The proletariat, far 
from suffering any disadvantage from this, will as a result rather be 
in a position to unite, to feel itself a class, to acquire a proper political 
point of view within the democracy, and finally to conquer the 
bourgeoisie. The democratic proletariat not only needs the kind of 
centralisation begun by the bourgeoisie but will have to extend it very 
much further. During the short time when the proletariat was at the 
helm of state in the French Revolution, during the rule of the 
Mountain party, it used all means—including grape-shot and the 
guillotine—to effect centralisation. When the democratic proletariat 

=====第401页=====
The Civil War in Switzerland 373 
again comes to power, it will not only have to centralise every country 
separately but will have to centralise all civilised countries together as 
soon as possible. 
l/r-Switzerland, on the other hand, has never done anything but 
obstruct centralisation; with really brutish obstinacy it has insisted on 
its isolation from the whole outside world, on its local customs, 
habits, prejudices, narrow-mindedness and seclusion. It has stood 
still in the centre of Europe at the level of its original barbarism, 
while all other nations, even the other Swiss, have gone forward. It 
stands pat on cantonal sovereignty with all the obduracy of the crude 
primitive Germans, that is, on the right to be eternally stupid, 
bigoted, brutal, narrow-minded, recalcitrant and venal if it so wishes, 
whether its neighbours like it or not. If their own brutish situation 
comes under discussion, they no longer recognise such things as 
majorities, agreements or obligations. But in the 19th century it is no 
longer possible for two parts of one and the same country to exist 
side by side without any mutual intercourse and influence. The 
radical cantons affect the Sonderbund, the Sonderbund affects the 
radical cantons, where, too, very crude elements still exist here and 
there. The radical cantons are, therefore, interested in getting the 
Sonderbund to abandon its bigotry, narrow-mindedness and obdu­
racy, and if it won't, then its self-will must be broken by force; and 
this is what is happening at this moment. 
The civil war which has now broken out can only help the cause of 
democracy. Even though there is still a great deal of primitive 
Germanic crudity to be found in the radical cantons, even though a 
peasant, or a bourgeois regiment, or a mixture of both is concealed 
behind their democracy, even though the most civilised cantons still 
lag behind the development of European civilisation and really 
modern elements only rise to the top slowly here and there, this is no 
great help to the Sonderbund. It is necessary, urgently necessary, 
that this last bastion of brutal, primitive Germanism, of barbarism, 
bigotry, patriarchal simplicity and moral purity, of immobility, of 
loyalty unto death to the highest bidder, should at last be destroyed. 
The more energetically the Swiss Diet sets to work and the 
more violently it shakes up this old nest of priests, the more claim 
it will have on the support of all really resolute democrats and 
the more it will prove that it understands its position. But of course 
the five great powers are there and the radicals themselves are 
afraid. 
As far as the Sonderbund is concerned, it is significant that the 
true sons of William Tell have to beg the House of Austria, 
Switzerland's hereditary foe, for help just when Austria is baser, 

=====第402页=====
374 Frederick Engels 
viler, meaner and more hateful than ever. This is yet another part of 
the punishment for the glorious liberation of Switzerland from the 
talons of the two-headed eagle and the much boasting that went with 
it. And for the cup of punishment to be filled to the brim Austria 
itself has to be in such a pass that it could not give William Tell's 
sons any help whatever. 
Written about November 10, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 91, November 14, 1847 time 

=====第403页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE REFORM MOVEMENT IN FRANCE 
When, during the last session of the Legislative Chambers, M. 
E. de Girardin had brought to light those numerous and scandal­
ous facts of corruption which he thought would overthrow the 
government; when, after all, the government had maintained 
themselves against the storm; when the celebrated Two Hundred 
and Twenty-Five 3 declared themselves "satisfied" as to the innocence 
of the ministry, all seemed to be over, and the Parliamentary 
Opposition, towards the close of the session, fell back into the same 
impotency and lethargy which they had manifested at the beginning. 
But all was not over. Though Messrs Rothschild, Fould, Foulchiron, 
and Co. were satisfied, the people were not, nor was a large portion 
of the middle classes. The majority of the French bourgeoisie, 
especially those of the second and third rank, could not but see that 
the present class of electors became more and more the obedient 
servants of a small number of bankers, stock-jobbers, railway-
speculators, large manufacturers, landed and mining proprietors, 
whose interest was the only interest cared for by the government. 
They saw that there was no hope for them ever to regain the position 
in the Chambers which, since 1830, they had been losing more and 
more every day, unless they extended the suffrage. They knew that 
electoral and parliamentary Reform was a dangerous experiment 
for them to try; but what could they do? Seeing that the haute finance, 
the lords of Paris Exchange, bought up the government and both the 
Chambers; seeing their own interests openly trampled upon; they 
were obliged either to submit patiently, and await humbly and 
a The majority in the Chamber of Deputies supporting the Guizot govern­
ment.—Ed. 

=====第404页=====
376 Frederick Engels 
quietly the day when the encroachments of the ruling money lords 
would make them bankrupts, or to risk parliamentary Reform. They 
preferred the latter. 
The Opposition, of all shades, therefore, united, some four 
months ago, in getting up a demonstration in favour of Electoral 
Reform. A public dinner was arranged and took place in July, at the 
Château-Rouge ball-rooms, at Paris. All fractions of Reformers were 
represented, and the assembly was rather mixed; but the Democrats, 
having been the most active, evidently predominated. They had 
made it a condition of their assistance, that the king's 3 health should 
not be drunk, but be replaced by a toast in favour of the sovereignty 
of the people; the committee knowing well that in the most 
democratic town of France they could not get up a decent 
demonstration without the Democrats, were obliged to comply. If I 
recollect rightly, you gave, at the time, a full account of the 
banquet,179 which was in every respect more like a demonstration of 
the strength, both in number and intellect, of democracy at Paris, 
than anything else. 
The Journal des Débats failed not to raise a terrible outcry about 
this banquet. 
"What! no toast to the king? and this toast not omitted by negligence, by want of a 
sense of propriety—no, this omission put as a condition for their support by part of 
the getters-up! Why, what pretty company this calm and peaceful M. Duvergier de 
Hauranne —this moral-force, monarchical M. Odilon Barrot have got into! Why, this 
is not mere republicanism—this is revolutionism, physical-forcism, socialism, utopi-
anism, anarchism and communism! Ah, but, gentlemen, we know you—we have had 
samples of your bloody deeds, we have proofs of what you are contending for! Fifty 
years ago, gentlemen, you called yourselves the club of the Jacobinsl" lS0 
Next day's National replied to the fierce and furious vituperation 
of the furiously moderate paper by a host of quotations from Louis 
Philippe's private journal, written in 1790 and 1791, where every 
day's note of the then "Citizen Égalité b junior" commenced with the 
words: 
"To-day I was at the Jacobins"—"To-day I took the liberty of saying a few words at 
the Jacobins which were warmly applauded"—"To-day I was called to the office of 
door-keeper at the Jacobins", etc.c 
The central committee of the Opposition had invited their friends 
in the country to imitate the example given by the metropolis, in 
a Louis Philippe.—Ed. 
b The name which Duke of Orleans, Louis Philippe's father, took during the 
French Revolution.—Ed. 
c "Journal du duc de Chartre" in Le National, August 12, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第405页=====
The Reform Movement in France 377 
getting up everywhere similar banquets in favour of Reform. This 
was done accordingly, and a great number of Reform dinners were 
held in almost all parts of France. But not everywhere the same 
union of all fractions of Reformers could be made to prevail. In a 
great number of the smaller towns the middle-class Liberals were 
strong enough to carry the king's health being drunk, by which the 
Democrats were excluded. In other localities they tried to make it 
pass in the shape of a toast:—"The constitutional king, and the 
sovereignty of the people." This being not yet sufficient to the 
Democrats, they went on shuffling, and replaced the "constitutional 
king" by the "constitutional institutions", among which royalty, of 
course, was tacitly comprised. The great question now agitated 
among the provincial Liberals is, whether they are to give up even 
this, and to resign all attempts at carrying the king's health in 
whatever shape or disguise it be, or whether they are to separate 
openly from the Democrats, who, in that case, would get up separate 
and competing banquets. For the democratic party insist upon the 
original agreement, that the king be not mixed up at all with the 
affair, and if in one case the National has been wavering a little, the 
party of the Réforme stand firmly on the side of republicanism. In all 
the large towns the Liberals have been forced to give way, and'if in 
the localities of lesser importance they have carried the king's health, 
it is because such banquets cost a great deal of money, and, 
therefore, the people are naturally excluded from them. On the 
occasion of the banquet of Bar-le-Duc, the Réforme says: 
"Whoever would take such demonstration as a sample of the state of public 
opinion in France, would be very much mistaken indeed; they are got up by the 
middle classes only, and the people are entirely shut out from them. This agitation, if 
it be confined to the limits of the Bar-le-Duc banquet, will vanish like all bourgeois 
movements; like the Free Trade movement, which after a few hollow speeches died 
away very soon."3 
The first large banquet, after that of Paris, was held at Strasburg, 
in the beginning of September. It was rather a democratic one, and a 
working man, at the close of it, proposed a toast to the organisation 
of labour, which term, in France, expresses that which in England 
the National Association of United Trades 181 are trying to carry out; 
viz. the freeing of labour from the oppression of capital by carrying 
on manufacturing, agricultural, and other purposes, for the account, 
either of the associated working men themselves, or of the people at 
large, under a democratic government. 
Then came the banquets of Bar-le-Duc, a  bourgeois  demonstration, 
finished by the Mayor proposing the health of the Constitutional 
"Banquet de Bar-le-Duc". —Ed. 

=====第406页=====
378 Frederick Engels 
King (very constitutional, indeed); of Colmar, Rheims, and Meaux, 
all of them entirely dominated by the bourgeoisie, who, in those 
secondary towns, always have it all their own way. 
But the banquet of Saint-Quentin, again, was more or less 
democratic; and that of Orleans, in the last days of September, was, 
from beginning to end, a thoroughly democratic meeting. Judge of it 
by the toast to the working classes, responded to by M. Marie, one of 
the most celebrated barristers of Paris, and a democrat. He 
commenced his speech in the following terms: 
"To the working men—to those men, always neglected and forgotten, but always 
faithful to the interests of their country, always ready to die for its cause, be it in 
defending their native land against foreign aggression, be it in guarding our 
institutions, when menaced by inward foes! To those, from whom we demanded the 
days of July,182 and who gave them to us; terrible in their actions, generous in their 
triumph, resplendent with courage, probity, and disinterestedness!"3 
and concluded the toast in these words: "Liberty, equality, 
fraternity!" It is characteristic that the Orleans banquet was the only 
one at which we find it stated that covers were reserved for the 
representatives of the working people. 
The banquets of Culommiers, Melun, and Cosne, again, were 
mere bourgeoisie gatherings. The "Left Centre", the middle-class 
Liberals of the Constitutionnel and Siècle, amused themselves in 
listening to the speeches of MM. Barrot, Beaumont, Drouyn de 
Lhuys, and such like retailers of Reform. At Cosne, the democrats 
openly declared against the demonstration, because the king's health 
was insisted upon. The same narrow spirit prevailed at the banquet 
of La Charité, on the Loire. 
In return, the Reform dinner of Chartres was thoroughly 
democratic. No toast to the king—toasts for Electoral and Parliamen­
tary Reform upon the largest base, for Poland and Italy, for the 
organisation of labour. 
This week banquets will take place at Lille, Valenciennes, Avesnes, 
and throughout the Department of the North generally. Those of 
Lille and Valenciennes, at least, will probably take a decidedly 
democratic turn. In the South of France, at Lyons, and in the West, 
other demonstrations are preparing. The Reform Movement is far 
from being near to its close. 
You see from this account that, from its very beginning, the 
Reform Movement of 1847 has been marked by a struggle betwixt 
the Liberals and the Democrats; that while the Liberals carried their 
ends in all the smaller localities, the Democrats were the stronger in 
a Quoted from the article "Banquet réformiste du département du Loiret". —Ed. 

=====第407页=====
The Reform Movement in France 379 
all large towns: in Paris, Strasburg, Orleans, Chartres, and even in 
one smaller town, in Saint-Quentin; that the Liberals were very 
anxious of having the support of the Democrats; that they shuffled 
and made concessions, while the Democrats never retracted an iota 
of the condition under which they were ready to give their support, 
and that wherever the Democrats assisted, they had it all their own 
way. Thus, after all, the whole movement has been turned to the 
profit of democracy, for all those banquets which excited public 
attention in some degree, were, one and all, democratic. 
The Reform movement was seconded by the Departmental 
Councils, who met in September, and who are entirely composed by 
bourgeois. The Councils of the Departments of the Côté-d'Or, of 
Finisterre, of the Aisne, the Moselle, the Haut-Rhin, the Oise, the 
Vosges, the North, and others, demanded, more or less, extensive 
reforms, all of them, of course, confined to the limits of bourgeois 
Liberalism. 
But what, will you ask, are the reforms demanded? There are as 
many different systems of reform, as there are shades of Liberals 
and Radicals. The least thing asked for, is the extension of the 
Suffrage, to what is called the capacities, or what you, in England, 
would call the learned professions, even if they do not pay the 200 
francs of direct taxes, which make, at present, a man a voter. Then 
the Liberals have some other propositions, more or less in common 
with the Radicals. These are:— 
1st. The extension of the incompatibilities, or the declaring of 
certain government offices to be incompatible with the functions of a 
representative. The government have, at present, more than 150 of 
their subordinate employees in the Deputies, all of which may, at any 
moment, be cashiered, and are, therefore, entirely dependent upon 
the Ministry. 
2nd. The enlargement of some electoral districts, some of which 
are composed of less than 150 voters, who are, therefore, entirely 
ruled through the influence of the government upon their local and 
personal interests. 
3rd. The electing of all deputies of a Department in a full meeting 
of all the electors, assembled at its principal town, by which means 
local interests are intended to be more or less submerged in the 
common interests of the whole Department, and thus render 
nugatory the corruption and influence of the government. 
Then, there are proposals for lowering the amount of the voting 
qualification in different degrees. The most radical of these 
propositions is that of the National, the paper of the Republican 
small tradesmen, for extending the suffrage to all men belonging to 

=====第408页=====
380 Frederick Engels 
the National Guard. This would give the vote to the entire class of 
small tradesmen and shopkeepers, and extend the suffrage in the 
same degree as the Reform Bill has done in England; but the 
consequences of such a measure would, in France, be much more 
important. The small bourgeoisie in this country are so much 
oppressed and squeezed by the large capitalists, that they would be 
obliged to have recourse to direct aggressive measures against the 
moneylords, as soon as they get the suffrage. As I said in an article I 
sent you some months ago, they would be carried further and 
further, even against their own consent; they would be forced either 
to give up the positions already won, or to form an open alliance with 
the working classes, and that would, sooner or later, lead to the 
Republic.3  They know this in some measure. Most of them support 
Universal Suffrage, and so does the National, which goes for the 
above measure only, as far as it is considered as a preliminary step in 
the road of reform. Of all Parisian daily papers, there is, however, 
but one which will not be satisfied with anything less than Universal 
Suffrage, and which, by the term "Republic", understands not 
merely Political Reforms, which will, after all, leave the working 
classes as miserable as before—but Social Reforms, and very definite 
ones too. This paper is the Réforme. 
The Reform movement is, however, not to be considered as the 
totality of the agitation now going on in France. Far from it! At all 
these banquets be they Liberal or Democratic, the middle classes 
were predominating; that of Orleans was the only one in which 
working men took part. The movement of the working people is 
going on, side by side, with these banquets, silently, underground, 
almost invisible, for every one who does not take the trouble of 
looking after it. But it is going on more lively than ever. The 
government know this very well. They have given their permission 
to all these middle-class banquets; but when the typographic working 
men of Paris, in September, asked for the permission to hold their 
annual banquet, which, up to the present time, they had held every 
year, and which was in no manner of a political character, it was 
refused to them. The government are so afraid of the working 
people, that they do not allow them the slightest liberty. They are 
afraid, because the people have entirely given up all attempts at 
insurrection and rioting. The government desire a riot, they provoke 
it by every means. The police throw out small bombshells filled with 
incendiary papers; which, by the explosion of the shell, are spread all 
over the streets. A trades' affair in the Rue S. Honoré was profited by 
a See this volume, p.  219.—\Ed. 

=====第409页=====
The Reform Movement in France 381 
to make the most brutal attacks upon the people, in order to provoke 
them to riot and violence.183 Tens of thousands assembled every 
evening during a fortnight; they were treated in the most infamous 
manner; they were on the very brink of repelling force by force; but 
they held out and no pretext for more gagging laws are to be forced 
from them. And think, what a tacit understanding, what a common 
feeling of what was to be done, at the moment, must have prevailed; 
what an effort it must have cost to the people of Paris, to submit to 
such infamous treatment rather than try a hopeless insurrection. 
What an enormous progress this forebearance proves in those very 
same working men of Paris, who seldom went into the streets, 
without battering to pieces every thing before them; who are 
accustomed to insurrection, and who go into a revolution just as gaily 
as they go to the wineshop! But if you would draw from this the 
conclusion that the revolutionary ardour of the people is decreasing, 
you would be quite mistaken. On the contrary, the necessity of a 
revolution, and a revolution more thoroughgoing, more radical by 
far than the first one, is deeper than ever felt by the working people 
here.  But they know from the experience of 1830, that mere fighting 
will not do; that the enemy once beaten, they must establish 
measures that will guarantee the stability of their conquest; that will 
destroy not only the political, but the social power of capital, that will 
guarantee their social welfare, along with their political strength. 
And, therefore, they very quietly await their opportunity, but, in the 
meantime, earnestly apply themselves to the study of those questions 
of social economy, the solution of which will show what measures 
alone can establish, upon a firm basis, the welfare of all. Within a 
month or two, six thousand copies of M. Louis Blanc's work on "The 
Organisation of Labour",3  have been sold in the workshops of Paris, 
and you must consider, that five editions of this book had been 
published before. They read likewise a number of other works upon 
these questions; they meet in small numbers of from ten to twenty, 
and discuss the different plans propounded therein. They talk not 
much of revolution, this being a thing admitting of no doubt, a 
subject upon which they one and all agree; and when the moment 
will have arrived, at which a collision between the people and the 
government will be inevitable, down they will be in the streets and 
squares at a moment's notice, tearing up the pavement, laying 
omnibuses, carts and coaches, across the streets, barricading every 
alley, making every narrow lane a fortress, and advancing, in spite of 
all resistance, from the Bastille to the Tuileries. 184 And then, I fear, 
a Louis Blanc, Organisation du travail.—Ed. 

=====第410页=====
382 Frederick Engels 
most of the reform banquet gentry will hide themselves in the 
darkest corner of their houses, or be scattered like dead leaves before 
the popular thunderstorm. Then it will be all over with Messrs 
Odilon Barrot, de Beaumont and other Liberal thunderers, and then 
the people will judge them quite as severely as they now judge the 
Conservative Governments. 
Written in early November 1847 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 526, November 20, 1847 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our Paris Correspondent" 

=====第411页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE CHARTIST MOVEMENT] 1 
The opening of the recently elected Parliament that counts among 
its members distinguished representatives of the People's Party186 
could not but produce extraordinary excitement in the ranks of 
democracy. Everywhere the local Chartist associations are being 
reorganised. The number of meetings increases and the most diverse 
ways and means of taking action are being proposed and discussed. 
The Executive of the National Charter Association187 has just 
assumed leadership of this movement, outlining in an address to the 
British democrats the plan of campaign which the party will follow 
during the present session. 
"In a few days," we are told, "a meeting will be held which in the face of the people 
dares to call itself the assembly of the commons of England. In a few days this 
assembly, elected by only one class of society, will begin its iniquitous and odious work 
of strengthening the interests of this class, to the detriment of the people. 
"The people must protest en  masse  at the very beginning against the exercise of the 
legislative functions usurped by this assembly. You, Chartists of the United Kingdom, 
you have the means to do so; it is your duty to use them to advantage. We therefore 
submit to you a new national petition with the demands of the People's Charter. Cover 
it with millions of your signatures. Make it possible for us to present it as the 
expression of the will of the nation, as the solemn protest of the people against every 
law passed without the consent of the people, as a Bill, finally, for the restoration of 
the sovereignty out of which the nation has been tricked for so many centuries. 
"But the petition by itself will not suffice to meet the needs of the moment. True, 
we have won a seat in the legislative chamber by electing Mr. O'Connor. The 
democratic members will find him to be a vigilant and energetic leader. But O'Connor 
must be supported by pressure from without, and it is you who should create this 
pressure from without, this strong and imposing public opinion. Let the sections of 
our Association be reorganised everywhere; let all our former members rejoin our 
ranks;  let meetings be called everywhere; let everywhere the Charter be made the 
issue of the day; let each locality contribute its share to increase our funds. Be active, 

=====第412页=====
384 Frederick Engels 
give proof of the old energy of the English and the campaign we are opening will be 
the most glorious ever undertaken for the victory of democracy."3 
The Fraternal Democrats,188 a society consisting of democrats from 
almost every nation in Europe, has also just joined, openly and 
unreservedly, in the agitation of the Chartists. They adopted a 
resolution of the following tenor: 
"Whereas the English people will be unable effectively to support democracy's 
struggle in other countries until it has won democratic government for  itself;  and 
"whereas our society, established to succour the militant democracy of every 
country, is duty-bound to come to the aid of the English democrats in their effort to 
obtain an electoral reform on the basis of the Charter; 
"therefore the Fraternal Democrats undertake to support with all their strength 
the agitation for the People's Charter."b 
This fraternal society, which counts among its members the most 
distinguished democrats, both English and foreigners residing in 
London, is daily gaining in importance. It has grown to such 
proportions that the London liberals have considered it advisable to 
set up in opposition to it a bourgeois International League189 headed 
by Free-Trade parliamentary celebrities. The sole object of this new 
association, whose leadership includes Dr. Bowring, Col. Thompson 
and other champions of Free Trade, is to carry on Free-Trade 
propaganda abroad under cover of philanthropic and liberal 
phrases. But it seems that the association will not make much 
headway. During the six months of its existence it has done almost 
nothing, whereas the Fraternal Democrats have openly come out 
against any act of oppression, no matter who may attempt to commit 
it. Hence the democrats, both English and foreign, in so far as the 
latter are represented in London, have attached themselves to the 
Fraternal Democrats, declaring at the same time that they will not 
allow themselves to be exploited for the benefit of England's 
Free-Trade manufacturers. 
Written on November 21, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
November 22, 1847 
a "The Executive Committee to the Chartists of the United Kingdom", November 
18, 1847.—Ed. 
b Resolution of the Fraternal Democrats, November 15, 1847.—\Ed. 

=====第413页=====
Frederick Engels 
SPLIT IN THE CAMP.— 
THE RÉFORME AND THE NATIONAL.— 
MARCH OF DEMOCRACY190 
Since my last3 the banquets of Lille, Avesnes, and Valenciennes, 
have been held. Avesnes was merely constitutional; Valenciennes 
half-and-half; Lille a decided triumph of democracy over middle-
class intrigue. Here are, shortly, the facts concerning this most 
important meeting:— 
Besides the liberals and the party of the National the democrats of 
the Réforme had been invited, and Messrs Ledru-Rollin and Flocon, 
editor of the last-named paper, had accepted the invitation. 
M. Odilon Barrot, the virtuous middle-class thunderer, was also 
invited. Every thing was ready, the toasts were prepared, when all of 
a sudden M. Odilon Barrot declared he could not assist, nor speak to 
his toast, "Parliamentary Reform", unless that reform was qualified 
by adding:—"as a means to insure the purity and sincerity of the 
institutions conquered in July 1830." This addition excluded, of 
course, the republicans. Great consternation of the committee 
ensued. M. Barrot was inflexible. At last it was resolved to submit the 
decision to the whole meeting. But the meeting very plainly declared 
they would have no alterations in the programme; they would not 
violate the understanding upon which the democrats had come to 
Lille.  M. Odilon Barrot, along with his tail of liberal deputies and 
editors, scornfully retired; Messrs Flocon and Ledru-Rollin were 
sent for, the banquet took place in spite of the liberals, and 
M. Ledru's speech was rapturously applauded. 
Thus the treacherous plot of the middle-class reformers resulted 
in a glorious triumph of democracy. M. Odilon Barrot had to 
decamp shamefully and will never dare to show his face again in the 
democratic city of Lille. His only excuse was, he had understood the 
a See this volume, pp. 375-82.—Ed. 

=====第414页=====
386 Frederick Engels 
gentlemen of the Réforme intended to profit by the Lille banquet to 
get up a revolution—in the very depth of tranquillity! 
A few days after, M. Barrot got some consolation in the Avesnes 
banquet, a mere family meeting of some middle-class liberals. Here 
he had the pleasure of toasting the King.3  But at Valenciennes he was 
again obliged to pocket his favourite sentiment, dropped so sadly at 
Lille;  no King's health was to be drunk, although the formidable 
getters-up of revolutions, at the shortest notice, were not at hand. 
The discomfited thunderer will have to devour his virtuous 
indignation until another hole-and-corner banquet will allow him to 
denounce "anarchism", "physical forcism", and "communism", to 
the astounded grocers and tallow-chandlers of some petty provincial 
town. 
The Lille banquet produced extraordinary discussions in the 
press.  The Conservative papers shouted triumph at the division in 
the ranks of the reformers. M. Thiers' old and drowsy Constitution­
nel, and the Siècle, M. Barrot's "own", all of a sudden were seized 
with the most dreadful convulsions. 
"No,"  shouted the indignant Siècle to its shopkeeping public, "no, we are none of 
these anarchists, we have nothing in common with these restorers of the reign of 
terror, with these followers of Marat and Robespierre: we would prefer to their reign 
of blood the present system, were it even a hundred times worse than it is!" 
And quite rightly; for such peaceful grocers and tallow-chandlers 
the white nightcap is a hundred times more fit than the red cap of 
the Jacobin. At the same time, however, that these papers heaped 
their vilest and most virulent abuse upon the Réforme, they treated 
the National with the utmost esteem. The National, indeed, has 
behaved, on this occasion, in a more than doubtful manner. Already 
at the banquet of Cosne, this paper blamed the conduct of several 
democrats who would not assist on account of the King's health being 
proposed. Now, again, it spoke very coolly of the Lille banquet, and 
deplored the accident which for a moment troubled the demonstra­
tion, while several provincial allies of the National openly attacked 
the conduct of Messrs Ledru and Flocon. The Réforme now asked of 
that paper a more explicit declaration. The National declared his ar­
ticle to be quite explicit enough. Then, asked the Réforme, what was 
the deplorable accident at Lille? What is it you deplore? Is it M. Bar-
rot's or M. Ledru-Rollin's conduct you deplore? Is it M. Barrot's 
impudence or his bad luck you deplore? Is it M. Ledru's speech in 
favour of Universal Suffrage? Is it the discomfiture of monarchism, 
the triumph of democracy, you deplore? Do you avow, or not, what 
your provincial allies say on this occasion? Do you accept the praise 
a Louis Philippe.—Ed. 

=====第415页=====
Split in the Camp.— The Réforme and the National 387 
of the Siècle, or do you take our part of the abuse it heaps upon us? 
Would you have advised M. Marie, your friend, to submit, if, at Orle­
ans, M. Odilon Barrot had made similar pretensions? The National 
replied, from party motives they would have no controversy with 
the Réforme: they were not responsible for articles sent to provin­
cial papers by a  "friend"  of theirs; as to the other questions, the past 
of the National allowed them to pass them unnoticed, and not to trou­
ble themselves with a reply. The Réforme gave the whole of this reply, 
with this remark only:—"Our questions remain." 3 Democrats now 
have the documents under their eyes—they may judge for them­
selves. This they have done; a whole host of radical, and even liberal, 
papers of France have declared in the most decided terms for the 
Réforme. 
The conduct of the National, indeed, deserves the strongest blame. 
This paper is getting more and more into the hands of the middle 
classes. It has of late always deserted the cause of democracy at the 
decisive moment; it has always preached union with the middle 
classes, and has on more than one occasion served none but Thiers 
and Odilon Barrot. If the National does not very soon change its 
conduct, it will cease to be counted as a democratic paper. And in this 
Lille affair, the National, out of mere personal antipathy against men 
more radical than  itself,  has not hesitated to sacrifice the very prin­
ciples upon which [it] itself had contracted an alliance with the 
liberals in order to get up banquets. After what has passed, the 
National will never again be able to oppose seriously toasting the 
King at future banquets. The "past" of the National is not so very 
bright as to allow of its answering by silence only the questions of its 
contemporary. Think only of its defence of the Parisian Bastilles!191 
P.S.—The Reform Banquet of Dijon has come off this week. 
Thirteen hundred sat down at dinner. The whole affair was 
thoroughly democratic. No toast to the King, of course. All the 
speakers belonged to the party of the Réforme. MM. Louis Blanc, 
Flocon, E. Arago, and Ledru-Rollin, were the chief speakers. M. Flo-
con, editor of the Réforme, spoke to the toast of the foreign dem­
ocrats, and mentioned the English Chartists in a very honourable 
manner. Next week I shall give you his speech at full length, as well 
as a full report of the whole proceedings of this most important 
meeting. 6 
Written at the end of November 1847 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 528, December 4, 1847 
a La Réforme, November 16, 1847.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 397-401 and 409-11.—Ed. 
! 4—  1H2B 

=====第416页=====
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[ON POLAND] 
SPEECHES AT THE INTERNATIONAL MEETING 
HELD IN LONDON ON NOVEMBER 29, 1847 TO MARK 
THE 17TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE POLISH UPRISING OF 1830 
MARX'S SPEECH 
The unification and brotherhood of nations is a phrase on the lips 
of all parties today, especially those of bourgeois free traders. A 
certain kind of brotherhood does of course exist among the 
bourgeois classes of all nations. It is the brotherhood of the 
oppressors against the oppressed, of the exploiters against the 
exploited. Just as, despite the competition and conflicts existing 
between the members of the bourgeoisie, the bourgeois class of one 
country is united by brotherly ties against the proletariat of that 
country, so the bourgeois of all countries, despite their mutual 
conflicts and competition on the world market, are united by 
brotherly ties against the proletariat of all countries. For the peoples 
to be able truly to unite, they must have common interests. And in 
order that their interests may become common, the existing property 
relations must be done away with, for these property relations 
involve the exploitation of some nations by others: the abolition of 
existing property relations is the concern only of the working class. It 
alone has also the means for doing this. The victory of the proletariat 
over the bourgeoisie is, at the same time, victory over the national 
and industrial conflicts which today range the peoples of the various 
countries against one another in hostility and enmity. And so the 
victory of the proletariat over the bourgeoisie is at the same time the 
signal of liberation for all oppressed nations. 
The old Poland is lost in any case and we would be the last to wish 
for its restoration. But it is not only the old Poland that is lost. The 
old Germany, the old France, the old England, the whole of the old 
society is lost. But the loss of the old society is no loss for those who 
have nothing to lose in the old society, and this is the case of the great 
majority in all countries at the present time. They have rather 

=====第417页=====
On Poland 389 
everything to gain by the downfall of the old society, which is the 
condition for the establishment of a new society, one no longer based 
on class antagonisms. 
Of all countries, England is the one where the contradiction 
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie is most highly devel­
oped. The victory of the English proletarians over the English 
bourgeoisie is, therefore, decisive for the victory of all the oppressed 
over their oppressors. Hence Poland must be liberated not in Poland 
but in England. So you Chartists must not simply express pious 
wishes for the liberation of nations. Defeat your own internal 
enemies and you will then be able to pride yourselves on having 
defeated the entire old society. 
ENGELS' SPEECH 
Allow me, dear friends, to speak here today as an exception in my 
capacity as a German. For we German democrats have a special 
interest in the liberation of Poland. It was German princes who 
derived great advantages from the division of Poland and it is 
German soldiers who are still holding down Galicia and Posen. The 
responsibility for removing this disgrace from our nation rests on us 
Germans, on us German democrats above all. A nation cannot 
become free and at the same time continue to oppress other nations. 
The liberation of Germany cannot therefore take piace without the 
liberation of Poland from German oppression. And because of this, 
Poland and Germany have a common interest, and because of this, 
Polish and German democrats can work together for the liberation 
of both nations.—I also believe that the first decisive blow which will 
lead to the victory of democracy, to the liberation of all European 
nations, will be struck by the English Chartists. I have lived in 
England for a number of years now and openly aligned myself with 
the Chartist movement during this period. The English Chartists will 
be the first to rise because it is precisely in England that the struggle 
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat is the most intense. And 
why is it the most intense? Because in England, as a result of modern 
industry, of the introduction of machinery, all oppressed classes are 
being merged together into a single great class with common 
interests, the class of the proletariat; because as a consequence, on 
the opposite side all classes of oppressors have likewise been united 
into a single class, the bourgeoisie. The struggle has thus been 
simplified and so it will be possible to decide it by one single heavy 
blow. Isn't this so? The aristocracy no longer has any power in 
14* 

=====第418页=====
390 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
England; the bourgeoisie alone rules and it has taken the aristocracy 
in tow. But the whole great mass of the people stands opposed to the 
bourgeoisie, united in a formidable phalanx, whose victory over the 
ruling capitalists draws nearer and nearer. And you have to thank 
machinery for this elimination of opposed interests which previously 
divided the different sections of workers, for this levelling of the 
living standards of all workers. Without machinery no Chartism, and 
although machinery may temporarily worsen your position it is 
nevertheless machinery that makes our victory possible. But not only 
in England; in all other countries it has had the same effect on the 
workers. In Belgium, in America, in France, in Germany it has 
evened out the position of all workers and daily continues to do so 
more and more; in all these countries the workers now have the same 
interest, which is the overthrow of the class that oppresses them—the 
bourgeoisie. This levelling of living standards, this identification of 
the party interests of the workers of all nations is the result of 
machinery, and so machinery is an enormous historical advance. 
What follows from this for us? Because the condition of the workers 
of all countries is the same, because their interests are the same, 
their enemies the same, they must also fight together, they must 
oppose the brotherhood of the bourgeoisie of all nations with a 
brotherhood of the workers of all nations. 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the newspaper 
Zeitung No. 98, December 9, 1847 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第419页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE ANNIVERSARY OF THE POLISH REVOLUTION 
OF 1830]  193 
Dear Citizen! 
I arrived yesterday evening just in time to attend the public 
meeting called to celebrate the anniversary of the Polish revolution 
of 1830. 
I have been present at many similar celebrations but I have never 
seen such general enthusiasm, such perfect and cordial agreement 
between men of all nations. 
The chairmanship was given to Mr. Arnott, an English workman. 
The first speech was by Mr. Ernest Jones, editor of The Northern 
Star, who, while speaking against the behaviour of the Polish 
aristocracy during the insurrection of 1830, gave much praise to the 
efforts made by Poland to escape from the yoke of her oppressors. 
His brilliant and powerful speech was loudly applauded. 
After him, M. Michelot gave a speech in French. 
Mr. Schapper from Germany followed him. He told the meeting 
that the Brussels Democratic Association had delegated to London 
Mr. Marx, German democrat and one of its vice-presidents, to 
establish relations of correspondence between the Brussels society 
and the London society of Fraternal Democrats,194 and also to prepare 
for a democratic congress of the different European nations. 
Mr. Marx was received with prolonged applause, when he came 
forward to address the assembly. 
In a speech in German, translated by Mr. Schapper, Mr. Marx 
declared that England would give the signal for the deliverance of 
Poland. Poland, he said, would be free only when the civilised 
nations of Western Europe had won democracy. Now, of all the 
democracies of Europe, the strongest and most numerous was that of 
England, organised throughout the whole country. It was in England 
that the antagonism between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie was 
most developed, that the decisive struggle between these two classes 

=====第420页=====
392 Frederick Engels 
became more and more inevitable. It was therefore in England that 
in all probability the fight would begin which would end with the 
universal triumph of democracy and which would also break the 
Polish yoke. The success of other European democrats depended on 
the victory of the English Chartists; therefore Poland would be saved 
by England. 
Mr. Harney, chief editor of The Northern Star, followed by 
thanking the democrats of Brussels for having immediately 
approached the democrats of London, taking no account of the 
advances made to them by the bourgeoisie of the London Inter­
national League, 195 a society founded by the free traders in order 
to exploit foreign democrats in the interests of free trade and to 
compete with the society of Fraternal Democrats which was almost 
exclusively composed of workers. 
Mr. Engels, from Paris, a German democrat, then declared that 
Germany had a special interest in the freedom of Poland because the 
German governments exercised their despotism over a part of 
Poland. German democracy ought to have at heart the ending of this 
tyranny which shamed Germany. 
Mr. Tedesco, from Liège, in a vigorous speech, thanked the Polish 
fighters of 1830 for having loudly proclaimed the principle of 
insurrection. His speech, translated by Mr. Schapper, was warmly 
applauded. 
After some remarks by Mr. Charles Keen, Colonel Oborski replied 
for Poland. 
Mr. Wilson, an English workman who by his vigorous opposition 
recently almost brought about the break-up of a meeting of the 
International League, was the last to address the assembly. 
On the proposal of Messrs Harney and Engels, three cheers were 
given for the three great European democratic newspapers: the 
Réforme, The Northern Star, and the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung; on the 
proposal of Mr. Schapper, three groans were given for the three 
anti-democratic papers: the Journal des Débats, The Times and the 
Augsburg Zeitung. 3 
The meeting ended with the singing of the Marseillaise, in which 
everybody joined, standing and with hats off. 
Written on November 30, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
December 5, 1847 . 
Published in English lor the nrst 
time 
a Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung. — Ed. 

=====第421页=====
Frederick Engels 
REFORM BANQUET AT LILLE.— 
SPEECH OF M. LEDRU-ROLLIN 
In response to the toast: —"To the labourers,—to their imprescrip­
tible rights,—to their sacred interests, hitherto unknown." 2 
"Citizens,—Yes, to the labourers! to their imprescriptible rights,—to their sacred 
interests, hitherto unknown. To the unalienable rights of man, proclaimed in 
principle, by two glorious revolutions ; but artfully eluded in their application, and 
successfully re-wrested from the people, and which are now only a glorious, yet bitter 
remembrance! Political rights to the people, it is said, is madness. How entrust them 
with them, in their state of incapacity, of ignorance, of moral depravity? To give the 
people political freedom is a blind and dangerous power; it is revolution—blood 
—anarchy—chaos! Gentlemen, you know the people; you in this industrial city, at 
once so wealthy and so poor, believe you this picture to be true! Oh! doubtless, if we 
cast our eyes over the pages of certain romance w  riters,  to whom the grand side of things 
has appeared trivial, vulgar—who have sought for effect in the humorous, the 
fantastic, the exceptional, the people—-is it thus! Taking the normal life of our towns, 
from one point, where criminals escaped from justice, find a refuge, the way of life, 
the dregs of society, they have said, 'Such are the people!' Doubtless such would still be 
the people, did we put faith in those mercenary writers, who, to terrify the wealthy, cry 
out against the invasion of the barbarians! Barbarians! they have cast that epithet upon 
the people, as the most outrageous of insults. Ah! if barbarians always signify men full 
of simplicity, of strength, of social and youthful energy, those barbarians can alone 
save our worn-out official world, fast hastening to decay in powerlessness and 
corruption. No; a thousand times no, it is not the people. It is not upon the theatre of 
crime and debauchery, that it must be sought for. To be acquainted with it, we must 
transport ourselves into those manufacturing towns, where the merchant, struggling 
against unrestricted competition which crushes him, between the tyrannical pressure 
a Ledru-Rollin's speech at the banquet at Lille on November 7, 1847 was translated 
by Engels according to the report in La Réforme, November 10, 1847.—Ed. 
The reference is evidently to the revolutions of 1789-94 and 1830.— Ed. 

=====第422页=====
394 Frederick Engels 
of capital and opposition to wages, which eat him up, he is compelled to reduce those 
wages, in order to avoid bankruptcy and dishonour. Ah! believe not that the people, in 
their spirit of justice, always accuse the masters as the cause of that cruel necessity. 
Know they not that our industry fails for want of outlet; that we have seen the greatest 
number of the markets of the world closed against us; and that our commerce has 
perished, where our flag has been trampled under foot? Well; in the midst of those 
vicissitudes, of those fluctuations, of this crisis of wages, what befalls the workman? 
The labour of the father, no longer sufficing to procure bread for the family, the 
daughter prostitutes herself for food; the child must go to aid the formidable 
machine, and exhaust his unevolved strength; and by the side of those beauteous 
fabrics, the product of our industry, the eye wanders over rickety boys, faded girls, 
worn-out men, bent under the pressure of premature labour. And, nevertheless, 
of that physically decayed population—those who have escaped enervation, 
sickness—who have attained their proper height, will go forth to do battle for their 
country—nobly to encounter death beneath her banner. Such are the people of the 
towns, sociable, good, patient in the midst of those daily evils,—doing more, deriving 
from within themselves the light of knowledge, dealt out to them with such a niggardly 
hand, reading, sometimes composing verses upon their sufferings or their prospects, 
publishing journals, which enlighten and prepare those formidable problems, re­
specting the future fate of mankind! It is those people of the towns whom some writ­
ers, who only judge by their own flimsy minds, call barbarians!... In this slight and 
rapid sketch, we have only seen the people in their habitual life—their daily struggles; 
but were one of those unforeseen scourges, in which a fearful inundation sweeps off 
everything in its destructive course, a terrible fire, or a severe cholera suddenly to 
arise,  who would be foremost in the cause of humanity? who would forget their 
families and their wives, upon their lowly couches? their children, who might die on 
the morrow? who would peril life, without counting the cost; and fly when the service 
was performed, without even leaving their names?—the people! Intelligence or 
devotedness, head or heart, the people are, therefore, worthy to exercise the rights to 
which they lay claim. And who are better aware of it than the citizens, who by the 
superhuman efforts of the people, have conquered the twofold tyranny of the nobility 
and the priesthood. It was to that clergy, to that nobility, as to the States of 1614, that a 
member of the bourgeoisie once said— 'You, our elder brothers, you, our younger 
brothers—for we are all brothers—forming but one and the same nation.' And the 
clergy and the nobles attempted to make that courageous member of the third retract 
and their minions to scourge him, regarding a plebeian as of a conquered and inferior 
race....  Not only are the people worthy to represent themselves, but if justice is to 
be rendered, they can only be efficiently represented by themselves. Who, then, in 
a legislative chamber knows sufficiently, at this present moment, their interests, their 
wants to dare to defend them? There are many men, gentlemen, who would unite in 
our principle of Reform; for it is now made evident—but they still dread the advance 
of democracy; yet never has a solemn and decisive movement, in the onward march of 
humanity, been preceded by more significant auguries! Let us pass rapidly in review 
those transcendent men of our own age. Towering above all, is one, whose prophetic 
speech is engraven on every heart. 'Before fifty years,' said Napoleon, 'Europe will be 
Cossack or Republican.'... It shall not be Cossack—and in this patriotic city exists 
the right so to say. If doubt could ever have prevailed, it would assuredly not have been 
in the midst of those whose love of national independence and of the revolution of 1792, 
transformed each citizen into a hero! Republican—but I pause, gentlemen—the laws 
of September are in force, and in order to be strong, when armed in a good cause, 
we must know how to keep within the law. 1 shall, therefore, only permit myself to 
choose, as interpreters of my thoughts, a few men, whose very names shed a glory over 

=====第423页=====
Reform Banquet at Lille.— Speech of M. Ledru-Rollin 395 
their country. He, for example, who has sung the high hymn of legitimacy, and who 
has achieved renown, in essaying to restore the ancient ruins of the past. Chateau­
briand, in his sincerity, has been unable to avoid regarding the approaching future 
of the world, as tending towards democracy.... Beranger, whose patriotic hymns 
will be eternally repeated by the world—hymns, which we, his contemporaries, ought 
to teach to our children as a prayer, whilst a Waterloo remains to be avenged!! 
Beranger believes in the approaching sovereignty of the people. And Lamartine, 
sparkling with poetry, with eloquence, has passed by legitimacy—he has traversed the 
marshes of the plain, in order to approach nearer to us. Though an ardent admirer of 
the Girondists, yet the noble candour of his mind leads him to draw conclusions 
favourable to the Radicals. There is a something, however, which still divides him 
from pure democracy; as for  myself,  I only behold the steps of giants, each day rapidly 
striding towards us. So much for men of letters, gentlemen, and that unanimous 
testimony rendered by such illustrations in favour of our party, might suffice for its 
hopes.  But cast your eyes into the domain of science; behold a man who is at the 
summit of all—of whom the two worlds would deprive us—Arago! But for an 
imperious duty he would have been here in the midst of you. He would, much better 
than I am able, have spoken to you of the rights of the people; he who was the first to 
advocate their cause in another assembly, where to do so required no small amount of 
moral courage. Is not, then, Arago entirely for democracy? And in the arts, who with 
his powerful chisel draws forth, from marble, those men who have best served the 
people? Who confides to the eternity of bronze those grand revolutionary figures, to 
bequeath them to the admiration of future ages? David of Angers! Is he not, also, for 
the cause of the people? Well, when so many illustrious men declare in favour of 
democracy, or struggle for its attainment, how conclude otherwise than that right and 
Providence combat with us, and for us? Those are the teachings of talented men; but 
have not the teachings of the people also their manifestations? Look at Poland—heroic 
Poland—the last pulsations of whose heart still throb for liberty—no longer possessing 
an army; each day some martyr consecrates himself to her cause. Italy; she too longs 
for unity. She emerges from her ruins, which constituted her glory, in order to acquire 
fresh renown. Mav she on awakening distrust  herself;  let her remember Masaniello. 
Switzerland;— I feel that I ought well to weigh my words at this solemn moment. We 
can do one thing, gentlemen, we can unite ourselves for an instant, by recollection, by 
thought, with those whom we look upon as brothers, in order to pray that victory may 
be with them, as have hitherto been right and reason! The cause of Switzerland is 
ours,  gentlemen; the Radicals there wage war against two things, which are the 
plague-spots of our era—aristocrats and worthless priests. Respect our creeds, but war 
against those who, under the mask of religion, are the abettors of despotism, and of 
tvranny. Short-sighted beings! who see not in this double association of genius and of 
the people, the near advent of a Messiah of equality! Thus then, O people, to whom I 
would sacrifice all that I possess of devotedness and strength, hope, and believe. 
Between this period, in which thy ancient faith is extinguished, and in which the new 
light has not yet been showered upon you, each evening in thy desolate dwelling 
piously repeat the immortal symbol—LIBERTY, EQUALITY, FRATERNITY! Yes, 
liberty for all; liberty of conscience; liberty of thought, liberty of association; for man 
cannot become moral without communing with man, and it is in order the better to 
subjugate him that he is isolated by a system of corruption. They know that a bundle 
of sticks cannot be broken. Equality likewise for all—equality in presence of civil law, 
equalitv in political matters, equality in education, in order that man may have no 
superior, except in morals or in virtue! Fraternity—inexhaustible source, from 
whence will spring noble and celebrated institutions; of association, of strength. 
Then labour will no longer be a right, it will be a duty. Let there be no more 

=====第424页=====
396 Frederick Engels 
revenues, except from labour and for labour. Yes, salvation. O great and immortal 
symbol, thy advent draws nigh! People, may the plaudits bestowed on thy humble 
interpreter be wafted to thee, and prove at once a consolation and a hope!" 
Compiled and translated into English Reprinted from the newspaper 
in the first half of December 1847 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 530, December 18, 1847 
with editorial note: 
"From Our Paris Correspondent" 

=====第425页=====
Frederick Engels 
REFORM MOVEMENT IN FRANCE.— 
BANQUET OF DIJON 197 
This meeting of the Democracy of the Department of the Côte 
d'Or, was incontestably the most splendid one of the whole series of 
Reform Banquets. 1,300 sat down to dinner. There were present 
deputations from almost all the neighbouring towns, and even a 
Swiss deputation, composed of citizens from Neufchâtel, Geneva and 
Lucerne. The character of the meeting is very clearly marked out by 
the names of the principal speakers—MM. Louis Blanc, Flocon, 
Ledru-Rollin, Etienne Arago —all of them belonging to the 
Ultra-Democratic party, represented by the Réforme. We need not 
say that Louis Philippe was not toasted at this dinner. 
M. Signard, of Gray, a neighbouring town, spoke to the 
toast—"The Democrats of Lille who, at the late banquet of their 
town sternly refused to compromise with the sham-Liberals; and by 
their energy, union, and intelligence, saved the honour of Democ­
racy."3 
M. Etienne Arago, a well-known literary character of Paris, and 
who but recently brought upon the stage an exceedingly successful 
comedy, entitled The Aristocracies, then spoke to the senti­
ment—"The development of literature, science, and the fine arts"; 
exposing, in a brilliant speech, the rapid advance literature and 
science were sure to make under a free and democratic system. 
At the toast—"The future progress of France", the chairman 
called upon M. Louis Blanc, who was very enthusiastically received 
by the meeting. He delivered a splendid speech, containing many 
a Here and below speeches are quoted according to the reports on the banquet of 
Dijon printed in La Réforme, November 24 and 25, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第426页=====
398 Frederick Engels 
just and striking observations on the past development of France; on 
the conclusions to draw from it with regard to the future; on the 
particular character impressed indelibly upon the French Democrat­
ic Movement by the revolution. He was repeatedly and deservedly 
interrupted by applause. It was a speech quite worthy of the first 
historical writer France now possesses. There is, however, one point 
upon which we would make a few observations, which we hope will 
be taken in the same friendly spirit in which we write them. 
M. Blanc says— 
"We want union in Democracy. And no one may deceive  himself,  we do not think 
and labour for France only, but for the whole world, because the future of France 
contains in it the future of mankind. In fact, we are placed in this admirable position, 
that, without ever ceasing to be national, we are necessarily cosmopolite, and are even 
more cosmopolite than national. Whoever would call himself a Democrat, and be at 
the same time an Englishman, would give the lie to the history of his own country, for 
the part which England has always played, has been a struggle of egotism against 
fraternity. In the same manner, he who is a Frenchman, and would not be a 
cosmopolite, would give the lie to his country's past; for France never could make 
predominant any idea, except it was for the benefit of the whole world. Gentlemen, at 
the time of the Crusades, when Europe went to conquer the grave of Christ, it was 
France who took the movement under her wing. Afterwards, when the priests would 
impose upon us the yoke of Papist supremacy, the Gallican bishops defended the 
rights of conscience. And in the last days of the ancient monarchy, who supported 
young, republican America? France, always France! And what was true of 
monarchical France, how should it not be true of Republican France? Where, in the 
book of history, do we find anything resembling that admirable, self-sacrificing 
disinterestedness of the Republic, when, exhausted by the blood she had shed on our 
frontiers and on the scaffold, she found yet more blood to shed for her Batavian 
brethren? When beaten or victorious, she enlightens her very enemies by the sparks 
of her genius! Let Europe send us sixteen armies, and we shall send her liberty in 
return." 
Now, without intending to deprecate in any manner the heroic 
efforts of the French Revolution, and the immense gratitude the 
world owes to the great men of the Republic, we think that the 
relative position of France and England, with regard to cosmopolit­
ism, is not at all justly delineated in the above sketch. We entirely 
deny the cosmopolitic200 character ascribed to France before the 
revolution, and the times of Louis XI and Richelieu may serve as 
proofs. But what is it M. Blanc ascribes to France? That she never 
could make predominant any idea, except it was to benefit the whole 
world. Well, we should think M. Louis Blanc could not show us any 
country in the world which could do otherwise than France is said to 
have done. Take England, for instance, which M. Blanc places in 
direct opposition to France. England invented the steam-engine; 
England erected the railway; two things which, we believe, are 
worth a good many ideas. Well, did England invent them for  herself, 

=====第427页=====
Reform Movement in France. —Banquet of Dijon 399 
or for the world? The French glory in spreading civilisation 
everywhere, principally in Algiers. Well, who has spread civilisation 
in America, Asia, Africa, and Australia, but England?201 Who 
founded the very Republic, in the freeing of which France took some 
part? England—always England. If France assisted in freeing the 
American Republic from English tyranny, England freed the Dutch 
Republic, just two hundred years sooner, from Spanish oppres­
sion^ If France gave, at the end of the last century, a glorious 
example to the whole world, we cannot silently pass by the fact that 
England, a hundred and fifty years sooner, gave that example,203 and 
found at that time, not even France prepared to follow. And, as far 
as ideas are concerned, those very ideas, which the French 
philosophers of the 18th century—which Voltaire, Rousseau, 
Diderot, D'Alembert, and others, did so much to popularise—where 
had these ideas first been originated, but in England? Let us never 
forget Milton, the first defender of regicide, Algernon Sydney, 
Bolingbroke, and Shaftesbury, over their French more brilliant 
followers. 
If an Englishman "would call himself a democrat he would give 
the lie to the history of his own country", says M. Blanc. Well, we 
consider it as the veriest proof of sterling democracy, that it must give 
the lie to its country, that it must repudiate all responsibility for a past 
filled up with misery, tyranny, class oppression, and superstition. Let 
the French not make an exception to the other democrats; let them 
not take the responsibility for the doings of their Kings and 
Aristocrats of former times. Therefore, what M. Blanc thinks a 
disadvantage to English democrats, we think to be a great advantage, 
that they must repudiate the past, and only look to the future. 
A Frenchman is necessarily a cosmopolite. Yes, in a world ruled 
over by French influence, French manners, fashions, ideas, politics. 
In a world in which every nation has adopted the characteristics of 
French nationality. ,But that is exactly what the democrats of other 
nations will not like. Quite ready to give up the harshness of their 
own nationality, they expect the same from the French. They will not 
be satisfied in the assertion, on the part of the French, that they are 
cosmopolites; assertion which amounts to the demand urged upon 
all others to become Frenchmen. 
Compare Germany. Germany is the fatherland of an immense 
number of inventions—of the printing press, for instance. Germany 
has produced—and this is recognised upon all hands—a far greater 
number of generous and cosmopolitic ideas than France and 
England put together. And Germany, in practice, has always been 
humiliated, always been deceived in all her hopes. She can tell best 

=====第428页=====
400 Frederick Engels 
what French cosmopolitism has been. In the same measure as France 
has to complain—and quite justly—of the treachery of English 
policy, Germany has experienced a policy quite as treacherous on the 
part of France, from Louis XI down to Louis Philippe. If we were to 
apply the measure of M. Louis Blanc, the Germans would be the true 
cosmopolites, and yet they do not pretend to this. 
So much upon this point. We wish to establish a discussion upon it, 
as this will only lead to a mutual understanding; to a firm union of 
French and English Democracy. 
After M. Blanc, M. Flocon spoke to the toast: "The Democrats of 
Europe." 
M. Flocon said: 
"Look around you, listen to the voices which arise from foreign countries; 
complaints or menace; sighs or hopes; what tell they? They invoke the principle of the 
French Revolution; they proclaim in the face of all despotisms, its immortal motto: 
Liberté, Egalité, Fraternité. Yes, those very nations, which in the delusions of slavery and 
ignorance, made an impious war on the revolution; they now come by thousands to 
take up its standard, and promise to be most ardent defenders of the glorious 
principles they did not understand in times past. This striking fact is before the eyes of 
all the world, and I know nothing more terrible to our enemies, nothing which could 
more effectually recall to our minds our duty. In England, at the side of the old 
factions, in the face of the richest and most tyrannical aristocracy of the world, the 
people are organising. An immense association, conducted by experienced leaders, 
enrols daily thousands of working men, who will undertake to avenge the wrongs of 
humanity. And the rights of man are not a new watchword in England. At the time of 
the old civil wars, in the midst of religious fanaticism and political passions, several 
parties clearly saw the great social truth: 
When Adam delved and Eve span 
Where was then the gentleman? 
That was proclaimed by the Covenanters almost three hundred years ago. The 
same question is again put; and the cotton lords disdain as much to listen to the 
complaint of the children of toil, as did the landlords in by-gone times. Therefore, 
asking what is right will not suffice, the people must be strong enough to take it, and 
the English people know this. In Belgium, at this very moment, a society is organising, 
uniting Democrats of all nations, a Democratic Congress206 is being prepared. In 
Germany, while the princes play the game of granting gracious constitutions, the 
people prepare themselves for working out their own salvation." 
The speaker then reviewed briefly the Polish, Italian, and Swiss 
movements, and closed his speech as follows: 
"Yes,  the seed of the revolution is germinating, the soil is fertile, the splendid 
flower of hope adorns the fields of the future. But the winter has be'en long, and we 
ought soon to take to the sickle, to make our harvest. Let us then take up again the 
work of the revolution, where our fathers left it. Let us make haste, else we shall have 
to take it up where they commenced." (Loud applause.) 
The next toast: "The Sovereignty of the people", was spoken to by 
M. Ledru-Rollin, deputy. 

=====第429页=====
Reform Movement in France. — Banquet of Dijon 401 
Letters of apology were read from MM. François Arago, 
Lamennais, Dupont de L'Eure, and the meeting separated. 
This demonstration proves that the provincial Democrats are 
more and more leaving the party of the National, in order to rally 
around the party of the Réforme. 
Written in the first half of December 1847 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 530, December 18, 1847 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our Paris Correspondent" 

=====第430页=====
Karl Marx 
REMARKS 
ON THE ARTICLE BY M. ADOLPHE BARTELS 207 
M. Adolphe Bartels claims that public life is finished for him. 
Indeed, he has withdrawn into private life and does not mean to 
leave it; he limits  himself,  each time some public event occurs, to 
hurling protests and proclaiming loudly that he believes he is his 
own master, that the movement has been made without him, M. Bar­
tels, and in spite of him, M. Bartels, and that he has the right to 
refuse it his supreme sanction. It will be agreed that this is just as 
much a way of participating in public life as any other, and that by all 
these declarations, proclamations and protestations the public man 
hides behind the humble appearance of the private individual. This 
is the way in which the unappreciated and misunderstood genius 
reveals  himself. 
M. A. Bartels knows very well that the democrats of the different 
nations, in forming a body under the name of a democratic 
association, have had no other object but to exchange ideas and come 
to an understanding about the principles which will serve to bring 
about the union and fraternity of peoples. It goes without saying 
that, in a society which proposes such a goal for  itself,  it is the duty of 
all foreigners to state their opinions frankly, and it is truly ridiculous 
to call them  schoolmasters  every time they take the floor to fulfil this 
duty in the association to which they belong. If M. A. Bartels accuses 
foreigners of wanting to teach lessons it is because they refuse to take 
lessons from him. 
M. A. Bartels will recall, no doubt, that in the provisional 
committee in which he took part he even proposed to make the 
Society of German Workers 208 the nucleus of the new society to be 
founded. I had to reject this proposal, in the name of the German 

=====第431页=====
Remarks on the Article by M. Adolphe Bartels 403 
workers. Might it perhaps be that M. A. Bartels meant to lay a trap 
for us, to contrive the means for a false denunciation? 
M. Bartels is free to decry our doctrines as "filthy and barbarous". 
He does not criticise, he does not prove, he condemns; and he gives 
proof of his orthodoxy by condemning in advance what he does not 
understand. 
We are more tolerant than M. A. Bartels. We overlook his "blue 
devils", 3 which are quite innocent devils. 
M. A. Bartels being more theocratic than democratic, it is quite 
natural that he finds an accomplice in the Journal de Bruxelles. This 
paper accuses us of wanting to "improve  the human race". 209 Let it calm 
down! Fortunately, we Germans are not unaware that since 1640 the 
Congregatio de propaganda fide? 10 has had the monopoly in improving 
the human race. We are too modest and too few to want to compete 
with the reverend fathers in that humanitarian industry. Let them 
take the trouble to compare the report in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung b with that of The Northern Star, and they will be able to assure 
themselves that it is only by a mistake that The Northern Star makes 
me say "Chartists;—you will be hailed as the saviours of the human 
race." 2n 
The Journal de Bruxelles is moved by a more charitable spirit when 
it reminds us of the example of Anacharsis Cloots mounting the 
scaffold for having wanted to be more patriotic than the patriots of 
1793 and 1794. In this respect the reverend fathers are free from all 
reproach. They have never been more patriotic than the patriots. On 
the contrary, they have always and everywhere been accused of 
wanting to be more reactionary than the reactionaries and, what is 
still worse, of wanting to be more governmental than the national 
government. When we think of the said experiences which they have 
just undergone in Switzerland, we are all ready to recognise that the 
admonitions they address to us so that we should avoid the opposite 
extreme and similar dangers, are of a generosity worthy of the early 
Christians. We thank them for this 
Written about December 17, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in French in the Translated from the French 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 101, 
December 19 1847 Published in English for the first 
time 
Signed: Karl Marx 
a Blue devils—delirium tremens.—Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 388-90.—Ed. 

=====第432页=====
Karl Marx 
LAMARTINE AND COMMUNISM 
Brussels, December 24. Once again the French papers carry a letter 
from M. de Lamartine. This time it is communism on which this 
poetic socialist at last gives his candid opinion having been 
challenged to do so by Cabet. 212 At the same time Lamartine 
promises to set forth his views in detail on this "important subject" in 
the near future. For the present he contents himself with a few  brief, 
oracular utterances: 
"My opinion of communism," he says, "may be summarised in a feeling(\), namely 
the following: were God to entrust me with a society of savages to civilise them and 
make into well-mannered people, the first institution I should give them would be that 
of property." 
"The fact," continues M. Lamartine, "that man appropriates the elements to 
himself is a law of nature and a precondition of life. Man appropriates the air by 
breathing, space by striding through it, the land by cultivating it, and even time, by 
perpetuating himself through his children; property is the organisation of the life 
principle in the universe; communism would be the death of labour and of the whole 
of humanity." 
"Your dream," M. Lamartine finally consoles M. Cabet, "is too beautiful for this 
earth." 
M. Lamartine is thus an opponent of communism, and what is 
more not merely of a communist system; in fact, he enters the lists 
on behalf of the "perpetuity of private property". For his "feeling" 
tells him three things: 1. that property civilises people, 2. that it is 
the organisation of the life principle in the world, and 3. that its 
opposite, communism, is too beautiful a dream for this bad world. 
No doubt M. Lamartine "feels" a better world, in which the "life 
principle" is differently "organised". In this bad world, however, it 
just so happens that "appropriation" is a precondition of life. 

=====第433页=====
Lamartine and Communism 405 
It is not necessary to analyse M. Lamartine's confused feeling in 
order to resolve it into its contradictions. We wish only to make one 
single observation. M. Lamartine believes he has proved the 
perpetuity of bourgeois property by pointing out that property in 
general forms the transition from the state of savagery to that of 
civilisation, and by giving us to understand that the process of 
breathing and the making of children presuppose the right of 
property just as much as does social private property. 
M. Lamartine sees no distinction between the epoch of transition 
from savagery to civilisation and our own epoch, any more than 
between the "appropriation" of air and the "appropriation" of the 
products of society; for both of these are "appropriations", forsooth, 
just as both epochs are "epochs of transition"! 
In his "detailed" polemic against communism M. Lamartine will 
no doubt find an opportunity to deduce "logically" from these 
general platitudes arising from his "feeling" a whole series of other, 
still more general platitudes.—Perhaps then we shall likewise find 
the opportunity to shed light upon his platitudes "in greater detail". 
—For the present we shall content ourselves with passing on to 
our readers the "feelings" which a monarchist-Catholic newspaper 
opposes to those of M. Lamartine. The Union monarchique namely, in 
yesterday's issue, speaks out against Lamartine's feelings as follows: 
"Here we see how these enlighteners of humanity leave it leaderless. The wretches! 
... They have robbed the poor man of the God who comforted him;... they have 
taken Heaven from him;... they have left man alone with his want and his wretchedness. 
And then they come and say: 'You wish to possess the earth—it is not yours. You 
wish to enjoy the good things of life—they belong to others. You wish to share in 
wealth—that is out of the question. Stay poor, stay naked, stay abandoned—die!"' 
The Union monarchique comforts the proletarians with God. The 
Bien Public, M. Lamartine's paper, comforts them with the "life 
principle". 
Written on December 24, 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 103, December 26, 1847 time 

=====第434页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE RÉFORME AND THE NATIONAL™ 
Following the Lille banquet a controversy developed between the 
Réforme and the National, which has now led to a decisive split 
between the two papers. 
The facts are as follows: 
From the inception of the reform banquets the National has 
attached itself even more openly than before to the dynastic 
opposition.214  At the Lille banquet M. Degeorge of the National 
withdrew together with Odilon Barrot. The National expressed its 
opinion of the Lille banquet in terms that were more than equivocal. 
Challenged by the Réforme to explain itself in more detail, it refused, 
with the excuse that it did not wish to start polemics with this 
newspaper. This was no reason at all for failing to comment on facts. 
To be  brief,  the Réforme did not let the matter drop and eventually 
attacked M. Garnier-Pagès of the National for a speech in which he 
denied the existence of classes and deleted the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat in the general phrase of citoyens français. Now, at last, the 
National declared that it would defend its friends against a 
newspaper which cast suspicion on all worthy patriots, such as 
Carnot, Garnier-Pagès, etc. 
The National, very soon defeated on every point, could finally hit 
upon no other expedient than to accuse the Réforme of communism. 
"You speak of indefinite strivings, of theories and systems which arise among the 
people, you censure us for openly attacking these—to put it bluntly—communistic 
strivings. Very well then, declare yourselves directly, either for or against communism. 
We declare for all to hear that we have nothing in common with the Communists, with 
these people who deny property, family and country. When the day of battle comes we 
shall fight not with, but against these abominable strivings. We have no peace, no 
tolerance for these odious fantasies, for this absurd and barbarous (sauvage) system 

=====第435页=====
The Réforme and the National 407 
which bestialises man and reduces him to the level of a brute (le réduit à l'état de 
brute).  And you believe the people would be with you? The people would surrender 
what litde property they have earned in the sweat of their brow, their family, their 
country? You believe that the people would ever allow themselves to be persuaded 
that it is a matter of indifference whether or not Austria brings us under the yoke of 
her despotism, whether or not the Powers dismember France?" 3 
To such grounds against communism the National adds its plans 
for improving the condition of the workers—postal reform, financial 
reform, luxury taxes, state subsidies, the abolition of the octrois,215 
and free competition. 
Correcting the ridiculous ideas of communism held by the 
National is not worth the effort. It is ludicrous, however, that the 
National is still parading the terrifying fantasy of a constantly 
threatening invasion by the "Great Powers", and that it still believes 
that beyond the Rhine and across the Channel there are millions of 
bayonets pointed against France, and hundreds of thousands of 
cannons aimed at Paris. The Réforme has quite correctly replied to 
this that in the event of an invasion by the Kings it will not be the 
fortifications which will serve as a rampart, but the peoples 
themselves. 
With reference to the article from the National quoted above the 
Réforme declares: 
"We are not communistic, and our reason is that communism disregards the laws 
of production, that it is not concerned with ensuring that enough is produced for the 
whole of society. But the economic proposals of the Communists stand closer to us 
than those of the National, which accepts the existing bourgeois economics without 
further ado. We shall defend the Communists against the police and the National also 
in the future, because we acknowledge at least their right of discussion, and because 
the doctrines that originate from the workers themselves always deserve considera­
tion." 
We thank the Réforme for the energetic way in which it has stood 
for true democracy as against the National. We thank the Réforme for 
defending communism against it. We willingly acknowledge that the 
Réforme has always defended the Communists whenever they have 
been persecuted by the government. Alone of all the Paris 
newspapers, the Réforme defended the materialistic Communists 
when they were dragged to court by M. Delangle 216; on this same 
occasion M. Cabet almost conceded that the government was right as 
against the materialists. We are glad that the Réforme, even in the 
more or less undeveloped forms in which communism has so far 
appeared, has discovered a kernel of truth to which it stands closer 
a Quoted from the leading article in La Réforme, December 21, 1847; the reply of 
this newspaper given below is from the same source.— Ed. 

=====第436页=====
408 Frederick Engels 
than it does to the representatives of bourgeois economics. On the 
other hand, we hope to be able to prove to the Réforme before long 
that communism as we defend it is still more closely related to the 
principles of the Réforme than to communism itself as it has hitherto 
been presented in France, and as it now is being spread, in part, 
abroad. 
In its repudiation of the National, furthermore, the Réforme h only 
pronouncing the same judgment that the democratic movement in 
Germany, England and Belgium, indeed everywhere except in 
France, has long since passed on it. 
Written at the end of December 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 104, December 30, 1847 time 

=====第437页=====
Frederick Engels 
LOUIS BLANCS SPEECH AT THE DIJON BANQUET217 
The Northern Star in its report of the Dijon banquet criticises the 
speech of Louis Blanc in remarks with which we completely concur. 
The union of the democrats of different nations does not exclude 
mutual criticism. It is impossible without such criticism. Without 
criticism there is no understanding and consequently no union. We 
reproduce the remarks of The Northern Star in order that we too, for 
our part, may protest against preconceptions and illusions which are 
in direct and hostile opposition to the trends of modern democracy 
and which should be abandoned if the union of democrats of 
different nations is to remain more than an empty phrase. 
At the Dijon banquet, M. Blanc said: 
"We want union in Democracy. And no one may deceive himself about this, we do 
not think and labour for France only, but for the whole world, because the future of 
France contains in it the future of mankind. In fact, we are placed in this admirable 
position, that, without ever ceasing to be national, we are necessarily cosmopolite, and 
are even more-cosmopolite than national. Whoever would call himself a Democrat, and 
be at the same time an Englishman, would give the lie to the history of his own country, 
for the part which England has always played in history has been the struggle for ego­
tism against 'fraternité'. In the same manner, he who is a Frenchman, and would not be 
a cosmopolite, would give the lie to his country's past; for France never could make 
predominant any idea, except it was for the benefit of the whole world. Gentlemen, at 
the time of the Crusades, when Europe went to conquer the grave of Christ, it was 
France who took the movement under her wing. Afterwards, when the priests would 
impose upon us the yoke of Papist supremacy, the Gallican bishops defended the 
rights of conscience. And in the last days of the ancient monarchy, who supported 
young, republican America? France, always France! And what was true of 
monarchical France, how should it not be true of republican France? Where, in the 
book of history, do we find anything resembling that admirable, self-sacrificing 
disinterestedness of the French Republic, when, exhausted by the blood she had shed 
on our frontiers and on the scaffold, she found yet more blood to shed for her 

=====第438页=====
410 Frederick Engels 
Batavian brethren? When beaten or victorious, she enlightened her very enemies by 
the sparks of her genius! Let Europe send us sixteen armies, and we shall send her 
liberty in return." 
The Northern Star says with regard to this: 
"Now, without intending to deprecate in any manner the heroic 
efforts of the French Revolution, and the immense gratitude the 
world owes to the great men of the Republic, we think that the 
relative position of France and England, with regard to cosmopolit­
ism, is not at all justly delineated in the above sketch. We entirely 
deny the cosmopolitic character ascribed to France before the 
revolution, and the times of Louis XI and Richelieu may serve as 
proofs. But what is it M. Blanc ascribes to France? That she never 
could make predominant any idea, except it was to benefit the whole 
world. Well, we should think M. Louis Blanc could not show us any 
country in the world which could do otherwise than France is said to 
have done. Take England, for instance, which M. Blanc places in 
direct opposition to France. England invented the steam-engine; 
England erected the railway; two things which, we believe, are worth 
a good many ideas. Well, did England invent them for  herself,  or for 
the world? The French glory in spreading civilisation everywhere, 
principally in Algiers. Well, who has spread civilisation in America, 
Asia, Africa, and Australia, but England? Who founded the very 
Republic, in the freeing of which France took some part? Eng­
land—always England. If France assisted in freeing the American 
Republic from English tyranny, England freed the Dutch Republic, 
just two hundred years sooner, from Spanish oppression. If France 
gave,  at the end of the last century, a glorious example to the whole 
world, we cannot silently pass by the fact that England, a hundred 
and fifty years sooner, gave that example, and found at that time, not 
even France prepared to follow. And, as far as  ideas  are concerned, 
those very ideas, which the French philosophers of the 18th 
century—which Voltaire, Rousseau, Diderot, D'Alembert, and 
others, did so much to popularise—where had these ideas first been 
originated, but in England? Let us never forget Milton, the first 
defender of regicide, Algernon Sydney, Bolingbroke, and Shaftes­
bury, over their French more brilliant followers. 
'"If an Englishman would call himself a democrat he would give 
the lie to the history of his own country,' says M. Blanc. 
"Well, we consider it as the veriest proof of sterling democracy, 
that it must give the lie to its country, that it must repudiate all 
responsibility for a past filled up with misery, tyranny, class 
oppression, and superstition. Let the French not make an exception 

=====第439页=====
Louis Blanc's Speech at the Dijon Banquet 411 
to the other democrats; let them not take the responsibility for the 
doings of their kings and aristocrats of former times. What 
M. Blanc thinks a disadvantage to English democrats, we think to be 
a great advantage, that they must repudiate the past, and only look to 
the future. 
" 'A Frenchman is necessarily a cosmopolite,' says M. Blanc. Yes, in 
a world ruled over only by French influence, French manners, 
fashions, ideas, politics. In a world in which every nation has adopted 
the characteristics of French nationality. But that is exactly what the 
democrats of other nations will not accept. Quite ready to give up the 
harshness of their own nationality, they expect the same from the 
French. They will not be satisfied in the assertion, on the part of the 
French, that they are cosmopolites by the mere fact that they are 
French, an assertion which amounts to the demand urged upon all 
others to  become  Frenchmen. 
"Compare Germany. Germany is the fatherland of an immense 
number of inventions—of the printing press, for instance. Germany 
has produced—and this is recognised upon all hands—a far greater 
number of generous and cosmopolitic ideas than France and 
England put together. And Germany, in practice, has always been 
humiliated, always been deceived in all her hopes. She can tell best 
what French cosmopolitism has been. Just as France had to complain 
of the treachery of English policy, Germany experienced an equally 
treacherous policy on the part of France, from Louis XI down to 
Louis Philippe. If we were to apply the measure of M. Louis Blanc, 
the Germans would be the true cosmopolites. However the German 
democrats are far from having any such pretensions.,, 
Written in December 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 104, December 30, 1847 time 

=====第440页=====
Frederick Engels 
CHARTIST AGITATION 
Since the opening of Parliament Chartist agitation has developed 
enormously. Petitions are being prepared, meetings held and 
Chartist agents are travelling everywhere. Besides the great National 
Petition for the People's Charter which this time, it is hoped, will 
collect four million signatures, two other petitions for the Chartist 
Land Company have just been submitted to the people; the first, 
edited by O'Connor and published in The Northern Star this week, 
can be summarised as follows: 
"To the Honourable, the Commons of Great Britain and Ireland in Parliament 
assembled, Gentlemen: 
"We,  the undersigned, members of the Chartist Land Company and all workmen, 
considering that excessive speculation in the products of our work, the unlimited 
competition -md the continual increase in the mechanical means of production have 
everywhere closed outlets for our work; 
"that as the mechanical means of production increase, manual labour decreases 
and workers are sacked; 
"that your recent decision about the temporary suspension of work on the railways 
will throw thousands of workers out of work, which will flood the labour market and 
will make the employers again reduce the wages already reduced so many times; 
"that, nevertheless, we shall ask no more than to live from the products of our 
work; 
"that we reject all poor rates as an insult, serving only to give the capitalists a 
reserve to throw at any moment on the labour market in order to reduce wages by 
means of competition between the workers themselves; 
"that while manufacturing industry no longer knows how to employ the masses of 
proletarians which it has produced, agricultural industry still offers a vast field for our 
work, for it is sure that by the use of labour the yield of the land of our country can be 
at least quadrupled; 
"that therefore we have formed a company for purchasing land whereby each may 
be enabled to earn a livelihood for himself and family without being at the expense of 

=====第441页=====
Chartist Agitation 413 
the parish or of individual charity, and without reducing the wages of other workers 
by competition. 
"In this way we therefore pray you, gentlemen, to pass such a law which releases 
and affranchises the Land Company from paying the Stamp duties, as well as the duty 
on bricks, timber and other building materials and to pass the Bill which will be placed 
before you to this end." 
The Bill has also been drafted by Feargus O'Connor, who is soon 
going to present it to Parliament. 
The second petition demands the return to the people of the 
uncultivated land that is the property of the parishes. This land, 
which for thirty years has been sold in blocks to great landowners, 
ought, as the petition requests, to be divided into small fields to be 
leased or sold on easy terms of payment to the labourers of this land. 
This petition was adopted in London at a great meeting where 
Messrs Harney and Jones, editors of The Northern Star, supported it 
in the absence of O'Connor, who was kept in Parliament. It was also 
adopted at a large meeting in Norwich where Mr. Jones, who is one 
of the best speakers in England, again gave it his brilliant and 
irresistible support. 
The National Petition has finally3 been adopted by a large meeting 
in London. The principal speakers here were Messrs Keen, 
Schapper (German) and Harney. The address by the latter, above 
all, was marked by its democratic strength. 
"What is our entire political and social system," he said, "but a gigantic fraud, 
erected and maintained for the benefit of idlers and impostors. 
"Behold the Church! The bishops and archbishops appropriate to themselves 
enormous salaries while leaving the hard-working clergy only a few pounds a year. 
Millions of pounds, in the shape of tithes, are taken annually from the people; these 
tithes were originally destined mainly for the upkeep of the churches and the support 
of the poor; now there are separate rates for that, and the Church 'sacks' all the tithes. 
I ask, is not such a Church an organised imposture? (Cheers.) 
"Behold our House of Commons, representing not the common people, but the 
aristocracy and the middle class, and dooming six-sevenths of the adult males of this 
country to political slavery by denying them the right to vote. Is not this house a 
legalised imposture? (Loud cheers.) 
"Behold those venerable peers who, whilst the wail of distress is heard through the 
land, can sit, evening after evening, waiting for the Coercion Bill coming up from the 
Commons. Will any one be good enough to show me the utility of the Hospital of 
Incurables—will any one attempt to defend this hereditary imposture? (Cheers.) 
"Of course, the respect I entertain for that blessed specimen of the 'wisdom of our 
ancestors'—the monarchy—forbids me to speak in other than the most loyal terms of 
so interesting a sovereign as Queen Victoria, who regularly, once a year, is delivered of 
a royal speech and a royal baby. (Laughter.) We have just had the speech, and I see an 
announcement that in March next we are to have the baby. Her most gracious Majesty 
expresses great concern for her people's sufferings, admires their patience, and 
a December 20, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第442页=====
414 Frederick Engels 
promises them another baby—and when it comes to babies, she has never yet 
promised in vain. (Bursts of laughter.) Then, there is Prince Albert, a celebrated 
hatmaker, a capital breeder of pigs, and a distinguished Field Marshal and who, for 
all his services, is paid thirty thousand pounds a year. No, citizens, the monarchy is no 
imposture." (Laughter and applause.) 
The speaker, having contrasted with this picture of official society 
the picture of the people's sufferings, concluded by demanding the 
adoption of the National Petition for the Charter. The petition was 
adopted unanimously. Mr. Duncombe will place it on the table in the 
House of Commons, when it has toured the country. I shall send you 
the translation of it as soon as I have obtained a copy.218 
Written at the end of December 1847 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
December 30, 1847 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第443页=====
Karl Marx 
WAGES 219 
[A] 
Explained already: 
1. Wages = price of the commodity. 
Hence, generally speaking, wages are determined in the same way 
as prices. 
Human activity=commodity. 
Manifestation of life, life activity, appears as mere means; 
existence divorced from this activity as purpose. 
2. As commodity wages depend on competition, demand and 
supply. 
3. The supply itself depends on the cost of production, i.e., on the 
labour time required for the production of a commodity. 
4. Inverse proportion of profits and wages. Opposition of the two 
classes whose economic existence are profits and wages.220 
5. Fight for increase or reduction of wages. Workers' associations. 
6. Average or normal price of labour; the minimum is valid only 
for the class of workers, not for the individual. Combinations of 
workers to maintain wages. 
7. Influence on wages of the removal of taxes, protective tariffs, 
reduction of armies, etc. The minimum is given on average as = the 
price of the necessary means of subsistence. 
[B] 
ADDITIONS 
I. ATKINSON3 
1. Hand-loom  weavers**  (working 15 hours per day). (Half a million 
of them.)  221 
a W. Atkinson, Principles of Political Economy.— Ed. 
b Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 

=====第444页=====
416 Karl Marx 
"Their distress a ... an inevitable condition of a species of labour easily learned, and 
constantly intruded on and superseded by cheaper means of production. A very short 
cessation of demand, where the competition for work is so great..., produces a crisis. 
...improvements, which, by superseding manual labour more and more, infallibly 
bring with them in the transition much of temporary suffering. Example of the 
hand-loom cotton weavers of the Dacca district of India; either starved or were thrown 
back into agricultural labour by the competition of English machinery." (Excerpt from 
the speech of Dr. Bowring in the House of Commons, July 1835.) b 
(This example on the passing from one trade to another to be used 
in respect of the debate on free trade.222) 
2. Something to be said on population theory. 
3. Influence of changed and expanded division of labour on the 
fixing of wages. 
II. CARLYLEC 
1. Not only the quantity of wages3 is to be considered. They vary 
in quality, depending on the play of circumstances. 
2. The advantage of wages: that from now on necessity, interest, 
haggling, alone link the worker to the employer. No longer anything 
patriarchal, as in the Middle Ages. 
Poor laws, extirpation of vermin, chargeable labourers.223 
3. The greater part of labour is not skilled labour.3 
4. The entire theory of Malthus and the economists amounts to 
saying that it lies with the workers to reduce the demand by not 
making any children. 
III. M'CULLOCHd 
"The wages earned by the labourer are. only the common and ordinary rate of 
profit to the proprietors of the machine called man, thereto [dazu]e a sum to replace 
the wear and tear of the machines, or, which is the same thing, to supply the place of 
the old and decayed labourers with new ones" fp. 319J.f 
3 Marx uses the English word.— Ed. 
b Bowring's speech is quoted in W. Atkinson, Principles of Political Economy, 
pp. 36-38.— Ed. 
c Th. Carlyle, Chartism.— Ed. 
d J. R. M'Culloch, The Principles of Political Economy.— Ed. 
e M'Culloch has here: "exclusive  of".—Ed. 
The words "to replace ... of the machines" and "new ones" are in English in the 
original.— Ed. 

=====第445页=====
^^T£LZJ^ 
u ^PuSL'^ ^Ä^v ^57*.*^? 
^ LV  *»•  ^ >•  -•- s** T_ , x ^ 
First page of Marx's manuscript "Wages" 

=====第446页=====

=====第447页=====
Wages 419 
IV. JOHN WADEa 
1. "If the object sought be to render an operative a machine, whereby the greatest 
quantity of work in a given occupation may be extracted from him, no way so effective 
as division of labour" [p. 125]. 
2. A reduction of wages drives the workers either to reduce their 
spending or to increase their productivity, in factories operated by 
machines, for instance (and in general), by working longer hours; or, 
with handicraftsmen, hand-loom weavers, etc., by working harder in 
the same hour. But since their wages have been reduced precisely 
because the demand has slackened, they thereby increase the supply 
at the unfavourable moment. The consequence is that their wages 
drop still lower, and then the bourgeois come along and say "If the 
people would only work". 
3. Altogether, the general law is that there cannot be two market 
prices, and that the  lower  market price prevails (given equal quality). 
Take 1,000 workers of equal skill; 50 are without work; the price is 
then determined not by the 950 who are employed but by the 50 who 
are unemployed. 
But this law of the market price weighs more heavily on the 
commodity labour than on other commodities, because the worker 
cannot lay up his commodity in store but must sell his life activity or, 
deprived of the means of subsistence, must die. 
The saleable commodity labour differs from other commodities in 
particular by its evanescent nature, by the impossibility of accumulating 
it, and by the fact that the  supply  cannot be increased or reduced with 
the same facility as with other products. 
4. The humanity of the capitalists consists in buying as much 
labour as possible at the cheapest price. Agricultural labourers earn 
more in summer than in winter, although in winter they need more 
food, fuel and warmer clothing. 
5. The abolition of Sunday, for example, would be a sheer loss to 
the workers. The masters seek to reduce wages by leaving them 
nominally the same but making the workers work a quarter of an 
hour more, for example, shortening meal times, etc. 
6. Wages affected by fashions, the changing seasons, and commer­
cial fluctuations.224 
7. If the worker, supplanted by the machine, goes into another 
industry, that is as a rule a worse one. He never gets back into his 
former position. 
a J. Wade, History of the Middle and Working  Classes.—  Ed. 
1 ;,_ 1 82ti 

=====第448页=====
420 Karl Marx 
The machine and the division of labour replace dear by cheap 
labour. 
One has suggested to the workers: 
1) savings banks; 
2) to learn all possible trades (so that when there is a surplus of 
workers in one industry the same occurs at once in all industries). 
8. In times of stagnation: 
a) cessation of work; 
b) reduction of wages; 
c) the same wage, but employment for fewer days in the week.225 
9. Concerning the combinations of trade,3 it is to be remarked: 
1. The expenses of the workers (the costs). Invention of machines 
in consequence of the combinations. Other division of labour. 
Depression of wages. Deplacement b of factories to other localities. 
2. If they were all to succeed in keeping wages so high that profits 
were significantly reduced below the average profits of other 
countries, or so that capital would grow more slowly, the industry of 
a country would be ruined, and the workers together with the 
masters even more so. 
Although a reduction in taxes does not benefit the workers, a rise 
in taxation, on the other hand, harms them. The good thing in the 
rise in taxation in countries with a developed bourgeoisie is that the 
estate of small farmers and proprietors (craftsmen, etc.) is thereby 
ruined and thrown into the working class. 
Influence of the Irish in England, the Germans in Alsace, on 
wages. 
V. CABBAGE' 
Truck  system.? 26 
VI. ANDREW UREd 
General principle of modern industry: to replace adults by 
children, skilled workers by unskilled, men by women. 
Equalisation of wages: Main feature of modern industry [see 
pp. 34, 35]. 
a The words "combinations of trade" are in English in the original.— Ed. 
b The word "déplacement" is in English in the original.— Ed. 
c Ch. Babbage, Traité sur l'économie des machines et des manufactures. — Ed. 
d A. Ure, Philosophie des manufactures, ou Economie industrielle. — Ed. 

=====第449页=====
Wages 421 
VII. ROSSI3 
Mr. Rossi thinks: 
The manufacturer only advances to the worker his share in the 
product because the latter cannot wait for its sale. This is a 
speculation which has no direct bearing on the production process. 
If the worker can maintain himself until the product is sold he will, as 
an associé, claim his share in it afterwards. 
Hence, wages are not a constituent element of the product as are 
capital and the land. They are a mere accident, a form of our social 
condition. Wages do not belong to capital. 
Wages are not a factor indispensable to production. In a different 
organisation of labour they may disappear [see pp. 369, 370]. 
[VIIL] CHERBULIEZb 
1. "...The increase of the productive capital does not necessarily entail an increase 
of the approvisionnement for the workers. Raw materials and machinery can be 
increased while approvisionnement is reduced. 
"The price of labour depends on a) the absolute quantity of the productive capital; 
b) on the proportions of the various elements of capital, two social facts on which the 
will of the workers cannot exert any influence. 
2. "It is not so much the absolute consumption of the worker as his relative 
consumption which makes his position either happy or unhappy. Beyond the 
necessary consumption ... the value of what we enjoy is  essentially  relative" [pp. 103-04, 
105, 109]. 
When one speaks of the fall or rise of wages one must never lose 
sight of the whole world market or of the position of the workers in 
the various countries. 
Egalitarian and other attempts to fix wages justly. 
The minimum wage itself changes and constantly falls. Example of 
spirits. 
("IX.]  BRAYC 
SAVINGS BANKS 
Triple machine in the hands of despotism and capital. 
1. The money flows back into the national bank, which makes 
profits by lending it back to the capitalists. 
a P. Rossi, Cours d'économie politique.—Ed. 
b A. Cherbuliez, Riche ou pauvre. — Ed. 
c J. F. Bray, Labour's Wrong and Labour's Remedy.— Ed. 

=====第450页=====
422 Karl Marx 
2. The golden chain by which the government holds a large part 
of the working class. 
3. By this means a new weapon is given into the hands of the 
capitalists as such [pp. 152, 153]. 
Once wages have fallen, they never rise to their previous height; 
absolute and relative wages. 
[C] 
I. HOW DOES THE GROWTH OF THE PRODUCTIVE FORCES 
AFFECT WAGES?227 
[Cf. VI, 3] a 
Machinery: Division of labour. 
Labour is simplified. Its cost of production is reduced. It becomes 
cheaper. The competition among the workers increases. 
Passing from one industry to another. On this see Dr. Bowring 
himself in relation to the hand-loom cotton weavers in the region of 
Dacca in India, in Parliament 1835. 
The new work into which the worker is flung, is worse than the 
former, more subordinate. Adult labour replaced by children's, 
men's by women's, more skilled by less skilled. 
Either working hours increased or wages reduced. 
Competition among workers not only in that one sells himself 
more cheaply than another, but also in that one does the work of two. 
In general, the growth of the productive forces has the following 
consequences: 
a) The position of the worker relative to that of the capitalist 
worsens, and the value of the things enjoyed is relative. The 
enjoyments themselves are indeed nothing but social enjoyments, 
relations, connections. 
b) The worker becomes an increasingly one-sided productive 
force which produces as much as possible in as little time as possible. 
Skilled labour increasingly transformed into simple labour. 
c) Wages become more and more dependent on the world market 
and the position of the worker increasingly subject to chance. 
d) In productive capital the share of machinery and raw materials 
grows much faster than that of approvisionnement. The increase of 
productive capital is therefore not accompanied by a similar increase 
of the demand for labour. 
a See this volume, pp. 428-34.-n£d. 

=====第451页=====
Wages 423 
Wages depend: 
a) on the mass of productive capital as a whole; 
R) on the proportion of its constituents. 
The worker has no influence on either. 
(Were it not for the fluctuations of wages, the worker would take 
no interest at all in the development of civilisation; he would remain 
stationary.) 
In the competition of the workers with the machine it is to be 
noted that handworkers (e.g., hand-loom cotton weavers) suffer 
even more than machine workers directly employed in the factory. 
Every development of new productive forces is at the same time a 
weapon against the workers. All improvements in the means of 
communication, for example, facilitate the competition of workers in 
different localities and turn local competition into national, etc. 
The cheapening of all commodities, which however does not occur 
in the case of the most immediate means of subsistence, has as a 
result that the worker wears a collection of rags and his misery 
displays the colours of civilisation. 
II. COMPETITION BETWEEN WORKERS AND EMPLOYERS 
a) To determine relative wages it should be noted that one taler 
for one worker and One taler for One employer do not have the same 
value. The worker must buy everything worse and dearer. His taler 
commands neither so many nor such good commodities as that of the 
employer. The worker must be a spendthrift and buy and sell against 
all economic principles. We must remark in general that we have in 
mind here only one aspect,  wages  themselves. But the exploitation of 
the worker begins anew as soon as he exchanges the price for his 
labour back into other commodities.— Épicier* pawnbroker, 
landlord, tout le monde l'exploite encore une fois. h 
ß) The employer, by commanding the means of employment, 
commands the means of subsistence of the worker, i.e., the latter's 
life depends on him; just as the worker himself degrades his life 
activity to a mere means of existence. 
Y) The commodity labour has great disadvantages against other 
commodities. For the capitalist, competition with the workers is a 
mere question of profit, for the workers it is a question of their 
existence. 
Labour is of a more evanescent nature than other commodities. It 
a Grocer.—Ed. 
b Everybody exploits him over again.—Ed. 

=====第452页=====
424 Karl Marx 
cannot be accumulated. The supply cannot be increased or reduced 
with the same facility as with other commodities. 
g) Factory regime. Housing legislation. Truck system,3 where the 
employer cheats the worker by raising the price of goods while 
leaving the nominal wage the same. 
III. COMPETITION AMONG THE WORKERS THEMSELVES 
a) By a general economic law there cannot be two market prices. 
The wages of 1,000 workers of the same skill are determined not by 
the 950 in employment but by the 50 unemployed. Influence of the 
Irish on the position of the English  workers  and of the Germans on the 
position of the Alsatian workers. 
b) The workers compete with each other not merely by one 
offering himself more cheaply than another, but by one doing the 
work of two. 
Advantages of the unmarried over the married worker, etc. 
Competition between workers from villages and towns. 
IV. FLUCTUATIONS OF WAGES 
They are occasioned by: 
1) Changes in fashions. 
2) The changing seasons. 
3) Fluctuations in trade. 
In case of a crisis 
a) the workers will limit their spending, or, to increase their 
productivity, they will either work longer hours or produce more in 
the same hour. But since their wages have been reduced because the 
demand for their product has slackened, they increase the unfa­
vourable proportion of the supply to the demand, and then the 
bourgeois says: if the people would only work. Their wages drop still 
lower through their overexertion. 
ß) In times of crisis: 
Complete unemployment. Reduction in wages. No change in 
wages and reduction of the working days.228 
Y) In all crises the following circular movement relates to the 
workers: 
The employer cannot employ the workers because he cannot sell 
his product. He cannot sell his product because he has nö buyers. He 
has no buyers because the workers have nothing to offer in exchange 
a Marx uses the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第453页=====
Wages 425 
but their labour, and precisely for that reason they cannot exchange 
their labour. 
§) When it is a question of a rise in wages, it is to be noted that one 
must always have in mind the world market and the fact that the 
rise in wages is ineffectual since workers in other countries are put 
out of work. 
V. MINIMUM WAGE 
1. The daily wage the worker takes home is the profit which his 
machine, his body, yields to its owner. Included in it is the sum 
necessary to replace the wear and tear3 of the machine, or, what is the 
same thing, to replace old, worn-out workers by new ones. 
2. It is inherent in the minimum wage that the abolition of 
Sunday, for example, would be a sheer loss to the worker. He would 
have to earn his wages in harder conditions. This is the purpose of 
the brave philanthropists who zealously argue against the observance 
of Sabbath. 
3. Although the minimum wage is determined on average by the 
price of the most indispensable provisions, it is nevertheless to be 
remarked: 
Firstly: that the minimum is different in different countries, the 
potato in Ireland, for example.229 
Secondly: not only that. The minimum itself has a historical 
movement and sinks always further towards the absolutely lowest 
level. Example of brandy. Distilled first from  draff,  then from grain, 
finally from spirits. 
Towards bringing about the really lowest level of the minimum 
contribute not only 
1) the general development of the working machines, the division 
of labour, the increase in competition among the workers themselves 
and its liberation from local fetters, but also 
2) the growth of taxation and the greater costliness of the state 
budget, for, although, as we have seen, the abolition of a tax does not 
benefit the worker, he is harmed by the introduction of any new tax 
so long as the minimum has not yet fallen to its lowest possible 
expression, and this is the case with all perturbations and difficulties 
of civil relations. The growth of taxation, incidentally, brings about 
the ruin of the small farmers, bourgeois and craftsmen. 
Example—after the war of liberation.230 The progress of industry, 
which brings with it cheaper products and substitutes. 
a Marx uses the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第454页=====
426 Karl Marx 
3. This minimum tends to become the same in different countries. 
4. When wages have once fallen and later rise again, they never 
rise, however, to their previous level. 
In the course of development, there is a double fall in wages: 
Firstly: relative, in proportion to the development of general 
wealth. 
Secondly: absolute, since the quantity of commodities which the 
worker receives in exchange becomes less and less. 
5. With the development of large-scale industry time becomes 
increasingly the measure of the value of commodities, hence also the 
measure of wages. Simultaneously the production of the commodity 
labour becomes cheaper and cheaper and costs less and less working 
time as civilisation progresses. 
The peasant still has free time and can earn something on the side. 
But big industry (not manufacture) does away with this patriarchal 
situation. Every moment of the worker's life, of his very existence, 
thus becomes more and more a matter of haggling. 
(Here add the following sections: 
1. Suggestions for the improvement of the workers' position. 
Malthus; Rossi etc.; Proudhon; Weitling. 
2. Workers' associations. 
3. Positive significance of wage labour.) 
VI. SUGGESTIONS FOR REMEDIES 
1. One of the most popular suggestions is the system of savings 
banks. 
We will say nothing at all of the impossibility for most of the 
workers to save. 
The purpose, at least the strictly economic meaning of savings 
banks,  is supposed to be: that by their own foresight and wisdom the 
workers can equalise the good working times with the bad, i.e., 
distribute their wages in the cycle through which the industrial 
movement runs in such a way that they actually never spend more 
than the minimum wage, that which is indispensable to sustain life. 
But we have seen that the fluctuations of wages not only 
revolutionise the worker, but that without the temporary rise of 
wages above the minimum he would remain excluded from all 
advances of production, from public wealth, from civilisation, hence 
from all possibility of emancipation. 
He must therefore turn himself into a bourgeois calculating 
machine, make thrift into a system, and give misery a stationary, 
conservative character. 

=====第455页=====
Wages 427 
In addition, the savings bank system is a triple machine of 
despotism: 
a) The savings bank is the golden chain by which the government 
holds a large part of the working class. By it they not only acquire an 
interest in the preservation of the existing conditions. Not only does 
it lead to a split between that portion of the working class which takes 
part in the savings banks and the portion which does not. The 
workers themselves thus give into the hands of their enemies the 
weapons to preserve the existing organisation of society which 
subjugates them. 
ß) The money flows back into the national bank, this lends it again 
to the capitalists and both share in the profits and thus, with the 
money borrowed from the people at a miserable rate of inter­
est—which only by this centralisation becomes a mighty industrial 
lever—increase their capital, their direct ruling power over the 
people. 
2. Another suggestion, very popular with the bourgeoisie, is 
education, especially comprehensive industrial education. 
a) We shall not draw attention to the trite contradiction which lies 
in the fact that modern industry replaces compound labour more 
and more with simple labour which requires no education; we shall 
not draw attention to the fact that it throws more and more children 
from the age of seven upwards behind the machine and turns them 
into a source of income not only for the bourgeois class but for their 
own proletarian parents; the factory system frustrates the school 
laws,  example Prussia; nor shall we draw attention to the fact that the 
education of the mind, if the worker had such an education, has no 
direct effect at all on his wages, that education is altogether dependent 
on the conditions of life, and that by moral education the bourgeois 
understands indoctrination with bourgeois principles, and that, 
finally, the bourgeois class neither has the means, nor if it had them 
would it use them, to offer the people a real education. 
We confine ourselves to stressing a purely economic viewpoint. 
ß) The true purpose which education has with the philanthropic 
economists is this: every worker should be trained in as many 
industries as possible, so that if by the introduction of new machines 
or by a change in the division of labour he is thrown out of one 
industry, he can as easily as possible find employment in another. 
Assuming this to be possible: 
The consequence would be that if there were a surplus of hands in 
one industry, this surplus would at once spread to all other 
industries, and even more than before the reduction of wages in one 
business would lead directly to a general reduction in wages. 

=====第456页=====
428 Karl Marx 
Even as it is, since modern industry simplifies work everywhere 
and makes it easy to learn, the rise of wages in one industry at once 
causes an influx of workers into this industry and the reduction of 
wages will more or lesr directly assume a general character. 
We cannot here, of course, consider all the many minor palliatives 
which are suggested from the bourgeois side.3 
3. We must, however, turn to a third suggestion, which has had, 
and continues to have, very significant practical consequences—the 
Malthusian theory. 
This entire theory, in so far as we have to consider it here, amounts 
to the following: 
a ) The level of wages depends on the proportion of the hands 
which offer themselves to the hands which are required. 
Wages can rise in two ways. 
Either when the capital which sets the labour in motion increases 
so rapidly that the demand for workers increases more rapidly, in 
quicker progression, than their supply. 
Or, secondly, when the population is growing so slowly that 
competition among the workers remains weak although productive 
capital does not grow rapidly. 
On one side of this proportion, namely the growth of productive 
capital, you workers can exert no influence. 
But you can on the other side. 
You can reduce the supply of workers, i.e., the competition among 
them, by making as few children as possible. 
To reveal the utter stupidity, baseness and hypocrisy of this 
doctrine, the following is sufficient: 
j$) (This is to be included in I: How does the growth of the 
productive forces affect wages?) 
Wages rise when the demand for labour grows. This demand 
grows when the capital grows which sets the labour in motion, i.e., 
when the productive capital grows. 
Here there are two main points to be made: 
Firstly: A main condition for the rise of wages is the growth of the 
productive capital, and its most rapid possible growth. The main 
condition for the worker to be in a passable position is, therefore, to 
depress his position in relation to the bourgeois class more and more, 
to increase as much as possible the power of his opponent, capital. 
That is, he can only be in a passable position provided he creates 
and reinforces the power which is hostile to him, his own opposite. 
On this condition of creating this hostile power, the means of 
a Marx later added: "Pauperism".—Ed. 

=====第457页=====
Wages 429 
employment flow to him from that power and turn him anew into 
part of the productive capital and into the lever which increases the 
latter and hurls it into an accelerated movement of growth. 
Incidentally, when one has grasped this relationship of capital and 
labour, all Fourierist and other attempts at mediation appear in their 
true absurdity. 
Secondly: Having thus explained this crazy relationship, we must 
add a second, even more important element. 
Namely, what does it mean: Growth of productive capital, and in 
what conditions does it take place? 
Growth of capital=accumulation and concentration of capital. In 
the same measure in which capital is accumulated and concentrated, 
it leads: 
to work on a larger scale and hence to a new division of labour 
which simplifies the work still more; 
then to the introduction of machinery on a larger scale and to the 
introduction of new machinery. 
That means, therefore, that in the measure in which productive 
capital grows, there grows 
the competition among the workers because the division of labour 
is simplified and every branch of labour is open to everybody. 
Competition also grows among them because in the same measure 
they have to compete with the machines and are thrown out of work 
by them. By constantly increasing the scale of operations and because 
the rate of interest tends to fall more and more through the 
competition among the capitals offered, the concentration and 
accumulation of productive capital brings about the following: 
Small industrial enterprises are ruined and cannot stand up to 
competition with the big ones. Entire sections of the bourgeois class 
are thrown down into the working class. The competition among the 
workers is therefc e increased by the ruin of the small industrialists 
which is fatally linked with the growth of productive capital. 
And at the same time as the rate of interest falls, small capitalists 
formerly not participating in industry directly are forced to become 
industrial, i.e., to supply big industry with further victims. From this 
side,  too, the working class is enlarged and competition among the 
workers increased. 
While the growth of the productive forces leads to work on a 
larger scale, momentary overproduction becomes more and more 
necessary, the world market more and more extensive, and 
competition more universal. The crises, therefore, become more and 
more violent. So the workers are given a sudden encouragement to 
marry and multiply, they are agglomerated and concentrated in 

=====第458页=====
430 Karl Marx 
large masses, and their wages fluctuate more and more. Every new 
crisis,  therefore, creates directly much bigger competition among the 
workers. 
Speaking generally, the growth of the productive forces, with their 
more rapid means of communication, accelerated circulation and 
feverish turnover of capital consists in the fact that in the same time 
more can be produced, and hence, under the law of competition, 
more must be produced. That is, production takes place in more and 
more difficult conditions, and so that competition can be put up with 
in these conditions, production must take place on an ever growing 
scale and capital must be concentrated in fewer and fewer hands. 
And so that this producing on a larger scale may be fruitful, the 
division of labour and machinery must be constantly and dispropor­
tionately extended. 
This producing in more and more difficult conditions also extends 
to the worker as part of capital. He must produce more, in more and 
more difficult conditions, i.e., for less and less wages and more work, 
at constantly decreasing production costs. So the minimum itself is 
constantly being reduced to greater exertions with minimum 
enjoyment. 
The disproportion rises geometrically, not arithmetically.3 
The growth of the productive forces therefore leads to increased 
power of big capital, to the machine called the worker becoming 
more and more simple, to an increase in direct competition among 
the workers through greater division of labour and use of 
machinery, through a positive premium being placed on the 
production of people, through the competition of the ruined 
sections of the bourgeois class, etc. 
We can formulate the matter still more simply: 
Productive capital consists of three constituent parts: 
1) the raw material which is worked up; 
2) the machines and materials such as coal, etc., which are 
necessary to drive the machines; buildings, etc.; 
3) the part of capital intended for the maintenance of the workers. 
Given the growth of productive capital, in what proportion do 
these three constituents stand to each other? 
The growth of productive capital is linked with its concentration, 
and with that the fact that it can only be profitable if it is exploited on 
an ever larger scale. 
A large part of capital will therefore be transformed directly into 
instruments of labour and will operate as such, and the more the 
a This sentence was written by Marx in the margin.—Ed. 

=====第459页=====
Wages 431 
productive forces grow, the larger will be this part of capital which is 
directly transformed into machinery. 
The growth of machinery and of the division of labour has the 
consequence that in a shorter time far more can be produced. Hence 
the store of raw materials must grow in the same proportion. In the 
course of the growth of the productive capital the part of capital 
transformed into raw materials necessarily increases. 
There is still the third part of capital, that which is intended for the 
maintenance of the workers, i.e., transformed into wages. 
In what proportion does the growth of this part of productive 
capital stand to the two others? 
The greater division of labour causes a worker to produce as much 
as three, four, or five did formerly. Machinery has as a consequence 
the same proportion on a much larger scale. 
It further stands to reason that the growth of the parts of 
productive capital transformed into machinery and raw materials is 
not accompanied by a similar growth of the part of productive capital 
intended for wages. In that case the purpose of the use of machinery 
and the increased division of labour would, of course, be thwarted. It 
stands to reason that the part of productive capital intended for 
wages does not grow in the same measure as the part intended for 
machinery and raw materials. Moreover, in the same measure in 
which productive capital grows, i.e., the power of capital as such, in 
the same measure there increases the disproportion between the 
capital invested in raw materials and machinery and that spent on 
wages. That means, therefore, that the part of productive capital 
intended for wages becomes smaller and smaller in relation to that 
which acts as machinery and raw material. 
After the capitalist has put a larger capital into machinery, he is 
compelled to spend a larger capital on the purchase of raw materials 
and the fuels required to drive the machines. But if formerly he 
employed 100 workers, now he will need perhaps only 50. Otherwise 
he would have perhaps to double the other parts of his capital again, 
i.e., make the disproportion still greater. He will therefore dismiss 
50, or else the 100 must work for the same price as formerly the 50 
did. There are, therefore, redundant workers on the market. 
With improved division of labour only the capital for raw material 
will have to be increased. The place of three workers will perhaps be 
taken by one. 
But take the most favourable case. Let the capitalist expand his 
enterprise so that he can not only retain the previous number of his 
workers—and, of course, he does not care a fig about waiting until he 
can do so—but even increase it; in this case production must have 

=====第460页=====
432 Karl Marx 
been enormously expanded for it to be possible to retain the same 
number of workers or even increase it, and the proportion of 
workers to the productive forces has relatively become infinitely 
more a disproportion. Overproduction is thereby accelerated, and in 
the next crisis more workers than ever are unemployed. 
It is, therefore, a general law which necessarily arises from the 
nature of the relation between capital and labour that in the course of 
the growth of the productive forces the part of productive capital 
which is transformed into machinery and raw material, i. e., capital as 
such, increases in disproportion to the part which is intended for 
wages; i. e., in other words, the workers must share among themselves 
an ever smaller part of the productive capital in relation to its total 
mass.  Their competition, therefore, becomes more and more violent. 
In other words: the more productive capital grows, the more, in 
proportion, the means of employment and the means of subsistence 
for the workers are reduced, and the more rapidly, in other words, 
the working population grows in proportion to its means of 
employment. And this increases in the same measure in which the 
productive capital as a whole grows. 
To compensate the above disproportion it must be enlarged in 
geometrical proportion, and in order afterwards, in a time of crisis, 
to readjust it, it is enlarged still more. 
This law, which arises simply from the relation of the worker to 
capital, and which turns even the condition most favourable for him, 
the rapid growth of productive capital, into an unfavourable one, the 
bourgeois have changed from a social law into a law of nature by 
saying that by a law of nature the population grows more rapidly 
than the means of employment or the means of subsistence. 
They fail to understand that the growth of this contradiction is 
inherent in the growth of productive capital. 
We shall return to this later. 
Productive force, in particular the social force of the workers 
themselves, not paid for, is even directed against them. 
Y) First absurdity: 
We have seen that when productive capital grows—the most 
favourable case presupposed by the economists—when, therefore, 
the demand for labour increases relatively, it is in the nature of 
modern industry and in the nature of capital that the means for the 
employment of workers do not grow in the same proportion, that the 
same circumstances which make productive capital grow, make the 
disproportion between the supply of labour and the demand for it 
grow still more rapidly, in a word, that the growth of the productive 

=====第461页=====
Wages 433 
forces makes grow  at the  same time  the disproportion between  the 
number  of workers  and the  means  for  their employment. This 
depends neither  on the  increase  of means  of subsistence  nor on the 
increase  of the  population regarded  by itself. It  follows necessarily 
from  the  nature  of large-scale industry  and the  relationship  of 
labour  and  capital. 
If the  growth  of productive capital progresses only slowly, 
however,  if it  remains stationary  or even decreases,  the number  of 
workers  is always  too large  in proportion  to the  demand  for labour. 
In both cases,  the most favourable  and the  most unfavourable,  it 
follows from  the  relationship  of labour  to capital, from  the nature  of 
capital  itself,  that  the supply  of labour will always  be too  great  for the 
demand  for  labour. 
d ) Leaving aside  the nonsense that  the entire working class cannot 
possibly take  the decision  not to  make  any  children, their condition, 
on the  contrary, makes  the  sexual instinct their chief pleasure  and 
develops  it one-sidedly. 
After  the  bourgeoisie  has  depressed  the  existence  of the  workers 
to a minimum,  it wants  in addition  to limit their acts  of reproduction 
to a minimum. 
s ) That  the  bourgeoisie, incidentally, does  not and  cannot mean 
these phrases  and  counsels seriously,  is clear from  the following: 
Firstly:  By replacing adults with children, modern industry places  a 
veritable premium  on the  making  of children. 
Secondly:  Big  industry constantly requires  a reserve army  of 
unemployed workers  for  times  of overproduction.  The  main 
purpose  of the  bourgeois  in relation  to the  worker  is, of  course,  to 
have  the  commodity labour  as cheaply  as possible, which  is only 
possible when  the  supply  of this commodity  is as  large  as possible  in 
relation  to the  demand  for it, i.e.,  when  the  overpopulation  is the 
greatest. 
Overpopulation  is therefore  in the  interest  of the  bourgeoisie,  and 
it gives  the workers good advice which  it knows  to be  impossible  to 
carry  out. 
t ) Since capital only increases when  it employs workers,  the 
increase  of capital involves  an increase  of the  proletariat,  and, as we 
have seen, according  to the  nature  of the  relation  of capital  and 
labour,  the  increase  of the  proletariat must proceed relatively even 
faster. 
x ) The  above theory, however, which  is also expressed  as 
a law of  nature, that population grows faster than  the  means  of 
subsistence,  is the  more welcome  to the  bourgeois  as it  silences  his 
conscience, makes hard-heartedness into  a moral duty  and the 

=====第462页=====
434 Karl Marx 
consequences of society into the consequences of nature, and finally 
gives him the opportunity to watch the destruction of the proletariat 
by starvation as calmly as other natural event without bestirring 
himself,  and, on the other hand, to regard the misery of the 
proletariat as its own fault and to punish it. To be sure, the proletarian 
can restrain his natural instinct by reason, and so, by moral 
supervision, halt the law of nature in its injurious course of 
development. 
X) The poor laws may be regarded as an application of this theory. 
Extirpation of vermin. Arsenic. Workhouses.3 Pauperism in general. 
The treadmill again within civilisation. Barbarism reappears, but 
created in the lap of civilisation itself and belonging to it; hence 
leprous barbarism, barbarism as leprosy of civilisation. Workhouses3 
the Bastilles of the workers. Separation of man and wife. 
4. We will now briefly speak of those who want to improve the 
condition of the workers by a different way of fixing wages. 
Proudhon. 
5. Finally, among the remarks which philanthropic economists 
have made on wages, yet another view must be mentioned. 
a) Among other economists Rossi, in particular, has expounded 
the following: 
The manufacturer only advances to the worker his share in the 
product because the worker cannot wait for its sale. If the worker 
could maintain himself until the product was sold he would, as an 
associé, afterwards claim his share, as is the case between the actual 
and the industrial capitalist. That the worker's share has the 
particular form of wages is an accident, the result of a speculation, of 
a specific act which takes place alongside the production process and 
does not form any necessary constituent element of it. Wages are 
merely an accidental form of our social conditions. They do not 
necessarily belong to capital. They are not an indispensable factor of 
production. They can disappear under another organisation of 
society. 
ß ) This whole trick amounts to the following: If the workers 
possessed enough accumulated labour, i.e., enough capital, not to 
have to live directly on the sale of their labour, the wage form would 
end. That is, if all workers were at the same time capitalists; which is 
to presuppose and preserve capital without the contrast of wage 
labour without which it cannot exist. 
Y ) Nevertheless, the following admission is to be observed: Wages 
are no accidental form of bourgeois production, but the whole of 
a Marx uses the English word.—Ed. 

=====第463页=====
Wages 435 
bourgeois production is a passing historical form of production. All 
its relationships, capital as well as wages, rent, etc., are transitory and 
can be abolished at a certain point of development. 
VII. WORKERS' ASSOCIATIONS 
An element in the population theory was that it is supposed to 
lessen the competition among workers. The associations, by contrast, 
have the purpose of removing it and replacing it by union of 
workers. 
The economists are right when they remark against the associa­
tions: 
1. The costs which they cause the workers are mostly greater than 
the rise in the gains they want to get. In the long run they cannot 
withstand the laws of competition. These combinations bring about 
new machines, a new division of labour, removal from one place of 
production to another. In consequence of all this a reduction of 
wages. 
2. If the combinations were to succeed in keeping the price of 
labour so high in one country that profits fell significantly in relation 
to the average profit in other countries, or so that capital was held up 
in its growth, stagnation and recession of industry would be the 
consequence, and the workers would be ruined together with their 
masters. For that, as we have seen, is the condition of the worker. His 
condition deteriorates by leaps and bounds when productive capital 
grows, and he is ruined from the start when it declines or remains 
stationary. 
3. All these objections of the bourgeois economists are, as we have 
said, correct, but only correct from their point of view.231 If in the 
associations it really were a matter only of what it appears to be, 
namely the fixing of wages, if the relationship between labour and 
capital were eternal, these combinations would be wrecked on the 
necessity of things. But they are the means of uniting the working 
class,  of preparing for the overthrow of the entire old society with its 
class contradictions. And from this standpoint the workers are right 
to laugh at the clever bourgeois schoolmasters who reckon up to 
them what this civil war is costing them in fallen, injured, and 
financial sacrifices. He who wants to beat his adversary will not 
discuss with him the costs of the war. And how far the workers are 
from such mean-spiritedness is proved to the economists by the very 
fact that the best-paid workers form the most combinations and that 
the workers spend all they can scrape from their wages on forming 

=====第464页=====
436 Karl Marx 
political and industrial associations and meeting [the costs] of this 
movement. And if in their moments of philanthropy Messrs the 
bourgeois and their economists are so gracious as to allow in the 
minimum wage, that is, in the minimum life, a little tea, or rum, or 
sugar and meat, it must by contrast appear to them as shameful as 
incomprehensible that the workers reckon in this minimum a little of 
the costs of war against the bourgeoisie and that out of their 
revolutionary activity they even make the maximum of their 
enjoyment of life. 
VIII. POSITIVE ASPECT OF WAGE LABOUR 
Before we conclude, let us draw attention to the positive aspect of 
wage labour. 
a) If one says "positive aspect of wage labour" one says "positive 
aspect of capital", of large-scale industry, of free competition, of the 
world market, and I do not need to explain to you in detail how 
without these production relations neither the means of produc­
tion—the material means for the emancipation of the proletariat and 
the foundation of a new society—would have been created, nor 
would the proletariat itself have taken to the unification and develop­
ment through which it is really capable of revolutionising the old 
society and  itself.  Equalisation of wages. 
ß ) Let us take wages themselves in the essence of their evil, that 
my activity becomes a commodity, that I become utterly and abso­
lutely for sale. 
Firstly: thereby everything patriarchal falls away, since haggling, 
purchase and sale remain the only connection, and the money 
relationship the sole relationship between employer and workers. 
Secondly: the halo of sanctity is entirely gone from all relationships 
of the old society, since they have dissolved into pure money 
relationships. 
Likewise, all so-called higher kinds of labour, intellectual, artistic, 
etc., have been turned into articles of commerce and have thereby 
lost their old sanctity. What a great advance it was that the entire 
regiment of clerics, doctors, lawyers, etc., hence religion, law, etc., 
ceased to be judged by anything but their commercial value.3 
(Thirdly: since labour has become a commodity and as such subject 
to free competition, one seeks to produce it as cheaply as possible, 
i.e., at the lowest possible production cost. All physical labour has 
a Here the manuscript has an insertion: "National, class, property relations."—Ed. 

=====第465页=====
Wages 437 
thereby become infinitely easy and simple for the future organisa­
tion of society.— To be put in general form.) 
Thirdly: as the workers realised through the general saleability that 
everything was separable, dissoluble from  itself,  they first became 
free of their subjection to a given relationship. The advantage both 
over payment in kind and over the way of life prescribed purely by 
the (feudal) estate is that the worker can do what he likes with his 
money. 
Written at the end of December 1847 
First published in Russian in the 
journal Sotsialisticheskoye khozyaistvo, 
1924 and in German in the journal 
Unter dem Banner des Marxismw, 1925 Printed according to the manus­
cript 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第466页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE "SATISFIED" MAJORITY.—GUIZOT'S SCHEME 
OF "REFORM".—QUEER NOTIONS 
OF M. GARNIER-PAGÈS.— DEMOCRATIC BANQUET 
AT CHÂLON.— SPEECH OF M. LEDRU-ROLLIN.— 
A DEMOCRATIC CONGRESS.—SPEECH OF M. FLOCON.— 
THE RÉFORME AND THE NATIONAL 
The French Chambers are now open, and we shall very soon have 
the pleasure of seeing what effect the Reform agitation has had upon 
the 225 "satisfied" members of the majority.3 We shall see whether 
they will be satisfied, too, with the manner in which Guizot has 
exposed France in the Swiss question to the ridicule of all Europe. 
Why, this fat, corrupting and corrupted stock-jobbing, swindling, 
blood-sucking, and cowardly majority, are the very men to swallow 
down even that—to say "amen" to the trick which Palmerston, in 
return for the Spanish marriages, played on his worthy colleague 
Guizot232—to declare that never was France so great, so glorious, so 
respected, so "satisfied"—as at this very moment. 
And it is at this very moment that all the papers of Paris, from the 
Debate to the Réforme, discuss, as openly as can be done under the 
circumstances, the eventuality consequent upon the death of Louis 
Philippe. The Débats afraid of seeing the majority split itself up, 
warns them every day that this inevitable event, whenever it takes 
place, will be the signal for the general rendezvous of all political 
parties; that "republicanism", "communism", "anarchism", "terror­
ism", and so forth, will then break from their subterraneous caverns, 
to spread desolation, horror and destruction; that France will be 
lost—liberty, safety, property will be lost, unless the friends of order 
(M. Guizot and Co., of course) keep them down with a strong hand; 
that this perilous moment may occur any day; and that if M. Guizot is 
not supported in office, all will be lost. The other papers, the Presse, 
a See this volume, pp. 216-17.—£d. 
Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires. —Ed. 

=====第467页=====
The "Satisfied" Majority 439 
the Constitutionnel, the Siècle, on the contrary, say that quite the 
reverse will take place, that all the horrors of a bloody revolution will 
overrun the country, unless the abominable corruptor, Guizot, shall, 
at the moment of the king's death, have been replaced by their 
respective political heroes, by M. de Girardin, M. Thiers, or M. 
O. Barrot. The Radical papers discuss the question from another 
point of view, as we shall see by and by. 
Thus,  even the  Débats  agrees indirectly that "satisfied" France only 
awaits the proper moment for proving her dissatisfaction, in a 
manner which the frightened bourgeois imagination of the Débats 
depicts most ludicrously to its terrified reason. This, however, does 
not matter to the "satisfied" two hundred and twenty-five. They 
have a logic of their own. If the people are satisfied, then there is no 
reason for a change of system. If they are dissatisfied, why, then, 
their very dissatisfaction is a reason to stick more to the system; for if 
only one inch was abandoned, there would be a sudden eruption of 
all the horrors of revolution. Do whatever you like, these bourgeois 
will always draw the conclusion from it that they are the best rulers of 
the country. 
Nevertheless, Guizot will give a small bit of reform. He will add to 
the electoral list the "capacities", that is, all persons possessing a 
university degree, lawyers, doctors, and other such humbugs. A 
glorious reform, indeed. But this will suffice to disarm the 
"Progressive Conservatives", or, as they call themselves now—for, in 
want of something else to do, they change names every quarter—the 
Conservative opposition. And it will be a ready stroke for M. Thiers, 
who,  while sending his second, M. Duvergier de Hauranne, on 
a Reform banquetting errand, slily prepared his reform-plan, 
with which he was to surprise the Chambers, and which was 
equally the same as the one now to be proposed by his rival, 
Guizot. 
There will be a deal of crying, shouting, and noise-making 
generally in the Chambers; but I hardly think M. Guizot has 
anything serious to apprehend from his faithful two hundred and 
twenty-five. 
So much for the official world. In the meantime the Reform 
banquets and the polemic between the National and the Réforme have 
continued. The allied oppositions, that is, the left centre (M. Thiers' 
party),  the left (M. Odilon Barrot's party) and the "sensible Radicals" 
(the National), had the banquets of Castres, Montpellier, Neubourg, 
and others; the ultra-Democrats (the Réformé), had the banquet of 
Châlon. The chief speaker of the banquets of Montpellier and 
Neubourg was M. Garnier-Pagès, brother of the well-known 

=====第468页=====
440 Frederick Engels 
democrat of that name,3  deceased a few years ago. But M. 
Garnier-Pagès, the younger, is far from being like his brother; he 
totally lacks that energy, that courage and never-compromising spirit 
which secured so prominent a position to the deceased leader of 
French Democracy. At Neubourg, M. Garnier-Pagès, the younger, 
came out with assertions proving him to be entirely ignorant of the 
actual state of society, and consequently of the means of improving 
it. While all modern democracy is based upon the great fact, 
that modern society is irreparably divided into two classes— 
the bourgeoisie, or possessors of all means of production and all 
produce, and the proletarians, or possessors of nothing but their 
labour to live upon; that the latter class is socially and politically 
oppressed by the former; while the acknowledged tendency of 
modern Democrats in all countries is to make political power pass 
from the middle classes to the working classes, these latter 
constituting the immense majority of the people—in the face of all 
these facts, M. Gamier boldly asserts that the division of the people 
into middle classes and working classes does in reality not exist, that 
it is a mischievous invention of M. Guizot's got up to divide the 
people; that in spite of Guizot he recognises that all Frenchmen are 
equal—that they all participate in the same life, and that he 
recognises in France none but French citizensl According to 
M. Garnier-Pagès, then, the monopolising of all instruments of 
production in the hands of the bourgeoisie, which abandons the 
proletarians to the tender mercies of the economical law of wages, 
reducing the share of the working men to the lowest level of food, is 
an invention of M. Guizot's too! According to him, the whole of that 
desperate struggle now going on in all civilised countries of the 
world, between Labour and Capital, a struggle the different phases 
of which are marked by coalitions, trades' unions, murders, riots, 
and bloody insurrections—a struggle whose reality is testified by the 
death of the proletarians shot at Lyons, at Preston, at Langenbielau, 
at Prague, 233 this struggle has been carried on upon no better 
grounds than a lying assertion of a French professor! What else do 
the words of M. Garnier-Pagès mean but this? "Let the capitalists 
continue to monopolise all powers of production — let the 
working man continue to live upon the merest pittance, but 
give him, as a compensation for his suffering, the title of citizen!" 
Ay, M. Pages would under certain circumstances, and with certain 
restrictions, perhaps, consent to give the people the suffrage; but let 
them never think of profiting by the gift by passing measures which 
a Etienne Joseph Louis Garnier-Pagès. —Ed. 

=====第469页=====
The "Satisfied" Majority 441 
would essentially alter the actual mode of production and distribu­
tion of wealth—which would, in course of time, give to the entire 
people the command of the productive powers of the country, and 
do away with all individual "employers"! The Réforme was perfectly 
right in styling this honourable gentleman a bourgeois radical* 
The Ultra-Democrats had, as I said before, only one banquet, but 
it was a bumper, and worth a dozen of the coalition party. More than 
two thousand citizens sat down to dinner at Chalon-sur-Saône. The 
National had been invited, but very significantly had not come. The 
men of the Réforme, accordingly, had it all their own way. 
M. Ledru-Rollin, who had been designated by the National as the 
chief of the ultra-democratic party, here, accepted this position. He 
explained his position and the position of his party, by relating in a 
brilliant abstract, the different phases of French democracy since 
1789.  He then justified himself against the attacks of the National, 
attacked that paper in turn, and proposed a jury of Democrats to be 
nominated from all parts of France—one-half by either party—to 
decide between the Réforme and the National. 
And now (he said), after having settled this home affair, would it not be a good 
thing if the French democracy entered into relation with the other democracies? 
There is at this moment a great movement going on in Europe amongst all the 
disinherited, who suffer by heart or by hunger. This is the moment to console them, to 
strengthen them, and to enter into communion with them.... Let us, then, hold a 
congress of Democrats of all nations, now, when the congress of kings has failed!... 
There is one republic in Europe, which just now has secured in its own territory the 
ascendancy of democracy—there is Switzerland, a country worthy of seeing the 
Democrats of all nations upon its free soil!... And thus, citizens, let me conclude, by 
coupling to my toast: "To the Unity of the French Revolution", that other one, "The 
Union of all Democracies". 
This speech excited loud applause, and it merited it. We heartily 
rejoice in M. Ledru-Rollin's oratorial success at Châlon, but at the 
same time, must protest against an unguarded expression, which, we 
are sure, has been said without intention to hurt. M. Ledru-Rollin 
says,  that the moment has arrived for French Democrats to console 
and to strengthen the suffering working men of other nations. The 
Democrats of no country, we are sure, want consolation from 
whomsoever it be. They admire the revolutionary pride of French 
Democrats, but they take for themselves the right to be quite as 
proud and independent. The four millions of English Chartists 
certainly are strong enough to do their own work for themselves. 
Glad as we are to see the French democracy take up with enthusiasm 
a The reference is to the leading article in La Réforme, December 17, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第470页=====
442 Frederick Engels 
the idea of a Democratic Congress, and an alliance of all 
democracies, we expect, before all things, a perfect reciprocity and 
equality. Any alliance, which should not recognise this equality as its 
foundation, would itself be anti-democratic. We know, however, too 
well the profoundly democratic sentiments of the men of the Réforme 
to doubt of their perfectly agreeing with us; we only wish them to 
drop for the interest of our common cause, certain expressions, 
which far from expressing their real sentiments, are an inheritance 
from the time when the National alone represented the French 
Democracy. 
At the same banquet, M. Flocon spoke to the toast:—"The Rights of 
Man and of the Citizen". He read the declaration of rights of the 
National Convention,234 which he declared to be, up to this day, the 
faithful abstract of true Democratic principles. To this, what he 
called the true French principle, he opposed the present system of 
moneyocracy, which places man upon a lower level than even cattle, 
because man is overabundant, and costs more than he gives in nature 
when his labour is not required. This system, from the country in 
which it first arose, he called the English system. 
But lo, he said, while the English principle is introduced into the fatherland of the 
revolution, the English people themselves strive to throw its yoke off their shoulders, 
and write upon their banners the glorious motto:—"Liberty, Equality, Fraternity!" 
Thus,  by one of those painful turns, of which history offers more than one example, 
the very nation which first gave truth to the world, fallen back into darkness and 
ignorance, would soon be obliged to ask from its neighbours the revolutionary 
traditions which itself could not conserve. Shall it ever come thus far with us? No, 
never, as long as there are Democrats like you, and meetings like this! No, we never 
will prop up the worm-eaten frame of those English institutions, which the English 
themselves will no longer support! (No, no!) Well then, to your tents, O Israel! Every 
one of you rally round his standard! Every one for his faith! Here, on our side, 
Democracy with her twenty-five millions of proletarians to free, whom she greets with 
the names of citizens, brothers, equal and free men; there the bastard-opposition, with 
her monopolies and aristocracy of capital! They speak of reducing the qualification by 
one-half;  we, we proclaim the rights of man and of the citizen! (Loud and 
long-continued applause, which ended by the whole meeting singing the Chant du 
départ. 2*5) 
We regret not to have room for giving more of the speeches 
delivered at this splendid and thoroughly Democratic banquet. 
At last, the Réforme has forced the National to enter into a polemic. 
The former journal, in declaring its adhesion to the principles 
announced by M. Garnier-Pagès, at the Montpellier banquet, in a 
speech on the French revolution, at the same time disputed the right 
of men, like M. Gamier, who had sacrificed the interests of 
Democracy to M. Odilon Barrot and the middle-class opposition, to 

=====第471页=====
The "Satisfied" Majority 443 
act as the representatives of the principles of the Revolution.* This, at 
last, brought out a reply from the National, in which Ledru-Rollin in 
his turn was attacked. The principal points of accusation against the 
National were: 1st. Its support of the bastilles around Paris, by which 
the inheritance of the revolution was placed under the control of 
twelve hundred pieces of cannon.236 2nd. Its silence last year, upon a 
pamphlet of M. Carnot,i> in which he engaged the Democrats to join 
the Left Centre and the Left, to get them into office as soon as 
possible, to drop for the moment the Republican principle, and to 
agitate for an extension of the Suffrage within the limits of the 
Charter.287  M. Garnier-Pagès, the younger, had about the same time 
announced similar principles; the pamphlet declared itself to be the 
expression of the opinion not of an individual, but of a party in the 
Chamber. The Réforme attacked both M. Garnier's speech and M. 
Carnot's (son of the celebrated member of the Convention and 
Republican minister of war^) pamphlet, and tried to provoke the 
National to a declarations But the National remained silent. The 
Réforme rightly declared that the policy proposed by both deputies 
would tend to nothing but to place the Democratic party wholly 
under the control of MM. Thiers and Barrot, and break it up 
entirely as a distinct party. 3rd. The National following up in practice 
during the Reform banquet agitation the policy proposed by M. 
Carnot. 4th. Its virulent and calumniating attacks upon the 
Communists, while proposing at the same time no practicable or 
effective remedy for the misery of the working people. 
The dispute has been going on for a week at least. At last the 
National retired from the contest, after having conducted it in a very 
improper manner. It has been regularly beaten; but, in order to 
mask its defeat, it finally accepted M. Ledru's proposal of a 
Democratic jury. 
We can only declare our full adhesion to the part the Réforme has 
taken in this affair. It has saved the honour, independence, and the 
strength of French Democracy as a distinct party. It has maintained 
the principles of the Revolution, which were endangered by the 
course pursued by the National. It has asserted the rights of the 
working classes in opposition to middle-class encroachments. It has 
unmasked these bourgeois radicals—who would make the people 
a The reference is to the leading articles in La Réforme, December 15, 17 and 19, 
1847.—Ed. 
b L. H. Carnot, Les radicaux et la charte. —Ed. 
c Lazare Nicolas Carnot. —Ed. 
d The reference is to the leading article in La Réforme, December 20, 1847.—Ed. 

=====第472页=====
444 Frederick Engels 
believe that no class oppression exists—who will not see the frightful 
civil war of class against class in modern society,—and who have 
nothing but vain words for the working people. The Réforme, by 
keeping up this contest, until it has succeeded in forcing its haughty 
rival to break silence, to wave, to retract, to explain, and at last 
to withdraw,—the Réforme, we say, has well merited of Democracy. 
Written at the beginning Reprinted from the newspaper 
of January 1848 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 533, January 8, 1848 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our Paris Correspondent" 

=====第473页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE COERCION BILL FOR IRELAND 
AND THE CHARTISTS]238 
The Irish Coercion Bill came into force last Wednesday.3 The 
Lord Lieutenantb  was not slow in taking advantage of the despotic 
powers with which this new law invests him; the act has been applied 
all over the counties of Limerick and Tipperary and to several 
baronies in the counties of Clare, Waterford, Cork, Roscommon, 
Leitrim, Cavan, Longford and King's County.^ 
It remains to be seen what the effect of this odious measure will be. 
In this connection we already have the opinion of the class in whose 
interests the measure was taken, namely, the Irish landowners. They 
announce to the world in their organs that the measure will have no 
effect whatsoever. And in order to achieve this a whole country is 
being placed in a state of siege! To achieve this nine-tenths of the 
Irish representatives have deserted their country! 
This is a fact. The desertion has been a general one. During the 
discussion of the Bill the O'Connell family itself became divided: 
John and Maurice, two of the deceased "Liberator's"0 sons, 
remained faithful to their homeland, whereas their cousin,d Morgan 
O'Connell, not only voted for the Bill, but also spoke in its support 
on several occasions. There were only eighteen members who voted 
for the outright rejection of the Bill, and only twenty supported the 
amendment put forward by Mr. Wakley, the Chartist member for a 
borough on the outskirts of London, who demanded that the 
a December 29, 1847.—Ed. 
Earl of Clarendon.—Ed. 
c Daniel O'Connell.—Ed. 
Read "brother", a mistake in La Réforme. —Ed. 

=====第474页=====
446 Frederick Engels 
Coercion Bill should also be accompanied by measures aimed at 
reducing the causes of the crimes which it was proposed to repress. 
And among these eighteen and twenty voters there were also four or 
five English Radicals and two Irishmen representing English 
boroughs, meaning that out of the hundred members which Ireland 
has in Parliament there were only a dozen who put up serious 
opposition to the Bill. 
This was the first discussion on an important question affecting 
Ireland which had been held since the death of O'Connell. It was to 
decide who would take the place of the great agitator in leading 
Ireland. Up to the opening of Parliament Mr. John O'Connell had 
been tacitly acknowledged in Ireland as his father's successor. But it 
soon became evident after the debate had begun that he was not 
capable of leading the party and, what is more, that he had found a 
formidable rival in Feargus O'Connor. This democratic leader about 
whom Daniel O'Connell said, "We are happy to make the English 
Chartists a present of Mr. F. O'Connor", put himself at the head of 
the Irish party in a single bound. It was he who proposed the 
outright rejection of the Coercion Bill; it was he who succeeded in 
rallying all the opposition behind him; it was he who opposed each 
clause, who held up the voting whenever possible; it was he who in 
his speeches summed up all the arguments of the opposition against 
the Bill; and finally it was he who for the first time since 1835 
reintroduced the motion for Repeal of the Union,240 a motion which 
none of the Irish members would have put forward. 
The Irish members accepted this leader with a bad grace. As 
simple Whigs in their heart of hearts they fundamentally detest the 
democratic energy of Mr. O'Connor. He will not allow them to go on 
using the campaign for repeal as a means for overthrowing the 
Tories in favour of the Whigs and to forget the very word "repeal" 
when the latter come to power. But the Irish members who support 
repeal cannot possibly do without a leader like O'Connor and, 
although they are trying to undermine his growing popularity in 
Ireland, they are obliged to submit to his leadership in Parliament. 
When the parliamentary session is over O'Connor will probably go 
on a tour of Ireland to revive the agitation for repeal and to found an 
Irish Chartist party. There can be no doubt that if O'Connor is 
successful in doing this he will be the leader of the Irish people in less 
than six months. By uniting the democratic leadership of the three 
kingdoms3 in his hands, he will occupy a position which no agitator, 
not even O'Connell, has held before him. 
a England, Scotland and Ireland.—Ed. 

=====第475页=====
The Coercion Bill for Ireland and the Chartists 447 
We will leave it to our readers to judge the importance of this 
future alliance between the peoples of the two islands. British 
democracy will advance much more quickly when its ranks are 
swelled by two million brave and ardent Irish, and poverty-stricken 
Ireland will at last have taken an important step towards her 
liberation. 
Written on January 4, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
January 8, 1848 

=====第476页=====
Frederick Engels 
FEARGUS O'CONNOR AND THE IRISH PEOPLE 241 
The first issue of The Northern Starior 1848 contains an address to 
the Irish people by Feargus O'Connor, the well-known leader of the 
English Chartists and their representative in Parliament. This address 
deserves to be read from beginning to end and carefully considered by 
every democrat, but our restricted space prevents us from repro­
ducing it in full. 
We would, however, be remiss in our duty if we were to pass it over 
in silence. The consequences of this forceful appeal to the Irish 
people will very soon be strongly felt and seen. Feargus O'Connor, 
himself of Irish descent, a Protestant and for over ten years a leader 
and main pillar of the great labour movement in England, must 
henceforth be regarded as the virtual chief of the Irish Repealers242 
and advocates of reform. His speeches in the House of Commons 
against the recently published disgraceful Irish Coercion Bill243 have 
given him the first claim to this status, and the subsequently con­
tinued agitation for the Irish cause shows that Feargus O'Connor is 
just the man Ireland needs. 
O'Connor is indeed seriously concerned about the well-being of the 
millions in Ireland. Repeala—the abolition of the Union, that is, the 
achievement of an independent Irish Parliament—is not an empty 
word, not a pretext for obtaining posts for himself and his friends 
and for making profitable private business transactions. 
In his address he shows the Irish people that Daniel O'Connell, 
that political juggler, led them by the nose and deceived them for 
thirteen years by means of the word "Repeal". 
He shows in its true light the conduct of John O'Connell, who has 
taken up his father's political heritage and who like his father is 
prepared to sacrifice millions of credulous Irishmen for the sake of 
a Here and below Engels uses the English  term.—Ed. 

=====第477页=====
Feargus O'Connor and the Irish People 449 
his personal ventures and interests. All O'Connell's speeches at the 
Dublin Conciliation Hall244 and all his hypocritical protestations and 
beautiful phrases will not obliterate the disrepute he has brought 
upon himself earlier and in particular now in the House of 
Commons during the debates on the Irish Coercion Bill. 
The Irish people must and will see how things stand, and then it 
will kick out the entire gang of so-called Repealers, who under cover 
of this cloak laugh up their sleeves and in their purses and John 
O'Connell, the fanatical papist and political rogue, will be kicked out 
first of all. 
If this were all the address contained, we should not have especially 
mentioned it. 
But it is of much wider importance. For Feargus O'Connor speaks 
in it not only as an Irishman but also, and primarily, as an English 
democrat, as a Chartist. 
With a luciditv which cannot escape even the most obtuse mind, 
O'Connor shows that the Irish people must fight with all their might 
arc in close association with the English working classes and the 
Chartists in order to win the six points of the People's Charter— 
annual parliaments, universal suffrage, vote by ballot, abolition of the 
p-> opertv qualification for members of Parliament, payment of M.P.s 
and the establishment of equal electoral districts. Only after these six 
points are won will the achievement of the Repeal have any 
advantages for Ireland. 
Furthermore O'Connor points out that justice for Ireland has 
already been demanded earlier by the English workers in a petition 
which received 3i/2 million signatures^« and that now the English 
Chartists have again protested against the Irish Coercion Bill in 
numerous petitions and that the oppressed classes in England and 
Ireland must at last fight together and conquer together or continue 
to languish under the same oppression and live in the same misery 
and dependence on the privileged and ruling capitalist class. 
There can be no doubt that henceforth the mass of the Irish people 
will unite ever more closely with the English Chartists and will act 
with them according to a common plan. As a result the victory of the 
English democrats, and hence the liberation of Ireland, will be 
hastened by many years. That is the significance of O'Connor's 
address to the Irish people. 
Written at the beginning Printed according to the newspaper 
of January 1848 
First published in Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung No. 3, January 9, 1848 

=====第478页=====
Karl Marx 
SPEECH ON THE QUESTION OF FREE TRADE 
DELIVERED TO THE DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION OF BRUSSELS 
AT ITS PUBLIC MEETING OF JANUARY 9, 1848246 
Gentlemen,—The Repeal of the Corn Laws247 in England is the 
greatest triumph of Free Trade in the nineteenth century. In every 
country where manufacturers discuss Free Trade, they have in mind 
chiefly Free Trade in corn or raw material generally. To burden 
foreign corn with protective duties is infamous, it is to speculate on 
the hunger of the people. 
Cheap food, high wages,3 for this alone the English Free Tradersb 
have spent millions, and their enthusiasm has already infected their 
Continental brethren. And, generally speaking, all those who 
advocate Free Trade do so in the interests of the working class.0 
But, strange to say, the people for whom cheap food is to be 
procured at all costs are very ungrateful. Cheap food is as ill reputed 
in England as is cheap government in France. The people see in 
these self-sacrificing gentlemen, in Bowring, Bright & Co., their 
worst enemies and the most shameless hypocrites. 
Everyone knows that in England the struggle between Liberals 
and Democrats takes the name of the struggle between Free Traders 
and Chartists. Let us see how the English Free Traders have proved 
to the people the good intentions that animate them. 
a In the 1848 French edition these words are repeated in English after the 
French.—Ed. 
In the 1848 French edition, here and below, as a rule, the English is used, though 
the French "libre-échangiste" also occurs sometimes.— Ed. 
c In the 1848 French edition the end of this phrase reads: "to ease the condition of 
the working class".—Ed. 

=====第479页=====
SUR LA QUESTION 
DU LIBRE ÉCHANGE, 
PRONONCÉ k 
L'ASSOCIATION DEMOCRATIQUE 
DE BRUXELLES, 
Dans la  Séance Publique  da 9  Janvier  1848, 
PAR CHARLES MARX. 
Im primé aux frais de VAssociation Démocratique. 
messieurs . 
L'abolition des lois céréales en Angleterre est le plus grand 
triomphe que le libre échange ait remporté au 19"" siècle. Dans 
tous les pays où les fabricants parlent de libre échange ils ont 
principalement en vue le libre échange des grains et des matières 
premières en général. Frapper de droils protecteurs les grains 
étrangers , c'est infâme , c'est spéculer sur la famine des peuples. 
First page of a separate edition of Marx's "Speech on the Question of Free Trade" 
(Brussels, February 1848) 
16—1826 

=====第480页=====

=====第481页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 453 
This is what they said to the factory hands,— 
"The duty on corn is a tax upon wages; this tax vou pay to the 
landlords, those medieval aristocrats; if your position is a wretched 
one, it is so only on account of the high price of the most 
indispensable articles of food." 
The workers in turn asked of the manufacturers,— 
"How is it that in the course of the last thirty years, while our 
commerce and manufacture3 has immensely increased, our wages 
have fallen far more rapidly, in proportion, than the price of corn 
has gone up? 
"The tax which you say we pay the landlords is about three pence a 
week per worker. And yet the wages of the hand-loom weaver fell, 
between 1815 and 1843, from 28s. per week to 5s., and the wages of 
the power-loom weaver, between 1823 and 1843, from 20s. per 
week to 8s. 
"And during the whole of the time that portion of the tax which 
you say we pay the landlord has never exceeded three pence. And, 
then, in the year 1834, when bread was very cheap and business 
lively, what did you tell us? You said, Tf you are poor, it is only 
because you have too many children, and your marriages are more 
productive than your labor!' 
"These are the very words you spoke to us, and you set about 
making new Poor Laws, and building workhouses, those bastilles of 
the proletariat." 
To this the manufacturers replied,— 
"You are right, worthy laborers: it is not the price of corn alone, 
but competition of the hands among themselves as well, which 
determines wages. 
"But just bear in mind the circumstance that our soil consists of 
rocks and sandbanks only. You surely do not imagine that corn can 
be grown in flower-pots! If, instead of wasting our labor and capital 
upon a thoroughly sterile soil, we were to give up agriculture, and 
devote ourselves exclusively to commerce and manufacture, all 
Europe would abandon its factories, and England would form one 
huge factory town, with the whole of the rest of Europe for its 
agricultural districts." 
While thus haranguing his own workingmen, the manufacturer is 
interrogated by the small tradesmen, who exclaim,— 
"If we repeal the Corn Laws, we shall indeed ruin agriculture; but, 
for all that, we shall not compel other nations to give up their own 
a The 1848 French edition has here and below "industry" instead of "commerce 
and manufacture".—Ed. 
16' 

=====第482页=====
454 Karl Marx 
factories, and buy our goods. What will the consequences be? I lose 
my customers in the country, and the home market is destroyed." 
The manufacturer turns his back upon the workingmen and 
replies to the shopkeeper,— 
"As to that, you leave it to us! Once rid of the duty on corn, we 
shall import cheaper corn from abroad. Then we shall reduce wages 
at the very time when they are rising in the countries where we get 
our corn. Thus in addition to the advantages which we already enjoy 
we shall have lower wages, and, with all these advantages, we shall 
easily force the Continent to buy of us." 
But now the farmers and agricultural laborers join in the 
discussion. 
"And what, pray, is to become of us? Are we to help in passing a 
sentence of death upon agriculture, when we get our living by it? Are 
we to let the soil be torn from beneath our feet?" 
For all answer the Anti-Corn Law League248 contented itself with 
offering prizes for the three best essays upon the wholesome 
influence of the Repeal of the Corn Laws on English agriculture. 
These prizes were carried off by Messrs Hope, Morse, and Greg, 
whose essays3 were distributed broadcast throughout the agricultural 
districts.b One of the prize essayists devotes himself to proving that 
neither the tenant farmer nor the agricultural laborer would lose by 
the repeal of the Corn Laws, and that the landlord alone would lose. 
'The English tenant farmer," he exclaims, "need not fear repeal, 
because no other country can produce such good corn so cheaply as 
England. Thus, even if the price of corn fell, it would not hurt you, 
because this fall would only affect rent, which would go down, while 
the profit of capital and the wages of labor remain stationary." 
The second prize essayist, Mr. Morse, maintains, on the contrary, 
that the price of corn will rise in consequence of repeal. He is at 
infinite pains to prove that protective duties have never been able to 
secure a remunerative price for corn. 
In support of his assertion he quotes the fact that, whenever 
foreign corn has been imported, the price of corn in England has 
gone up considerably, and that when little corn has been imported 
the price has fallen extremely. This prize-winner forgets that the 
importation was not the cause of the high price, but that the high 
price was the cause of the importation. In direct contradiction of his 
a The Three Prize  Essays  on Agriculture and the Corn Law. Published by the National 
Anti-Corn Law League.—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has: "whose books were circulated in the rural districts 
in thousands of copies."—Ed. 

=====第483页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 455 
colleague he asserts that every rise in the price of corn is profitable to 
both the tenant farmer and laborer, but does not benefit the 
landlord. 
The third prize essayist, Mr. Greg, who is a large manufacturer 
and whose work is addressed to the large tenant farmers, could not 
afford to echo such silly  stuff.  His language is more scientific. 
He admits that the Corn Laws can increase rent only by increasing 
the price of corn, and that they can raise the price of corn only by 
inducing the investment of capital upon land of inferior quality, and 
this is explained quite simply. 
In proportion as population increases, it inevitably follows, if 
foreign corn cannot be imported, that less fruitful soil must be 
placed under cultivation. This involves more expense and the 
product of this soil is consequently dearer. There being a demand 
for all the corn thus produced,3 it will all be sold. The price for all of 
it will of necessity be determined by the price of the product of the 
inferior soil.b The difference between this price and the cost of 
production upon soil of better quality constitutes the rent paid for 
the use of the better soil.c 
If, therefore, in consequence of the repeal of the Corn Laws, the 
price of corn falls, and if, as a matter of course, rent falls along with 
it, it is because inferior soil will no longer be cultivated. Thus the 
reduction of rent must inevitably ruin a part of the tenant farmers. 
These remarks were necessary in order to make Mr. Greg's 
language comprehensible. 
"The small farmers," he says, "who cannot support themselves by 
agriculture must take refuge in manufacture. As to the large tenant 
farmers, they cannot fail to profit by the arrangement: either the 
landlord will be obliged to sell them their land very cheap, or leases 
will be made out for long periods. This will enable tenant farmers to 
invest more capital in their farms, to use agricultural machinery on a 
larger scale, and to save manual labor, which will, moreover, be 
cheaper, on account of the general fall in wages, the immediate 
consequence of the repeal of the Corn Laws." 
Dr. Bowring conferred upon all these arguments the consecration 
of religion, by exclaiming at a public meeting, "Jesus Christ is Free 
Trade, and Free Trade is Jesus Christ." 
a The 1848 French edition does not have the words "thus produced".—Ed. 
b The 1848 French edition has here "requiring greater expenses".—Ed. 
c The 1848 French edition does not have the words "paid for the use of the better 
soil".—Ed. 

=====第484页=====
456 Karl Marx 
It will be evident that all this cant was not calculated to make cheap 
bread tasteful to workingmen. 
Besides, how should the workingmen understand the sudden 
philanthropy of the manufacturers, the very men still busy fighting 
against the Ten-Hours Bill, which was to reduce the working day of 
the mill hands from twelve hours to ten?249 
To give you an idea of the philanthropy of these manufacturers I 
would remind you of the factory regulations in force in all their mills. 
Every manufacturer has for his own private use a regular penal 
code by means of which fines are inflicted for every voluntary or 
involuntary offence. For instance, the hand pays so much when he 
has the misfortune to sit down on a chair, or whisper, or speak, or 
laugh; if he is a few moments late; if any part of a machine breaks, or 
if he turns out work of an inferior quality, etc. The fines are always 
greater than the damage really done by the workman. And to give 
the workingman every opportunity for incurring fines the factory 
clock is set forward, and he is given bad material to make into good 
stuff.  An overseer unskilful in multiplying infractions of rules is soon 
discharged. 
You see, gentlemen, this private legislation is enacted for the 
especial purpose ofa creating such infractions, and infractions are 
manufactured for the purpose of making money. Thus the 
manufacturer uses every means of reducing the nominal wage, and 
even profiting by accidents over which the workers have no control. 
And these manufacturers are the same philanthropists who have 
tried to persuade the workers that they were capable of going to 
immense expense for the sole and express purpose of improving the 
condition of these same workingmen! On the one hand they nibble at 
the workers' wages in the pettiest way, by means of factory 
legislation, and, on the other, they are prepared to make the greatest 
sacrifices to raise those wages by means of the Anti-Corn Law 
League. 
They build great palaces, at immense expense, in which the League 
takes upb its official residence. They send an army of missionaries to 
all corners of England to preach the gospel of Free Trade; they print 
and distribute gratis thousands of pamphlets to enlighten the 
workingman upon his own interests. They spend enormous sums to 
buy over the press to their side. They organize a vast administrative 
system for the conduct of the Free Trade movement, and bestow all 
a The 1848 French edition does not have the words "the especial purpose 
of".—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has here "as it were".—Ed. 

=====第485页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 457 
the wealth of their eloquence upon public meetings. It was at one of 
these meetings that a workingman cried out,— 
"If the landlords were to sell our bones, you manufacturers would 
be the first to buy them, and to put them through the mill and make 
flour of them." 
The English workingmen have appreciated to the fullest extent 
the significance of the struggle between the lords of the land and of 
capital. They know very well that the price of bread was to be 
reduced in order to reduce wages, and that the profit of capital 
would rise by as much as rent fell. 
Ricardo, the apostle of the English Free Traders, the leading 
economist of our century, entirely agrees with the workers upon this 
point. 
In his celebrated work upon Political Economy3 he says: 
"If instead of growing our own corn ... we discover a new market from which we 
can supply ourselves ... at a cheaper price, wages will fall and profits rise. The fall in 
the price of agricultural produce reduces the wages, not only of the laborer employed 
in cultivating the soil, but also of all those employed in commerce or manufacture" 
[t. I, pp. 178-79; Eng. ed., p. 137]. 
And do not believe, gentlemen, that it is a matter of indifference to 
the workingman whether he receives only four francs on account of 
corn being cheaper, when he had been receiving five francs before. 
Have not his wages always fallen in comparison with profit? And is 
it not clear that his social position has grown worse as compared with 
that of the capitalist? Beside which he loses actually. So long as the 
price of corn was higher and wages were also higher, a small saving 
in the consumption of bread sufficed to procure him other 
enjoyments. But as soon as bread is cheap, and wages are therefore 
low, he can save almost nothing on bread, for the purchase of other 
articles. 
The English workingmen have shown the English b Free Traders 
that they are not the dupes of their illusions or of their lies; and if, in 
spite of this, the workers have made common cause with the 
manufacturers against the landlords, it is for the purpose of 
destroying the last remnant of feudalism, that henceforth they may 
have only one enemy to deal with. The workers have not 
miscalculated, for the landlords, in order to revenge themselves 
upon the manufacturers, have made common cause with the workers 
to carry the Ten-Hours Bill, which the latter had been vainly 
a D. Ricardo, Des principes de l'économie politique et de  l'impôt. — Ed. 
The 1848 French edition does not have the word "English".—Ed. 

=====第486页=====
458 Karl Marx 
demanding for thirty years, and which was passed immediately after 
the repeal of the Corn Laws. 
When Dr. Bowring, at the Congress of Economists,11 drew from his 
pocket a long list to show how many head of cattle, how much ham, 
bacon, poultry, etc., is imported into England, to be consumed—as 
he asserted— by the workers, he forgot to state that at the same time 
the workers of Manchester and other factory towns were thrown out 
of work by the beginning of the crisis. 
As a matter of principle in Political Economy, the figures of a 
single year must never be taken as the basis for formulating general 
laws.  We must always take the average of from six to seven years, a 
period during which modern industry passes through the successive 
phases of prosperity, overproduction, crisis,b thus completing the 
inevitable cycle. 
Doubtless, if the price of all commodities falls,—and this is the 
necessary consequence of Free Trade—I can buy far more for a 
franc than before. And the workingman's franc is as good as any 
other man's. Therefore, Free Trade must be advantageous to the 
workingman. There is only one little difficulty in this, namely that 
the workman, before he exchanges his franc for other commodities, 
has first exchanged his labor for the money of the capitalist.0 If in 
this exchange he always received the said franc d while the price of all 
other commodities fell, he would always be the gainer by such a 
bargain. The difficulty does not lie in proving that, the price of all 
commodities falling, more commodities can be bought for the same 
sum of money. 
Economists always take the price of labor at the moment of its 
exchange with other commodities, and altogether ignore the 
moment at which labor accomplishes its own exchange with capital. 
When it costs less to set in motion the machinery which produces 
commodities, then the things necessary for the maintenance of this 
machine, called workman, will also cost less. If all commodities are 
cheaper, labor, which is a commodity too, will also fall in price, and 
we shall see later that this commodity, labor, will fall far lower in 
proportion than all other commodities. If the workingman still pins 
his faith to the arguments of the economists, he will find, one fine 
a See this volume, pp. 274-78 and pp. 282-90.—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has "prosperity, overproduction, stagnation, 
crisis".—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has "for capital" instead of "for the money of 
capitalist".—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has "the said franc for the same work".—Ed. 

=====第487页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 459 
morning,3 that the franc has dwindled in his pocket, and that he has 
only five sous left. 
Thereupon the economists will tell you,— 
"We admit that competition among the workers will-certainly not 
be lessened under Free Trade, and will very soon bring wages into 
harmony with the low price of commodities. But, on the other hand, 
the low price of commodities will increase consumption, the larger 
consumption will increase production, which will in turn necessitate 
a larger demand for labor and this larger demand will be followed by 
a rise in wages." 
The whole line of argument amounts to this: Free Trade 
increases productive forces. When manufactures keep advancing, 
when wealth, when the productive forces, when, in a word, 
productive capital increases, the demand for the labor, the price of 
labor, and consequently the rate of wages, rises also. 
The most favorable condition for the workingman is the growth of 
capital. This must be admitted: when capital remains stationary, 
commerce and manufacture are not merely stationary but decline, 
and in this case the workman is the first victim. He goes to the wall 
before the capitalist. And in the case of the growth of capital, under 
the circumstances, which, as we have said, are the best for the 
workingman, what will be his lot? He will go to the wall just the same. 
The growth of capital implies the accumulation and the concentra­
tion of capital. This centralization involves a greater division of labor 
and a greater use of machinery. The greater division of labor 
destroys the especial skill of the laborer; and by putting in the place 
of this skilled work labor which any one can perform it increases 
competition among the workers. 
This competition becomes more fierce as the division of labor 
enables a single man to do the work of three. Machinery 
accomplishes the same result on a much larger scale. The 
accumulation of productive capital forces the industrial capitalist to 
work with constantly increasing means of production, ruins the small 
manufacturer, and drives him into the proletariat. Then, the rate of 
interest falling in proportion as capital accumulates, the little rentiers 
and retired tradespeople,0 who can no longer live upon their small 
incomes, will be forced to look out for some business again and 
ultimately to swell the number of proletarians. Finally, the more 
productive capital grows, the more it is compelled to produce for a 
a The 1848 French edition does not have the words "one fine morning".—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition does not have the words "and retired trades­
people".—Ed. 

=====第488页=====
460 Karl Marx 
market whose requirements it does not know,—the more supply tries 
to force demand,3 and consequently crises increase in frequency and 
in intensity. But every crisis in turn hastens the concentration of 
capital, adds to the proletariat. Thus, as productive capital grows, 
Competition among the workers grows too, and grows in a far greater 
proportion. The reward of labor is less for all, and the burden of 
labor is increased for some at least. 
In 1829 there were, in Manchester, 1,088 cotton spinners 
employed in 36 factories. In 1841 there were but 448, and they 
tended 53,353 more spindles than the 1,088 spinners did in 1829. If 
manual labor had increased in the same proportion as productive 
force, the number of spinners ought to have risen to  1,848; 
improved machinery had, therefore, deprived 1,400 workers of 
employment. 
We know beforehand the reply of the economists—the people 
thus thrown out of work will find other kinds of employment. Dr. 
Bowring did not fail to reproduce this argument at the Congress of 
Economists. But neither did he fail to refute  himself.  In 1835, Dr. 
Bowring made a speech in the House of Commons upon the 50,000 
hand-loom weavers of London who have been starving without being 
able to find that new kind of employment which the Free Traders 
hold out to them in the distance. Let us hear the most striking 
portion of this speech of Mr. Bowring.b 
"The misery of the hand-loom weavers," he says, "is the inevitable fate of all kinds 
of labor which are easily acquired, and which may, at any moment, be replaced by less 
costly means. As in these cases competition amongst the work-people is very great, the 
slightest falling-off in demand brings on a crisis. The hand-loom weavers are, in a 
certain sense, placed on the borders of human existence. One step further, and that 
existence becomes impossible. The slightest shock is sufficient to throw them on to the 
road to ruin. By more and more superseding manual labor, the progress of 
mechanical science must bring on, during the period of transition, a deal of temporary 
suffering. National well-being cannot be bought except at the price of some individual 
evils.  The advance of industry is achieved at the expense of those who lag behind, and 
of all discoveries that of the power-loom weighs most heavily upon the hand-loom 
weavers. In a great many articles formerly made by hand, the weaver has been placed 
hors de combat; but he is sure to be beaten in a good many more stuffs that are now 
made by hand." 
Further on he says,—"I hold in my hand a correspondence of the governor-
general with the East India Company. This correspondence is concerning the weavers 
of the Dacca district. The governor says in his letter,—A few years ago the East India 
Company received from six to eight million pieces of calico woven upon the looms of 
The 1848 French edition has: "the more production outstrips consumption, the 
more supply tries to force demand".—Ed. 
Marx quotes Dr. Bowring according to Principles of Political Economy by 
W. Atkinson.— Ed. 

=====第489页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 461 
the country. The demand fell off gradually and was reduced to about a million pieces. 
At this moment it has almost entirely ceased. Moreover, in 1800 North America 
received from India nearly 800,000 pieces of cotton goods. In 1830 it did not take 
even 4,000. Finally, in 1800 a million of pieces were shipped for Portugal; in 1830 
Portugal did not receive above 20,000. 
"The reports on the distress of the Indian weavers are terrible. And what is thé 
origin of that distress? The presence on the market of English manufactures, the 
production of the same article by means of the power-loom. A great number of the 
weavers died of starvation; the remainder has gone over to the other employment, 
and chiefly to field labor. Not to be able to change employment amounted to a 
sentence of death. And at this moment the Dacca district is crammed with English 
yarns and calicoes. The Dacca muslin, renowned all over the world for its beauty and 
firm texture, has also been eclipsed by the competition of English machinery. In the 
whole history of commerce, it would, perhaps, be difficult to find suffering equal to 
what these whole classes in India had to submit to" [W. Atkinson, pp. 36-38]. 
Mr. Bowring's speech is the more remarkable because the facts 
quoted by him are correct, and the phrases with which he seeks to 
palliate them are characterized by the hypocrisy common to all Free 
Trade discourses. He represents the workers as means of production 
which must be.superseded by less expensive means of production, 
pretends to see in the labor of which he speaks a wholly exceptional 
kind of labor, and in the machine which has crushed out the weavers 
an equally exceptional kind of machine. He forgets that there is no 
kind of manual labor which may not any day share the fate of the 
hand-loom weavers. 
"The constant aim and tendency of every improvement of mechanism is indeed to 
do entirely without the labor of men, or to reduce its price, by superseding the labor of 
the adult males by that of women and children, or the work of the skilled by that of the 
unskilled workman. In most of the throstle mills, spinning is now entirely done by girls 
of sixteen years and less. The introduction of the self-acting mule has caused the 
discharge of most of the (adult male) spinners, while the children and young persons 
have been kept on" [p. 34; Eng. ed., p. 23]. 
The above words of the most enthusiastic of Free Traders, 
Dr. Ure,a are calculated to complete the confessions of Dr. Bowring. 
Mr. Bowring speaks of certain individual evils, and, at the same time, 
says that these individual evils destroy whole classes; he speaks of the 
temporary sufferings during a transition period, and does not deny 
that these temporary evils have implied for the majority the 
transition from life to death, and for the rest a transition from a 
better to a worse condition. When he asserts, farther on, that the 
sufferings of the working class b are inseparable from the progress of 
a A. Ure, Philosophie des manufactures, ou Economie industrielle, t. I.— Ed. 
b The 1848 French edition has "these workers" instead of "the working 
class".—Ed. 

=====第490页=====
462 Karl Marx 
industry, and are necessary to the prosperity of the nation, he simply 
says that the prosperity of the bourgeois class presupposes as 
necessary the suffering of the laboring class. 
All the comfort which Mr. Bowring offers the workers who perish, 
and, indeed, the whole doctrine of compensation which the Free 
Traders propound, amounts to this— 
You thousands of workers who are perishing, do not despair! You 
can die with an easy conscience. Your class will not perish. It will 
always be numerous enough for the capitalist class to decimate it 
without fear of annihilating it. Besides, how could capital be usefully 
applied if it did not take care to keep up its exploitable material, i.e., 
the workingmen, to be exploited over and over again? 
But, then, why propound as a problem still to be solved the 
question: What influence will the adoption of the Free Trade have 
upon the condition of the working class? All the laws formulated by 
the political economists from Quesnay to Ricardo, have been based 
upon the hypothesis that the trammels which still interfere with 
commercial freedom have disappeared. These laws are confirmed in 
proportion as Free Trade is adopted. The first of these laws is that 
competition reduces the price of every commodity to the minimum 
cost of production. Thus the minimum of wages is the.natural price 
of labor. And what is the minimum of wages? Just so much as is 
required for production of the articles absolutely necessary for the 
maintenance of the worker, for the continuation, by hook or by 
crook, of his own existence and that of his class. 
But do not imagine that the worker receives only this minimum 
wage, and still less that he  always  receives it. No, according to this law, 
the working class will sometimes be more fortunate, will sometimes 
receive something above the minimum, but this surplus will merely 
make up for the deficit which they will have received below the 
minimum in times of industrial depression. That is to say that within 
a given time which recurs periodically, in other words, in the cycle3 
which commerce and industry describe while passing through the 
successive phases of prosperity, overproduction, stagnation, and 
crisis,  when reckoning all that the working class has had above and 
below mere necessaries, we shall see that, after all, they have received 
neither more nor less than the minimum; i.e., the working class will 
have maintained itself as a class after enduring any amount of misery 
and misfortune, and after leaving many corpses upon the industrial 
battle-field. But what of that? The class will still exist; nay, more, it 
will have increased. 
a The 1848 French edition has "circle" instead of "cycle".—Ed. 

=====第491页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 463 
But this is not all. The progress of industry creates less and less 
expensive means of subsistence. Thus spirits have taken the place of 
beer, cotton that of wool and linen, and potatoes that of bread. 
Thus,  as means are constantly being found for the maintenance of 
labor on cheaper and more wretched food, the minimum of wages is 
constantly sinking. If these wages began by letting the man work to 
live, they end by forcing him to live the life of a machine. His 
existence has no other value than that of a simple productive force, 
and the capitalist treats him accordingly. This law of the commodity 
labor, of the minimum of wages will be confirmed in proportion as 
the supposition of the economists, Free Trade, becomes an actual 
fact. Thus, of two things one: either we must reject all political 
economy based upon the assumption of Free Trade, or we must 
admit that under this same Free Trade the whole severity of the 
economic laws will fall upon the workers. 
To sum up, what is Free Trade under the present conditions of 
society? Freedom of Capital. When you have torn down the few 
national barriers which still restrict the free development3 of capital, 
you will merely have given it complete freedom of action. So long as 
you let the relation of wages-labor to capital exist, no matter how 
favorable the conditions under which you accomplish the exchange 
of commodities, there will always be a class which exploits and a class 
which is exploited. It is really difficult to understand the presump­
tion of the Free Traders who imagine that the more advantageous 
application of capital will abolish the antagonism between industrial 
capitalists and wage-workers. On the contrary. The only result 
will be that the antagonism of these two classes will stand out more 
clearly. 
Let us assume for a moment that there are no more Corn Laws or 
national and municipal import duties6; that in a word all the 
accidental circumstances which to-day the workingman may look 
upon as a cause of his miserable condition have vanished, and we 
shall have removed so many curtains that hide from his eyes his true 
enemy. 
He will see that capital released from all trammels will make him 
no less a slave than capital trammelled by import duties. 
Gentlemen! Do not be deluded by the abstract word Freedom! 
whose freedom? Not the freedom of one individual in relation to 
another, but freedom of Capital to crush the worker 
a The 1848 French edition has "advance" instead of "free development".—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has "no more customs, no more town dues" 
(octroi).—Ed. 

=====第492页=====
464 Karl Marx 
Why should you desire farther to sanction unlimited competi­
tion with this idea of freedom, when the idea of freedom itself is 
only the product of a social condition based upon Free Competi­
tion? 
We have shown what sort of fraternity Free Trade begets between 
the different classes of one and the same nation. The fraternity 
which Free Trade would establish between the nations of the earth 
would not be more real, to call cosmopolitan exploitation universal 
brotherhood is an idea that could only be engendered in the brain of 
the bourgeoisie. Every one of the destructive phenomena to which 
unlimited competition gives rise within any one nation is 
reproduced in more gigantic proportions in the market of the world. 
We need not pause any longer upon Free Trade sophisms on this 
subject, which are worth just as much as the arguments of our prize 
essayists Messrs Hope, Morse, and Greg. 
For instance, we are told that Free Trade would create an 
international division of labor, and thereby give to each country 
those branches of production most in harmony with its natural 
advantages. 
You believe perhaps, gentlemen, that the production of coffee and 
sugar is the natural destiny of the West Indies. 
Two centuries ago, nature, which does not trouble itself about 
commerce, had planted neither sugar-cane nor coffee trees there. 
And it may be that in less than half a century you will find there 
neither coffee nor sugar, for the East Indies, by means of cheaper 
production, have already successfully broken down this so-called 
natural destiny of the West Indies. 
And the West Indies, with their natural wealth, are as heavy a 
burden for England as the weavers of Dacca, who also were destined 
from the beginning of time to weave by hand. 
One other circumstance must not be forgotten, namely that, just as 
everything has become a monopoly, there are also nowadays some 
branches of industry which prevail over all others, and secure to the 
nations which especially foster them the command of the market of 
the world. Thus in the commerce of the world cotton alone has much 
greater commercial importance than all the other raw materials used 
in the manufacture of clothing. It is truly ridiculous for the Free 
Traders to refer to the few specialties in each branch of industry, 
throwing them into the balance against the product used in everyday 
consumption, and produced most cheaply in those countries in 
which manufacture is most highly developed. 
If the Free Traders cannot understand how one nation can grow 
rich at the expense of another, we need not wonder, since these same 

=====第493页=====
Speech on the Question of Free Trade 465 
gentlemen also refuse to understand how in the same country one 
class can enrich itself at the expense of another. 
Do not imagine, gentlemen, that in criticising freedom of 
commerce we have the least intention of defending Protection. 
One may be opposed to constitutionalism without being in favor of 
absolutism.2 
Moreover, the Protective system is nothing but a means of 
establishing manufacture upon a large scale in any given country, 
that is to say, of making it dependent upon the market of the world; 
and from the moment that dependence upon the market of the 
world is established, there is more or less dependence upon Free 
Trade too. Besides this, the Protective system helps to develop free 
competition within a nation. Hence we see that in countries where 
the bourgeoisie is beginning to make itself felt as a class, in Germany 
for example, it makes great efforts to obtain Protective duties. They 
serve the bourgeoisie as weapons against feudalism and absolute 
monarchy,b as a means for the concentration of its own powers for 
the realization of Free Trade within the country. 
But, generally speaking, the Protective system in these days is 
conservative, while the Free Trade system works destructively. It 
breaks up old nationalities and carries antagonism of proletariat and 
bourgeoisie to the uttermost point. In a word, the Free Trade system 
hastens the Social Revolution. In this revolutionary sense alone, 
gentlemen, I am in favor of Free Trade. 
First publishedin French as a pamphlet Printed according to the American 
at the beginning of February 1848 edition of 1889, checked with the 
in Brussels 1848 French edition 
Signed: Karl Marx 
a The 1848 French edition has "ancien régime" instead of "absolutism".—Ed. 
The 1848 French edition has "government" instead of "monarchy".—Ed. 

=====第494页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE CHARTIST MOVEMENT 
[THE FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS 
TO THE WORKING CLASSES OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND] 
The Society of Fraternal Democrats at its last meeting adopted an 
address to the workers of Great Britain and Ireland. This address, 
edited by Mr. Harney, of The Northern Star, is published in the latest 
number of this newspaper.250 
After recalling, in a portrayal as rapid as eloquent, the sufferings 
of the working class today, this address calls on the workers of the 
two islands to complete their party organisation: 
On all sides the middle class has laid traps for you. In order to divert you from the 
People's Charter, the only goal important to you, they spawn all sorts of projects for 
superficial reforms. But within a few years you have twice had to learn the hard lesson 
that any scheme of reform emanating from the  bourgeoisie  must be for you "like Dead 
Sea fruits that tempt the eye, but turn to ashes on the lips". Remember the agitation 
for the Reform Bill, and that for the repeal of the Corn Laws. 
...Nonetheless, you are asked to support a "National League for the Reform of 
Abuses", an "Anti-State Church Association", an "Anti-Bribery Society", and societies 
for the reform of the currency, and the abolition of certain taxes, etc., etc. The one 
design of the projectors of these schemes is to perfect the already dominant power of 
the middle class. They all combine to resist your rightful claim to the privileges of 
citizenship: they are therefore your enemies. Were they desirous, as they profess to be, 
of promoting your welfare, they would aid you to obtain sovereign power. They well 
know that if you controlled the legislature, all the reforms they seek—and reforms of 
much greater importance—would be forthwith effected. How then can they call 
themselves your friends, while refusing you the suffrage? 
Let this great truth be impressed upon every working man, that it is from the hut 
and the hovel, the garret and the cellar, that must come the regenerators of his order 
and the social saviours of the human race. Receive with joy and fraternal love every man 
who,  belonging to the privileged orders, shall renounce class distinctions, and ally him­
self with you, but look to no class above your own for your emancipation. ...Practi­
cally outlawed by the other classes of the state, you must find in your own clear heads, 
courageous hearts, and powerful arms the means of effecting your regeneration. 
...We must call your serious attention to a wicked and abominable conspiracy 
against your interests, the conspiracy both by the enemies of all reform, and by many of 
the middle-class sham-reformers. These conspirators seek to revive those national pre-

=====第495页=====
The Chartist Movement 467 
judices, now all but extinct, which formerly made the working men of these coun­
tries the willing butchers of their fellow men of other lands. They desire to inflame 
the people of these islands with a dread and hatred of the people of France, under the 
pretext that the French contemplate the invasion and subjugation of England. 
Working men of Great Britain and Ireland, your country is already invaded and 
subjugated by enemies within—enemies who have reduced you politically and socially 
to the condition of Helots. You will not dislodge these enemies by increasing the 
physical power of your rulers. We believe that the veritable people of France—the 
proletarians—have learnt by experience that, like yourselves, their enemies are not to 
be found on any foreign shore, but in their own country. In France, as in England, a 
triumphant moneyocracy rules supreme and grinds the sons of labour to the dust. As 
in England, the people in France fights against this enemy and for the advent of 
liberty, equality and fraternity. 
Even supposing this country were menaced by aggression from without, England 
would have nothing to apprehend if her people were freemen. It is not armies, navies 
or fortresses that constitute the true defence of nations; a nation's best defence 
consists in a people which is truly free.... 
Let the privileged classes renounce their unjust usurpations and establish political 
equality and social justice, and England will have nothing to fear against a world in 
arms.  On the contrary, the people of all countries would hail with joy the march of 
England's power, if that power were arrayed on the side of the liberty and social 
emancipation of mankind. 
Working men of Great Britain and Ireland, why should you arm yourselves and 
fight for the preservation of institutions in the privileges of which you have no share? 
For the maintenance of laws made not to protect, but to constrain you? For the 
protection of property which you can regard only as the accumulated plunder of the 
fruits of your labour? You are deprived of the produce of your industry; and then 
your poverty is made the pretext for withholding from you your citizens' rights! 
Subjected to plunder, wrong, and insult by the possessors of property, you are asked 
to pour out your blood in defence of property! Let the privileged and the 
property-holders fight their own battles! And if they are too weak to do so, let them 
give the people what belongs to it; let them learn to submit to the popular will; if they 
do so, the whole nation will form a rampart round these islands which no foreign 
invader could ever break through! 
Your great want is political power as the means to effect your social emancipation; 
and until that political power is yours, let your resolve be: No vote, no musket! Give us 
the suffrage, or we will not fight! 
Working men of Great Britain and Ireland! Hold in abhorrence the conspirators 
who would set nation against nation, in the name of that wicked lie, that men of 
different countries are "natural enemies". Rally round the banner of democracy, with 
its motto: "All men are brothers!" 
Signed on behalf of the Society of Fraternal Democrats: G. Julian 
Harney, Ernest  Jones,  Thomas Clark, Charles Keen (Great Britain); /. A. 
Michelot, H. Bernard (France); Carl Schapper, J. Moll (Germany); 
/. Schabelitz, H. Krell (Switzerland); Peter Holm, Luntberg 
(Scandinavia); Louis Oborski (Poland); C. Pohse, P. Bluhm (Russia). 
Written on January 9, 1848 
First published in La Réforme, 
January 10, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first time 

=====第496页=====
Karl Marx 
THE SITUATION IN FRANCE 
What does the Ministry do?—Nothing. 
What does the parliamentary, legal opposition do?—Nothing. 
What can France expect from the present Chambers?—Nothing. 
What does M. Guizot want?—To remain Minister. 
What do Messrs Thiers, Mole and Company want?—To become 
ministers again. 
What does France gain from this ôte-toi, afin que je m'y mette a?— 
Nothing. 
Ministry and opposition are thus condemned to do nothing. 
Who alone will accomplish the coming French revolution?— 
The proletariat. 
What will the bourgeoisie do for this?—Nothing. 
Written about January 16, 1848 Printed according to the Deutsche-
„ ,..,.. , „ , „ .. , Brüsseler-Zeitung 
First published in the Deutscne-Brusseler-
ZeitungNo. 5, January 16, 1848 and Published in English for the first 
in La Réforme, January 19, 1848 time 
a Get out so that I can get  in.—Ed. 

=====第497页=====
Frederick Engels 
EXTRAORDINARY REVELATIONS.— ABDEL-KADER.— 
GUIZOT'S FOREIGN POLICY 
A curious document has just been published and distributed, 3 as if 
for a New Year's gift to the Chamber of Deputies. It is a statement of 
facts explaining how a certain M. Petit got the place of a tax collector 
(receveur particulier) at Corbeil, near Paris, and has been published by 
M. Petit  himself.  M. Petit has been forced to this act in consequence 
of a suit for separation pending between himself and his wife, and in 
which action it had been alleged that he had bought his place by 
prostituting his wife to a gentleman intimately connected with 
M. Guizot. He now declares in his publication— 
"Yes,  my place was bought, as all places are bought now-a-day; but it was bought 
not with prostitution, but with hard cash only." 
Then he goes on to detail how he first aspired to the office of a 
Councillor Referendary at the Court of Accounts. How the ministry 
promised him that place, if he only could procure the resignation of 
one of the councillors; how the minister's secretary intimated to him, 
which of the councillors would most likely sell their charge; how he 
then, for 15,000 francs, procured the wished-for resignation; how 
then he was told he must procure a resignation of a Councillor 
Referendary, not of the second, but of the first class, as the 
government wanted such a one in order to fulfil a promise made by 
them on their coming into office; how by makeshifts of different 
sorts,  the difference of price of the two resignations was made up; 
how at last the resignation was procured; how then the ministry 
wanted not only a resignation like that tendered, but one of a higher 
a "Réponse de M. Petit, ex-receveur des finances à Corbeil, aux calomnies 
répandues à l'occasion de son procès en séparation." —Ed. 

=====第498页=====
470 Frederick Engels 
degree still, of a Master Councillor; how this new resignation was also 
procured by the means of "cash down"; how finally it was offered to 
M. Petit to accept the tax collectorship of Corbeil, rather than the 
place in the Court of Accounts; how M. Petit accepted this; how then 
the different resignations were signed and exchanged against the 
amounts of money stipulated; and how, two days later, the whole 
of the royal ordinances were published, accepting the resignations, 
and promoting and naming the several individuals concerned, 
to the offices stipulated by the transaction. 
These are the principal facts of the matter. There are some others 
of less importance, proving how M. Petit, as soon as he was once 
hooked by having paid the first sum, was made to pay more and 
more. But these I pass over. I only mention, that in the publication of 
M. Petit all the names are given in full. 
You will easily imagine what a noise this little pamphlet has made 
in Paris. All papers are full of it, and the more so, as the Minister of 
Finance3  (to which department the Court of Accounts belongs) 
under whose direction the above transactions took place, had openly 
denied anything of the sort ever having occurred, when questioned 
about it in the Chamber by M. Luneau. M. Luneau, at the time, 
declared the sale of places in the above department to be a matter of 
public notoriety. Known to the majority, as well as to the opposition. 
Known to every one, in short, except, it appeared, to the minister 
himself.  M. Lacave met this by a flat denial. 251 Now the matter has 
come out in a manner which makes all burking impossible. And yet, 
although all Paris has been full of it for almost a week past, the 
government has not opened its mouth. 
We only repeat the words of M. Dupin the elder, pronounced 
when M. Luneau brought the matter forward in the Chamber— 
"It was hardly worth while to make a revolution to abolish the venality of places, if 
this infamous system is suffered to lift up its head again." 
The next subject occupying the papers is the capture of 
Abd-el-Kader,252 and the resolution which the government will come 
to as to'his future location. There is no doubt they will confirm and 
execute the Duke D'Aumale's promise, and send the Emir to 
Egypt.253  It is curious that almost all the papers of the Opposition, 
from the National to the Constitutionnel, demanded the breach of that 
promise. Now, there is no doubt the promise was granted 
conditionally, and leaving the government free to confirm, or not to 
confirm it. The refusal of confirmation would not directly imply, as 
a J. P. J. Lacave-Laplagne.—Ed. 

=====第499页=====
Extraordinary Revelations 471 
the Sun has it, an infamy. But there is no doubt, either, that a similar 
act on the part of any other government, particularly the English, 
would have been treated by those very same papers as the most 
infamous treason. It is evident, that, it being impossible to replace 
matters in the same state as they were when Abd-el-Kader 
conditionally surrendered, it would imply a want of generosity of the 
first order to refuse to him the confirmation of the conditions of 
surrender. But in such questions these national papers are blind, and 
would commit the same acts for whose commission they blame 
others. The only two papers which have spoken in favour of 
confirming the treaty with Abd-el-Kader, are the Presse and the 
Réforme. The first, a monarchical paper, wanted it confirmed, 
because the government could not give the lie to a son of the king, 3 to 
a son of France; thus reviving the old title of the princes of Royal 
blood before the revolution. 
"No",  said the Réforme, "the matter is a delicate one—the honour of our country is 
implied; in such matters we had better be too generous than too narrow, and 
therefore, confirm the word given, were it even that of a prince." 
Again, the Réforme alone has taken the right view of the matter. 
Upon the whole it is, in our opinion, very fortunate that the 
Arabian chief has been taken. The struggle of the Bedouins was a 
hopeless one, and though the manner in which brutal soldiers, like 
Bugeaud, have carried on the war is highly blameable, the conquest 
of Algeria is an important and fortunate fact for the progress of 
civilisation. The piracies of the Barbaresque states, never interfered 
with by the English government as long as they did not disturb their 
ships,  could not be put down but by the conquest of one of these 
states.  And the conquest of Algeria has already forced the Beys of 
Tunis and Tripoli, and even the Emperor of Morocco,0 to enter 
upon the road of civilisation. They were obliged to find other 
employment for their people than piracy, and other means of filling 
their exchequer than tributes paid to them by the smaller states of 
Europe. And if we may regret that the liberty of the Bedouins of the 
desert has been destroyed, we must not forget that these same 
Bedouins were a nation of robbers,—whose principal means of living 
consisted of making excursions either upon each other, or upon the 
settled villagers, taking what they found, slaughtering all those who 
resisted, and selling the remaining prisoners as slaves. All these 
nations of free barbarians look very proud, noble and glorious at a 
a Duke of Aumale, son of Louis Philippe.—Ed. 
b From articles in La Réforme, January 2, 3 and 5, 1848.—Ed. 
c Abd-ur-Rahman.— Ed. 

=====第500页=====
472 Frederick Engels 
distance, but only come near them and you will find that they, as well 
as the more civilised nations, are ruled by the lust of gain, and only 
employ ruder and more cruel means. And after all, the modern 
bourgeois, with civilisation, industry, order, and at least relative 
enlightenment following him, is preferable to the feudal lord or to 
the marauding robber, with the barbarian state of society to which 
they belong. 
M. Guizot has laid before the Chambers part of the diplomatic 
correspondence relating to Switzerland and Italy. The first proves 
again that he has been regularly done by Lord Palmerston, and both 
prove the intimate alliance France has entered into with Austria. 
That was the last infamy which as yet had been spared to 
Louis-Philippistic France. The representative of tyranny, of oppres­
sion attained by means the most infamous,—the country of stability 
and reaction, the ally of France, as reconstituted by two revolutions! 
Deeper she cannot sink. But this is quite well. The deeper the 
bourgeoisie brings down this country, the nearer draws the day of 
reckoning. And it will come, before the  bourgeoisie  think of it. There 
is a party they do not take into account, and that party is the noble, 
the generous, the brave French people. 
The dispute between the Réforme and the National* has been 
submitted to a jury selected by both parties. All hostilities are 
suspended. By the end of this month the decision will be given. May 
it be as it will, we hope the Réforme will continue in the only course 
which can save the Democracy of France. 
Written in mid-January 1848 Reprinted from the newspaper 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 535, January 22, 1848 
with an editorial note: 
"From Our Paris Correspondent" 
a See this volume, pp. 385-87, 406-08 and 438-44.—Ed. 

=====第501页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE CHARTIST MOVEMENT 
[MEETING IN SUPPORT OF THE NATIONAL PETITION] 
The fourth meeting convened for the adoption of the National 
Petition by the Chartist Council was held in London last Tuesday.3 
Mr. Julian Harney presided. Messrs Clark and Dixon, of the Chartist 
central committee,b West, of Macclesfield, Skelton, Keen, and Fussell 
spoke in turn. But the orators of the evening were Messrs Harney 
and Jones. We give extracts of their speeches0: 
Mr. Ernest Jones.—We are assembled here to assist in passing a Coercion Bill against 
the government, and to produce such a "pressure from without", as shall squeeze 
poor little Lord John Russell into something like a decent and statesman-like shape. 
We need this pressure, seeing that of all the parliaments we have had, the present 
parliament is assuredly the most hostile to working men. (A voice: No! no!) Someone 
says No. But I repeat that no class has ever proved as hostile to the working class as the 
middle class of England. (Hear, hear.) It has cast down aristocracy on the left, 
democracy on the right, and lives on the ruins of both. I do not wish to raise the 
aristocracy. No! Let the bruised serpent lie, for it would sting the hand that healed it.... 
Under feudalism, the people were fat slaves; under your rule, Sir defender of the 
middle class, they are lean slaves. (Loud cheers.) 
Seeing then that we never had a more middle class, and therefore a more hostile 
parliament, it is time to organise resistance. And the people knows this. We too are 
increasing our army; the Old Guards of Chartism are in the field again. We too are 
enrolling our militia, the starving millions. We too are strengthening our "national 
defences", courage in our hearts, discipline in our ranks, and unity in our action. 
(Applause.) 
...But there are some gentlemen here who are not satisfied with this, and who say 
that millions of determined, well organised and well informed men are insufficient to 
obtain the Charter. These gentlemen tell the people that they must grow rich and then 
a January 11, 1848.—Ed. 
The reference is to the Executive Committee of the National Charter 
Association.—Ed. 
c Quoted from the report: "The People's Charter.—Important Public Meeting" 
published in The Northern  Star.—Ed. 

=====第502页=====
474 Frederick Engels 
they will be free. But I tell you, you must become free and then you will be rich! 
(Applause.) 
Become rich! how? In the workhouse or the gaol? Become rich in the deer forests 
of our nobles? Become rich on six shillings (8 francs)a a week? Become rich in the 
churchyards of famished Ireland? (Applause.) Go tell it to the unemployed in 
Manchester—to the 20,000 destitute in Bradford. Go tell it to the Irish tenant, dying 
by the light of his burning cottage set on fire by his landlord. Go tell it to the beggar at 
the doors of Grosvenor Square! Go tell him once for all to stay a slave; but do not 
insult his misery by telling him to become rich! I know you will here point to our 
glorious Land Company54 to prove that the people can become rich.... But do you 
imagine that the government will let you go on?... This company has succeeded in 
rescuing 50,000 families from ruin; but rest assured, Parliament will prevent you from 
forming other companies, unless you obtain political power!... Let the Land Company 
members remember their forefathers, the yeomanry of England, who all owned the 
land. How did they lose it? Why, by taxation, which ruined them. 
...Now then, gentlemen, make money, it will be wanted for the militia, for the 
increased army. Make money, it will be wanted for fresh palaces, for new bishops, for 
new royal babies! Make money, become middle class yourselves, and then, as you 
know, the middle class will no longer fear you! Make money—and this impossible task 
will be your only salvation. Not one word about our triumph at Nottingham, of our 
organisation, of our national petition and our National Convention, now being 
prepared. 
...No,  my friends, above all we need the vote.... And you, men of London, you have 
it more in your power to obtain it than your brothers in the rest of England.... Our 
gallant men of the north are a long way off; their voices will not be heard, for there are 
hundreds of miles and plenty of barracks between those petitioners and Parliament. 
But you, men of London, can go in person and knock at the doors of St. Stephen's,255 
knock till your privileged debtors give you back, trembling, what they have owed you 
for centuries! So knock, and go on knocking until justice has been done. (Thunderous 
applause.) 
Mr. Julian Harney.—We are here to adopt a petition to Parliament.... But we are 
not asking for mercy or pity. Even were we so degraded as to do such a thing, we know 
that we have nothing to expect from the pity of our oppressors.... It was not by crying 
misericordia that our forefathers rescued themselves from the yoke of the traitor 
Charles I. It was not by begging for merc,r that the Americans broke their chains. It 
was not by crying misericordia that the French people overthrew the tyranny of 
feudalism, priestcraft and monarchy. (Great cheering.) 
No, it would be vain for us to implore Capital for mercy. All our petitions would 
achieve nothing if they were not followed by other measures. First, we do not ask for 
pity, we ask for justice. We demand it, not only by the petition, but also by our 
agitation and our organisation, which is already beginning to terrify the parliamentary 
middle class. Continue to agitate, then, for when you cease, your petitions are only 
empty words. 
Truly, the prize is worth the struggle. Behold this mighty empire, built up by the 
strong arms and cemented by the blood of your fathers; this empire of 160 million 
inhabitants, covering the sixth part of the habitable globe, this empire on which "the 
sun never sets".0 How is it that you, owners and conquerors of millions of miles of this 
a Here and below the French equivalents were inserted by Engels. —Ed. 
An allusion to O'Connor's election to Parliament.—Ed. 
c A phrase used by contemporaries of king of Spain and German Emperor 
Charles V about his domains where the "sun never  sets".—Ed. 

=====第503页=====
The Chartist Movement 475 
fair earth, do not possess a foot of land? That millions of the heirs of this magnificent 
empire are dying of hunger, that thousands have no shelter from the wintry blast? 
The natural and manufactured riches of every clime are produced in the limits of the 
British Empire. Our manufactures are the wonder and envy of the whole world. For 
skill, industry and heroism our artisans, labourers and sailors are celebrated 
everywhere. All the elements of greatness and happiness abound, in spite of which 
you are crushed by misery. This empire is rightfully the property not of an idle, a 
scheming privileged few, but of the entire people. Is such a prize not worth struggling 
for? The Charter is the means by which you will win it. (Cheers.) When, therefore, the 
usurpers ask you to arm in defence of the country, refuse until you have your fair 
share of its advantages. If you armed yourselves, what would be your fate? Remember 
the poor soldier who was recently shot in India for insubordination, this is your share; 
compare it with the share of the Duke of Wellington, who got from the Treasury a 
sum of two and à half million pounds (60 million francs): So much for the aristocrats. 
Well, then! If the aristocrary fears the loss of its broad acres, let it fight for the 
protection of those acres! If the Church fears the confiscation of its immense 
revenues, let the parsons and bishops arm themselves! If the Jews and jobbers of 
'Change Alley ö  fear the swamping of their funds, let them fight to protect their 
plunder! If the shopocracy fear the seizure of their tills and their ledgers let them arm 
and fight to protect their property! But you, men of the people, overworked and 
ill-paid sons of toil, houseless and shivering serfs of privilege, you who have neither 
lands,  nor revenues, nor rent nor tithes, nor public funds, nor shares, nor profits, nor 
usury, nor votes, to whom the throne affords no protection and the law no security, 
fight for something else, or fight not at all! (Great cheering.) If you must fight, fight 
for yourselves. (Renewed cheering.) When lords and priests and bourgeois ask you to 
fight, let your answer be: No vote, no musket! Knaves and fools are now rushing into 
print with talk of national defence; there is only one defence, that of the Chartists: The 
land for the people, every man a home, every man a vote, and every man a musket! 
(Thunderous applause.) 
Written on January 17 and 18, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
January 19, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第504页=====

=====第505页=====
Karl Marx 
and 
Frederick Engels 
MANIFESTO 
OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY257 

=====第506页=====
Written in December 1847-January 1848 Printed according to the text of the 
First published as a separate edition English edition of 1888, checked with 
in London in February 1848 the German editions of 1848, 1872, 
1883 and 1890 

=====第507页=====
« H f f < ft 
ï>er 
$Uniiimiiiifttfd>at ^«rtci. 
gScrôffentïi^t im ftebruar i848. 
"Proletarier aller Sànbtr «rmnigt  (.»u<i)i  ! 
bonbon. 
©ebrutft m ber Office ber „SUbun^-Wc fdffdmf f für älrbcifer' 
von $. ffi. JurjljiHli. 
46, LIVERPOOL STREBT, BISHOPS«.'AIE. 
Cover of the first German 23-page edition of the Manifesto of the Communist 
Party 

=====第508页=====

=====第509页=====
A spectre is haunting Europe—the spectre of Communism. All the 
Powers of old Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise 
this spectre: Pope and Czar, Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals 
and German police-spies. 
Where is the party in opposition that has not been decried as 
Communistic by its opponents in power? Where the Opposition that 
has not hurled back the branding reproach of Communism, against 
the more advanced opposition parties, as well as against its 
reactionary adversaries? 
Two things result from this fact: 
I. Communism is already acknowledged by all European Powers 
to be itself a Power. 
II. It is high time that Communists should openly, in the face of 
the whole world, publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, 
and meet this nursery tale of the Spectre of Communism with a 
Manifesto of the party  itself. 
To this end, Communists of various nationalities have assembled 
in London, and sketched the following Manifesto, to be published in 
the English, French, German, Italian, Flemish and Danish lan­
guages. 

=====第510页=====
I 
BOURGEOIS AND PROLETARIANS* 
The history of all hitherto existing society** is the history of class 
struggles. 
Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and  serf, 
guild-master*** and journeyman, in a word, oppressor and op­
pressed, stood in constant opposition to one another, carried on an 
uninterrupted, now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each time 
ended, either in a revolutionary re-constitution of society at large, or 
in the common ruin of the contending classes. 
In the earlier epochs of history, we find almost everywhere a 
complicated arrangement of society into various orders, a manifold 
* By bourgeoisie is meant the class of modern Capitalists, owners of the means 
of social production and employers of wage-labour. By proletariat, the class of modern 
wage-labourers who, having no means of production of their own, are reduced to 
selling their labour-power in order to live. [Note  by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 
** That is, all written history. In 1847, the pre-history of society, the social 
organisation existing previous to recorded history, was all but unknown. Since then, 
Haxthausen discovered common ownership of land in Russia, Maurer proved it to be 
the social foundation from which all Teutonic races started in history, and by and by 
village communities were found to be, or to have been the primitive form of society 
everywhere from India to Ireland. The inner organisation of this primitive 
Communistic society was laid bare, in its typical form, by Morgan's crowning discovery 
of the true nature of the gens and its relation to the tribe. With the dissolution of these 
primeval communities society begins to be differentiated into separate and finally 
antagonistic classes. I have attempted to retrace this process of dissolution in Der 
Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigenthums und des Staats, 2nd edition, Stuttgart, 1886. 
[Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888, and—less the last sentence—to the German 
edition of 1890.] 
*** Guild-master, that is, a full member of a guild, a master within, not a head of a. 
guild. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 

=====第511页=====
Cover of the 1848 30-page edition of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 

=====第512页=====

=====第513页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 485 
gradation of social rank. In ancient Rome we have patricians, 
knights, plebeians, slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords, vassals, 
guild-masters, journeymen, apprentices,3 serfs; in almost all of these 
classes, again, subordinate gradations. 
The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of 
feudal society has not done away with class antagonisms. It has but 
established new classes, new conditions of oppression, new forms of 
struggle in place of the old ones. 
Our epoch, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however, this 
distinctive feature: it has simplified the class antagonisms. Society as 
a whole is more and more splitting up into two great hostile camps, 
into two great classes directly facing each other: Bourgeoisie and 
Proletariat. 
From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers 
of the earliest towns. From these burgesses the first elements of the 
bourgeoisie were developed. 
The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up 
fresh ground for the rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and 
Chinese markets, the colonisation of America, trade with the 
colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in commodities 
generally, gave to commerce, to navigation, to industry, an impulse 
never before known, and thereby, to the revolutionary element in 
the tottering feudal society, a rapid development. 
The feudal system of industry, under which industrial production 
was monopolised by closed guilds,b now no longer sufficed for the 
growing wants of the new markets. The manufacturing system took 
its place. The guild-masters were pushed on one side by the 
manufacturing middle class;c division of labour between the 
different corporate guilds vanished in the face of division of labour 
in each single workshop. 
Meantime the markets kept ever growing, the demand ever rising. 
Even manufacture no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and 
machinery revolutionised industrial production. The place of 
manufacture was taken by the giant, Modern Industry, the place of 
the industrial middle class, by industrial millionaires, the leaders of 
whole industrial armies, the modern bourgeois. 
a The German editions of 1848. 1872, 1883 and 1890 have "journeymen" 
("Gesellen") instead of "journeymen, apprentices".—Ed. 
In the German editions the beginning of the phrase is: "The former feudal, or 
guild, organisation of industry".— Ed. 
The German editions have here and below "middle estate" ("Mittelstand") 
instead of "middle class".—Ed. 
17* 

=====第514页=====
486 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
Modern3 industry has established the world market, for which the 
discovery of America paved the way. This market has given an 
immense development to commerce, to navigation, to communica­
tion by land. This development has, in its turn, reacted on the 
extension of industry; and in proportion as industry, commerce, 
navigation, railways extended, in the same proportion the bour­
geoisie developed, increased its capital, and pushed into the back­
ground every class handed down from the Middle Ages. 
We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the 
product of a long course of development, of a series of revolutions in 
the modes of production and of exchange. 
Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied 
by a corresponding political advance of that class.b An oppressed 
classc  under the sway of the feudal nobility, an armed and 
self-governing association in the medieval commune*; here indepen­
dent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany), there taxable "third 
estate" of the monarchy (as in France),d afterwards, in the period of 
manufacture proper, serving either the semi-feudalc or the absolute 
monarchy as a counterpoise against the nobility, and, in fact, 
cornerstone of the great monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie has 
at last, since the establishment of Modern Industry and of the world 
market, conquered for  itself,  in the modern representative State, 
exclusive political sway. The executive of the modern State is but a 
committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bour­
geoisie. 
The bourgeoisie, historically, has played a most revolutionary part. 
The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an 
end to all feudal, patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn 
* "Commune" was the name taken, in France, by the nascent towns even before 
they had conquered from their feudal lords and masters local self-government and 
political rights as the "Third Estate". Generally speaking, for the economical 
development of the bourgeoisie, England is here taken as the typical country; for its 
political development, France. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 
This was the name given their urban communities by the townsmen of Italy and 
France, after they had purchased or wrested their initial rights of self-government 
from their feudal lords. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.] 
a The German editions have here and below "large-scale" instead of 
"modern".—Ed. 
b The words "of that class" were added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
c The German editions have "estate" instead of "class".—Ed. 
The words "medieval", "(as in Italy and Germany)", "(as in France)" were 
added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
e The German editions have "estate" instead of "semi-feudal".—Ed. 

=====第515页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 487 
asunder the motley feudal ties that bound man to his "natural 
superiors", and has left remaining no other nexus between man and 
man than naked self-interest, than callous "cash payment". It has 
drowned the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour, of 
chivalrous enthusiasm, of philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water 
of egotistical calculation. It has resolved personal worth into 
exchange value, and in place of the numberless indefeasible 
chartered freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable free­
dom—Free Trade. In one word, for exploitation, veiled by religious 
and political illusions, it has substituted naked, shameless, direct, 
brutal exploitation. 
The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto 
honoured and looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the 
physician, the lawyer, the priest, the poet, the man of science, into its 
paid wage-labourers. 
The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil, 
and has reduced the family relation to a mere money relation. 
The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal 
display of vigour in the Middle Ages, which Reactionists so much 
admire, found its fitting complement in the most slothful indolence. 
It has been the first to show what man's activity can bring about. It 
has accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramids, 
Roman aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has conducted expedi­
tions that put in the shade all former Exoduses of nations and 
crusades. 
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising 
the instruments of production, and thereby the relations of 
production, and with them the whole relations of society. Conserva­
tion of the old modes of production in unaltered form, was, on the 
contrary, the first condition of existence for all earlier industrial 
classes. Constant revolutionising of production, uninterrupted 
disturbance of all social conditions, everlasting uncertainty and 
agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier ones. All 
fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable 
prejudices and opinions, are swept away, all new-formed ones 
become antiquated before they can ossify. All that is solid melts into 
air, all that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face 
with sober senses, his real conditions of life, and his relations with his 
kind. 
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products 
chases the bourgeoisie over the whole surface of the globe. It must 
nestle everywhere, settle everywhere, establish connexions every­
where. 

=====第516页=====
488 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market 
given a cosmopolitan character to production and consumption in 
every country. To the great chagrin of Reactionists, it has drawn 
from under the feet of industry the national ground on which it 
stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or 
are daily being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries, 
whose introduction becomes a life and death question for all civilised 
nations, by industries that no longer work up indigenous raw 
material, but raw material drawn from the remotest zones; industries 
whose products are consumed, not only at home, but in every 
quarter of the globe. In place of the old wants, satisfied by the 
productions of the country, we find new wants, requiring for their 
satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the 
old local and national seclusion and self-sufficiency, we have 
intercourse in every direction, universal inter-dependence of 
nations. And as in material, so also in intellectual production. The 
intellectual creations of individual nations become common proper­
ty. National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more 
and more impossible, and from the numerous national and local 
literatures, there arises a world literature. 
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of 
production, by the immensely facilitated means of communication, 
draws all, even the most barbarian, nations into civilisation. The 
cheap prices of its commodities are the heavy artillery with which it 
batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians' 
intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all 
nations, on pain of extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of 
production; it compels them to introduce what it calls civilisation into 
their midst, i.e., to become bourgeois themselves. In one word, it 
creates a world after its own image. 
The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. 
It has created enormous cities, has greatly increased the urban 
population as compared with the rural, and has thus rescued a 
considerable part of the population from the idiocy of rural life. Just 
as it has made the country dependent on the towns, so it has made 
barbarian and semi-barbarian countries dependent on the civilised 
ones,  nations of peasants on nations of bourgeois, the East on the 
West. 
The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the 
scattered state of the population, of the means of production, and of 
property. It has agglomerated population, centralised means of 
production, and has concentrated property in a few hands. The 
necessary consequence of this was political centralisation. Indepen-

=====第517页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 489 
dent, or but loosely connected provinces with separate interests, laws, 
governments and systems of taxation, became lumped together into 
one nation, with one government, one code of laws, one national 
class-interest, one frontier and one customs-tariff. 
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has 
created more massive and more colossal productive forces than have 
all preceding generations together. Subjection of Nature's forces to 
man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and agricul­
ture,  steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of 
whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole 
populations conjured out of the ground—what earlier century had 
even a presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap 
of social labour? 
We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose 
foundation the bourgeoisie built itself up, were generated in feudal 
society. At a certain stage in the development of these means of 
production and of exchange, the conditions under which feudal 
society produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of 
agriculture and manufacturing industry, in one word, the feudal 
relations of property became no longer compatible with the already 
developed productive forces3; they became so many fetters. They 
had to be burst asunder; they were burst asunder. 
Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social 
and political constitution adapted to it, and by the economical and 
political sway of the bourgeois class. 
A similar movement is going on before our own eyes. Modern 
bourgeois society with its relations of production, of exchange and of 
property, a society that has conjured up such gigantic means of 
production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer, who is no longer 
able to control the powers of the nether world whom he has called up 
by his spells. For many a decade past the history of industry and 
commerce is but the history of the revolt of modern productive 
forces against modern conditions of production, against the 
property relations that are the conditions for the existence of the 
bourgeoisie and of its rule. It is enough to mention the commercial 
crises that by their periodical return put on its trial, each time more 
threateningly, the existence of the entire bourgeois society. In these 
crises a great part not only of the existing products, but also of the 
previously created productive forces, are periodically destroyed. In 
a The German editions add: "they hindered production instead of developing 
it".—Ed. 

=====第518页=====
490 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
these crises there breaks out an epidemic2 that, in all earlier epochs, 
would have seemed an absurdity—the epidemic of over-production. 
Society suddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary 
barbarism; it appears as if a famine, a universal war of devastation 
had cut off the supply of every means of subsistence; industry and 
commerce seem to be destroyed; and why? Because there is too 
much civilisation, too much means of subsistence, too much industry, 
too much commerce. The productive forces at the disposal of society 
no longer tend to further the development of the conditions of 
bourgeois property0; on the contrary, they have become too 
powerful for these conditions, by which they are fettered, and so 
soon as they overcome these fetters, they bring disorder into the 
whole of bourgeois society, endanger the existence of bourgeois 
property. The conditions of bourgeois society are too narrow to 
comprise the wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie 
get over these crises? On the one hand by enforced destruction of a 
mass of productive forces; on the other, by the conquest of new 
markets, and by the more thorough exploitation of the old ones. 
That is to say, by paving the way for more extensive and more 
destructive crises, and by diminishing the means whereby crises are 
prevented. 
The weapons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the 
ground are now turned against the bourgeoisie  itself. 
But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring 
death to  itself;  it has also called into existence the men who are to 
wield those weapons—the modern working class—the proletarians.0 
In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed, in the 
same proportion is the proletariat, the modern working class, 
developed—a class of labourers, who live only so long as they find 
work, and who find work only so long as their labour increases 
capital. These labourers, who must sell themselves piecemeal, are a 
commodity, like every other article of commerce, and are conse­
quently exposed to all the vicissitudes of competition, to all the 
fluctuations of the market. 
Owing to the extensive use of machinery and to division of labour, 
the work of the proletarians has lost all individual character, and, 
consequently, all charm for the workman. He becomes an append-
a The German editions have: "a social epidemic".—Ed. 
The German editions of 1848 have: "bourgeois civilisation and the conditions of 
bourgeois property".—Ed. 
c The German editions have: "the modern workers, the proletarians".—Ed. 

=====第519页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 491 
age of the machine, and it is only the most simple, most monotonous, 
and most easily acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the 
cost of production of a workman is restricted, almost entirely, to the 
means of subsistence that he requires for his maintenance, and for 
the propagation of his race. But the price of a commodity, and 
therefore also of labour,258 is equal to its cost of production. In 
proportion, therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the 
wage decreases. Nay more, in proportion as the use of machinery 
and division of labour increases, in the same proportion the burden 
of toil3 also increases, whether by prolongation of the working hours, 
by increase of the work exacted in a given time or by increased speed 
of the machinery, etc. 
Modern industry has converted the little workshop of the 
patriarchal master into the great factory of the industrial capitalist. 
Masses of labourers, crowded into the factory, are organised like 
soldiers. As privates of the industrial army they are placed under the 
command of a perfect hierarchy of officers and sergeants. Not only 
are they slaves of the bourgeois class, and of the bourgeois State; they 
are daily and hourly enslaved by the machine, by the overlooker, 
and, above all, by the individual bourgeois manufacturer  himself. 
The more openly this despotism proclaims gain to be its end and 
aim, the more petty, the more hateful and the more embittering it is. 
The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual 
labour, in other words, the more modern industry becomes 
developed, the more is the labour of men superseded by that of 
women.11 Differences of age and sex have no longer any distinctive 
social validity for the working class. All are instruments of labour, 
more or less expensive to use, according to their age and sex. 
No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer, 
so far, at an end, and he receives his wages in cash, than he is set 
upon by the other portions of the bourgeoisie, the landlord, the 
shopkeeper, the pawnbroker, etc. 
The lower strata of the middle classc—the small tradespeople, 
shopkeepers, and retired tradesmen generally,d the handicraftsmen 
and peasants—all these sink gradually into the proletariat, partly 
a The German editions have: "the quantity of labour".—Ed. 
b The German 23-page edition of 1848 has: "of women and children".—Ed. 
c The German editions have: "The former lower strata of the middle 
estate".—Ed. 
d The German editions have: "and rentiers" instead of "and retired tradesmen 
generally".—Ed. 

=====第520页=====
492 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on 
which Modern Industry is carried on, and is swamped in the 
competition with the large capitalists, partly because their specialised 
skill is rendered worthless by new methods of production. Thus the 
proletariat is recruited from all classes of the population. 
The proletariat goes through various stages of development. With 
its birth begins its struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first the contest is 
carried on by individual labourers, then by the workpeople of a 
factory, then by the operatives of one trade, in one locality, against 
the individual bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct 
their attacks not against the bourgeois conditions of production, but 
against the instruments of production themselves3; they destroy 
imported wares that compete with their labour, they smash to pieces 
machinery, they set factories ablaze, they seek to restore by force the 
vanished status of the workman of the Middle Ages. 
At this stage the labourers still form an incoherent13 mass scattered 
over the whole country, and broken up by their mutual competition. 
If anywhere they unite to form more compact bodies, this is not yet 
the consequence of their own active union, but of the union of the 
bourgeoisie, which class, in order to attain its own political ends, is 
compelled to set the whole proletariat in motion, and is moreover 
yet, for a time, able to do so. At this stage, therefore, the proletarians 
do not fight their enemies, but the enemies of their enemies, the 
remnants of absolute monarchy, the landowners, the non-industrial 
bourgeois, the petty bourgeoisie. Thus the whole historical move­
ment is concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so 
obtained is a victory for the bourgeoisie. 
But with the development of industry the proletariat not only 
increases in number; it becomes concentrated in greater masses, its 
strength grows, and it feels that strength more. The various interests 
and conditions of life within the ranks of the proletariat are more 
and more equalised, in proportion as machinery obliterates all 
distinctions of labour, and nearly everywhere reduces wages to the 
same low level. The growing competition among the bourgeois, and 
the resulting commercial crises, make the wages of the workers ever 
more fluctuating. The unceasing improvement of machinery, ever 
more rapidly developing, makes their livelihood more and more 
precarious; the collisions between individual workmen and individu-
a The German editions have: "They direct their attacks not only against the 
bourgeois conditions of production, they direct them against the instruments of 
production themselves."—Ed. 
b This word was inserted in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 

=====第521页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 493 
al bourgeois take more and more the character of collisions between 
two classes. Thereupon the workers begin to form combinations 
(Trades' Unions)3 against the bourgeois; they club together in order 
to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent associations in 
order to make provision beforehand for these occasional revolts. 
Here and there the contest breaks out into riots. 
Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The 
real fruit of their battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in the 
ever-expanding union of the workers. This union is helped on by the 
improved means of communication that are created by modern 
industry and that place the workers of different localities in contact 
with one another. It was just this contact that was needed to 
centralise the numerous local struggles, all of the same character, 
into one national struggle between classes. But every class struggle is 
a political struggle. And that union, to attain which the burghers 
of the Middle Ages, with their miserable highways, required centu­
ries, the modern proletarians, thanks to railways, achieve in a few 
years. 
This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and consequently 
into a political party, is continually being upset again by the 
competition between the workers themselves. But it ever rises up 
again, stronger, firmer, mightier. It compels legislative recognition 
of particular interests of the workers, by taking advantage of the 
divisions among the bourgeoisie  itself.  Thus the ten-hours' bill in 
England was carried.259 
Altogether collisions between the classes of the old society further, 
in many ways, the course of development of the proletariat. The 
bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a constant battle. At first with the 
aristocracy; later on, with those portions of the bourgeoisie  itself, 
whose interests have become antagonistic to the progress of industry; 
at all times, with the bourgeoisie of foreign countries. In all these 
battles it sees itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for 
its help, and thus, to drag it into the political arena. The bourgeoisie 
itself,  therefore, supplies the proletariat with its own elements of 
political and general13 education, in other words, it furnishes the 
proletariat with weapons for fighting the bourgeoisie. 
Further, as we have already seen, entire sections of the ruling 
classes are, by the advance of industry, precipitated into the 
proletariat, or are at least threatened in their conditions of existence. 
a The words in parentheses were inserted in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
The words "political and general" were added in the English edition of 
1888.—Ed. 

=====第522页=====
494 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
These also supply the proletariat with fresh elements of enlighten­
ment and progress.2 
Finally, in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour, 
the process of dissolution going on within the ruling class, in fact 
within the whole range of old society, assumes such a violent, glaring 
character, that a small section of the ruling class cuts itself adrift, and 
joins the revolutionary class, the class that holds the future in its 
hands.  Just as, therefore, at an earlier period, a section of the nobility 
went over to the bourgeoisie, so now a portion of the bourgeoisie 
goes over to the proletariat, and in particular, a portion of the 
bourgeois ideologists, who have raised themselves to the level of 
comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole. 
Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today, 
the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes 
decay and finally disappear in the face of Modern Industry; the 
proletariat is its special and essential product. 
The lower middle class,b the small manufacturer, the shopkeeper, 
the artisan, the peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to 
save from extinction their existence as fractions of the middle class. 
They are therefore not revolutionary, but conservative. Nay more, 
they are reactionary, for they try to roll back the wheel of history. If 
by chance they are revolutionary, they are so only in view of their 
impending transfer into the proletariat, they thus defend not their 
present, but their future interests, they desert their own standpoint 
to place themselves at that of the proletariat. 
The "dangerous class", the social scum,c that passively rotting 
mass thrown off by the lowest layers of old society may, here and 
there, be swept into the movement by a proletarian revolution; its 
conditions of life, however, prepare it far more for the part of a 
bribed tool of reactionary intrigue. 
In the conditions of the proletariat, those of old society at large are 
already virtually swamped. The proletarian is without property; his 
relation to his wife and children has no longer anything in common 
with the bourgeois family relations; modern industrial labour, 
modern subjection to capital, the same in England as in France, in 
America as in Germany, has stripped him of every trace of national 
character. Law, morality, religion, are to him so many bourgeois 
a The German editions have "elements of education" instead of "elements of 
enlightenment and progress".—Ed. 
The German editions have here and below "middle estates" instead of "the 
lower middle class" and "the middle class".—Ed. 
The German editions have "lumpen proletariat" instead of "the dangerous class, 
the social scum".—Ed. 

=====第523页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 495 
prejudices, behind which lurk in ambush just as many bourgeois 
interests. 
All the preceding classes that got the upper hand, sought to fortify 
their already acquired status by subjecting society at large to their 
conditions of appropriation. The proletarians cannot become 
masters of the productive forces of society, except by abolishing their 
own previous mode of appropriation, and thereby also every other 
previous mode of appropriation. They have nothing of their own to 
secure and to fortify; their mission is to destroy all previous securities 
for, and insurances of, individual property. 
All previous historical3 movements were movements of minorities, 
or in the interest of minorities. The proletarian movement is the 
self-conscious,3 independent movement of the immense majority, in 
the interest of the immense majority. The proletariat, the lowest 
stratum of our present society, cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, 
without the whole superincumbent strata of official society being 
sprung into the air. 
Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the 
proletariat with the bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle. The 
proletariat of each country must, of course, first of all settle matters 
with its own bourgeoisie. 
In depicting the most general phases of the development of the 
proletariat, we traced the more or less veiled civil war, raging within 
existing society, up to the point where that war breaks out into open 
revolution, and where the violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays 
the foundation for the sway of the proletariat. 
Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have already 
seen, on the antagonism of oppressing and oppressed classes. But in 
order to oppress a class, certain conditions must be assured to it 
under which it can, at least, continue its slavish existence. The  serf,  in 
the period of serfdom, raised himself to membership in the 
commune, just as the petty bourgeois, under the yoke of feudal 
absolutism, managed to develop into a bourgeois. The modern 
labourer, on the contrary, instead of rising with the progress of 
industry, sinks deeper and deeper below the conditions of existence 
of his own class. He becomes a pauper, and pauperism develops 
more rapidly than population and wealth. And here it becomes 
evident, that the bourgeoisie is unfit any longer to be the ruling class 
in society, and to impose its conditions of existence upon society as an 
over-riding law. It is unfit to rule because it is incompetent to assure 
an existence to its slave within his slavery, because it cannot help 
3 This word was added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 

=====第524页=====
496 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
letting him sink into such a state, that it has to feed him, instead of 
being fed by him. Society can no longer live under this bourgeoisie, 
in other words, its existence is no longer compatible with society. 
The essential condition for the existence, and for the sway of the 
bourgeois class, isa the formation and augmentation of capital; the 
condition for capital is wage-labour. Wage-labour rests exclusively on 
competition between the labourers. The advance of industry, whose 
involuntary promoter is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the 
labourers, due to competition, by their revolutionary combination, 
due to association. The development of Modern Industry, therefore, 
cuts from under its feet the very foundation on which the 
bourgeoisie produces and appropriates products. What the bour­
geoisie, therefore, produces, above all, is its own grave-diggers. Its 
fall and the victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable. 
a The German editions have here: "The accumulation of wealth in the hands of 
i ndividuals".—Ed. 

=====第525页=====
II 
PROLETARIANS AND COMMUNISTS 
In what relation do the Communists stand to the proletarians as a 
whole? 
The Communists do not form a separate party opposed to other 
working-class parties. 
They have no interests separate and apart from those of the 
proletariat as a whole. 
They do not set up any sectarian3 principles of their own, by which 
to shape and mould the proletarian movement. 
The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class 
parties by this only: 1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of 
the different countries, they point out and bring to the front the 
common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of all 
nationality. 2. In the various stages of development which the 
struggle of the working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass 
through, they always and everywhere represent the interests of the 
movement as a whole. 
The Communists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically, the 
most advanced andb resolute section of the working-class parties of 
every country, that section which pushes forward all others; on the 
other hand, theoretically, they have over the great mass of the 
proletariat the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, 
the conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian 
movement. 
a The German editions have "separate" instead of "sectarian".—Ed. 
The words "the most advanced and" were added in the English edition of 
1888.—Ed. 

=====第526页=====
498 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all the 
other proletarian parties: formation of the proletariat into a class, 
overthrow of the bourgeois supremacy, conquest of political power 
by the proletariat. 
The theoretical conclusions of the Communists are in no way 
based on ideas or principles that have been invented, or discovered 
by this or that would-be universal reformer. 
They merely express, in general terms, actual relations springing 
from an existing class struggle, from a historical movement going on 
under our very eyes. The abolition of existing property relations is 
not at all a distinctive feature of Communism. 
All property relations in the past have continually been subject to 
historical change consequent upon the change in historical condi­
tions.3 
The French Revolution, for example, abolished feudal property in 
favour of bourgeois property. 
The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of 
property generally, but the abolition of bourgeois property. But 
modern bourgeois private property is the final and most complete 
expression of the system of producing and appropriating products, 
that is based on class antagonisms, on the exploitation of the many by 
the few.b 
In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in 
the single sentence: Abolition of private property. 
We Communists have been reproached with the desire of 
abolishing the right of personally acquiring property as the fruit of a 
man's own labour, which property is alleged to be the groundwork of 
all personal freedom, activity and independence. 
Hard-won, self-acquired, self-earned property! Do you mean the 
property of the petty artisanc and of the small peasant, a form of 
property that preceded the bourgeois form? There is no need to 
abolish that; the development of industry has to a great extent 
already destroyed it, and is still destroying it daily. 
Or do you mean modern bourgeois private property? 
But does wage-labour create any property for the labourer? Not a 
bit. It creates capital, i.e., that kind of property which exploits 
wage-labour, and which cannot increase except upon condition of 
begetting a new supply of wage-labour for fresh exploitation. 
In the German editions this phrase reads: "All property relations have been 
subject to constant historical replacement, constant historical change."—Ed. 
The German editions have: "the exploitation of the ones by the others".—Ed. 
The German editions have: "the property of the petty bourgeois".—Ed. 

=====第527页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 499 
Property, in its present form, is based on the antagonism of capital 
and wage-labour. Let us examine both sides of this antagonism. 
To be a capitalist is to have not only a purely personal, but a 
social status in production. Capital is a collective product, and only 
by the united action of many members, nay, in the last resort, only 
by the united action of all members of society, can it be set in 
motion. 
Capital is, therefore, not a personal, it is a social power. 
When, therefore, capital is converted into common property, into 
the property of all members of society, personal property is not 
thereby transformed into social property. It is only the social 
character of the property that is changed. It loses its class character. 
Let us now take wage-labour. 
The average price of wage-labour is the minimum wage, i.e., that 
quantum of the means of subsistence, which is absolutely requisite to 
keep the labourer in bare existence as a labourer. What, therefore, 
the wage-labourer appropriates by means of his labour, merely 
suffices to prolong and reproduce a bare existence. We by no means 
intend to abolish this personal appropriation of the products of 
labour, an appropriation that is made for the maintenance and 
reproduction of human life, and that leaves no surplus wherewith to 
command the labour of others. All that we want to do away with is 
the miserable character of this appropriation, under which the 
labourer lives merely to increase capital, and is allowed to live only 
in so far as the interest of the ruling class requires it. 
In bourgeois society, living labour is but a means to increase 
accumulated labour. In Communist society, accumulated labour is 
but a means to widen, to enrich, to promote the existence of the 
labourer. 
In bourgeois society, therefore, the past dominates the present; in 
Communist society, the present dominates the past. In bourgeois 
society capital is independent and has individuality, while the living 
person is dependent and has no individuality. 
And the abolition of this state of things is called by the bourgeois 
abolition of individuality and freedom! And rightly so. The abolition 
of bourgeois individuality, bourgeois independence, and bourgeois 
freedom is undoubtedly aimed at. 
By freedom is meant, under the present bourgeois conditions of 
production, free trade, free selling and buying. 
But if selling and buying disappears, free selling and buying 
disappears also. This talk about free selling and buying, and all the 
other "brave words" of our bourgeoisie about freedom in general, 
have a meaning, if any, only in contrast with restricted selling and 

=====第528页=====
500 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
buying, with the fettered traders of the Middle Ages, but have no 
meaning when opposed to the Communistic abolition of buying and 
selling, of the bourgeois conditions of production, and of the 
bourgeoisie  itself. 
You are horrified at our intending to do away with private 
property. But in your existing society, private property is already 
done away with for nine-tenths of the population; its existence for 
the few3 is solely due to its non-existence in the hands of those 
nine-tenths. You reproach us, therefore, with intending to do away 
with a form of property, the necessary condition for whose existence 
is the non-existence of any property for the immense majority of 
society. 
In one word, you reproach us with intending to do away with your 
property. Precisely so; that is just what we intend. 
From the moment when labour can no longer be converted into 
capital, money, or rent, into a social power capable of being 
monopolised, i.e., from the moment when individual property can 
no longer be transformed into bourgeois property, into capital,0 
from that moment, you say, individuality vanishes. 
You must, therefore, confess that by "individual" you mean no 
other person than the bourgeois, than the middle-class owner of 
property. This person must, indeed, be swept out of the way, and 
made impossible.0 
Communism deprives no man of the power to appropriate the 
products of society; all that it does is to deprive him of the power to 
subjugate the labour of others by means of such appropriation. 
It has been objected that upon the abolition of private property all 
work will cease, and universal laziness will overtake us. 
According to this, bourgeois society ought long ago to have gone to 
the dogs through sheer idleness; for those of its members who work, 
acquire nothing, and those who acquire anything, do not work. The 
whole of this objection is but another expression of the tautology: 
that there can no longer be any wage-labour when there is no longer 
any capital. 
All objections urged against the Communistic mode of producing 
and appropriating material products, have, in the same way, been 
urged against the Communistic modes of producing and appropri­
ating intellectual products. Just as, to the bourgeois, the disap-
a The words "for the few" were added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
b The words "into capital" were added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
c The words "and made impossible" were added in the English edition of 
1888.—Ed. 

=====第529页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 501 
pearance of class property is the disappearance of production  itself, 
so the disappearance of class culture3 is to him identical with the 
disappearance of all culture. 
That culture, the loss of which he laments, is, for the enormous 
majority, a mere training to act as a machine. 
But don't wrangle with us so long as you apply, to our intended6 
abolition of bourgeois property, the standard of your bourgeois 
notions of freedom, culture, law, &c. Your very ideas are but the 
outgrowth of the conditions of your bourgeois production and 
bourgeois property, just as your jurisprudence is but the will of your 
class made into a law for all, a will, whose essential character and 
direction are determined by the economical conditions of existence 
of your class.0 
The selfish misconception that induces you to transform into 
eternal laws of nature and of reason, the social forms springing from 
your present mode of production and form of property—historical 
relations that rise and disappear in the progress of production—this 
misconception you share with every ruling class that has preceded 
you.d What you see clearly in the case of ancient property, what you 
admit in the case of feudal property, you are of course forbidden to 
admit in the case of your own bourgeois form of property. 
Abolition of the family! Even the most radical flare up at this 
infamous proposal of the Communists. 
On what foundation is the present family, the bourgeois family, 
based? On capital, on private gain. In its completely developed form 
this family exists only among the bourgeoisie. But this state of things 
finds its complement in the practical absence of the family among the 
proletarians, and in public prostitution. 
The bourgeois family will vanish as a matter of course when its 
complement vanishes, and both will vanish with the vanishing of 
capital. 
Do you charge us with wanting to stop the exploitation of children 
by their parents? To this crime we plead guilty. 
But, you will say, we destroy the most hallowed of relations, when 
we replace home education by social. 
a The German editions have here and below "education" ["Bildung"] instead of 
"culture".—Ed. 
The words "our intended" were inserted in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
c In the German editions the end of this sentence reads as follows: "a will, whose 
content is determined by the material conditions of existence of your class."—Ed. 
d In the German editions this sentence reads as follows: "This selfish conception... 
you share with all the ruling classes which have perished."—Ed. 

=====第530页=====
502 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
And your education! Is not that also social, and determined by the 
social conditions under which you educate, by the intervention, 
direct or indirect, of society, by means of schools, &c? The Com­
munists have not invented the intervention of society in education; 
they do but seek to alter the character of that intervention, 
and to rescue education from the influence of the ruling 
class. 
The bourgeois clap-trap about the family and education, about the 
hallowed co-relation of parent and child, becomes all the more 
disgusting, the more, by the action of Modern Industry, all family 
ties among the proletarians are torn asunder, and their children 
transformed into simple articles of commerce and instruments of 
labour. 
But you Communists would introduce community of women, 
screams the whole bourgeoisie in chorus. 
The bourgeois sees in his wife a mere instrument of produc­
tion. He hears that the instruments of production are to be ex­
ploited in common, and, naturally, can come to no other conclu­
sion than that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the 
women. 
He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to 
do away with the status of women as mere instruments of produc­
tion. 
For the rest, nothing is more ridiculous than the virtuous 
indignation of our bourgeois at the community of women which, 
they pretend, is to be openly and officially established by the 
Communists. The Communists have no need to introduce communi­
ty of women; it has existed almost from time immemorial. 
Our bourgeois, not content with having the wives and daughters of 
their proletarians at their disposal, not to speak of common 
prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in seducing each other's wives. 
Bourgeois marriage is in reality a system of wives in common and 
thus,  at the most, what the Communists might possibly be 
reproached with, is that they desire to introduce, in substitution for a 
hypocritically concealed, an openly legalised community of women. 
For the rest, it is self-evident that the abolition of the present system 
of production must bring with it the abolition of the community of 
women springing from that system, i.e., of prostitution both public 
and private. 
The Communists are further reproached with desiring to abolish 
countries and nationality. 
The working men have no country. We cannot take from them 
what they have not got. Since the proletariat must first of all acquire 

=====第531页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 503 
political supremacy, must rise to be the leading class of the nation,3 
must constitute itself the nation, it is so far, itself national, though not 
in the bourgeois sense of the word. 
National differences and antagonisms between peoples are daily 
more and more vanishing, owing to the development of the 
bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to the world market, to 
uniformity in the mode of production and in the conditions of life 
corresponding thereto. 
The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still 
faster. United action, of the leading civilised countries at least, is one 
of the first conditions for the emancipation of the proletariat. 
In proportion as the exploitation of one individual by another is 
put an end to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also be 
put an end to. In proportion as the antagonism between classes 
within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one nation to another will 
come to an end. 
The charges against Communism made from a religious, a 
philosophical, and, generally, from an ideological standpoint, are not 
deserving of serious examination. 
Does it require deep intuition to comprehend that man's ideas, 
views and conceptions, in one word, man's consciousness, changes 
with every change in the conditions of his material existence, in his 
social relations and in his social life? 
What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual 
production changes its character in proportion as material produc­
tion is changed? The ruling ideas of each age have ever been the 
ideas of its ruling class. 
When people speak of ideas that revolutionise society, they do but 
express the fact, that within the old society, the elements of a new 
one have been created, and that the dissolution of the old ideas keeps 
even pace with the dissolution of the old conditions of existence. 
When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions 
were overcome by Christianity. When Christian ideas succumbed in 
the 18th century to rationalist ideas,c feudal society fought its death 
battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The ideas of religious 
liberty and freedom of conscience merely gave expression to the 
sway of free competition within the domain of knowledge. 
d The German editions of 1848 have "the national class" instead of "the leading 
class of the nation".—Ed. 
b The word "material" was added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
c The German editions have "the ideas of enlightenment" instead of "rationalist 
ideas".—Ed. 

=====第532页=====
504 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
"Undoubtedly," it will be said, "religious, moral, philosophical 
and juridical ideas2 have been modified in the course of historical 
development. But religion, morality, philosophy, political science, 
and law, constantly survived this change. 
"There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc., 
that are common to all states of society. But Communism abolishes 
eternal truths, it abolishes all religion and all morality, instead of 
constituting them on a new basis; it therefore acts in contradiction to 
all past historical experience." 
What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all past 
society has consisted in the development of class antagonisms, 
antagonisms that assumed different forms at different epochs. 
But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all 
past ages, viz., the exploitation of one part of society by the other. No 
wonder, then, that the social consciousness of past ages, despite all 
the multiplicity and variety it displays, moves within certain common 
forms,  or general ideas,b which cannot completely vanish except with 
the total disappearance of class antagonisms. 
The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with 
traditional property relations; no wonder that its development 
involves the most radical rupture with traditional ideas. 
But let us have done with the bourgeois objections to Communism. 
We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the 
working class is to raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class, 
to win the battle of democracy. 
The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by 
degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to centralise all instru­
ments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat 
organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total of productive 
forces as rapidly as possible. 
Of course, in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by 
means of despotic inroads on the rights of property, and on the 
conditions of bourgeois production; by means of measures, there­
fore,  which appear economically insufficient and untenable, but 
which, in the course of the movement, outstrip themselves, neces­
sitate further inroads upon the old social order,0 and are unavoid­
able as a means of entirely revolutionising the mode of production. 
a In the German editions the beginning of the sentence reads: "'Undoubtedly,' it 
will be said, 'religious, moral, philosophical, political, juridical ideas,  etc.'"—Ed. 
The German editions have "in forms of consciousness" instead of "or general 
ideas".—Ed. 
c The words "necessitate further inroads upon the old social order" were added in 
the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 

=====第533页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 505 
These measures will of course be different in different coun­
tries'. 260 
Nevertheless in the most advanced countries, the following will be 
pretty generally applicable: 
1. Abolition ' of property in land and application of all rents of 
land to public purposes. 
2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.b 
3. Abolition of all right of inheritance. 
4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels. 
5. Centralisation of credit in the hands of the State, by means of a 
national bank with State capital and an exclusive monopoly. 
6. Centralisation of the means of communication and transport0 in 
the hands of the State. 
7. Extension of factories and instruments of production owned by 
the State; the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and the 
improvement of the soil generally in accordance with a common 
plan. 
8. Equal liability of all to labour. Establishment of industrial 
armies, especially for agriculture. 
9. Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries; 
gradual abolition of the distinction between town and country, by a 
more equable distribution of the population over the country.d 
10. Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition of 
children's factory labour in its present form. Combination of 
education with industrial production, &c, 8cc. 
When, in the course of development, class distinctions have 
disappeared, and all production has been concentrated in the hands 
of a vast association of the whole nation,6 the public power will lose its 
political character. Political power, properly so called, is merely the 
organised power of one class for oppressing another. If the 
proletariat during its contest with the bourgeoisie is compelled, by 
the force of circumstances, to organise itself as a class, if, by means of 
a The German editions have here "expropriation".—Ed. 
The German editions have: "A heavy progressive  tax."—Ed. 
c The German editions have "all transport" instead of "the means of communica­
tion and transport".—Ed. 
d In the editions of 1848, point 9 reads: "Combination of agriculture with 
industry, promotion of the gradual elimination of the contradictions between town 
and countryside." In subsequent German editions the word "contradictions" was 
replaced by "distinctions".—Ed. 
e The German editions have "associated individuals" instead of "a vast association 
of the whole nation".—Ed. 

=====第534页=====
506 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
a revolution, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as such, sweeps away 
by force the old conditions of production, then it will, along with 
these conditions, have swept away the conditions for the existence of 
class antagonisms and of classes generally, and will thereby have 
abolished its own supremacy as a class. 
In place of the old bourgeois society, with its classes and class 
antagonisms, we shall have an association, in which the free 
development of each is the condition for the free development of all. 

=====第535页=====
Ill 
SOCIALIST AND COMMUNIST LITERATURE 
1. REACTIONARY SOCIALISM 
a. Feudal Socialism 
Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the 
aristocracies of France and England to write pamphlets against 
modern bourgeois society. In the French revolution of July 1830, 
and in the English reform agitation, these aristocracies again 
succumbed to the hateful upstart. Thenceforth, a serious political 
contest was altogether out of question. A literary battle alone 
remained possible. But even in the domain of literature the old cries 
of the restoration period* had become impossible. 
In order to arouse sympathy, the aristocracy were obliged to lose 
sight, apparently, of their own interests, and to formulate their 
indictment against the bourgeoisie in the interest of the exploited 
working class alone. Thus the aristocracy took their revenge by 
singing lampoons on their new master, and whispering in his ears 
sinister prophecies of coming catastrophe.3 
In this way arose feudal Socialism; half lamentation, half lampoon; 
half echo of the past, half menace of the future; at times, by its bitter, 
witty and incisive criticism, striking the bourgeoisie to the very 
heart's core; but always ludicrous in its effect, through total 
incapacity to comprehend the march of modern history. 
The aristocracy, in order to rally the people to them, waved the 
proletarian alms-bag in front for a banner. But the people, so often 
as it joined them, saw on their hindquarters the old feudal coats of 
arms,  and deserted with loud and irreverent laughter. 
* Not the English Restoration 1660 to 1689, but the French Restoration 1814 to 
1830.  [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.} 
a In the German editions the end of this sentence reads: "and whispering in his 
ears more or less sinister prophecies."—Ed. 

=====第536页=====
508 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
One section of the French Legitimists and "Young England" 261 
exhibited this spectacle. 
In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to 
that of the bourgeoisie, the feudalists forget that they exploited 
under circumstances and conditions that were quite different, 
and that are now antiquated. In showing that, under their rule, 
the modern proletariat never existed, they forget that the 
modern bourgeoisie is the necessary offspring of their own form of 
society. 
For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary character of 
their criticism that their chief accusation against the bourgeoisie 
amounts to this, that under the bourgeois régime a class is being 
developed, which is destined to cut up root and branch the old order 
of society. 
What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it 
creates a proletariat, as that it creates a revolutionary proletariat. 
In political practice, therefore, they join in all coercive measures 
against the working class; and in ordinary life, despite their 
high-falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the golden apples 
dropped from the tree of industry,3 and to barter truth, love, and 
honour for traffic in wool, beetroot-sugar, and potato spirits.* 
As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord,15 so 
has Clerical Socialism with Feudal Socialism. 
Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist tinge. 
Has not Christianity declaimed against private property, against 
marriage, against the State? Has it not preached in the place of these, 
charity and poverty, celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic 
life and Mother Church? Christian' Socialism is but the holy water 
with which the priest consecrates the heart-burnings of the 
aristocrat. 
* This applies chiefly to Germany where the landed aristocracy and squirearchy 
have large portions of their estates cultivated for their own account by stewards, and 
are, moreover, extensive beetroot-sugar manufacturers and distillers of potato spirits. 
The wealthier British aristocracy are, as yet, rather above that; but they, too, know how 
to make  up. for declining rents by lending their names to floaters of more or less shady 
joint-stock companies. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 
a The words "dropped from the tree of industry" were added in the English 
edition of 1888.—Ed. 
The German editions have here "feudal  lord".—Ed. 
c The German editions of 1848 have "holy" instead of "Christian" (the texts of 
these editions contain an obvious misprint: "heutige" —of today—for "heilige" — 
holy).—Ed. 

=====第537页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 509 
b. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism 
The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by the 
bourgeoisie, not the only class whose conditions of existence pined 
and perished in the atmosphere of modern bourgeois society. The 
medieval burgesses and the small peasant proprietors were the 
precursors of the modern bourgeoisie. In those countries which are 
but little developed, industrially and commercially, these two classes 
still vegetate3 side by side with the rising bourgeoisie. 
In countries where modern civilisation has become fully devel­
oped, a new class of petty bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating 
between proletariat and bourgeoisie and ever renewing itself as a 
supplementary part of bourgeois society. The individual members of 
this class, however, are being constantly hurled down into the 
proletariat by the action of competition, and, as modern industry 
develops, they even see the moment approaching when they will 
completely disappear as an independent section of modern society, 
to be replaced, in manufactures, agriculture and commerce, by 
overlookers, bailiffs and shopmen. 
In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more 
than half of the population, it was natural that writers who sided with 
the proletariat against the bourgeoisie, should use, in their criticism 
of the bourgeois régime, the standard of the peasant and petty 
bourgeois, and from the standpoint of these intermediate classes b 
should take up the cudgels for the working class. Thus arose 
petty-bourgeois Socialism. Sismondi was the head of this school, not 
only in France but also in England. 
This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the 
contradictions in the conditions of modern production. It laid bare 
the hypocritical apologies of economists. It proved, incontrovertibly, 
the disastrous effects of machinery and division of labour; the 
concentration of capital and land in a few hands; over-production 
and crises; it pointed out the inevitable ruin of the petty bourgeois 
and peasant, the misery of the proletariat, the anarchy in produc­
tion, the crying inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the indus­
trial war of extermination between nations, the dissolution of old 
moral bonds, of the old family relations, of the old nationalities. 
In its positive aims, however, this form of Socialism aspires either 
to restoring the old means of production and of exchange, and with 
a The German editions have "this class still vegetates" instead of "these two classes 
still vegetate".—Ed. 
The German editions have "the petty bourgeoisie" instead of "these inter­
mediate classes".—Ed. 

=====第538页=====
510 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
them the old property relations, and the old society, or to cramping 
the modern means of production and of exchange, within the 
framework of the old property relations that have been, and were 
bound to be, exploded by those means. In either case, it is both 
reactionary and Utopian. 
Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture; patriarchal 
relations in agriculture. 
Ultimately, when stubborn historical facts had dispersed all 
intoxicating effects of self-deception, this form of Socialism ended in 
a miserable fit of the blues.3 
c. German, or "True", Socialism 
The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a literature that 
originated under the pressure of a bourgeoisie in power, and that 
was the expression of the struggle against this power, was introduced 
into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in that country, had 
just begun its contest with feudal absolutism. 
German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits,h 
eagerly seized on this literature, only forgetting, that when these 
writings immigrated from France into Germany, French social 
conditions had not immigrated along with them. In contact with 
German social conditions, this French literature lost all its immediate 
practical significance, and assumed a purely literary aspect.0 Thus, to 
the German philosophers of the Eighteenth Century, the demands 
of the first French Revolution were nothing more than the demands 
of "Practical Reason"262 in general, and the utterance of the will of 
the revolutionary French bourgeoisie signified in their eyes the laws 
of pure Will, of Will as it was bound to be, of true human Will 
generally. 
The work of the German literati consisted solely in bringing the 
new French ideas into harmony with their ancient philosophical 
conscience, or rather, in annexing the French ideas without 
deserting their own philosophic point of view. 
a In the German editions this sentence reads: "In its further development this 
trend ended in a cowardly fit of the blues."—Ed. 
In the German editions the beginning of this sentence reads: "German 
philosophers, semi-philosophers and lovers of fine phrases".—Ed. 
c In the German editions of 1848 there follows: "It must have appeared as idle 
speculation on true society, on the realisation of humanity." In subsequent German 
editions the words "on true society" were omitted.—Ed. 

=====第539页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 511 
This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign 
language is appropriated, namely, by translation. 
It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic Saints 
over the manuscripts on which the classical works of ancient 
heathendom had been written. The German literati reversed this 
process with the profane French literature. They wrote their 
philosophical nonsense beneath the French original. For instance, 
beneath the French criticism of the economic functions of money, 
they wrote "Alienation of Humanity", and beneath the French 
criticism of the bourgeois State they wrote, "Dethronement of the 
Category of the General", and so forth.3 
The introduction of these philosophical phrases at the back of the 
French historical criticismsb they dubbed "Philosophy of Action", 
"True Socialism", "German Science of Socialism", "Philosophical 
Foundation of Socialism", and so on. 
The French Socialist and Communist literature was thus complete­
ly emasculated. And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to 
express the struggle of one class with the other, he felt conscious of 
having overcome "French one-sidedness" and of representing, not 
true requirements, but the requirements of Truth; not the interests 
of the proletariat, but the interests of Human Nature, of Man in 
general, who belongs to no class, has no reality, who exists only in the 
misty realm of philosophical fantasy. 
This German Socialism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously 
and solemnly, and extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such mounte­
bank fashion, meanwhile gradually lost its pedantic innocence. 
The fight of the German, and, especially, of the Prussian 
bourgeoisie, against feudal aristocracy and absolute monarchy, in 
other words, the liberal movement, became more earnest. 
By this, the long wished-for opportunity was offered to "True" 
Socialism of confronting the political movement with the Socialist 
demands, of hurling the traditional anathemas against liberalism, 
against representative government, against bourgeois competition, 
bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois legislation, bourgeois 
liberty and equality, and of preaching to the masses that they had 
nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by this bourgeois movement. 
a In the German editions this sentence reads: "For instance, beneath the French 
criticism of money relations they wrote, 'Alienation of Humanity', and beneath the 
French criticism of the bourgeois State they wrote, 'Elimination of the domination of 
the abstractly General',  etc."—Ed. 
b The German editions have "French theories" instead of "French historical 
criticisms".—Ed. 

=====第540页=====
512 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
German Socialism forgot, in the nick of time, that the French 
criticism, whose silly echo it was, presupposed the existence of 
modern bourgeois society, with its corresponding economic3 condi­
tions of existence, and the political constitution adapted thereto, the 
very things whose attainment was the object of the pending struggle 
in Germany. 
To the absolute governments,11 with their following of parsons, 
professors, country squires and officials, it served as a welcome 
scarecrow against the threatening bourgeoisie. 
It was a sweet finish after the bitter pills of floggings and bullets 
with which these same governments, just at that time,0 dosed the 
German working-class risings. 
While this "True" Socialism thus served the governments as a 
weapon for fighting the German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time, 
directly represented a reactionary interest, the interest of the 
German Philistines. In Germany the  petty-bourgeois  class,  a relic of the 
sixteenth century, and since then constantly cropping up again 
under various forms, is the real social basis of the existing state of 
things. 
To preserve this class is to preserve the existing state of things in 
Germany. The industrial and political supremacy of the bourgeoisie 
threatens it with certain destruction; on the one hand, from the 
concentration of capital; on the other, from the rise of a 
revolutionary proletariat. "True" Socialism appeared to kill these 
two birds with one stone. It spread like an epidemic. 
The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of 
rhetoric, steeped in the dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental 
robe in which the German Socialists wrapped their sorry "eternal 
truths",  all skin and bone, served to wonderfully increase the sale of 
their goods amongst such a public. 
And on its part, German Socialism recognised, more and more, its 
own calling as the bombastic representative of the petty-bourgeois 
Philistine. 
It proclaimed the German nation to be the model nation, and the 
German petty Philistine to be the typical man. To every villainous 
meanness of this model man it gave a hidden, higher, Socialistic 
interpretation, the exact contrary of its real character. It went to the 
extreme length of directly opposing the "brutally destructive" 
tendency of Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme and 
a The German editions have "material" instead of "economic".—Ed. 
The German editions have "To the German absolute governments".—Ed. 
c The words "just at that time" were added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 

=====第541页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 513 
impartial contempt of all class struggles. With very few exceptions, 
all the so-called Socialist and Communist publications that now 
(1847) circulate in Germany belong to the domain of this foul and 
enervating literature.* 
2. CONSERVATIVE, OR BOURGEOIS, SOCIALISM 
A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social 
grievances, in order to secure the continued existence of bourgeois 
society. 
To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, 
improvers of the condition of the working class, organisers of 
charity, members of societies for the prevention of cruelty to 
animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of every 
imaginable kind. This form of Socialism has, moreover, been worked 
out into complete systems. 
We may cite Proudhon's Philosophie de la Misère as an example of 
this form. 
The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social 
conditions3 without the struggles and dangers necessarily resulting 
therefrom. They desire the existing state of society minus its 
revolutionary and disintegrating elements. They wish for a 
bourgeoisie without a proletariat. The bourgeoisie naturally con­
ceives the world in which it is supreme to be the best; and bourgeois 
Socialism develops this comfortable conception into various more or 
less complete systems.5 In requiring the proletariat to carry out such 
a system, and thereby to march straightway into the social0 New 
Jerusalem, it but requires in reality, that the proletariat should 
remain within the bounds of existing society, but should cast away all 
its hateful ideas concerning the bourgeoisie. 
A second and more practical, but less systematic, form of this 
Socialism sought to depreciate every revolutionary movement in the 
eyes of the working class, by showing that no mere political reform, 
but only a change in the material conditions of existence, in 
* The revolutionary storm of 1848 swept away this whole shabby tendency and 
< ured its protagonists of the desire to dabble further in Socialism. The chief 
i epresentative and classical type of this tendency is Herr Karl Grün. [Note  by Engels to 
the German edition of 1890.] 
a The German editions have: "want the living conditions of modern society".—Ed. 
b The German editions have here: "a more or less complete system".—Ed. 
c This word was added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 

=====第542页=====
514 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
economical relations, could be of any advantage to them. By changes 
in the material conditions of existence, this form of Socialism, 
however, by no means understands abolition of the bourgeois 
relations of production, an abolition that can be effected only by a 
revolution, but administrative reforms, based on the continued 
existence of these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no respect 
affect the relations between capital and labour, but, at the best, less­
en the cost, and simplify the administrative work, of bourgeois 
government. 
Bourgeois Socialism attains adequate expression, when, and only 
when, it becomes a mere figure of speech. 
Free trade: for the benefit of the working class. Protective duties: 
for the benefit of the working class. Prison Reform3: for the benefit 
of the working class. This is the last word and the only seriously 
meant word of bourgeois Socialism. 
It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois—for 
the benefit of the working class. 
3. CRITICAL-UTOPIAN SOCIALISM AND COMMUNISM 
We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great 
modern revolution, has always given voice to the demands of the 
proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf and others. 
The first direct attempts of the proletariat to attain its own ends, 
made in times of universal excitement, when feudal society was being 
overthrown, these attempts necessarily failed, owing to the then 
undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to the absence of the 
economic conditions for its emancipation, conditions that had yet to 
be produced, and could be produced by the impending bourgeois 
epoch alone.b The revolutionary literature that accompanied these 
first movements of the proletariat had necessarily a reactionary 
character. It inculcated universal asceticism and social levelling in its 
crudest form. 
The Socialist and Communist systems properly so called, those of 
Saint-Simon, Fourier, Owen and others, spring into existence in the 
early undeveloped period, described above, of the struggle between 
proletariat and bourgeoisie (see Section I. Bourgeois and Pro­
letarians). 
a The German editions have here: "Solitary confinement".—Ed. 
The German editions have "material conditions" instead of "economic 
conditions", and the end of the sentence is: "and could be only the product of the 
bourgeois epoch".—Ed. 

=====第543页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 515 
The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, 
as well as the action of the decomposing elements in the prevailing 
form of society. But the proletariat, as yet in its infancy,3 offers to 
them the spectacle of a class without any historical initiative or any 
independent political movement. 
Since the development of class antagonism keeps even pace with 
the development of industry, the economic situation, as they find it, 
does not as yet offer to them the material conditions for the 
emancipation of the proletariat. They therefore search after a new 
social science, after newb social laws, that are to create these 
conditions. 
Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive action, 
historically created conditions of emancipation to fantastic ones, and 
the gradual, spontaneous0 class organisation of the proletariat to an 
organisation of society specially contrived by these inventors. Future 
history resolves  itself,  in their eyes, into the propaganda and the 
practical carrying out of their social plans. 
In the formation of their plans they are conscious of caring chiefly 
for the interests of the working class, as being the most suffering 
class.  Only from the point of view of being the most suffering class 
does the proletariat exist for them. 
The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own 
surroundings, causes Socialists of this kind to consider themselves 
far superior to all class antagonisms. They want to improve 
the condition of every member of society, even that of the 
most favoured. Hence, they habitually appeal to society at large, 
without distinction of class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class. 
For how can people, when once they understand their system, 
fail to see in it the best possible plan of the best possible state of 
society? 
Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary, 
action; they wish to attain their ends by peaceful means, and 
endeavour, by small experiments, necessarily doomed to failure, 
and by the force of example, to pave the way for the new social 
Gospel. 
Such fantastic pictures of future society, painted at a time when 
the proletariat is still in a very undeveloped state and has but a 
fantastic conception of its own position, correspond with the first 
a The words "as yet in its infancy" were added in the English edition of  1888.—  Ed. 
b In both cases the word "new" was added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
c The German editions have "Social" instead of "Historical".—Ed. 
n The word "spontaneous" was added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 
IN—IH2fi 

=====第544页=====
516 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
instinctive yearnings of that class for a general reconstruction of 
society. 
But these Socialist and Communist publications contain also a 
critical element. They attack every principle of existing society. 
Hence they are full of the most valuable materials for the 
enlightenment of the working class. The practical measures pro­
posed in them—such as the abolition of the distinction between 
town and country, of the family, of the carrying on of industries for 
the account of private individuals,3 and of the wage system, the 
proclamation of social harmony, the conversion of the functions of 
the State into a mere superintendence of production, all these 
proposals point solely to the disappearance of class antagonisms 
which were, at that time, only just cropping up, and which, in these 
publications, are recognised in their earliest indistinct and undefined 
forms only. These proposals, therefore, are of a purely Utopian 
character. 
The significance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism 
bears an inverse relation to historical development. In proportion as 
the modernb  class struggle develops and takes definite shape, this 
fantastic standing apart from the contest, these fantastic attacks on it, 
lose all practical value and all theoretical justification. Therefore, 
although the originators of these systems were, in many respects, 
revolutionary, their disciples have, in every case, formed mere 
reactionary sects. They hold fast by the original views of their 
masters, in opposition to the progressive historical development of 
the proletariat. They, therefore, endeavour, and that consistently, to 
deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms. 
They still dream of experimental realisation of their social Utopias, 
of founding isolated "phalanstères", of establishing "Home Col­
onies",  of setting up a "Little Icaria"*—duodecimo editions of the 
New Jerusalem—and to realise all these castles in the air, they are 
compelled to appeal to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By 
* Phalanstères  were Socialist colonies on the plan of Charles Fourier; Icaria was the 
name given by Cabet to his Utopia and, later on, to his American Communist colony. 
[Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 
"Home Colonies" were what Owen called his Communist model societies. 
Phalanstères was the name of the public palaces planned by Fourier. Icaria was the 
name given to the Utopian land of fancy, whose Communist institutions Cabet 
portrayed. [Note by Engels to the German edition of 1890.] 
a In the German editions the beginning of this sentence reads as follows: "Their 
positive propositions concerning the future society, for example, abolition ol the 
contradiction between town and country, of the family, of private profit...".—Ed. 
This word was added in the English edition ot  1 888.—  Ed. 

=====第545页=====
Manifesto of Communist Party 517 
degrees they sink into the category of the reactionary [or]a conser­
vative Socialists depicted above, differing from these only by more 
systematic pedantry, and bv their fanatical and superstitious  belief b 
in the miraculous effects of their social science. 
They, therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of 
the working class; such action, according to them, can only result 
from blind unbelief in the new Gospel. 
The Owenites in England, and the Fourierists in France, 
respectively oppose the Chartists and the Réformistes. 263 
a In the English edition of 1888 the word "or" is omitted, but it is given in all 
other authorised editions.—Ed. 
b The German editions have "fanatical superstition".—Ed. 

=====第546页=====
IV 
POSITION OF THE COMMUNISTS 
IN RELATION TO THE VARIOUS EXISTING 
OPPOSITION PARTIES 
Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the 
existing working-class parties, such as the Chartists in England and 
the Agrarian Reformers in America.264 
The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, 
for the enforcement of the momentary interests of the working class; 
but in the movement of the present, they also represent and take 
care ofa the future of that movement. In France the Communists ally 
themselves with the Social-Democrats,* against the conservative and 
radical bourgeoisie, reserving, however, the right to take up a critical 
position in regard to phrases and illusions traditionally handed down 
from the great Revolution. 
In Switzerland they support the Radicals, without losing sight of 
the fact that this party consists of antagonistic elements, partly of 
Democratic Socialists, in the French sense, partly of radical 
bourgeois. 
In Poland they support the party that insists on an agrarian 
revolution as the prime condition for national emancipation, that 
party which fomented the insurrection of Cracow in 1846.265 
* The party then represented in Parliament by Ledru-Rollin, in literature by Louis 
Blanc, in the daily press by the Réforme. The name of Social-Democracy signified, with 
these its inventors, a section of the Democratic or Republican party more or less tinged 
with Socialism. [Note by Engels to the English edition of 1888.] 
The party in France which at that time called itself Socialist-Democratic was 
represented in political life by Ledru-Rollin and in literature by Louis Blanc; thus it 
differed immeasurably from present-day German Social-Democracy. [Note  by Engels to 
the German edition of 1890.] 
The words "and take care of" were added in the English edition of 1888.—Ed. 

=====第547页=====
Manifesto of the Communist Party 519 
In Germany they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a 
revolutionary wav, against the absolute monarchy, the feudal 
squirearchy, and the petty bourgeoisie.3 
But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the working 
class the clearest possible recognition of the hostile antagonism 
between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in order that the German 
workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against the 
bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the bourgeoisie 
must necessarily introduce along with its supremacy, and in order 
that, after the fall of the reactionary classes in Germany, the fight 
against the bourgeoisie itself may immediately begin. 
The Communists turn their attention chiefly to Germany, because 
i hat country is on the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to 
be carried out under more advanced conditions of European 
civilisation, and with a much more developed proletariat, than that 
of England was in the seventeenth, and of France in the eighteenth 
century, and because the bourgeois revolution in Germany will be 
but the prelude to an immediately following proletarian revolution. 
In short, the Communists everywhere support every revolutionary 
movement against the existing social and political order of things. 
In all these movements they bring to the front, as the leading 
question in each, the property question, no matter what its degree of 
development at the time. 
Finally, they labour everywhere for the union and agreement of 
the democratic parties of all countries. 
The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They 
openly declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible 
overthrow of all existing social conditions. Let the ruling classes 
tremble at a Communistic revolution. The proletarians have nothing 
to lose but their chains. They have a world to win. 
WORKING MEN OF ALL COUNTRIES, UNITE! 
a In the German editions the end of this sentence reads: "against the absolute 
monarchy, the feudal landowners and philistinism [Kleinbürgerei]". —Ed. 

=====第548页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE MOVEMENTS OF 1847 266 
The year 1847 was certainly the most stormy we have experienced 
for a very long time. A constitution and a United Diet in Prussia267; 
an unexpectedly rapid awakening in political life and a general 
arming against Austria in Italy; a civil war in Switzerland268; a new 
Parliament of pronounced radical complexion in Britain; in France 
scandals and Reform banquets; in America the conquest of Mexico 
by the United States—that is a series of changes and movements such 
as no other recent year can show. 
The last turning point in history was the year 1830. The July 
revolution in France and the Reform Bill in Britain finally secured 
the victory of the bourgeoisie; and in Britain this was, indeed, 
the victory of the industrial bourgeoisie, the manufacturers, 
over the non-industrial bourgeoisie, the rentiers. Belgium, and to a 
certain extent Switzerland, followed suit; here again the bourgeoisie 
triumphed.269 Poland rose in revolt,270 Italy chafed under Metter-
nich's heel. Germany was seething. All countries were preparing for 
a mighty struggle. 
But after 1830 there was everywhere a set-back. Poland fell, the 
insurgents in Romagna were dispersed,271  the movement in Germa­
ny was suppressed. The French bourgeoisie defeated the republicans 
in France  itself,  and betrayed the liberals of other countries whom it 
had spurred on to revolt. The liberal ministry in Britain could 
accomplish nothing. Finally, in 1840, reaction was in full swing. 
Poland, Italy, and Germany were politically dead: the Berliner 
politisches Wochenblatt 3 sat enthroned in Prussia; Herr Dahîmann's 
d The allusion is to Frederick William IV, who paironised this reactionary 
newspaper.—F.d. 

=====第549页=====
The Movements of 1847 521 
all-too-clever constitution was repealed in Hanover272; the decisions 
of the Vienna Conference of 1834 were in full force.273 The 
Conservatives and the Jesuits were thriving in Switzerland. In 
Belgium, the Catholics were at the helm. Guizot ruled supreme over 
France. In Britain, under pressure from the growing power of Peel, 
the Whig government was in its last throes, and the Chartists were 
vainly endeavouring to reorganise their ranks after their great defeat 
of 1839.274 Everywhere the reactionary party was victorious; 
everywhere the progressive parties were broken up and dispersed. 
The arrest of the historical movement—this seemed to be the final 
result of the mighty struggles of 1830. 
1840 was, however, also the peak of reaction just as 1830 had been 
the peak of the revolutionary movement of the bourgeoisie. From 
1840 onward the movements against the existing state of affairs 
began afresh. Though often defeated, in the long run they gained 
more and more ground. While in England the Chartists reorganised 
themselves and became stronger than ever, Peel was forced time and 
again to betray his party, dealing it a fatal blow by the repeal of the 
Corn Laws,275 and finally himself to resign. The radicals gained 
ground in Switzerland. In Germany, and especially in Prussia, the 
liberals were pressing their demands more vigorously with every 
year. The liberals emerged victorious from the Belgian elections of 
1847.  France was an exception, for there the reactionary ministry 
secured a triumphant majority in the 1846 elections; and Italy 
remained dead, until Pius IX mounted the papal throne, and at the 
end of 1846 attempted a few dubious reforms. 
So came the year 1847, and with it a series of victories for the 
progressive parties of nearly all countries. Even where they sustained 
defeat, this was more advantageous to them than an immediate 
victory would have been. 
The year 1847 decided nothing, but everywhere it brought the 
parties into sharp and clear confrontation; it brought no final 
solution of any questions, but it posed all questions in such a way that 
now they must be solved. 
Among all the movements and changes of the year 1847 the most 
important were those in Prussia, in Italy and in Switzerland. 
In Prussia, Frederick William IV was at length forced to grant a 
constitution. The sterile Don Quixote of Sans-Souci,276 after long 
struggles and labour-pains, was delivered of a constitution which was 
to establish for all time the victory of the feudalist, patriarchal, 
abolutist, bureaucratic, and clerical reaction. But he had miscalcu­
lated. The bourgeoisie was strong enough by then to turn even that 
constitution into a weapon against the king and all the reactionary 

=====第550页=====
522 Frederick Engels 
classes of society. In Prussia, as everywhere else, the bourgeoisie 
began by refusing him money. The king was in despair. One could 
say that in the first days after the refusal of the money Prussia was 
without a king. The country was in the throes of revolution without 
knowing it. Then by good luck came the fifteen million from Russia; 
Frederick William was king again, the bourgeoisie of the Diet 
crumpled up in alarm, and the revolutionary storm clouds scattered. 
The Prussian bourgeoisie was, for the time being, defeated. But it 
had made a great step forward, had won for itself a forum, had given 
the king a proof of its power, and had worked the country up into a 
great state of agitation. The question: who shall govern Prussia—the 
alliance of nobles, bureaucrats, and priests headed by the king, or the 
bourgeoisie—is now posed in such a way that it must be decided in 
favour of one side or of the other. In the United Diet a compromise 
between the two parties was still possible, but today no longer. Now it 
is a matter of life-and-death struggle between the two. To make 
matters worse, the committees (those unhappy inventions of the 
Berlin constitution manufacturers) are now assembling.277 They will 
make the already complicated legal issues so enormously more 
involved, that no man will any longer know where he stands. They 
will tie matters up into a Gordian knot which will have to be cut with 
the sword. They will complete the final preparations for the bourgeois 
revolution in Prussia. 
We can therefore await the advent of this Prussian revolution with 
the utmost calm. The United Diet will have to be convened in 1849 
whether the king wants it or not. We will give His Majesty a 
breathing space till then, but not a moment longer. Then he will have 
to resign his sceptre and his "unimpaired" crown278 to the Christian 
and the Jewish bourgeois of his realm. 
Thus 1847 was politically a very good year for the Prussian 
bourgeoisie in spite of their temporary defeat. The bourgeoisie and 
petty bourgeoisie of the other German states have also noted this and 
shown the most heartfelt sympathy towards them. They know that 
the victory of the Prussian bourgeoisie is their own victory. 
In Italy we have witnessed the amazing spectacle of the man who 
occupies the most reactionary position in the whole of Europe, who 
represents the petrified ideology of the Middle Ages, the Pope,a 
taking the lead in a liberal movement. The movement grew to power 
in a night, carrying along with it the Austrian archduke of Tuscanyb 
and the traitor Charles Albert of Sardinia, undermining the throne 
a Pius IX.—Ed. 
Leopold II, duke of Tuscany.—Ed. 

=====第551页=====
The Movements of 1847 523 
of Ferdinand of Naples, its waves sweeping over Lombardy to the 
Tyrolese and Styrian Alps. 
Today the movement in Italy resembles that which took place in 
Prussia from 1807 to 1812.279  As in Prussia of those days, there are 
two issues: external independence and internal reforms. For the 
moment there is no demand for a constitution, but only for 
administrative reforms. Any serious conflict with the government is 
avoided in the meantime so as to maintain as united a front as 
possible in face of the foreign overlord. What kind of reforms are 
these? To whose advantage are they? In the first place to that of the 
bourgeoisie. The press is to be favoured; the bureaucracy to be made 
to serve the interests of the bourgeoisie (cf. the Sardinian reforms, 
the Roman consulta, 280 and the reorganisation of the ministries); the 
bourgeois are to be granted extended influence on communal 
administration; the bon plaisir 3 of the nobles and of the bureaucracy 
is to be restricted; the bourgeoisie is to be armed as guardia civica. 
Hitherto all the reforms have been and could be only in the interests 
of the bourgeoisie. Compare the Prussian reforms of Napoleonic 
times.  These are exactly the same, only that in many respects they go 
further: the administration made subservient to the interests of the 
bourgeoisie; the arbitrary power of the nobility and the bureaucracy 
broken; municipal self-government established; a militia inaugu­
rated; the corvée abolished. As earlier in Prussia, so today in Italy, 
the bourgeoisie, owing to its growing wealth and, in particular, to the 
growing importance of industry and commerce in the life of the 
people as a whole, has become the class upon which the country's 
liberation from foreign domination mainly depends. 
The movement in Italy is thus a decisively bourgeois movement. 
All the classes now inspired with a zeal for reform, from the princes 
and the nobility down to the pifferari and the lazzaroni,281 appear for 
the nonce as bourgeois, and the Pope himself is the First Bourgeois 
in Italy. But once the Austrian yoke has finally been thrown off, all 
these classes will be greatly disillusioned. Once the bourgeoisie has 
finished off the foreign enemy, it will start on the separation of 
the sheep from the goats at home; then the princes and the counts 
will again call out to Austria for help, but it will be too late, and then 
the workers of Milan, of Florence, and of Naples will realise that their 
work is only really beginning. 
Finally Switzerland. For the first time in its history, this country has 
played a definite part in the European system of states, for the first 
time it has dared to act decisively and has had the courage to enter 
a Power of arbitrary decision.—Ed. 

=====第552页=====
524 Frederick Engels 
the arena as a federal republic instead of as heretofore an 
agglomeration of twenty-two antagonistic cantons, utter strangers to 
one another. By most resolutely putting down the civil war, it has 
assured the supremacy of the central power—in a word, has become 
centralised. The de facto centralisation will have to be legalised 
through the impending reform of the Federal Pact. 
Who,  we again ask, is going to profit by the outcome of the war, by 
federal reform, by the reorganisation of the Sonderbund cantons? 
The victorious party, the party which was victorious in the individual 
cantons from 1830 to 1834, the liberals and radicals, i.e., the 
bourgeoisie and the peasantry. The rule of the patriciate in the 
former imperial towns was already overthrown as a result of the July 
revolution. Where it had been practically restored, as in Berne and 
Geneva, revolutions followed in 1846. Where it as yet remained in­
tact, as for instance in Basle City, it was shaken to its foundations 
in the same year. There was little feudal aristocracy in Switzerland, 
and where it still survived it found its chief strength in an alliance 
with the herdsmen of the upper Alps. These men were the last, the 
most obstinate and the most rabid enemies of the bourgeoisie. They 
were the mainstay of the reactionary elements in the liberal cantons. 
Aided by the Jesuits and the pietists, 282 they covered the whole of 
Switzerland with a network of reactionary conspiracies (cf. the 
canton of Vaud). They thwarted all the plans laid before the Diet 
by the bourgeoisie, and hindered the final defeat of the philistine 
patriciate in the former imperial cities. 
In 1847a these last enemies of the Swiss bourgeoisie were 
completely broken. 
In almost all the cantons the Swiss bourgeoisie had had a pretty 
free hand in commerce and industry. In so far as the guilds still 
existed, they did little to hamper bourgeois development. Tolls 
within the country hardly existed. Wherever the bourgeoisie had 
developed to any considerable extent, political power was in its 
hands.  But although it had made good progress in the individual 
cantons and had found support there, the main thing was still 
lacking, namely centralisation. Whereas feudalism, patriarchalism, 
and philistinism flourish in separated provinces and individual 
towns, the bourgeoisie needs for its growth as wide a field as possible; 
instead of twenty-two small cantons it needed  one  large Switzerland. 
Cantonal sovereignty, which best suited the conditions in the old 
Switzerland, had become a crushing handicap for the bourgeoisie. 
The bourgeoisie needed a centralised power, strong enough to 
a The original has by mistake "1846".—Ed. 

=====第553页=====
The Movements of 1847 525 
impose a particular course of development on the legislation of the 
individual cantons and, by sheer weight of influence, to cancel out 
the differences in their constitutions and laws, to wipe out the 
vestiges of the. feudal, patriarchal and philistine legislation, and 
energetically to represent the interests of the Swiss bourgeoisie in 
relation to other countries. 
The bourgeoisie has won for itself this centralised power. 
But did not the peasants also help in overthrowing the Sonder­
bund? Certainly they did! So far as the peasants are concerned, they 
will play the same part towards the bourgeoisie as they played for so 
long towards the petty bourgeoisie. The peasants will remain the 
exploited arm of the bourgeoisie, they will fight its battles for it, 
weave its calico and ribbons, and provide the recruits for its 
proletariat. What else can they do? They are owners, like the 
bourgeois, and for the moment their interests are almost identical 
with those of the bourgeoisie. All the political measures which thev 
are strong enough to put through, are hardly more advantageous to 
the bourgeoisie than to the peasants themselves. Nevertheless, they 
are weak in comparison with the bourgeoisie, because the latter are 
more wealthy and have in their hands the lever of all political power 
in our century—industry. With the bourgeoisie, the peasantry can 
achieve much; against the bourgeoisie, nothing. 
It is true that a time will come when the fleeced and impoverished 
section of the peasantry will unite with the proletariat, which by then 
will be further developed, and will declare war on the bour­
geoisie—but that does not concern us here. 
Enough that the expulsion of the Jesuits and their associates, those 
organised opponents of the bourgeoisie, the general introduction of 
civil instead of religious education, the seizure of most of the church 
estates by the state, benefit above all the bourgeoisie. 
Thus the common factor in the three most noteworthy movements 
of the year 1847 is that all are primarily and chiefly in the interests of 
die bourgeoisie. The party of progress was, everywhere, the party of 
the bourgeoisie. 
It is indeed the characteristic feature of these movements that 
those countries which remained backward in 1830 are precisely those 
which last year took the first decisive steps to raise themselves to the 
level of 1830—that is, to secure the victory of the bourgeoisie. 
So far, then, we have seen that the year 1847 was a brilliant year 
for the bourgeoisie. 
Let us proceed. 
In Britain a new parliament lias assembled, a parliament which, in 
the words of John Brigh* the Quaker, is the most bourgeois CM-, 

=====第554页=====
526 Frederick Engels 
convened. John Bright is the best authority in the matter, seeing that 
he himself is the most determined bourgeois in the whole of Britain. 
But the bourgeois John Bright is not the bourgeois who rules in 
France or who thunders with pathetic bravado against Frederick 
William IV. When John Bright speaks of a bourgeois he means a 
manufacturer. Ever since 1688, separate sections of the bourgeois 
class have been ruling in England. But, in order to facilitate their 
seizure of power, the bourgeoisie has allowed the aristocrats, its 
dependent debtors, to retain their rule in name. Whereas, in reality, 
the struggle in England is between sections of the bourgeoisie, 
between rentiers and manufacturers, the manufacturers are able to 
represent it as a struggle between the aristocracy and the 
bourgeoisie, or, in case of necessity, as a struggle between the 
aristocracy and the people. The manufacturers have no interest in 
maintaining the appearance of government by the aristocracy, for 
the lords, the baronets and the squires do not owe them a farthing. 
On the other hand they have a great interest in destroying this 
appearance, for with it the rentiers lose their last sheet-anchor. The 
present bourgeois or manufacturers' parliament will see to this. It 
will change the old feudal-looking England into a more or less 
modern country of bourgeois organisation. It will bring the British 
constitution nearer to those of France and of Belgium. It will 
complete the victory of the English industrial bourgeoisie. 
Another advance of the bourgeoisie: for an advance within the 
bourgeoisie is also an extension and a strengthening of bourgeois 
rule. 
France alone appears to be an exception. The power which fell into 
the hands of the whole of the big bourgeoisie in 1830 is being year by 
year increasingly limited to the rule of the wealthiest section of this 
big bourgeoisie, to the rule of the rentiers and the stock exchange 
speculators. They have made the majority of the big bourgeoisie 
serve their interest. The minority, which is headed by a section of the 
manufacturers and shipping owners, is continually diminishing. This 
minority has now made common cause with the middle and petty 
bourgeoisie who have no electoral rights and celebrates its alliance at 
reform banquets. It despairs of ever coming to power with the 
present electorate. After long hesitation, it has made up its mind to 
promise a share of political power to the sections of the bourgeoisie 
next below  itself,  and especially the bourgeois ideologists, as being 
the least dangerous—the lawyers, doctors, and so on. It is, of 
course, still very far from being able to keep its promise. 
Thus also in France we see approaching the struggle within the 
bourgeoisie which in Britain has already been almost ended. But, as 

=====第555页=====
The Movements of 1847 527 
always in France, the situation is more sharply defined, more 
revolutionary than elsewhere. This distinct division into two camps is 
also an advance for the bourgeoisie. 
In Belgium the bourgeoisie won a decisive victory in the elections 
of 1847. The Catholic ministry was forced to resign, and here also 
the liberal bourgeoisie now rule for the time being. 
In America we have witnessed the conquest of Mexico and have 
rejoiced at it.283 It is also an advance when a country which has 
hitherto been exclusively wrapped up in its own affairs, perpetually 
rent with civil wars, and completely hindered in its development, a 
country whose best prospect had been to become industrially subject 
to Britain—when such a country is forcibly drawn into the historical 
process. It is to the interest of its own development that Mexico will 
in future be placed under the tutelage of the United States. The 
evolution of the whole of America will profit by the fact that the 
United States, by the possession of California, obtains command of 
the Pacific. But again we ask: "Who is going to profit immediately by 
the war?" The bourgeoisie alone. The North Americans acquire new 
regions in California and New Mexico for the creation of fresh 
capital, that is, for calling new bourgeois into being, and enriching 
those already in existence; for all capital created today flows into the 
hands of the bourgeoisie. And what about the proposed cut through 
the Tehuantepec isthmus?284 Who is likely to gain by that? Who else 
but the American shipping owners? Rule over the Pacific, who will 
gain by that but these same shipping owners? The new customers 
for the products of industry, customers who will come into being in 
the newly acquired territories—who will supply their needs? None 
other than the American manufacturers. 
Thus also in America the bourgeoisie has made great advances, 
and if its representatives now oppose the war, that only proves that 
they fear that these advances have in some ways been bought too 
dear. 
Even in quite barbarous lands the bourgeoisie is advancing. In 
Russia, industry is developing by leaps and bounds and is succeeding 
in converting even the boyars into bourgeois. Both in Russia and 
Poland serfdom is being restricted and the nobility thereby 
weakened in the interest of the bourgeoisie, and a class of free 
peasants is being created which the bourgeoisie everywhere needs. 
The Jews are being persecuted—entirely in the interest of the settled 
Christian bourgeois, whose business was spoiled by the pedlars.—In 
Hungary, the feudal magnates are more and more changing into 
wholesale corn and wool merchants and cattle dealers, and 
consequently now appear in the Diet as bourgeois.—What of all 

=====第556页=====
528 Frederick Engels 
the glorious advances of "civilisation" in such lands as Turkey, 
Egypt, Tunis, Persia, and other barbarous countries? They are 
nothing else but a preparation for the advent of a future bourgeoisie. 
In these countries the word of the prophet is being fulfilled: 
"Prepare ye the way of the Lord....3 Lift up your heads, O ye gates; 
and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall 
come in. Who is this King of glory?"b The bourgeois! 
Wherever we look, the bourgeoisie are making stupendous 
progress. They are holding their heads high, and haughtily 
challenge their enemies. They expect a decisive victory, and their 
hopes will not be disappointed. They intend to shape the whole 
world according to their standard; and, on a considerable portion of 
the earth's surface, they will succeed. 
We are no friends of the bourgeoisie. That is common knowledge. 
But this time we do not grudge the bourgeoisie their triumph. We 
can chuckle over the haughty looks which the bourgeois deign to 
bestow (especially in Germany) upon the apparently tiny band of 
democrats and Communists. We have no objection if everywhere 
they force through their purposes. 
Nay more. We cannot forbear an ironical smile when we observe 
the terrible earnestness, the pathetic enthusiasm with which the 
bourgeois strive to achieve their aims. They really believe that they 
are working on their own  behalf!  They are so short-sighted as to 
fancy that through their triumph the world will assume its 
final configuration. Yet nothing is more clear than that they are 
everywhere preparing the way for us, for the democrats and the 
Communists; than that they will at most win a few years of troubled 
enjoyment, only to be then immediately overthrown. Behind them 
stands everywhere the proletariat, sometimes participating in their 
endeavours and partly in their illusions, as in Italy and Switzerland, 
sometimes silent and reserved, but secretly preparing the overthrow 
of the bourgeoisie, as in France and Germany; finally, in Britain and 
America, in open rebellion against the ruling bourgeoisie. 
We can do still more. We can say all this to the bourgeoisie straight 
out, we can lay our cards on the table. Let them know in advance that 
they are working only in our interest. They still cannot for that 
reason give up their fight against the absolute monarchy, the 
nobility, and the clergy. They must conquer—or already now go 
under. 
In Germany in a very short time they will even have to ask for our 
help. 
a Isaiah 40 :  3.—  Ed. 
b Psalms 24 :  7,8.—Ed. 

=====第557页=====
The Movements of 1847 529 
So just fight bravely on, most gracious masters of capital! We need 
you for the present; here and there we even need you as rulers. You 
have to clear the vestiges of the Middle Ages and of absolute 
monarchy out of our path; you have to annihilate patriarchalism; 
you have to carry out centralisation; you have to convert the more or 
less propertyless classes into genuine proletarians, into recruits for 
us; by your factories and your commercial relationships you must 
create for us the basis of the material means which the proletariat 
needs for the attainment of freedom. In recompense whereof you 
shall be allowed to rule for a short time. You shall be allowed to 
dictate your laws, to bask in the rays of the majesty you have 
created, to spread your banquets in the halls of kings, and to take 
the beautiful princess to wife—but do not forget that 
"The hangman stands at the door!"3 
Written about January 20, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung No. 7, January 23, 1848 
Signed: F. E. 
a Heinrich Heine, Riuer  Olaf". — Ed. 

=====第558页=====
Frederick Engels 
THE BEGINNING OF THE END IN AUSTRIA 
"It will endure Metternich and me," said the late Emperor Franz. 
If Metternich does not wish to give his emperor the lie, he had better 
die as soon as possible. 
This chequered Austrian monarchy, scraped together by theft and 
by inheritance, this organised jumble of ten languages and nations, 
this planless mish-mash of contradictory customs and laws, is at last 
beginning to disintegrate. 
Honest German citizens have for years been fervent admirers of 
the director of this creaking state machine, the cowardly swindler 
and assassin—Metternich. Talleyrand, Louis Philippe and Metter­
nich, three most mediocre minds and hence most suitable for our 
mediocre times, are regarded by German citizens as three gods who 
for thirty years have manipulated world history as if it were a puppet 
show. Going by his own daily experience, the honest citizen regards 
history as a kind of plot hatched in a tavern or as feminine gossip on 
a somewhat larger scale. 
Certainly, there is no country over which the tidal wave of 
revolution, the triple Napoleonic invasions285 passed away so 
completely without trace as Austria. Certainly, there is no country 
where feudalism, patriarchalism and faint-hearted philistinism 
defended by the paternal rod, have been maintained so immaculate­
ly or harmoniously as in Austria. But is it Metternich's fault? 
On what does the might, the tenacity, the stability, of the House of 
Austria rest? 
When Italy, France, England, Belgium, North and West Germany, 
one after another extricated themselves from feudal barbarism 
during the latter half of the Middle Ages, when industry was 

=====第559页=====
The Beginning of the End in Austria 531 
developing, trade expanding, the towns thriving and the burghers 
acquired political importance, one part of Germany lagged behind 
West European development. Bourgeois civilisation followed the sea 
coasts and the course of the big rivers. The inland, especially the 
barren and impassable mountainous regions, remained the seat of 
barbarism and of feudalism. This barbarism was especially concen­
trated in the South German and South Slav inland areas. Protected 
by the Alps from Italian civilisation and by the mountains of 
Bohemia and Moravia from that of North Germany, these inland 
countries had the additional good fortune of being the basin of the 
only reactionary river in Europe. The Danube, far from linking 
them with civilisation, brought them into contact with a much 
more vigorous barbarism. 
When the great monarchies developed in Western Europe in the 
wake of bourgeois civilisation, the inland countries of the Upper 
Danube likewise had to unite in a great monarchy. This was required 
if only for the needs of defence. Here, in the centre of Europe, the 
barbarians of all tongues and of all nations associated under the 
sceptre of the House of Hapsburg. Here they found in Hungary a 
mainstay of solid barbarism. 
The Danube, the Alps, the rocky breastworks of Bohemia—these 
are the bases for the existence of Austrian barbarism and of the 
Austrian monarchy. 
The House of Hapsburg supported the burghers against the 
aristocracy and the towns against the princes because this was the 
only condition on which a great monarchy was possible. When, later 
on, it again supported the petty bourgeoisie, this was because the 
petty bourgeoisie in the rest of Europe had become reactionary 
themselves with regard to the big bourgeoisie. On both occasions it 
supported the petty bourgeois for decidedly reactionary purposes. 
But now this method has miscarried. 
The House of Austria was thus from the first the representative of 
barbarism, of reactionary stability in Europe. Its power rested on the 
foolishness of the patriarchalism entrenched behind the impassable 
mountains, on the inaccessible brutality of barbarism. A dozen 
nations whose customs, character, and institutions were flagrantly 
opposed to one another clung together on the strength of their 
common dislike for civilisation. 
Hence the House of Austria was invincible as long as the barbarous 
character of its subjects remained untouched. Hence it was 
threatened by only one danger—the penetration of bourgeois 
civilisation. 
But this sole danger was not to be averted. Bourgeois civilisation 

=====第560页=====
532 Frederick Engels 
could be warded off for a time, it could be temporarily adapted and 
subordinated to Austrian barbarism. But it was bound to overcome 
feudal barbarism sooner or later, and shatter the only link which had 
held the most variegated provinces together. 
This explains Austria's passive, hesitant, cowardly, sordid and 
underhand policy. Austria can no longer act, as before, in an openly 
brutal, thoroughly barbarous way because it must make concessions 
to civilisation every year, and because its own subjects become less 
reliable every year. Every decisive step would lead to a change at 
home or in the neighbouring countries, every change would mean a 
breach in the dam behind which Austria laboriously protects itself 
against the rising tides of modern civilisation. The first victim of any 
change would be the House of Austria itself which stands or falls 
with barbarism. Although Austria was still able to disperse the 
Piedmontese, Neapolitan and Romagnese rebels with cannon fire in 
1823 and 1831, it was forced to set in motion a still undeveloped 
revolutionary element—the peasantry—in 1846 in Galicia; it had 
to stop the advance of its troops near Ferrara in 1847 and resort 
to conspiracy in Rome.286 Counter-revolutionary Austria uses 
revolutionary means—this is the surest sign that its end is ap­
proaching. 
Once the Italian insurrections of 1831, and the Polish revolution 
of 1830 had been suppressed and the French bourgeois had given 
guarantees of good behaviour, Emperor Franz could go to his grave 
in peace; the times seemed misérable enough to endure even his 
feeble-minded offspring. 3 
As yet the realm of the crowned idiot was still safe from 
revolutions. But who could ensure it against the causes of revolu­
tions? 
As long as industry remained domestic industry, as long as every 
peasant family or s^t least every village produced its own industrial 
products, without putting much on the market, industry itself 
remained feudal and excellently suited to Austrian barbarism. As 
long as it remained mere manufactory, rural industry, few products 
of the inland countries were made available for export and foreign 
trade was minimal, industry existed in a few districts only and was 
easily adaptable to the Austrian status quo. If manufacture could 
only produce relatively few big bourgeois even in England and 
France, then it could only produce a modest middle class in 
thinly-populated and remote Austria, and even this only here and 
there. As long as hand labour existed, Austria was safe. 
a Ferdinand  I.—Ed. 

=====第561页=====
The Beginning of the End in Austria 533 
But machinery was invented and machines ruined hand labour. 
The prices of industrial products fell so swiftly and so low that first 
of all manufacture and then, gradually, the old feudal domestic-
industry went under. 
Austria fortified itself against the machines by a consistent system 
of prohibitive tariffs. But in vain, it was precisely the system of 
prohibitive tariffs which was responsible for bringing machinery into 
Austria. Bohemia used machinery in the cotton industry; Lombardy 
for silk spinning; Vienna even started to produce machinery. 
The results were quick to follow. The workers in manufacture 
became destitute. The entire population of the manufacturing 
districts was torn out of its hereditary mode of life. The former 
philistines grew into big bourgeois and lorded it over hundreds of 
workers just as their princely and aristocratic neighbours lorded it 
over hundreds of peasant serfs. Through the collapse of the old type 
of industry, these peasant serfs lost their old occupations and 
acquired new needs as a result of the new industry. It was no longer 
possible to carry on feudal agriculture alongside modern industry. 
The abolition of corvée became a necessity. The feudal position of 
the peasants in relation to the landowners became untenable. The 
towns became thriving. The guilds were oppressive for the 
consumers, useless for those who belonged to them and intolerable 
for those engaged in industry. Competition had to be permitted 
surreptitiously. The position of all classes in society was radically 
changed. The old classes withdrew more and more into the 
background before the two new classes, the bourgeoisie and the 
proletariat. Agriculture declined in importance compared with 
industry, the countryside gave way to the towns. 
Such were the consequences of machinery in some areas of 
Austria, especially in Bohemia and Lombardy. They gave rise to a 
reaction which affected the entire monarchy to a greater or lesser 
degree; everywhere they undermined the old barbarism, and with it 
the foundations of the House of Austria. 
While in Romagna in 1831 the battered Austrian soldiers replied 
to cries of Viva I'ltalia with grape-shot, in England the first railways 
were built. Like machinery, railways immediately became a necessity 
for all European countries. Austria had to have them, willy-nilly. In 
order not to give increased power to the already growing bourgeoi­
sie, the Government built them  itself;  but it went from Scylla to 
Charybdis. It prevented the establishment of powerful bourgeois 
joint stock companies only by borrowing from the same bourgeois 
the money to build the railways, by putting itself in pawn to 
Rothschild, Arnstein, Eskeles, Sina, etc. 

=====第562页=====
534 Frederick Engels 
Still less did the House of Austria escape the effects of the railways. 
The mountain ranges which separated the Austrian monarchy 
from the outside world, Bohemia from Moravia and Austria, Austria 
from Styria, Styria from Illyria, Illyria from Lombardy, fell before 
the railways. The granite walls behind which each province had 
maintained a separate nationality and a limited local existence, 
ceased to be a barrier. All of a sudden the products of large-scale 
industry, of machinery, forced their way, almost free of transport 
costs,  into the most remote corners of the monarchy, destroyed the 
old hand labour and shattered the feudal barbarism. Trade between 
the provinces, and with the civilised outside world, acquired an 
unheard-of importance. The Danube, flowing towards the backward 
regions, ceased to be the main artery of the Empire; the Alps and the 
Bohemian forests no longer exist; the new artery now passes from 
Trieste to Hamburg, Ostend and Le Havre, far beyond the frontiers 
of the Empire, through the mountain ranges to the remote coasts of 
the North Sea and the ocean. Participation in the general interests of 
the State, in what was happening in the outside world became a 
necessity. The local barbarism began to disappear, particular 
interests began to diverge here, to merge there. Nationalities 
separated in one place to link up somewhere else, and out of the 
confused agglomeration of mutually alien provinces emerged larger 
and better defined groups with common tendencies and interests. 
"It will endure Metternich and me." The French Revolution, 
Napoleon and the July upheavals had been withstood. But there was 
no withstanding steam. Steam forced its way through the Alps and 
the Bohemian forests, steam robbed the Danube of its role, steam 
tore Austrian barbarism to shreds and thereby pulled the ground 
from under the feet of the House of Hapsburg. 
In Europe and America they now have the pleasure of seeing 
Metternich and the whole House of Hapsburg crushed between the 
wheels of the steam-driven machines, and the Austrian monarchy 
being cut to pieces by its own locomotives. It is an exhilarating sight. 
The vassals rebel in Italy, and Austria dare not utter a word, the 
liberal pestilence invades Lombardy and Austria hesitates, vacillates, 
quakes before its own subjects. In Switzerland the oldest rebels 
against Austria, the L/r-Swiss, yield to Austrian suzerainty287 ; they are 
attacked, but Austria shivers at the bold words of Ochsenbein: If 
only one single Austrian soldier enters Switzerland I will throw twenty 
thousand men into Lombardy and proclaim the Italian Republic. 
And Austria goes off to beg in vain for assistance from the despised 
courts of Munich, Stuttgart and Karlsruhe. In Bohemia, the estates 
refuse to pay their taxes of fifty thousand guilders; Austria still wants 

=====第563页=====
The Beginning of the End in Austria 535 
to enforce payment but needs its troops in the Alps so badly that for 
the first time since the foundation of Austria it has to give way to the 
estates and do without the fifty thousand guilders. In Hungary, the 
Diet is preparing revolutionary proposals and is sure of a majority 
for them. And Austria, which needs the Hungarian Hussars in 
Milan, Modena and Parma, Austria itself puts forward revolutionary 
proposals288 to the Diet although it knows very well that these are its 
own death warrant. This unshakable Austria, this eternal bulwark of 
barbarism, no longer knows where to turn. It is suffering from the 
most terrible rash; if it scratches itself in front then it itches behind, 
and if it scratches behind, then it itches in front. 
And with these comical scratchings, the House of Austria scratches 
itself out of existence. 
If old Metternich does not follow his "upright" Franz pretty 
quickly he may live to see the imperial monarchy which he held 
together at the price of such exertions falling apart and most of it 
into the hands of the bourgeoisie; he may live to have the 
unspeakable experience of seeing the "burgher tailors" and 
"burgher grocers" refusing to doff their hats to him in the Prater289 
and calling him plain Herr Metternich. A few more shocks, one or 
two more costly mobilisations and Charles Rothschild will buy up the 
whole Austrian monarchy. 
We observe the victory of the bourgeois over the Austrian imperial 
monarchy with real satisfaction. We only wish that it may be the 
really vile, really dirty, really Jewish bourgeois who buy up this 
venerable empire. Such a repulsive, flogging, paternal, lousy 
government deserves to be under the heel of a really lousy, unkempt 
stinking adversary. Herr Metternich can depend on us to shear this 
adversary later as ruthlessly as Metternich will soon be shorn by 
him. 
The fall of Austria has a special significance for us Germans. It is 
Austria which is responsible for our reputation of being the 
oppressors of foreign nations, the hirelings of reaction in all 
countries. Under the Austrian flag Germans have held Poland, 
Bohemia, Italy in bondage. We have to thank the Austrian monarchy 
for the Germans being hated as vile mercenaries of despotism from 
Syracuse to Trento, from Genoa to Venice. Anyone who has seen 
what deadly hatred, the bloody and completely justified thirst for 
revenge against the  Tedeschi 71 reign in Italy must be moved to an 
undying hatred of Austria and applaud when this bulwark of 
barbarism, this scourge of Germany collapses. 
a Germans.—Ed. 

=====第564页=====
536 Frederick Engels 
We have every reason to hope that the Germans will revenge 
themselves on Austria for the infamy with which it has covered the 
German name. We have every reason to hope that it will be Germans 
who will overthrow Austria and clear away the obstacles in the way of 
freedom for the Slavs and Italians. Everything is ready: the victim 
lies there awaiting the knife which will cut its throat. May the 
Germans not lose their chance this time; may they be bold enough to 
say the words which Napoleon himself did not dare to utter— 
La dynastie de Habsbourg a  cessé  de régner.3 
Written about January 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 8, January 27, 1848 time 
Signed: F. E. 
a The Hapsburg dynasty has ceased to reign.—Ed. 

=====第565页=====
Karl Marx 
THE DÉBAT SOCIAL OF FEBRUARY 6 
ON THE DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION 
The Débat social of February 6 defends the Brussels Association 
Démocratique and its branches. 290 We shall permit ourselves a few 
comments on the character of this defence. 
It may well be in the interest of the Belgian radical party to point 
out to the Catholics that they are acting against their own interest in 
denouncing the Belgian radical party. It may well be in the interest 
of the Belgian radical party to distinguish between lower and higher 
clergy and to compensate the clergy in general with compliments for 
the truths it addresses to a part of it. We understand nothing of this. 
We are merely astonished that the Débat could overlook the fact that 
the attacks of the Flemish Catholic papers against the associations 
démocratiques were printed immediately in the Indépendance, 3 and 
the Indépendance is not, as far as we know, a Catholic newspaper. 
The Débat social declares that the Belgians are demanding political 
reforms through the democratic associations. 
We realise that the Débat has forgotten the cosmopolitan bcharacter 
of the Association Démocratique for a moment. Or perhaps it has 
not even forgotten it. It has merely remembered that a society 
which strives to promote democracy in all countries will work first 
on the country in which it resides. 
The Débat social is not content with saying what the Belgians want 
of the associations démocratiques; it goes further, it says what the 
Belgians do not want of them, what one consequently should not want 
if one belongs to the Association, which the Belgians have founded to 
demand political reforms. Avis aux  étrangers!* 
"The political reforms which the Belgians wish to demand through the democratic 
associations," says the Débat, "are not those Utopias pursued by certain democrats in 
a L'Indépendance belge.—Ed. 
b See Note 8.— Ed. 
' Warning to foreigners!—Ed. 

=====第566页=====
538 Karl Marx 
countries where the social institutions permit no hope of any effective reforms, where 
it is therefore just as reasonable to think of castles in the air as of the modest well-being 
of the already free nations. He who possesses nothing does just as well in dreaming of 
millions at a stroke as of a hundred talers of rent or profit." 
Here the Débat is evidently speaking of the Communists. 
We should like to ask it if the "modest well-being" of "free" 
England manifests itself in the Poor Rate growing faster than the 
population. 
We should like to ask it if by the "modest well-being of the free 
nations" it understands the destitution in Flanders. 
We should like it to let us into the secret whereby it intends to 
replace wages with a 100 talers of profit or rent. Or does it understand 
by the "modest well-being of the free nations" the modest well-being 
of the free capitalists and landowners? 
We should finally like to ask it if it has been charged by the 
Brussels Association Démocratique to give the lie to those Utopians 
who do not believe in "the modest happiness of the free nations". 
However, the Débat social is evidently not speaking of Communists 
in general, but of the German Communists, who, because political 
developments in their homeland do not allow them to found a 
German alliance or a German association libérale, 291 sink in despair 
into the arms of communism. 
We remind the Débat that communism originated in England and 
France, and not in Germany. 
German communism is the most determined opponent of all 
utopianism, and far from excluding historical development in fact 
bases itself upon it—for the time being we give this assurance to the 
Débat social in return for its own assurance. 
Germany is retarded in its political development, it still has a long 
political development to undergo. We should be the last to deny this. 
On the other hand, however, we believe that a country of more than 
40 million inhabitants, when it prepares for a revolution, will not 
seek the model for its movement in the radicalism of small free 
countries. 
Does the Débat understand by communism the throwing of class 
antagonisms and of class struggle into sharp relief? In that case, it is 
not communism which is communistic, but political economy and 
bourgeois society. 
We know that Robert Peel has prophesied that the class 
antagonism in modern society must erupt in a terrible crisis.292 We 
know that Guizot himself in his History of Civilisation* believes he is 
F.-P.-G. Guizot, Histoire générale de la civilisation en Europe.... —Ed. 

=====第567页=====
The Débat Social on the Democratic Association 539 
setting forth nothing but particular forms of the class struggle. But 
Peel and Guizot are Utopians. Realists are men who regard the mere 
statement of social facts as an offence against benevolent worldly 
wisdom. 
The Débat social is quite free to admire and to idealise North 
America and Switzerland. 
We ask it whether the political constitution of North America 
could ever be introduced in Europe without great social upheavals. 
We believe, for instance, if the Débat will pardon our boldness, that 
the English Charter, 293 if it were to be put forward not by individual 
enthusiasts for universal suffrage but by a great national party, 
presupposed a long and arduous unification of the English workers 
into a class, and that this Charter is being striven for with quite 
another purpose and must bring about quite different social 
consequences than the constitution of America or of Switzerland 
ever strove for or ever brought about. In our eyes those people are 
Utopians who separate political forms from their social foundation 
and present them as general, abstract dogmas. 
The manner in which the Débat social attempts to defend the 
Association Démocratique by simultaneously eliminating "certain 
democrats" who are dissatisfied with the "modest well-being of the 
free nations" is demonstrated yet again when it comes to speak of the 
discussions on free trade held within the Association. 294 
"Six sittings," says the Débat, "were devoted to the discussion of this interesting 
question, and many workers from the various workshops of our city asserted here 
principles which would not have been out of place at the famous congress of 
economists held in Brussels in September last." a 
Before this the Débat notes that the Association voted almost 
unanimously that absolute free trade between all nations should be 
considered as a goal of democracy. 
After this, in the same issue of the Débat we find a thoroughly 
commonplace speech by M. Le Hardy de Beaulieu, scraped together 
from the most decayed leavings of the English free-trade cookshop. 
And to round off, Cobden is glorified.295 
After this presentation in the Débat social, will anyone doubt that 
the Association voted by a great majority for free trade in the sense 
of the Congress of Economists and of the bourgeois free traders? 
Written about February 10, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 13, Februarv 13, 1848 time 
a See F. Engels' articles on the Congress of Economists, this volume, pp. 274-78 
and 282-90.— Ed. 

=====第568页=====
Frederick Engels 
THREE NEW CONSTITUTIONS 
Our predictions concerning the imminent triumph of the 
bourgeoisie3 are in fact being fulfilled more rapidly than we could 
have expected. In less than a fortnight three absolute monarchies 
have been transformed into constitutional states: Denmark, Naples 
and Sardinia. 
The movement in Italy has developed with remarkable rapidity. 
The Papal State, Tuscany and Sardinia in succession took their place 
at its head; one country impelled the next further and further, one 
advance always brought another in its wake. The Italian Customs 
Union 296 was the first step towards constituting the Italian bourgeoi­
sie, which decisively took the lead in the national movement and 
came daily more into collision with Austria. The bourgeoisie had 
achieved almost everything which could be achieved under an 
absolute monarchy, and a representative constitution daily became 
a more pressing necessity for it. But the winning of constitutional 
institutions—this was precisely the difficulty for the Italian bourgeoi­
sie. The princes were reluctant; the bourgeoisie dared not confront 
them too threateningly as it did not want to throw them into the arms 
of Austria again. The Italians of the Customs Union might have 
gone on waiting for a long time, when help suddenly came to them 
from a quite unexpected quarter—Sicily rebelled; the people of 
Palermo drove the royal troops out of the city with unprecedented 
bravery,* the people of Abruzzi, Apulia and Calabria attempted a 
new insurrection, Naples itself prepared for battle, and Ferdinand 
* Palermo with 200,000 inhabitants defeated 13,000 men. Paris with a million 
inhabitants defeated 7,000 to  8,000  men in the July revolution. 
a See this volume, pp. 520-29.— Ed. 

=====第569页=====
Three New Constitutions 541 
the bloodhound, pressed from all sides, with no hope of obtaining 
Austrian troops, was the first of all the Italian princes to have to 
grant a constitution and complete freedom of the press. The news 
reached Genoa and Turin; both cities demanded that Sardinia 
should not lag behind Naples; Charles Albert, too involved in the 
movement to withdraw, and also in need of money on account of 
armament against Austria—had to yield to the very emphatic 
representations of Turin and Genoa and similarly grant a constitu­
tion. There is no doubt at all that Tuscany must follow, and that 
Pius IX himself will have to make new concessions. 
The Italian bourgeoisie has gained its decisive victory in the streets 
of Palermo. It is now victorious; what will ensue can only be the 
exploitation of this victory in all respects and the securing of its 
results against Austria. 
This victory of the Italian bourgeoisie is again a defeat for Austria. 
How old Metternich must have gnashed his teeth in rage—the man 
who saw the Neapolitan revolution coming from afar, who again and 
again begged the Pope and Tuscany for permission to march his 
troops across their territories, and who nonetheless had to hold back 
his Pandours and Croats on the Po! One courier after another came 
to him from Naples; Ferdinand, Code and Del Carretto were 
screaming for help, and Metternich, who in 1823 and 1831 297 had 
reigned so omnipotently in Italy, could do nothing. He had to look 
on quietly and see his last, his most reliable ally defeated and 
humiliated in Italy, and the whole weight of Naples placed on the 
scales against Austria thanks to a revolution. And he had a hundred 
and fifty thousand men waiting on the Po! But England was there, 
and had the Austrians crossed the Po, it would have been the signal 
for the occupation of Venice and the bombardment of Trieste—and 
so Metternich's hangmen had to stand still and watch with their rifles 
in their hands while Naples was snatched from them. 
England's conduct in the whole Italian affair has been very proper. 
While the other great powers, France as much as Russia, have done 
everything to support Metternich, England has taken its place, quite 
alone, on the side of the Italian movement. The English bourgeoisie 
has the greatest interest in thwarting an Austro-Italian protective 
customs union and conversely in bringing about an anti-Austrian 
customs union in Italy based on free trade. For this reason it 
supports the Italian bourgeoisie, which for the time being itself still 
needs free trade for its development, and which is therefore the 
natural ally of the English bourgeoisie. 
In the meantime Austria is arming. These armaments are 
completely ruining its finances. Austria has no money, and it has 

=====第570页=====
542 Fiederick Engels 
turned to Rothschild for a loan; Rothschild has declared that he does 
not want a war and will not, therefore, provide any money in support 
of war. Indeed, is there any banker who will still advance money to 
the rotten Austrian monarchy for a war in which a country like 
England may involve itself? Metternich can thus no longer count on 
the bourgeoisie. He turns to the Emperor of Russia who, in the last 
few years, has also become a great capitalist, thanks to the mines of 
the Ural and Altai regions and to the corn trade—to the white Tsar, 
who has already once helped Frederick William IV with 15 million 
silver rubles, and who in general seems to be turning into the 
Rothschild of all declining absolute monarchies. Tsar Nicholas is said 
to have .granted 75 millions—in return for a Russian percentage, it 
goes without saying, and on good security. All the better. If the Tsar 
has to cover the expenses of the Prussian and Austrian monarchies in 
addition to his own, if his money is wasted on arming unsuccessfully 
against Italy, then his treasure will soon be exhausted. 
Will Austria risk a war? We hardly think so. Its finances are 
chaotic; Hungary is in full ferment, Bohemia is not secure; on the 
battlefield  itself,  in Lombardy, guerillas would spring up every­
where. And more than anything else the fear of England will restrain 
Metternich. At this moment Lord Palmerston is the most powerful 
man in Europe; his decision determines the issue, and this time his 
decision has been made known clearly enough. 
At quite the other end of Europe, in Denmark, a king3 dies. His 
son,b a coarse, jovial schnapps-tippler, immediately convokes an 
assembly of notables, a committee of the estates, in order to 
deliberate upon a common constitution for the Duchiesc and 
Denmark. And so that the Germans shall disgrace themselves 
everywhere, the Duchies have to declare that they do not want this 
constitution, because it would mean their being torn away from their 
common German homeland!298 
It is really too ridiculous. The Duchies have a considerably smaller 
population than Denmark, and yet the number of their representa­
tives is to be the same. Their language is to have equal rights in the 
assembly, in the official records, in everything. In short, the Danes 
make every possible concession to the Germans, and the Germans 
persist, in their absurd national obstinacy. The Germans have never 
been national-minded where the interests of nationality and the 
interests of progress have coincided; they were always so where 
a Christian  VIII.—Ed. 
b Frederick VIL—Ed. 
c Schleswig and Holstein. — Ed. 

=====第571页=====
Three New Constitutions 543 
nationality has turned against progress. Where it was important to be 
national-minded, they played the cosmopolitans; where it was 
important not to be directly national-minded, they were so to the 
point of absurdity. In every case they made themselves ridiculous. 
Either the inhabitants of the Duchies are capable people, and more 
advanced than the Danes—in which case they will obtain preponder­
ance over the Danes in the chamber of estate deputies and have no 
reason for complaint; or else they are German sluggards and lag 
behind the Danes in industrial and political development, in which 
case it is high time they were taken in tow by the Danes. But it is really 
too absurd for these upright Schleswig-Holsteiners to beg the 40 
million Germans to help them against the Danes and to refuse to take 
up their positions on a battlefield where they can fight with the same 
advantages as their opponents; it is too absurd that they should 
appeal to the police of the German Confederation 299 against a 
constitution. 
The Danish constitution is as much a blow against Prussia as the 
Neapolitan against Austria, although in itself it is only a reaction to 
abortive Prussian constitutional experiment of February  3. 300 As a 
further addition to its many embarrassments the Prussian govern­
ment now has received a new constitutional state as neighbour; at 
the same time it loses a faithful protege and ally. 
While Italy and Denmark have thus stepped into the ranks of the 
constitutional states, Germany lags behind. Every nation is moving 
forward, the smallest, weakest nations are always able to find a point 
in the European complications which enables them in spite of their 
big reactionary neighbours to win for themselves one modern 
institution after another. Only the 40 million Germans never bestir 
themselves. It is true that they are no longer asleep, but they still only 
talk and bluster, they have yet to act. 
But if the German governments were to set any great hopes on the 
bourgeoisie's fear of action, then they would be very much deceiving 
themselves. The Germans are the last in line because their revolution 
will be quite different from the Sicilian. The German bourgeois and 
the philistines know very well that behind them stands a daily 
growing proletariat which on the day after the revolution will put 
forward quite different demands than they themselves desire. The 
German bourgeois and philistines therefore behave in a cowardly, 
indecisive and vacillating manner—they fear a conflict not less than 
they fear the government. 
A German revolution is far more serious than a Neapolitan 
revolution. In Naples there is a confrontation only between Austria 
and England; in a German revolution the whole of the East and the 

=====第572页=====
544 Frederick Engels 
whole of the West will confront each other. A Neapolitan revolution 
will achieve its aim as soon as downright bourgeois institutions have 
been won; a German revolution will only really begin when it has got 
this far. 
For this reason the Germans must first of all be thoroughly 
compromised in the eyes of all other nations, they must become, 
more than they are already, the laughing-stock of all Europe, they 
must be compelled to make the revolution. But then they will really 
arise,  not the cowardly German burghers but the German workers; 
they will rise up, put an end to the whole filthy, muddled official 
German rule and with a radical revolution restore the honour of 
Germany. 
Written in the middle of February 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 15, February 20, 1848 time 

=====第573页=====
Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
[ON THE POLISH QUESTION] 
SPEECHES IN BRUSSELS, ON FEBRUARY 22, 1848 
ON THE OCCASION OF THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY 
301 OF THE CRACOW INSURRECTION 
SPEECH BY MR. KARL MARX 
Gentlemen, 
There are striking analogies in history. The Jacobin of 1793 has 
become the Communist of the present day. In 1793, when Russia, 
Austria and Prussia divided up Poland, the three powers produced 
the constitution of  1791,302  which had been condemned unanimously 
because of its alleged Jacobin principles. 
And what had it proclaimed? The Polish constitution of 1791! 
Nothing other than a constitutional monarchy: legislation placed in 
the hands of the representatives of the country, freedom of the 
press,  ireedom of conscience, public judicial trial, abolition of 
serfdom, etc. And all this was then called pure Jacobinism! Thus you 
see, gentlemen, that history has moved on. The Jacobinism of those 
days has today become, as far as liberalism goes, the most moderate 
imaginable. 
The three Powers have marched with history. In 1846 when by 
incorporating Cracow into Austria they confiscated the last remains 
of Polish nationality, they gave the name communism to what they 
once called Jacobinism. 
Now, what is the communism of the Cracow revolution? Was it 
communism to have wanted to restore Polish nationality? This is as 
much as to say that the war waged against Napoleon by the European 
coalition to save nationalities was a communist war, and that the 
Congress of Vienna303 was made up of crowned Communists. Or was 
the Cracow revolution communist because it wanted to set up a 
democratic government? Nobody will charge the millionaire citizens 
of Berne and New York with communist leanings. 
Communism denies the necessity for the existence of classes; it 
wants to abolish all classes, all class distinctions. The revolutionaries 
of Cracow wanted only to abolish political distinctions between the 
classes; they wanted to give equal rights to the different classes. 

=====第574页=====
546 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
But, briefly, to what extent was the Cracow revolution communist? 
Was it perhaps that it tried to break the chains of feudalism, to 
turn tributary property into free property, into modern property? 
If one asked French proprietors: "Do you know what Polish 
democrats want? The Polish democrats want to have the kind of 
property ownership which you already have", the French propri­
etors would answer, "They are quite right." But if you say, with 
M. Guizot, to the French proprietors: "The Poles want to abolish 
property as you instituted it by the revolution of 1789 and as it still 
exists in your country." "What!" they will shout, "they are 
revolutionaries, Communists; these scoundrels must be trampled 
down!" The abolition of guilds, of corporations, the introduction of 
free competition, is now called communism in Sweden. The Journal  des 
Débats went further: to abolish the unearned income constituted by 
the right of corruption for two hundred thousand electors, is to 
abolish a source of revenue, to destroy an acquired property, to be 
communist. Doubtless the Cracow revolution also wanted to abolish 
one kind of property. But what kind of property? One which could 
not be destroyed in the rest of Europe any more than the 
Sonderbund 304 in Switzerland, both having already disappeared. 
No one will deny that in Poland the political question is tied to 
the social question. The one has always been inseparable from the 
other. 
Better ask it of the reactionaries! During the Restoration305 were 
they only fighting political liberalism and its inevitable load of 
Voltairianism? 
A very renowned reactionary writer loudly professed that the 
highest metaphysics of a de Maistre and of a de Bonald was in the 
end a question of money, and is not every question of money a 
directly social question? The men of the Restoration did not conceal 
the fact that to bring back good politics it was necessary to bring back 
good property rights, feudal property, moral property. Everybody 
knows that loyalty to monarchy cannot dispense with tithes and 
corvée labour. 
Let us go further back. In 1789 the political question of the rights 
of man included the social question of free competition. 
And what then happened in England? In all questions from the 
Reform Bill until the abolition of the Corn Laws,306 did the political 
parties fight about anything except changes in property rights, 
questions of property, social questions? 
Here, in Belgium  itself,  is the struggle of liberalism with 
Catholicism anything but the struggle of industrial capital with large 
landed property? 

=====第575页=====
CÉLÉBRATION,  A BRUXELLES, 
DU DEUXIEME ANNIVERSAIRE 
RÉVOLUTION  POLONAISE 
du 22 février 1846. 
t0C0urs 
mOKOKCES 
PAS MM, A. J.  SENAULT, KARL MARX, LELEWEL , F. ENGELS 
ET LOUIS LUBL1NER, AVOCAT. 
BRUXELLES. 
C. G. VOGLER, LIBRAIRE-EDITEUR. 
1848 
Cover of the pamphlet containing the speeches "On the Polish Question' 
by Marx and Engels 

=====第576页=====

=====第577页=====
On the Polish Question 549 
And the political questions which have been debated for the last 
seventeen years, are these not basically social questions? 
Thus,  however you look at it, whether from a liberal, radical, even 
aristocratic point of view, could you still reproach the Cracow 
revolution with having joined a social question to a political question? 
The men who led the Cracow revolutionary movement were 
deeply convinced that only a democratic Poland could be independ­
ent, and a democratic Poland was impossible without the abolition 
of feudal rights, without the agrarian movement which would 
transform the tied peasants into free proprietors, modern propri­
etors.  Replace the Russian autocrat by Polish aristocrats and you will 
have given despotism naturalisation papers. It was thus that the 
Germans, in their war against foreign rule, exchanged one Napoleon 
for thirty-six Metternichs.307 
If the Polish lord no longer has a Russian lord over him, the Polish 
peasant will still have a lord over him, but a free lord in place of a 
slave lord. This political change will have altered nothing in his social 
position. 
The Cracow revolution has given a glorious example to the whole 
of Europe, by identifying the national cause with the democratic 
cause and the emancipation of the oppressed class. 
If this revolution has been stifled for the moment by the bloody 
hands of hired assassins it is now rising gloriously and triumphantly 
in Switzerland and Italy. It sees the confirmation of these principles 
in Ireland, where the narrowly nationalist party has gone to its grave 
with O'Connell, and where the new national party is above all 
reforming and democratic.308 
It is Poland once again which has taken the initiative, no longer 
feudal Poland, but democratic Poland; and from this moment its 
emancipation has become the point of honour for all the democrats 
of Europe. 
SPEECH BY MR. FREDERICK ENGELS 
Gentlemen, 
The insurrection whose anniversary we are celebrating today has 
failed. After some days of heroic resistance Cracow fell and the 
bleeding ghost of Poland, which had risen for a moment before the 
eyes of its assassins, descended again into its grave. 
The Cracow revolution was a defeat, a very deplorable defeat. Let 
us render the last honours to the fallen heroes, lament their setback 
and offer our sympathy to the twenty million Polish people whom 
this failure has again enchained. 
19* 

=====第578页=====
550 Karl Marx  and  Frederick Engels 
But, gentlemen,  is that  all we  have  to do? Is it  enough  to shed  a 
tear on the  tomb  of an  unhappy country  and to  pledge against  its 
oppressors  an implacable hatred, till  now not  very potent? 
No, gentlemen!  The  anniversary  of Cracow  is not  only  a day of 
mourning,  it is a day of  rejoicing  for us  other democrats;  for the 
defeat itself contains  a victory,  a victory whose fruits  are  ours  to 
gather, while  the  results  of the  defeat  are  only transitory. 
This victory  is the  victory  of young democratic Poland over  the old 
aristocratic Poland. 
Yes, the latest struggle  of Poland against  its foreign oppressors  has 
been preceded  by a  hidden struggle, concealed  but  decisive within 
Poland  itself, a  struggle  of oppressed Poles against Polish oppressors, 
a struggle  of democracy against  the  Polish aristocracy. 
Compare 1830309  and 1846,  compare Warsaw  and  Cracow.  In 
1830  the ruling class  in Poland  was as  selfish, narrow-minded  and 
cowardly  in the  legislative body  as it was  devoted, enthusiastic  and 
courageous  on the  field  of battle. 
What  did the  Polish aristocracy want  in 1830?  To safeguard  its 
own acquired rights with regard  to the  Emperor.3  It limited  the 
insurrection  to the  little country which  the Congress  of Vienna  was 
pleased  to call the Kingdom  of Poland310;  it restrained  the uprising  in 
the other Polish provinces;  it left intact  the degrading serfdom  of the 
peasants  and the  infamous condition  of the  Jews.  If the  aristocracy, 
in the  course  of the  insurrection,  had to  make concessions  to the 
people,  it only made them when  it was too late, when  the insurrection 
had failed. 
Let it be  said clearly:  the  insurrection  of 1830 was  neither  a 
national revolution  (it excluded three-quarters  of Poland)  nor a 
social  or a  political revolution;  it changed nothing  in the  internal 
condition  of the  people;  it was a  conservative revolution. 
But within  the  conservative revolution, within  the  national 
government  itself,  there  was one man who  vigorously attacked  the 
narrow views  of the  ruling class.  He proposed really revolutionary 
measures before whose boldness  the aristocrats  of the  Diet recoiled. 
By calling  the whole  of ancient Poland  to arms,  by thus making  the 
war for Polish independence  a European  war, by  emancipating  the 
Jews  and the  peasants,  by making  the latter share  in landed property, 
by reconstructing Poland  on the  basis  of democracy  and  equality,  he 
wanted  to make  the national cause  the cause  of freedom;  he wanted 
to identify  the  interest  of all  peoples with that  of the  Polish people. 
a Nicholas  I.—Ed. 

=====第579页=====
On the Polish Question 551 
Need I name the genius who conceived this plan, at once so vast and 
so simple? It was Lelewel. 
In 1830, these proposals were continually rejected by the blind 
self-interest of the aristocratic majority. But these principles, ripened 
and developed by the experience of fifteen years of servitude, we saw 
inscribed on the flag of the Cracow uprising. At Cracow, it was 
clearly seen that there were no longer men who had much to lose; 
there were no aristocrats; every step that was taken bore the stamp of 
that democratic, I might almost say proletarian, boldness which has 
only its misery to lose and a whole country, a whole world, to gain. 
There, no hesitation, no scruples; the three foreign powers were 
attacked together; the freeing of the peasants, agrarian reform, the 
emancipation of the Jews were proclaimed, without caring for a 
moment whether this offended certain aristocratic interests. 
The Cracow revolution wanted neither to re-establish ancient 
Poland nor to preserve what the foreign governments had let remain 
of the old Polish institutions; it was neither reactionary nor 
conservative. 
No, it was even more hostile to Poland itself than to its foreign 
oppressors, hostile to the ancient Poland, barbarous, feudal and 
aristocratic, based on the serfdom of the majority of the people. Far 
from wanting to re-establish the ancient Poland, it aimed to 
overthrow it utterly, and to found on its ruins, with a wholly new 
class,  with the majority of the people, a new Poland, modern, 
civilised and democratic, worthy of the nineteenth century, and 
which might be really the outpost of civilisation. 
The difference between 1830 and 1846, the immense progress 
made within unhappy Poland  itself,  bleeding and torn; the Polish 
aristocracy completely separated from the Polish people and thrown 
into the arms of the oppressors of its country; the Polish people 
irrevocably committed to the democratic cause; and finally the class 
struggle, the motive force of all social progress, established in Poland 
as here, that is the victory of democracy proved by the Cracow 
revolution, that is the result which will bear fruit when the defeat of 
the insurgents has been avenged. 
Yes, gentlemen, by the Cracow insurrection the Polish cause, from 
being national, as it was, has become the cause of all peoples; from a 
question of sympathy, as it was, it has become a question of interest 
of all democrats. Until 1846 we had a crime to avenge; henceforth we 
have allies to support, and we shall do it. 
And it is above all our Germany which ought to congratulate itself 
on this explosion of democratic passion in Poland. We are, ourselves, 
on the eve of a democratic revolution; we shall have to fight 

=====第580页=====
552 Karl Marx and Frederick Engels 
barbarian hordes from Austria and Russia. Before 1846 we might 
have had doubts as to what side Poland would take if there were a 
democratic revolution in Germany. The Cracow revolution has 
removed all doubts. Henceforth the German people and the Polish 
people are irrevocably allied. We have the same enemies, the same 
oppressors, for the Russian government weighs on us as much as on 
the Poles. The first condition for the deliverance both of Germany 
and of Poland is the overturning of the present political state in 
Germany, the downfall of Prussia and Austria, the driving back of 
Russia beyond the Dniester and the Dvina. 
The alliance of the two nations is therefore not by any means a 
beautiful dream, a charming illusion; no, gentlemen, it is an 
inevitable necessity resulting from the common interests of the two 
nations, and it has become necessary through the Cracow revolution. 
The German people, which until now had little of its own except 
words, will now have deeds to offer its Polish brothers; and just as we 
German democrats present here clasp hands with the Polish 
democrats, so the whole German people will celebrate its alliance 
with the Polish people on the very field of the first battle won in 
common over our common oppressors. 
First published in March 1848 in: Printed according to the text in 
Célébration, à Bruxelles, du deuxième Célébration... 
anniversaire de la Révolution Polonaise 
du 22 Février 1846, Bruxelles, 1848 Translated from the French 
Published in English in full for the 
first time 

=====第581页=====
Frederick Engels 
A WORD TO THE RIFORMA 
The Riforma of Lucca has printed a reply to one of those 
well-known and vile articles which the Augsburger Zeitung* is 
accustomed to publish on instructions from the Imperial Chancellery 
in Vienna. 311 
That trashy rag from the Lechb had not only praised to the skies 
the loyalty of the 518,000 Austrian soldiers to their feeble-minded 
Ferdinand, but had also claimed that all these soldiers, Bohemians, 
Poles,  Slovaks, Croats, Heyducks, Wallachians, Hungarians, Italians, 
etc., were burning with enthusiasm for German unity and would 
willingly part with their lives for it, as soon as it should be the will of  the 
Emperorl 
As though this were not precisely the misfortune—that so long as 
Austria exists Germany has to risk seeing its unity defended by 
Heyducks, Croats and Wallachians, as though the unity of Germany 
so long as Austria survives could be anything else but the unity of 
Germany with Croats, Wallachians, Magyars and Italians! 
The Riforma replies very aptly to the lying claim of the All-Gemeine c 
that Austria is in fact defending the interests of the German nation in 
Lombardy, and concludes with an appeal to the Germans, drawing a 
parallel between the Italian movement of 1848 and the German wars 
of liberation in 1813 and 1815. 
The Riforma evidently thought that by doing so it was paying a 
compliment to the Germans, otherwise it would never have equated, 
a Allgemeine Zeitung (Augsburg).—Ed. 
Augsburg is situated on the Lech.—Ed. 
c A pun on the name: Allgemeine Zeitung—"All-Gemeine" means thoroughly 
vile.—  Ed. 

=====第582页=====
554 Frederick Engels 
against its better judgment, today's progressive Italian movement 
with precisely those reactionary wars to which Italy directly owes its 
subjugation to Austria, to which Germany owes the restoration of as 
much as possible of the old confusion, fragmentation and tyranny, 
and to which the whole of Europe owes the infamous treaties of 
1815.312 
The Riforma may take our word for it: Germany is fully 
enlightened as to the wars of liberation, both through the 
consequences of the wars themselves and through the ignominious 
end to which the heroes of that "glorious" age have come. Only the 
hired papers of the government still puff their cheeks and trumpet 
forth praise for that stupidity-intoxicated period, the public laughs 
and even the iron cross turns red with shame. 
Precisely these newspapers, precisely these enthusiastic French-
eaters of 1813, are now raising the same outcry against the Italians as 
they did before against the French, who sing paeons of praise to 
Austria, to Christian-Germanic Austria, and who preach crusades 
against Romance knavery and Romance frippery—for indeed 
Italians are just as much Romance as the French. 
Would the Italians like an example of the sympathy they may 
expect from the worthy blusterers of the age of liberation, of the 
kind of ideas these red-headed visionaries entertain about the Italian 
nation? We shall merely quote the well-known song by A[ugust] 
A[dolf] Lfudwig] Folien 3: 
Yon land of marvels all may sing, 
Where mandolines and soft guitars do ring 
And, 'neath darkling  leaf,  the golden orange gleams; 
But I the purple German plum esteem 
And Borsdorf's apple on its leafy beam, 
and how these poetic ravings of an ever cool-headed philistine drivel 
on. Then come the most ludicrous pictures of bandits, daggers, 
fire-belching mountains, Romance knavery, the infidelity of Italian 
women, bugs, scorpions, poison, vipers, assassins, etc., seen by this 
virtuous lover of plums running around in dozens on all the 
highways of Italy, and finally the gushing philistine thanks his God 
that he is in the land of Love and Friendship, of shindies with 
chair-legs, of faithful, blue-eyed pastors' daughters, of probity and 
cosiness, in short in the land of German Loyalty. Such are the 
superstitious and novelettish ideas entertained by the heroes of 1813 
about Italy, which of course they have never seen. 
a August Folien composed the music and Johann Friedrichsen wrote the 
words.—Ed. 

=====第583页=====
A Word to the Riforma 555 
The Riforma and the men of the Italian movement in general can 
rest assured: public opinion in Germany is definitely on the side of 
the Italians. The German people have just as great an interest in the 
fall of Austria as the Italian people. They greet with undivided 
applause every step forward by the Italian people, and, we hope, 
they will not be missing from the battlefield at the right moment to 
put an end to all the Austrian magnificence once and for all. 
Written about February 22, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 16, February 24, 1848 time 
Signed: F. Engels 

=====第584页=====
Frederick Engels 
REVOLUTION IN PARIS 
The year 1848 is turning out well. The Sicilian revolution with its 
long train of constitutions is hardly over before Paris experiences a 
victorious insurrection. 
The opposition deputies had publicly pledged themselves to 
defend the right of assembly against Guizot, Duchâtel and Hébert by 
means of a courageous demonstration. 
All the preparations had been made. The hall was ready and 
awaited the banquet guests. Then suddenly, when the time had come 
to act, the poltroons of the Left, M. Odilon Barrot at their head, beat, 
as always, a cowardly retreat. 
The banquet was called off. But the people of Paris, stirred up by 
the loud-mouths in the Chamber, raging at the cowardice of these 
épiciers 3 and made discontented at the same time by protracted 
general unemployment, the people of Paris refused to be called off. 
At midday on Tuesday,b all Paris was on the streets. The masses 
were shouting: "Down with Guizot, long live the Reform!" They 
proceeded to Guizot's residence, which was protected by the troops 
with difficulty; but the windows were nevertheless broken. 
The masses proceeded to Odilon Barrot's house as well, shouted 
"Down with Barrot!" and broke his windows, too. M. Barrot, the 
cowardly originator of the whole outbreak, sent to the government 
and asked for a security guard! 
The troops stood by and quietly looked on. Only the Municipal 
Guard struck out, and that with the greatest brutality. The Municipal 
Guard is a corps consisting in the main of natives of Alsace and 
a Grocers, here philistines.—Ed. 
b February 22,  1848.—Erf. 

=====第585页=====
Revolution in Paris 557 
Lorraine, that is, men who are half German; they receive three and a 
half frfancs] a day and look very plump and well-nourished. The 
Municipal Guard is the basest body of soldiers in existence, worse 
than the Gendarmerie, worse than the old Swiss Guard; if the people 
win, things will go badly for it. 
Towards evening the people began to resist. Barricades were set 
up, guard posts stormed and set on fire. A police spy was cut down in 
the Place de la Bastille. Arms shops were looted. 
At five o'clock marching orders were sounded for the National 
Guard. But only a very few turned up, and those who did shouted 
"Down with Guizot!" 
During the night calm was restored. The last barricades were 
taken and the outbreak appeared to be over. 
On Wednesday morning, however, the revolt began again with 
renewed vigour. A large part of the centre of Paris lying to the east of 
the Rue Montmartre was strongly barricaded; after eleven o'clock 
the troops no longer dared venture in there. The National Guard 
gathered in large numbers, but only to hold the troops back from 
any attacks on the people and to shout "Down with Guizot, long live 
the Reform!" 
There were 50,000 soldiers in Paris, disposed according to 
Marshal Gerard's defence plan313 and holding all strategic points. 
But these points were so numerous that all of the troops were kept 
busy with them and were thus already forced into inaction. Apart 
from the Municipal Guard there were almost no soldiers free for an 
offensive. Gerard's excellent plan was of infinite help to the 
outbreak; it paralysed the troops and made it easier for them to 
maintain the passivity to which they were in any case inclined. The 
detached forts also proved to be anything but beneficial to the 
government. They had to be kept manned and thus also withdrew a 
considerable section of the troops from the battle area. No one 
thought of a bombardment. In general not a single person gave a 
thought to the fact that these bastilles even existed. One more proof 
how fruitless are all defence plans against a mass revolt in a great 
city! 
Towards noon the outcry against the Ministry in the ranks of the 
National Guard was so strong that several colonels sent word to the 
Tuileries that they would not hold themselves responsible for their 
regiments if the Ministry were to remain. 
At two o'clock the aged Louis Philippe was forced to drop Guizot 
and form a new Ministry. Hardly had this been made public when 
the National Guard went home in jubilation and illuminated their 
houses. 

=====第586页=====
558 Frederick Engels 
But the people, the workers, the only ones who had erected the 
barricades, battled with the Municipal Guard and thrown themselves 
against the bullets, the bayonets and the horses' hoofs, these workers 
had no desire to fight merely for M. Mole and M. Billault.314  They 
continued the struggle. While the Boulevard des Italiens was full of 
joy and jubilation, there was heavy shooting in the Rue Sainte-Avoie 
and Rambuteau. The battle lasted long into the night and was 
continued on Thursday morning. Evidence of the general participa­
tion of the workers in the battle was the tearing up of the rails on all 
the railways around Paris. 
The bourgeoisie has made its revolution, it has toppled Guizot and 
with him the exclusive rule of the Stock Exchange grandees. Now, 
however, in the second act of the struggle, it is no longer one section 
of the bourgeoisie confronting another, now the proletariat con­
fronts the bourgeoisie. 
News has just arrived that the people have won and proclaimed 
the Republic. We confess that we had not dared hope for this 
brilliant success by the Paris proletariat. 
Three members of the provisional government belong to the 
definitely democratic party, whose organ is the Réforme. The fourth 
is a worker"—for the first time in any country in the world. The others 
are Lamartine, Dupont de l'Eure and two men from the National 315 
By this glorious revolution the French proletariat has again placed 
itself at the head of the European movement. All honour to the 
workers of Paris! They have given the world an impulse which will be 
felt by every country in turn; for the victory of the Republic in 
France means the victory of democracy in the whole of Europe. 
Our age, the age of democracy, is breaking. The flames of the 
Tuileries and the Palais Royal are the dawn of the proletariat. 
Everywhere the rule of the bourgeoisie will now. come crashing 
down, or be dashed to pieces. 
Germany, we hope, will follow. Now or never will it raise itself from 
its degradation. If the Germans have any energy, any pride or any 
courage, then in a month's time we too shall be able to shout: 
"Long live the German Republic!" 
Written on February 25-26, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Published in English for the first 
Zeitung No. 17, February 27, 1848 time 
a Albert.—Ed. 

=====第587页=====
Frederick Engels 
TO THE EDITOR OF THE NORTHERN STAR™ 
Dear Sir, 
After the important events accomplished in France, the position 
taken by the Belgian people and government is of a greater interest 
than in ordinary times. I hasten, therefore, to inform your readers of 
what has happened since Friday, 25th of February. 
The excitement and inquietude was universal in this town on the 
evening of that day. All sorts of rumours were spread, but nothing 
was really believed. The railway station was full of a crowd of people 
of all classes, anxious for the arrival of news. The French 
Ambassador, ex-Marquis de Rumigny, himself was there. At 
half-past twelve at night, the train arrived, with the glorious news of 
Thursday's revolution, and the whole mass of people shouted, in one 
sudden outburst of enthusiasm: Vive la République! The news spread 
rapidly all over the town. On Saturday all was quiet. On Sunday, 
however, the streets were crowded with people, and every one was 
curious to see what steps would be taken by two societies—the 
Association Démocratique and the Alliance. 317 Both bodies assem­
bled in the evening. The Alliance, a set of middle-class Radicals, 
resolved to wait, and thus retired from the movement. The 
Association Démocratique, however, took a series of most important 
resolutions, by which this body placed itself at the head of the 
movement. They resolved to meet daily, instead of weekly; to send a 
petition to the town-council, reclaiming the arming, not only of the 
middle-class Civic Guard, but of all citizens in districts. In the 
evening some rioting took place in the streets. The people cried: Vive 
la République, and assembled in masses around the Town Hall. 
Several arrests took place, but nothing of any consequence occurred. 
Among the individuals arrested, there were two Germans—a 
political refugee, M.  Wolff,  and a working man. Now, you must 

=====第588页=====
560 Frederick Engels 
know that there existed here, in Brussels, a German working men's 
society,318 in which political and social questions were discussed, and 
a German democratic newspaper.3 The Germans, resident in 
Brussels, were known for being generally very active and uncompro­
mising democrats. They were almost all members of the Democratic 
Association, and the vice-president of the German society, Dr. Marx, 
was also vice-president of the Democratic Association. 
The government, perfectly aware of the narrow sentiment of 
nationalism prevalent among a certain class of the population of a 
small country like Belgium, immediately profited by these circum­
stances, in order to spread the rumour that the whole agitation for 
the Republic had been got up by the Germans—men who had 
nothing to lose, who had been expelled from three or four countries 
for their turpitudes, and who intended to place themselves at the 
head of the intended Belgian Republic. This precious piece of news 
was reported on Monday through the whole town, and in less than 
a day the whole mass of the shopocracy, who form the body of 
the Civic Guard, raised one unanimous outcry against the 
German rebels, who wanted to revolutionise their happy Belgian 
fatherland. 
The Germans had fixed a place of meeting in a coffee-house, 
where every one of them was to bring the latest news from Paris. But 
the outcry of the shopocrats was so great, and the rumours of 
government measures against the Germans were so manifold, that 
they were obliged to give up even this innocent means of 
communicating with each other. 
On Sunday evening already the police had succeeded in prevailing 
upon the publican, proprietor of the German society's room, to 
refuse them the room for any future meeting. 
The Germans behaved perfectly well during these times. Exposed 
to the most petty persecutions of the police, they yet rested at their 
post. They assisted every evening at the meeting of the Democratic 
Association. They abstained from all tumultuous crowding in the 
streets, but they showed, though personally exposing themselves, 
that in the hour of danger they would not abandon their Belgian 
brethren. 
When, after a few days, the extraordinary agitation of Sunday and 
Monday had ceased, when the people had returned to their work, 
when the government had recovered from their first terror, then 
commenced another series of persecutions against the Germans. The 
government published orders, according to which all foreign 
a Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. —Ed. 

=====第589页=====
To the Editor of The Northern Star 561 
working men, from the moment they had no work, were to be 
expelled the country; and all foreigners indiscriminately, whose 
passports were out of order, were to be treated in the same way. 
Thus,  while they took these measures, they excited, by the rumours 
they spread, the masters against all foreign working men, and made 
it impossible to any German to find work. Even those who had work 
lost it, and were, from that moment, exposed to an order of 
expulsion. 
Not only against working men out of work, but also against 
women, they commenced their persecution. A young German 
Democrat, who lives, according to the French and Belgian custom, 
with a French lady, just as married people live—and whose presence 
at Brussels appears to have importuned the police—was suddenly 
exposed to a series of persecutions, directed against his mistress. She 
having no passport—and who ever before thought in Belgium of 
asking passports from a woman?—was threatened with immediate 
expulsion! and the police declared that it was not for her sake, but 
for the sake of the individual with whom she lived. Seven times in 
three days, the Commissary of Police was at her house; she had to 
pass at his office several times, and was sent to the central police 
office, escorted by an agent—and if an influential Belgian Democrat 
had not interposed, she would certainly have been obliged to leave. 
But all this is nothing. The persecutions against working 
men,—the spreading of rumours about such and such an individual 
to be arrested, or about a general chase after the Germans to be 
made in all public houses of the town on Tuesday evening, all this is 
nothing compared with what I have now to report. 
On Friday evening,3 Dr. Marx, amongst others, received a royal 
ordinance, ordering him to quit the country within twenty-four 
hours.  He was engaged in arranging his trunks for the journey, 
when, at one o'clock in the morning, and in spite of the law which 
forbids the violation of the dwelling of a citizen from sunset to 
sunrise, ten police agents, armed, headed by a commissary of police, 
broke into his house, seized upon him and led him to the Town Hall 
prison. No reason was given but that his passport was not in order, 
though he presented them at least three passports, and though he 
had resided in Brussels for three years! He was led off. His wife, 
seized with terror, instantly ran to see a Belgian lawyer, who always 
offered his services to persecuted foreigners—the same whose 
friendly interposition has been mentioned above,—M. Jottrand, 
President of the Democratic Association. On her return, she met 
a March 3. The Northern Star reported this erroneously as "Saturday".—Ed. 

=====第590页=====
562 Frederick Engels 
with a friend, a Belgian, M. Gigot. He accompanied her home. At the 
door of Dr. Marx's house, they found two of the policemen who had 
arrested her husband. Where have you taken my husband? asked 
she. Why, if you will follow us we will show you where he is. They led 
her, along with M. Gigot, to the Town Hall, but instead of fulfilling 
their promise, they delivered up both of them to the police, and they 
were put into prison. Mrs. Marx, who had left her three little children a 
at home, with a servant only, was led into a room where she found a 
set of prostitutes of the lowest order, with whom she had to pass the 
night. Next morning she was led into a room where she had to stay 
three hours without fire, shivering with cold. M. Gigot was also 
detained. M. Marx had been put into a room with a raving madman, 
whom he was obliged to fight every moment. The most brutal 
treatment on the part of the jailors was joined to this infamous 
conduct. 
At three o'clock in the afternoon, at last, they were conducted 
before the judge, who very soon ordered their liberation. And of 
what had Mrs. Marx and M. Gigot been indicted? Of vagabondage, 
because neither of them had a passport in their pockets! 
M. Marx was equally liberated, and ordered to leave the country 
the same evening. Thus, after having been wantonly imprisoned 
during eighteen of the twenty-four hours left him to settle his affairs; 
after having had not only  himself,  but also his wife, separated for all 
that time from his three children, the eldest of whom has not 
attained her fourth year, he was sent away without a minute to put 
his affairs in order. 
M. Gigot, on his arrest, had only left the prison the day before. He 
had been seized, along with three democrats from Liège, at six 
o'clock on Monday morning, in an hotel, and arrested for vag­
abondage, because they had no passports. They were ordered to 
be liberated on Tuesday, but yet detained till Thursday against all 
law. One of them, M. Tedesco, is yet in prison, accused of nobody 
knows what. Both he and M. Wolff will be either liberated or placed 
before the tribunal in the course of this week. 
I must say, however, that the Belgian working men and several 
other democrats of that nation, particularly M. Jottrand, have 
behaved exceedingly well towards the persecuted Germans. They 
have shown themselves quite above all petty sentiments of nationali­
ty. They saw in us not foreigners but democrats. 
I hear that there is an order of arrest out against a Belgian working 
man and brave democrat, M. de Guasco. Another, M. Dassy, arrested 
Jenny, Laura and Edgar.—Ed. 

=====第591页=====
563 
on Sunday last, for rebellion, was before the tribunal yesterday; his 
judgment is not yet pronounced. 
I am daily and hourly expecting my order of expulsion, if not 
worse, for nobody can foretell what this Belgio-Russian government 
is about to dare. I hold myself ready to leave at a moment's notice. 
Such is the position of a German democrat in this free country, which, 
as the papers say, has nothing to envy in the French Republic. 
Salutation and Fraternity. 
Your old Friend Brussels, March 5th 
First published in The Northern Star 
No. 544, March 25, 1848 Reprinted from the newspaper 

=====第592页=====
Karl Marx 
TO THE EDITOR OF LA RÉFORME 
Dear Sir, 
At the present moment the Belgian government is aligning itself 
entirely with the policy of the Holy Alliance. Its reactionary fury falls 
on the German democrats with unprecedented brutality. Were we 
not too distressed by the persecution directed specifically against us, 
we would openly laugh at the ridiculous attitude assumed by the 
Rogier ministry when it accuses a few Germans of wishing to impose 
a republic on the Belgians against their wishes; but it so happens 
that, in the special case to which we refer, the hateful aspect of it 
outweighs the absurd. 
First of all, Sir, it is as well to know that almost all the Brussels 
newspapers are edited by Frenchmen, most of whom escaped from 
France to avoid the ignominious punishments which threatened 
them in their own country. These Frenchmen now have the utmost 
interest in protecting the Belgian independence which they all 
betrayed in  1833. 319 The king,3 the ministry and their supporters 
have used these rags to give credibility to the idea that a Belgian 
revolution, in the republican sense, would merely be an imitation of a 
francequillonnerie,h and that all the democratic astivity which is now 
making itself felt in Belgium has only been provoked by some 
hot-headed Germans. 
The Germans do not in the least deny that they openly associated 
with the Belgian democrats, and this without the slightest degree of 
a Leopold  I.—Ed. 
A scornful expression in Flemish, meaning stupidly copying anything that is 
French.—Ed. 

=====第593页=====
To the Editor of The Northern Star 565 
hot-headedness. In the eyes of the King's Prosecutor this means 
arousing the workers against the bourgeois, making the Belgians 
suspicious of a German king they so dearly love, and opening the 
gates of Belgium to a French invasion. 
Having received, on March 3 at five o'clock in the evening, an 
order to leave the kingdom of Belgium within twenty-four hours, 
I was busy, that same night, with preparing for the journey when 
a commissary of police, accompanied by ten municipal guards, 
burst into the place where I was living, searched the whole 
house, and ended by putting me under arrest on the pretext that 
I was without papers. Apart from the quite proper papers sent me 
by M. Duchâtel in expelling me from France, 320 I.had at hand the 
expulsion papers delivered to me by Belgium only a few hours 
earlier. 
I would not have spoken to you, Sir, about my arrest and the 
brutalities I suffered, were these not connected with an incident 
which would be difficult to understand even in Austria. 
Immediately after my arrest, my wife went to the home of M. 
Jottrand, President of the Democratic Association of Belgium, to 
urge him to take the necessary measures. On returning home she 
found at her door a policeman who told her, with perfect politeness, 
that if she should wish to speak to M. Marx, she need only follow 
him. My wife accepted the offer with alacrity. She was taken to the 
police station, and the Commissary at first told her that M. Marx was 
not there; then he brutally demanded who she was, why she had 
gone*to M. Jottrand's house, and whether she had her papers with 
her. A Belgian democrat, M. Gigot, had followed my wife to the 
police station with the municipal guard, and when he protested 
strongly against the Commissary's absurd and insolent questions he 
was silenced by guards who seized him and threw him into a cell. My 
wife,  under the charge of "vagabondage", was taken to the prison at 
the Hôtel de Ville and locked up in a dark room with prostitutes. At 
eleven o'clock in the morning she was taken, under police escort and 
in broad daylight, to the office of the examining magistrate. For two 
hours she was held in close custody, despite the most vigorous 
protests from all sides. She stayed there, in bitter cold, exposed to the 
most shameless remarks by the gendarmes. 
Finally she appeared before the examining magistrate, who was 
surprised that the police, in their solicitude, had not at the same time 
arrested the young children. The interrogation was naturally a sham, 
and my wife's only crime consists in the fact that, although belonging 
to the Prussian aristocracy, she shares the democratic opinions of her 
husband. 

=====第594页=====
566 Karl Marx 
I have not entered into all the details of this revolting affair. I 
merely add that, when we were released, the twenty-four hours had 
just ended, and we had to leave without being able to take even the 
most essential of our belongings. 
Karl Marx, 
Vice-President of the Brussels Democratic Association 
Written about March 6, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
March 8, 1848 . 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第595页=====
Karl Marx 
[PERSECUTION OF FOREIGNERS IN BRUSSELS] 321 
On Sunday, February 27 the Brussels Democratic Association held 
its first public meeting since the news of the proclamation of the 
French Republic. It was known in advance that an immense crowd of 
workers, determined to lend their active help to all measures that the 
Association would judge it proper to undertake, would be present. 
The government, for its part, had spread the rumour that king 
Leopold was ready to abdicate the moment the people wished it. This 
was a trap set for the Belgian democrats to make them undertake 
nothing decisive against such a good king, who asked nothing better 
than to shed the burden of royalty, provided that he was honourably 
left a reasonable pension. 
At the same time the king's government had ready a list of people 
whom it considered proper to arrest that very night as disturbers of 
public order. It had agreed with M. Hody, the chief of public 
security, to have on this list the foreigners as chief instigators of an 
artificial riot, as much to cover the arrest of Belgians known as 
resolute republicans as to awake national susceptibilities. This 
explains why, later on, his excellency M. Rogier, who is no more 
Belgian than His Majesty King Leopold is French, had published an 
ordinance which commanded the authorities to watch carefully the 
French and the Germans, the former compatriots of M. Rogier, the 
latter compatriots of Leopold. This ordinance recalls, in its form of 
wording, the laws on suspects.322 
This clever plan was executed in a manner the more perfidious 
and brutal in that the people arrested on the evening of February 27 
had abstained from any provocation. 
It might be said that pleasure had been taken in arresting these 
persons in order to maltreat and abuse them at leisure. 

=====第596页=====
568 Karl Marx 
Immediately after their arrest they were showered with punches, 
kicks and sabre-blows; they were spat in the face, these republicans. 
They were maltreated in the presence of the philanthropist Hody, 
who was delighted to give these foreigners proof of his powers. 
As there were no charges against them it only remained to release 
them. But no! They were kept in the cells for six days! Then the 
foreign prisoners were separated from the rest and taken directly in 
Black Marias to the railway station. There they were again put into 
vans,  each in a separate cell, and sent in this way to Quiévrain where 
Belgian police received them and dragged them to the French 
frontier. 
When at last they were able to collect themselves on the soil of 
liberty, they found they had in their pockets nothing but expulsion 
papers, dated the eve of their arrests. One of the expelled persons, 
M. Allard, is French. 
At the same time the government of the Petty King proclaimed, in 
the Chamber of Representatives, that the Belgian kingdom, including 
the two Flanders,3  was the best of all possible republics, and that it 
possessed a model police force, directed by a man such as M. Hody, 
at one and the same time an old republican, a phalansterist and a 
rejoined Leopoldist. The chamber wept with joy, the Catholic and 
liberal papers were in ecstasies about the domestic virtues of King 
Leopold and the public virtues of his servant Rogier. 
The Belgian people are republicans. The only Leopoldists are the 
big bourgeoisie, the landed aristocracy, the Jesuits, the officials and 
the ex-Frenchmen who, chased out of France, now find themselves 
at the head of the Belgian administration and the press. 
Metternich is delighted to find so opportunely at the French 
frontier a Coburg, a born enemy of the French revolution. But he 
forgets that the Coburgs of today no longer count except in 
questions of marriage. 
Written about March 10, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper 
First published in La Réforme, Translated from the French 
March 12, 1848 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a West and East Flanders—two provinces of the Belgian Kingdom.—Ed. 

=====第597页=====
Frederick Engels 
[THE SITUATION IN BELGIUM]^ 
Brussels, March 18 
The Belgian bourgeoisie refused a republic to the people fifteen 
days ago; now it is preparing itself to take the initiative in the 
republican movement. It cannot yet be proclaimed out loud, but it is 
whispered everywhere in Brussels: "Really, Leopold must go; really, 
only the republic can save us; but what we need is a good solid 
republic, without organisation of labour, without universal suffrage, 
without the workers meddling in it!" 
This is already some progress. The good bourgeoisie of Brussels 
who,  only a few days ago, desperately denied any intention of 
wanting to copy the French Republic, have felt the results of the 
financial crisis in Paris. While still decrying political imitation they 
submit to financial imitation. While still singing the praises of 
Belgian independence and neutrality, they found that the Brussels 
Stock Exchange was completely and most humiliatingly dependent 
on the Paris Stock Exchange. The cordon of troops which holds the 
southern frontier has not stopped the lowering of share prices from 
invading, unimpeded, the guaranteed neutral territory of Belgium. 
Indeed, the consternation which reigns in the Brussels market 
could not be more general. Bankruptcy is decimating the middling 
and small traders, snares are finding no buyers, quotations are only 
nominal, money is disappearing more quickly than in Paris, trade is 
completely stagnant, and most manufacturers have sacked their 
workmen. Here are a few examples of the general depression: a few 
days ago a dealer offered to sell one hundred and fifty shares of the 
Dendre railway at one hundred francs each, which were quoted 
above par on the London Stock Exchange before the February 
revolution. The first day he refused 45 francs, the second 35 francs, 

=====第598页=====
570 Frederick Engels 
and the third day he sold them at 10 francs per share! Land sold for 
six thousand francs two years ago no longer finds buyers for one 
third this price. 
And now, at this moment of general panic, the government 
demands, firstly, two-thirds of direct taxes in advance, and then a 
forced loan of fifty to sixty millions, measures which terrify the 
tax-payers already dissatisfied with an ever-increasing budget! 
This is a state of affairs which has not failed to persuade our good 
bourgeoisie that, in being enthusiastic for the monarchy, they have 
gained only full and complete participation in the troubles in France 
without having shared any of the advantages. This is the real cause of 
the growing republicanism. 
Meanwhile, the workers are not quiet. Ghent has had several days 
of disturbances; here two days ago there were meetings of many 
workers, ending in a petition to the king, which Leopold in person 
came to receive from the calloused hands which presented it to him. 
More serious demonstrations will soon follow. Every day puts more 
workers out of work. If the industrial crisis continues, if feelings in 
the working class warm up a little, the Belgian bourgeoisie, like that 
of Paris, will make its "mariage de raison" with the republic. 
Written on March 18, 1848 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt­
ausgabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第599页=====
FROM THE PREPARATORY MATERIALS 

=====第600页=====

=====第601页=====
Karl Marx 
PROTECTIONISTS 324 
1) have never protected small industry, only machine industry. 
Example: the school of List in Germany. Gulich.3 
2) If we believe what the protectionists say, they merely preserve 
the status quo. Protection will never effect sales of the protected 
product on foreign markets. Hence reactionary.15 
3) The last consolation of the protectionists is that the country is 
not exploited by foreign but by domestic capitalists. 
4) It is said, indeed, that internal reforms must first be made 
before one can think of free trade.c  The power to reform the 
position of the classes is not ascribed to the protective system  itself. 
But they say it would be foolish to reform international relations 
before domestic relations have been reformed. But what is the 
protective system? It is proof that the class which carries it into effect 
has power in its hands. Therefore, given the protective system [...] 
the capitalists will not concede anything. Moreover, gentlemen, great 
social and historical reforms are never made by concessions, by the 
generosity of the ruling classes, but only through the nécessité des 
choses. They must therefore be forced through. It is therefore 
ridiculous to believe that in a country where the protective system 
prevails [...] [...] [...] the relations between capital and labour are 
reformed in any way. I shall say no more of the protectionists [...] of 
the question.../ 
Written about September 18, 1847 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamtaus­
gabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 Published in English for the first 
time 
a In the original Jülich. —Ed. 
After "reactionary" the following is written between the lines: "conservateurs, and 
if conserved [?],  conservateurs — hommes réactionnaires." —Ed. 
c Marx uses the English  term.— Ed. 

=====第602页=====
Karl Marx 
DEMAND 325 
*) Demand. Most economists treat it almost exclusively from the 
individual standpoint. The world historic development of demand, 
its first universal development, depends firstly on the products of the 
various countries of the world becoming known to each other. If in 
the further course of development demand creates intercourse, 
initially it is intercourse which creates demand. Demand is the 
material content of intercourse, the totality of the objects of 
exchange, of the commodities which come into exchange and trade. 
Wars,  voyages of discovery, etc., all historical events whereby nations 
are brought into contact, are all so many conditions of expanding 
demand, of the formation of the world market. The growth of 
demand consists directly in the first place in the fact that already 
existing products of various countries <m contact, in A> are being 
exchanged. Demand gradually loses its local etc. character and 
becomes cosmopolitan. The production of all countries thus enters 
more and more into the consumption of the individuals of <all 
regions) of a country. 
The Crusades, for example, by making known the products of the 
Orient, greatly increased the demand for such products in Western 
Europe. (Cf. J., Notebook III, p. 106.) Places where these products 
stream together for exchange constitute the world market towns; 
the world market appeared in this form in particular before the 
discovery of America. In the 14th and 15th centuries Constan­
tinople, the Italian cities, Bruges and London. 
Also still at the same time like fairs, namely the caravan-like 
streaming together of merchants. In the 19th century, for example, 
fairs are of quite subordinate significance. (Cf. J., Notebook III, 
p. 106.) 

=====第603页=====
Demand 575 
How much less these market places depend on their own industry 
than the latter and its prosperity depend simply on their being the 
general stores, is proved by the decay of the trade of the Italian cities 
after 1498, from the moment when Lisbon became the chief market 
for Indian fabrics and spices. Antwerp, too, still had the same limited 
character in the 16th century as Bruges etc. earlier. 
Trade supremacy. The first dominant trading nation are the Dutch 
(from end of the 16th to the middle of the 17th century). Until then 
there were only first trading towns. The Spaniards and Portuguese 
form the transition from dominant trading towns to dominant 
trading nations. Carrying trade and fisheries nevertheless still form a 
decisive constituent of Dutch supremacy. 
The <agricultural> European North-East in the relation of an 
agricultural country to the European West. In the same measure in 
which here industry and shipbuilding increase, the demand for the 
raw products of the North-East increases and with it their 
production. 
Holland as the first trading and industrial nation, from the end of 
the 16th to the middle of the 17th century, is also the first nation for 
whom its domestic agriculture is insufficient and where the 
population is growing in far too great a proportion to domestic 
agriculture. Therefore carries on the first large-scale trade in grain. 
Amsterdam becomes the chief granary of Western Europe. (Cf. J., 
Notebook III, p. 107). 
Written in December 1847 Printed according to the manu­
script 
First published in French in the book 
Karl Marx, Œuvres.Économie. II, Published in English for the first 
[Paris,] 1968 time 

=====第604页=====
Karl Marx 
DRAFT PLAN FOR SECTION III 
OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST  PARTY526 
First draft 
1) <Critique) a Critical Utopian Systems (Communist). 
2) 
Second draft 
1) Reactionary socialism, feudal, religious petty bourgeois. 
2) Bourgeois socialism. 
3) German philosophical socialism .b 
4) Critical Utopian systems of literature. Owen, Cabet, Weitling, 
Fourier, St. Simon,  Babeuf. 
5) Direct party literature. 
6) Communist literature.327 
Written at the end of December 1847 
or the beginning of January 1848 
First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt­
ausgabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a This word is struck out in the manuscript.—Ed. 
Marx added this point in the left-hand margin and accordingly altered the 
original numbering from 3 to 4, 4 to 5, 5 to 6. 

=====第605页=====
Karl Marx 
PAGE FROM THE ROUGH DRAFT 
OF THE MANIFESTO OF THE COMMUNIST  PARTY528 
13) ...Proletarians, for the Ten-Hour Bill without sharing their 
illusions about the results of this measure.3 
We have seen, moreover: 
The Communists do not put forward a new theory of private 
property. They merely state the historical fact that the <means of 
production) b  bourgeois production relations and with them 
bourgeois property relations <and> <eith> <certain> of the 
<devel> <social> development of the social forces of production 
no longer <are appropriate> and therefore <to the development 
of industry itself) (and) in t.... 
But do not argue with us because you measure (oppose) the 
abolition of bourgeois property by your bourgeois ideas of freedom, 
culture, etc.! Your ideas themselves <are only> <prod> <are> 
(correspond) are products of the (existing) bourgeois produc­
tion and property relations, as your legal system is merely the will of 
your class elevated into law. (Your> A will whose content is 
determined by the material living conditions of your class. 
(Your) You share with all ruling classes that have perished the 
biased idea of transforming (the) your (bourgeois) production 
and property relations from historical, (and merely> transitory 
relations corresponding only to a certain (stage in the) develop­
ment of the productive forces, into eternal laws of nature and 
reason. 
a The first two lines are in Jenny Marx's hand. The rest in Marx's.—Ed. 
b Deletions in the original are given here in angular brackets.—Ed. 

=====第606页=====
57 8 Page from the Rough Draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 
What you comprehend for feudal property, you no longer 
comprehend for bourgeois <conditi> property. 
And yet, you cannot deny the fact that <in the course) with the 
development of <bourgeois> industry the one-sided, on....a 
The Communists do not put forward any new theory of property. 
They state a fact. You deny the most striking facts. You have to deny 
them. You are backward looking Utopians. 
Written in December 1847-January 1848 
First published as a facsimile in the journal 
Der Wahre Jakob No. 565 (6), March 17, 
1908 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a In the M S. the whole sentence including deleted words is struck  out.—Ed.  -

=====第607页=====
n"* * *f"'v  ? 
* - * ir ,* i. » ** 
L-» *„ ,f#T^ 5-^ -jib» ****.**•**£ 
\ ^. ^wjajnl' JSNn'*ik.  ******^*  ^ *  _*#•*%  ' ^f 
kl- • •«^^•J»  **77* 
Bottom  of the  page from Marx's manuscript, "Protectionists" 
with drawings  by Engels  ' 

=====第608页=====
4*£fy> *>tovzL±.xtee-c^^ ^^^^^j\ 
%> t . . LÊL- 4L—  -~- nV-~  «.- N ^^ 
A page of the rough draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party 

=====第609页=====
Karl Marx 
NOTES  ON THE  ARREST, 
MALTREATMENT  AND  EXPULSION 
OF WILHELM WOLFF  BY THE  BRUSSELS POLICE 
FEBRUARY  27 TO  MARCH  1, 1848a 
Petits Carmes.329  5 étrangers,  34 Belge 
Wolff's right  eye is so  injured  it will hardly regain sight. 
Sunday February  27,  between  10 and 11  o'clock  in the  evening. 
Real maltreatment  in the  Hôtel  de Ville, blows with  the  fist from 
all directions.  The  real maltreatment first  in the  police station where 
there were  a number  of drunken gardes civiques. Police punched 
Wolff  in the  right  eye so  that  the  sight.... 
They tore  off his  glasses, spat  in his  face, kicked  him,  punched 
him, abused  him, etc. One of the  gardes civiques proved  his valour 
by joining  in these manifestations. They tortured  him. 
In the  meantime Hody arrived, chef de la  sûreté publique, 
notorious philanthropist, hypocritical scoundrel. 
Wolff  had an  interview  of <1> V2  [hours] with  him in the 
presence  of the  scoundrel  who had  arrested  him  amidst frightful 
maltreatment. 
Hody's indignation  at Wolff's visiting him. Spoke furiously against 
the German Workers' Society.330  "I knew,"  he said among other 
things, "that there would  be about 2/3  Germans among those arrested 
tonight." Wolff said ironically:  "Oui,  insofar  as they were already 
marked  in advance  for arrest." 
Taken from  the  Permanence  to the  Amigo.331 Wolff  [..?.] t. 
evening  [...?...] 
The whole thing that evening  was a  provocation organised  by the 
police.  The  Ministry needed prisoners  at any  cost, including also 
Germans. 
a See  this volume,  pp.  567-68.—Ed. 
eo* 

=====第610页=====
582 Notes on the Arrest, Maltreatment and Expulsion of Wilhelm Wolff 
At the Amigo: soon more arrested persons arrived: those who were 
placed with  Wolff:  a Belgian. He was so maltreated and injured by 
the police that he lost at least a quart of blood. A third person see 
p. 2. 
On Monday etc. taken to the Petits Carmes. 
On Wednesday the 6 arrested foreigners received their expulsion 
passports. But Wolff's was dated Sunday, February 27, before his 
arrest. In prison horribly maltreated. 
Written early in March 1848 
First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamtaus­
gabe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第611页=====
APPENDICES 

=====第612页=====

=====第613页=====
RULES 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE 
Working Men of All Countries, Unite! 
SECTION I 
THE LEAGUE 
Art. 1. The League aims at the emancipation of humanity by 
spreading the theory of the community of property and its speediest 
possible practical introduction. 
Art. 2. The League is divided into communities and circles; at its 
head stands the Central Authority as the executive organ. 
Art. 3. Anyone who wishes to join the League is required : 
a. to conduct himself in manly fashion; 
b. never to have committed a dishonourable action; 
c. to recognise the principles of the League; 
d. to have acknowledged means of subsistence; 
e. not to belong to any political or national association; 
f. to be unanimously admitted into a community, and 
g. to give his word of honour to work loyally and to observe 
secrecy. 
Art. 4. All League members are equal and brothers, and as such 
owe each other assistance in every situation. 
Art. 5. All members bear League names. 
SECTION II 
THE COMMUNITY 
Art. 6. A community consists of at least three and at most twelve 
members. Increase above that number will be prevented by division. 
Art. 7. Every community elects a chairman and a deputy chairman. 
The chairman presides over meetings, the deputy chairman holds 
the funds, into which the contributions of the members are paid. 
Art. 8. The members of communities shall earnestly endeavour to 
increase the League by attracting capable men and always seek to 

=====第614页=====
586 Appendices 
work in such a way that principles and not persons are taken as 
guide. 
Art. 9. Admission of new members is effected by the chairman of 
the community and the member who has introduced the applicant to 
the League. 
Art. 10. The communities do not know each other and bear 
distinctive names which they choose themselves. 
SECTION III 
THE CIRCLE 
Art. 11. A circle comprises at least two and at most ten 
communities. 
Art. 12. The chairmen and deputy chairmen of the communities 
form the circle authority. They elect a president from among 
themselves. 
Art. 13. The circle authority is the executive organ for all the 
communities of the circle. 
Art. 14. Isolated communities must either join an already existing 
circle authority or form a new circle with other isolated communities. 
SECTION IV 
THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
Art. 15. The Central Authority is the executive organ of the whole 
League. 
Art. 16. It consists of at least five members and is elected by the 
circle authority of the place where it is to have its seat. 
SECTION V 
THE CONGRESS 
Art. 17. The Congress is the legislative authority of the League. 
Art. 18. Every circle sends one delegate. 
Art. 19. A Congress is held every year in the month of August. The 
Central Authority has the right in important cases to call an 
extraordinary congress. 
Art. 20. The Congress in office decides the place where the Central 
Authority is to have its seat for the current year. 
Art. 21. All legislative decisions of the Congress are submitted to 
the communities for acceptance or rejection. 

=====第615页=====
Appendices 587 
Art. 22. As the executive organ of the League the Central 
Authority is responsible to the Congress for its conduct of its office 
and therefore has a seat in it, but no deciding vote. 
SECTION VI 
GENERAL REGULATIONS 
Art. 23. Anyone who acts dishonourably to the principles of the 
League is, according to the circumstances, (removed) either 
removed or expelled. Expulsion precludes re-admission. 
Art. 24. Members who commit offences are judged by the 
(supreme) circle authority, which also sees to the execution of the 
verdict. 
Art. 25. Every community must keep the strictest watch over those 
who have been removed or expelled; further, it must observe closely 
any suspect individuals in its locality and report at once to the circle 
authority anything they may do to the detriment of the League, 
whereupon the circle authority must take the necessary measures to 
safeguard the League. 
Art. 26. The communities and circle authorities and also the 
Central Authority shall meet at least once a fortnight. 
Art. 27. The communities pay weekly or monthly contributions, 
the amount of which is determined by the respective circle 
authorities. These contributions will be used to spread the principles 
of the community of property and to pay for postage. 
Art. 28. The circle authorities must render account of expendi­
tures and income to their communities every six months. 
Art. 29. The members of the circle authorities and of the Central 
Authority are elected for one year and must then either be 
confirmed anew in their office or replaced by others. 
Art. 30. The elections take place in the month of September. The 
electors can, moreover, recall their officers at any time should they 
not be satisfied with their conduct of their office. 
Art. 31. The circle authorities have to see to it that there is material 
in their communities for useful and necessary discussions. The 
Central Authority, on the other hand, must make it its duty to send 
to all circle authorities such questions whose discussion is important 
for our principle. 
Art. 32. Every circle authority and failing that the community, 
even every League member, must, if standing alone, maintain 
regular correspondence with the Central Authority or a circle 
authority. 

=====第616页=====
588 Appendices 
Art. 33. Every League member who wishes to change his residence 
must first inform his chairman. 
Art. 34. Every circle authority is free to take any measures which it 
considers advisable for the security of the circle and its efficient 
work. These measures must, however, not be contrary to the general 
Rules. 
Art. 35. All proposals for changes in the Rules must be sent to the 
Central Authority and submitted by it to the Congress for decision. 
SECTION VII 
ADMISSION 
Art. 36. After the Rules have been read to him, the applicant is 
asked by the two League members mentioned in Art. 9 to reply to the 
following five questions. If he replies "Yes", he is asked to give his 
word of honour, and is declared a League member. 
These five questions are: 
a. Are you convinced of the truth of the principles of the 
community of property? 
b. Do you think a strong League is necessary for the realisation of 
these principles as soon as possible, and do you wish to join such a 
League? 
c. Do you promise always to work by word and deed for spreading 
and the practical realisation of the principles of the community of 
property? 
d. Do you promise to observe secrecy about the existence and all 
affairs of the League? 
e. Do you promise to comply with the decisions of the League? 
Then give us on this your word of honour as guarantee! 
In the name and by the order of the Congress 
Heide, 3 The President, 
Secretary Karl Schill b 
London,June 9, 1847 
First published in the book: Gründungs­
dokumente des Bundes der Kommunisten (Juni 
bis September 1847), Hamburg, 1969 
a Wilhelm Wolff.—Ed. 
h Karl Schapper. —Edr. Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第617页=====
[A CIRCULAR OF THE FIRST CONGRESS 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE TO THE LEAGUE MEMBERS 
JUNE 9, 1847]333 
THE CONGRESS TO THE LEAGUE3 
Dear Brothers! 
The First Congress of the League, which was called last February 
by the Central Authority (Halle)334 and opened on June 2 here in 
London, has concluded its deliberations. In view of the whole 
position of our League, its sessions could not be public.335 
But it is incumbent on us, members of the Congress, to make them 
public for you in retrospect, by at least giving you a survey of our 
proceedings. 
This is all the more our duty as the Central Authority in office up 
to now had to render account to us, and we, therefore, have to tell 
you how far the Congress was satisfied with this rendering of 
account. We must also do so, because we have added an article to the 
new Rules which makes all legislative decisions of the Congress 
subject to the vote of the individual communities0; hence, for this 
part of our decisions at least, there are two reasons why we owe you a 
statement of the grounds for them. 
After checking credentials the previous Halle had first to give the 
Congress an account of its conduct of office and to report on the 
state of the League. The delegates declared themselves completely 
satisfied with the way in which the Halle had looked after the 
interests of the League and had made a start with its reorganisation. 
That point was thereby disposed of. We take the following brief 
summary from the report of the Central Authority and from the 
original letters submitted to the Congress. 
Joseph Moll added afterwards in the original: "IN HAMBURG".—Ed. 
b The reference is to Art. 21 of the draft Rules of the Communist League (see this 
volume, p.  586.)—Ed. 

=====第618页=====
590 Appendices 
In London our League is strongest. Freedom of speech and of 
association immensely facilitates propaganda and gives opportunities 
to the many able members to use their character and talent for the 
greatest good of the League and the cause. For this purpose the 
League uses the German Workers' Educational Society, and also 
its branch in Whitechapel. Members of the League also take part in 
the Fraternal Democrats,336 the French communist discussion 
clubs, 337 etc. 
The previous Paris Halle itself realised in how much better a 
position the London League would be to take over the central 
leadership of the affairs of the League. The security of all documents 
and of members of the Central Authority itself is nowhere else as 
great as here. During its proceedings the Congress had opportunity 
enough to see that the London communities have a sufficient 
number of competent people who can be entrusted with the supreme 
executive authority of the League. It therefore decided that the 
Central Authority should remain in London. 
In Paris the League has much declined in recent years.338  The 
regional and Halle members have for a long time occupied 
themselves only with quarrels about formalities and alleged breaches 
of the Rules instead of looking after the affairs of the whole League 
or of its Gaus* In the communities similar time-wasting, superfluous 
and divisive trifles were dealt with. At most they discussed the old 
questions which have been talked over again and again, ever since 
Weitling's Garantien* to the point of boredom. In the Paris League 
itself there was no sign of the slightest progress, not the slightest 
concern with the development of the principle, or with the 
movement of the proletariat as it was proceeding in other localities of 
the League, and outside the League. The consequence was that all 
those who were not satisfied with what they were offered inside the 
League looked outside the League for further enlightenment. This 
need for enlightenment was made use of by a literary knight of 
industry and exploiter of workers, the German writer Karl GrimThis 
individual had sided with communism when he noticed that there 
was money to be made by communist waitings. After some time he 
found that it was dangerous to continue to declare himself a 
Communist and found occasion to resign in the new book by 
Proudhôn on the economic contradictions 0 which he himself had 
translated into German. This Grün used the economic statements in 
this otherwise quite insignificant book as the basis of lectures which 
a Regions or districts.—Ed. 
W. Weitling, Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit. —Ed. 
P.-J. Proudhôn, Système des contradictions économiques.—Ed. 

=====第619页=====
Appendices 591 
he gave in Paris for League members. These lectures were attended 
by two kinds of people: 1. those who had already enough of 
communism in general; 2. those who hoped perhaps to get from this 
Grün enlightenment on a number of questions and doubts never 
resolved for them in the community meetings. The latter were fairly 
numerous and consisted of those members of the Paris communities 
who were the most useful and the most capable of development. For 
a time this Grün succeeded in dazzling even a number of these with 
his phrases and his alleged immense learning. The League was thus 
split. On one side was the party which had exclusively dominated the 
Halle and the region, the party of the Weitlingians; on the other side 
were those who still believed one could learn something even from 
Grün. These soon saw, however, that Grün expressed definite 
hostility to the Communists and that all his teaching was quite unable 
to replace communism. Heated discussions took place during which 
it became clear that almost all League members remained loyal to 
communism and that only two or three defended this Grün and his 
Proudhonist system. At the same time it was revealed that this same 
Grün had defrauded the workers, as was his wont, by using 30 
francs, the sum collected for the Polish insurgents, 339 for his private 
purposes, and had also wheedled several hundred francs out of them 
for the printing of a miserable pamphlet about the dissolution of the 
Prussian Provincial Diet.3  But enough; the majority of Grün's former 
listeners stayed away and formed a new party which was mainly 
concerned to develop further the communist principle in all its 
implications and in its connection with social relations. By this split, 
however, the organisation of the League fell to pieces. In the course 
of the winter the Central Authority sent an emissary b who restored 
the organisation as far as possible. But soon the quarrels arose again; 
the three different parties and principles were irreconcilable. The 
party of progress succeeded with the aid of the Weitlingians in 
removing from the League the three or four stubborn Grünians who 
had declared themselves openly against communism. But then, when 
it came to the election of a delegate to the Congress, the two parties 
clashed in the regional meeting. The split became incurable, and in 
order at least to achieve an election, the three communities in which 
the party of progress was most strongly represented resolved to 
separate from the two communities on which the main strength of 
the Weitlingians rested and to elect a congress delegate for 
themselves at a general meeting. This was done. The Weitlingians 
a K. Grün, Die preussischen Landtags-Abschiede. —Ed. 
b Joseph Moll.— Ed. 

=====第620页=====
592 Appendices 
were thereby provisionally removed from the League and the 
number of League members was reduced by one third. After 
examining the reasons advanced by both parties, the Congress 
declared its agreement with the action of the three communities, 
because the Weitlingian party had everywhere held up the League in 
its development; this had also been experienced both in London and 
in Switzerland. The Congress resolved unanimously to remove the 
Paris Weitlingians from the League and to admit the delegate of the 
Paris majority3 to the Congress. 
Hence, the number of League members in Paris has been greatly 
reduced; but, at the same time, obstructive elements have also been 
removed, and, through the struggle, minds have been quickened to 
renewed activity. A new spirit is making itself felt, and a completely 
new energy. The police persecutions seem more or less to have 
ended; they were in any case not directed against the party which is 
now victorious and from which only one member was expelled, but 
struck Grün's party almost alone, proof that information of the 
Prussian Government was at the bottom of the whole persecution, as 
will be shown presently. And if the government has dispersed the 
public meetings at the Barriere, this too mainly hits the Grünians 
who made loud speeches there and inveighed against the Commu­
nists,  because here, of course, the Communists could not freely reply 
to them. Hence, the League is in far better shape in Paris now than at 
the time when the Halle resigned. We are less numerous but we are 
united and have capable people there. 
In Lyons the League has regular members who seem to be very 
active for the cause. 
In Marseilles we are also established. We have received the 
following letter about the membership there: "The position of the 
Marseilles League is not too good. Encouragement by letters would 
not help much; we shall try to arrange for some of us to go there this 
autumn and to organise the League anew." 
The League has succeeded in gaining a firm footing in Belgium. 
Brussels has a competent community whose members are Germans 
and Belgians and who have already founded a second community in 
Liège among the Walloon factory workers. In that country the 
prospects for the League are quite encouraging, and we hope that at 
the next congress Belgium will already be represented by several 
delegates. 
In Germany we had several communities in Berlin which this 
spring were suddenly dispersed by the police. League members will 
a Engels. — Ed. 

=====第621页=====
Appendices 593 
have seen from the newspapers that a meeting of workers directed 
by League members was cancelled by the police, an enquiry was held, 
and as a result several leading members were arrested. Among the 
arrested was a certain Friedrich Mentel, a tailor born in Potsdam, 
about 27 years old, of medium, stocky build, etc. This man, who had 
formerly been in London and Paris, and in the latter place had 
belonged to Griin's party and turned out to be a maudlin 
sentimentalist, and had, by the way, in the course of his travels 
got to know the situation in the League pretty accurately, was 
unable to stand up to this little ordeal. This time too it was seen 
that the weak-mindedness and vagueness of such sentimentalists can 
find final satisfaction only in religion. Within a few days this 
Mentel let himself be completely converted by a priest and twice 
during his arrest took part in the farce of Holy Communion. 
A Berlin member writes to us as follows: "...he told in court about the 
communities in Paris, London, Hamburg and Kiel (all of which he 
had visited himself) and gave the addresses to which Herrn. Kriege 
sent his Volks-Tribun to Berlin. To somebody else, he said to his 
face:  'Did I not sell you these books? Did we not go to meetings at 
such and such an address? Are you not a member of the League of 
the Just?' And when the answer to everything was 'No', Mentel 
said: 'How can you answer for this before God the Almighty and 
All-knowing?' and other such stupidities." Fortunately, Mentel's 
baseness did not succeed in confusing the other accused, so the 
government had no alternative but to let the arrested be acquitted 
for the time being. Clearly, this Mentel's denunciations are closely 
connected with the persecutions of the German Communists in 
Paris.  We can only congratulate ourselves that the Grünian Mentel 
regarded the Grünians themselves as the real leaders of the League 
and denounced them. Thereby the real Communists were in general 
protected from the persecutions. Naturally, the entire Berlin 
circle was disorganised by these events. However, knowing the 
competence of the members there, we are hopeful that the 
reorganisation of the League will soon be effected. 
Hamburg is also organised. But the members there have let 
themselves be somewhat intimidated by these persecutions in Berlin. 
The contacts were not broken for a single moment, however. 
The League is also established in Altona, Bremen, Mainz, Munich, 
Leipzig, Königsberg, Thorn, Kiel, Magdeburg, Stuttgart, Mannheim 
and Baden-Baden. In Scandinavia it is also already established in 
Stockholm. 
The position of the League in Switzerland is not as satisfactory as 
we might wish. Here the party of the Weitlingians was dominant 

=====第622页=====
594 Appendices 
from the beginning. The lack of development in the communities in 
Switzerland was particularly evident, on the one hand in their 
inability to bring the long-standing struggle with the Young 
Germans340  to a conclusion, and on the other hand in their religious 
attitude to the Young Germans and in the fact that they let 
themselves be exploited in the vilest manner by most despicable 
knights of industry, such as, for instance, the solemn Georg 
Kuhlmann of Holstein. As a result of police measures the League 
was so disorganised in Switzerland that the Congress decided to take 
extraordinary measures for its reconstitution. The success and the 
nature of these measures can, of course, only later be made known to 
the communities. 
Concerning America, we must wait for more detailed news from 
the emissary whom the Central Authority has sent there, before a 
precise report can be given of the final shape of the League's 
conditions there.3 
From this report and from the League letters produced two things 
emerge: firstly, that when the London Halle took over the 
leadership, the League was indeed in a difficult position, that the 
previous Central Authority0 had not at all attended to the duties 
incumbent on it; that it had utterly neglected to hold the whole 
together, and that in addition to this disorganisation of the League, 
elements of opposition had gradually germinated even in the 
individual communities themselves. In these circumstances, which 
threatened the existence of the League, the London Central 
Authority at once took the necessary measures: sent out emissaries, 
removed individual members who were jeopardising the existence of 
the whole, re-established contacts, called the general congress, and 
prepared the questions to be discussed there. At the same time it 
took steps to draw into the League other elements of the communist 
movement who until then had stood aside from it,341 steps which 
were highly successful. 
After settling these questions the Congress had to make a review of 
the Rules. The result of these deliberations lies before the com­
munities in the new Rules, all the articles of which were accepted 
unanimously, and which the Congress moves should be finally 
adopted. In justification of the changes made, we make the following 
observations: 
a Down to here the handwriting is Wolff's, from the following paragraph 
somebody else's, either J. Moll's or H. Bauer's.—Ed. 
The Halle of the League of the Just, which before its transfer from Paris to 
London consisted mainly of supporters of Weiding.—Ed.. 

=====第623页=====
Appendices 595 
The change of name from League of the Just to Communist 
League was adopted because, firstly, the old name had become 
known to the governments through the infamous treachery of that 
Mentel, and that in itself made a change advisable. Secondly, and 
chiefly, because the old name had been adopted on a special occasion 
in view of special events 342 which no longer have the slightest bearing 
on the present purpose of the League. This name is therefore no 
longer suited to the time and does not in the least express what we 
want. How many there are who want justice, that is, what they call 
justice, without necessarily being Communists! We are not distin­
guished by wanting justice in general—anyone can claim that for 
himself—but by our attack on the existing social order and on private 
property, by wanting community of property, by being Communists. 
Hence there is only one suitable name for our League, the name 
which says what we really are, and this name we have chosen. In the 
same spirit we have altered the traditional names Gau and Halle, 
which we took over from the political societies and the German 
character of which produced a disturbing impression given the 
nature of our anti-nationalist League which is open to all peoples; 
these names have been replaced by words which really mean what 
they should mean. The introduction of such simple, clear names 
serves also to remove from our propagandist League the con­
spiratorial character which our enemies are so keen to attach to us. 
The necessity to re-call the Congress, now called for the first time, 
to re-call it regularly and to transfer to it the entire legislative power of 
the League subject to confirmation by the communities, was 
unanimously recognised without discussion. We hope that in the 
provisions laid down in this respect we have hit on the points which 
mattered and through which the effective work of the Congress is 
ensured in the interest of the whole. 
As to the omission of the headings, which insofar as they contained 
legal provisions are replaced by certain articles of the Rules, and 
insofar as they contained general communist principles are replaced 
by the Communist Credo, this gives the Rules a simpler and more 
uniform shape and has at the same time led to a more precise 
definition of the position of each particular authority.343 
After the Rules had been dealt with, various proposals were 
discussed which had been prepared either by the Central Authority 
or put forward by individual delegates. 
First of all, there was discussion of one delegate's proposal to call a 
new congress in six months time. The Congress itself felt that, as the 
First Congress, which has been called and had met at a time when the 
organisation of the League was flagging, it had to regard itself above 

=====第624页=====
596 Appendices 
all as an organising and constituent assembly. It felt that a new 
congress was needed to deal thoroughly with the most important 
questions before it; since at the same time the new Rules had fixed 
the next congress for the month of August, so that there would be 
barely two months interval, and since it was also impossible to defer 
the Second Congress until August 1848, it was decided to call 
this Second Congress for Monday, November 29 of this year, 
here in London. We did not let ourselves be deterred by the bad 
time of the year any more than by the new costs. The League 
has survived a crisis and must not fight shy of an extraor­
dinary effort for once.—The new League Rules contain the 
necessary provisions for the election of delegates and so we hope 
that a large number of circles will send delegates to the Second 
Congress. 
The proposal of the same delegate to set up a special fund for 
emissaries also found general approval.—The point was made that 
our League has at its disposal two kinds of emissaries. Firstly, those 
who are sent out at the expense of the League with special missions 
to certain localities, either to establish the League in areas where it 
does not yet exist, or to organise it again where it is in decline. These 
emissaries must necessarily be under the direct control of the Central 
Authority.—Secondly, workers who are returning to their own 
homes or have to make other journeys. Such workers, often very 
capable men, could be used to the greatest advantage of the League 
for visits to many communities not far from their travel route, if they 
are reimbursed on behalf of the League for the additional expenses 
caused thereby. Such occasional emissaries can, of course, only be 
under the direct control of the circle authority and only in special 
cases be placed under the control of the Central Authority. Hence, 
the Congress decided to instruct the Central Authority to demand 
from every circle authority a certain financial contribution every 
three months and from these contributions to set up a fund for 
sending out emissaries of the first kind. Further, to instruct the circle 
authorities more than previously to use capable members leaving on 
journeys as  occasional  emissaries in the manner described and to pay 
the additional travelling expenses in advance from their own funds. 
In very special cases the circle authorities can apply to the Central 
Authority for a contribution for this purpose; whether this financial 
application is granted, is, of course, decided by the Central 
Authority. Every emissary is responsible to the authority which has 
supplied him with funds and must report to it. 
All of you will see how necessary it is to organise propaganda 
through emissaries and to subject it to central leadership. We hope 

=====第625页=====
Appendices 597 
that our decisions, taken after mature consideration, will meet with 
your approval and that they may be attended by good success for the 
cause. 
The next question was that of the organ of the League; it was 
recognised without discussion how necessary such a publication is. It 
was also readily understood that the paper could appear only in 
London, and that it should not appear more often than weekly and 
not less often than monthly.—Title, motto and format were agreed 
and you will be acquainted with them through the specimen number 
to be published in July. A commission is in existence to act for the 
editorial board pending the journal's publication; then an editor, 
who also has already been appointed,3  will take over the direction in 
co-operation with the Commission. This considered, the Congress 
came to the question of costs. Firstly, various things are needed to 
complete the printing equipment, in particular an iron press, for 
which the Central Authority was instructed to call for a contribution 
from the circles. But then the costs were calculated. It was found that 
at 2 pence, =4 sous, =2 Silbergroschen, =6 Kreuzers for every 
weekly issue of one sheet the number of subscribers required to 
cover the costs would be greater than we can rely on with certainty at 
present. A monthly paper without an editor would be able to exist 
with fewer subscribers, but would not fulfil the League's require­
ments. But whether we would be able to get the number of 
subscribers needed for a weekly paper was, as we have said, too 
uncertain for us to enter into the necessary engagements. We 
therefore resolved as follows: To start with, a specimen number will 
appear in July free of charge. Then the individual communities will 
have to send word through their circles how many members they 
have,  for the Congress has decided that at least as long as the journal 
is a monthly, every member pays for  one  copy, but every community 
receives only one, and the remainder are distributed free. League 
members must, moreover, make enquiries regarding the number of 
copies which can with certainty be sold in their area, gather 
subscribers and report on this, too. Then in November, taking 
account of the notices received by the Central Authority, the 
Congress will take further decisions and if possible launch the 
journal before the New Year. In the meantime the London printing 
press will be used to print pamphlets. 344 
Finally, the question of the Communist Credo. The Congress 
realised that the public proclamation ôf the principles of the League 
was a step of the greatest importance; that a credo which in a few 
a Wilhelm Wolff.—Ed. 

=====第626页=====
598 Appendices 
years,  perhaps months, might no longer suit the times and no longer 
correspond to the spirit of the majority, would be as harmful as a 
suitable credo would be useful; that this step had to be considered 
with particular care and must not be taken too hastily. Here, just as 
on the question of the League organ, the Congress became aware 
that it could not act definitively but only in a constituent role, that it 
had to give new food to the re-awakening life in the League by 
discussion on the plan of a credo. Hence, the Congress resolved to 
draft this plan and to submit it to the communities for discussion, so 
that proposals could be formulated for amendments and additions to 
be submitted to the Central Authority. The plan is appended.3 We 
recommend it for serious and mature consideration by the 
communities. We have tried on the one hand to refrain from all 
system-making and all barrack-room communism, and on the other 
to avoid the fatuous and vapid sentimentality of the tearful, 
emotional Communists345; we have, on the contrary, tried always to 
keep firm ground under our feet by the constant consideration of 
the social relations which alone have given rise to communism. We 
hope that the Central Authority will receive from you very many 
proposals for additions and amendments, and we will call on you 
again to discuss the subject with particular zest.b 
This,  dear Brothers, is the survey, the outcome, of our delibera­
tions.  We would very much have liked to have definitively settled the 
items before us, to have founded the League organ, to have 
proclaimed the communist principles in a credo. But in the interest 
of the League, in the interest of the comm[unist] movement, we had 
to set limits to ourselves here, we had to appeal anew to the majority, 
and to leave it to the second Congress to carry through what we have 
prepared. 
It is now for you, dear Brothers, to prove that you have the cause 
of the League, the cause of communism, at heart. The League has 
emerged victorious from a period of decline. Apathy and laxity 
have been overcome, the hostile elements which had arisen in the 
League itself have been eliminated. New elements have joined it. 
The future of the League is secure. But, dear Brothers, our position 
is not yet such that we can for one moment relax our efforts; all 
wounds are not yet healed, all gaps have not yet been filled, many 
painful effects of the struggle we have gone through can still 
be felt. Therefore the interest of the League, the communist cause, 
still demands of you a short period of the most strenuous activity; 
a See this volume, pp. 96-103.— Ed. 
b From the following paragraph the handwriting is again Wilhelm Wolff's.—Ed. 

=====第627页=====
Appendices 599 
therefore for a few months you must not even for a moment weary in 
your work. Extraordinary circumstances demand extraordinary 
effort. A crisis such as our League has gone through, a crisis in which 
we had first to fight the fatigue caused by the heavy pressure of 
German and other police harassments and, even more, caused by the 
hope of an early improvement in social conditions apparently 
receding ever further from fulfilment; a crisis, furthermore, in 
which we not only had to fight the persecutions of our enemies, of 
governments either dominated by or allied to the bourgeoisie against 
us, but in which we found enemies in our midst who had to be fought 
and rendered harmless, with regard only for the threatened position 
of the League, for the menacing disorganisation of the entire 
German-speaking Communist Party, without any consideration of 
persons; Brothers, one does not recover from such a crisis overnight. 
And even if the existence of the League, the strength of the 
organisation, is re-established, there will have to be months of 
unceasing work before we can say: We have done our duty as 
Communists, our duty as League members. 
Brothers! In the firm conviction that you will feel the importance 
of the situation as much as we do; in the firm conviction that you will 
nevertheless be fully equal to these difficult circumstances, we 
confidently appeal to you, to your enthusiasm for the cause of the 
community! We know that the bourgeoisie's infamous lust for gain 
leaves you hardly a moment to work for the cause; we know that it 
presses down to the lowest limit even the miserable wage it gives you 
for your hard work; we know that just now famine and the slump 
in business weigh on you especially heavily; we know that it 
persecutes you, imprisons you, ruins your health and endangers 
your lives if you find time and money despite all to work for the 
interest of the community; we know all that, and in spite of 
everything we have not hesitated for one moment to appeal to you 
for new financial sacrifices, to call on you to redouble your activity. 
For we ourselves would have to withdraw from the whole movement, 
blushing and ashamed, if we did not know that the men who elected 
us to decide on the good of the whole, will vigorously and 
unhesitatingly put our resolutions into practice; if we did not know 
that there is no one in our League for whom the interest of the 
Communist Party, the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the victory of 
the community is not his very own, his dearest interest; if we did not 
know that people with sufficient determination to organise a league 
which exposes them to great dangers are also determined and 
steadfast enough to defy these dangers and to make this League 
great and mighty over the whole of Europe; if we did not know, 

=====第628页=====
600 Appendices 
finally, that such people are the more courageous, the more active, 
the more enthusiastic, the greater the obstacles they face. 
Brothers! We represent a great, a wonderful cause. We proclaim 
the greatest revolution ever proclaimed in the world, a revolution 
which for its thoroughness and wealth of consequences has no equal 
in world history. We do not know how far it will be granted to us to 
share in the fruits of this revolution. But this we know, that this 
revolution is drawing near in all its might; this we see, that 
everywhere, in France as in Germany, in England as in America, the 
angry masses of the proletariat are in motion and are demanding 
their liberation from the fetters of money rule, from the fetters of 
the bourgeoisie, with a voice that is often still confused but is 
becoming ever louder and clearer. This we see, that the bourgeois 
class is getting ever richer, that the middle classes are being more and 
more ruined and that thus historical development itself strives 
towards a great revolution which will one day burst out, through the 
distress of the people and the wantonness of the rich. Brothers, we 
all hope to live to see that day, and even if last spring we did not get 
the chance to take up arms, as the letter of the Hallt predicted we 
might, do not let that disconcert you! The day is coming, and on the 
day when the masses of the people with their solid ranks scatter the 
mercenaries of the capitalists: on that day it will be revealed what our 
League was and how it worked! And even if we should not live to see 
all the fruits of the great struggle, even if hundreds of us fall under 
the grapeshot of the bourgeoisie, all of us, even the fallen, have lived 
to be in the struggle, and this struggle, this victory alone is worth a life 
of the most strenuous work. 
And so, farewell! 
In the name of the Congress, 
Heide,h The President, 
Secretary Karl Schill 0 
London,June 9, 1847 
First published in the book: Printed according to the manu-
Gründungsdokumente des Bundes script 
der Kommunisten (Juni bis September 1847), 
Hamburg 1969 Published in English for the first 
time 
a "Ansprache der Volkshalle des Bundes der Gerechten an den Bund", Februar 
1847.— Ed. 
b Wilhelm Wolff.—Ed. 
Karl Schapper. —Ed. 

=====第629页=====
NOTE BY MARX 
ON THE FORMATION OF THE BRUSSELS COMMUNITY 
AND CIRCLE OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE 
AUGUST 5, 1847 
August 5. Constitution of the new Community. 
Elected : President—Marx 
Secretary and Treasurer: Gigot 
Circle Authority: Gigot, Junge, Marx,  Wolff. 
First published in Russian in the book: 
Y. P. Kandel, Marx and Engels —Organisers 
of the Communist League, Moscow, 1953 Printed according to the manu­
script 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第630页=====
THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY TO THE LEAGUE 
Working Men of All Countries, Unite! Brothers: ° 
Three months have now passed since the Congress was held and 
its Circular2 was dispatched to you; we therefore now send you 
another report on our activity since then, and give you a summary of 
the present state of the League. 
We regret that we are unable to send you very encouraging news, 
but we have resolved to tell you the plain truth, be it encouraging or 
disheartening. Some of you may well think that emphasis should 
always be placed on the bright side of the situation so that people 
should not lose heart; we on the contrary are of the opinion that all 
should know the enormous and diverse difficulties with which we 
have to contend. Real men will not be deterred by this, but on the 
contrary spurred on to new activity. 
As long as our League is not strongly and firmly established, as 
long as it fails to intervene effectively in the course of events, our 
influence will be insignificant. Admittedly we now have a new basis, 
and in some places people seem to work with new enthusiasm but on 
the whole we are stillb far from the position we should have reached 
long ago. When the Congress Circular was dispatched we hoped we 
would receive favourable and definite replies to it from all quarters. 
The Central Authority had enclosed with it an accompanying letter 
calling attention once more to the points requiring a response and 
requesting prompt and definite replies.347 
a See this volume, pp. 589-600.—Ed. 
The original has "noch nicht" (still not).—Ed. 

=====第631页=====
Appendices 603 
So far we have only received a definite reply from the Brussels* 
circle, other places have only acknowledged receipt of the Circular, 
thanked us for our efforts, made some general comments, and no 
more. 
What is the cause of this negligence and where is it going to lead 
us? Many German proletarians are anxious to liberate themselves, 
but, if they do not set about the task more energetically than they 
have done so far, they will indeed not make much progress. We can't 
wait for things to fall into our lap. Many people are hindered in their 
activity by their mental sluggishness; others talk a great deal but 
when money contributions are requested they pull long faces, make 
all manner of excuses and give nothing; others again possess a large 
share of bourgeois cowardice, see policemen and gendarmes at every 
turn and never believe it is time to act. It gives one the gripes to see 
all the goings-on. The majority of the proletarians, and the most 
active at that—those in Silesia, Saxony, Rhenish Prussia, Westphalia 
and Hesse have poor or indeed no leadership, at least no communist 
one. 
We therefore call upon all members of our League once more to 
rise up at last out of their sleep and set to work, and we demand that 
first of all definite replies to the Congress Circular be sent in so that 
we can at least know whom we can count upon. 
After the Congress was over we sent the Congress Circular, the 
new Rules,3 the Communist Credob and an accompanying letter from 
the Central Authority to ten towns in Switzerland, France, Belgium, 
Germany and Sweden where we have communities. In addition we 
sent out from London two authorised emissaries to America, one to 
Norway, one to Germany and one to Holland.0 All promised the 
Central Authority to work to the best of their ability and to set up 
new communities in the places in which they settled and to put them 
in touch with us. 
In accordance with the resolution adopted at the Congress the 
League's new newspaper0 should have begun to appear in August348 
and we had been promised articles and also financial support for it; 
all League members were moreover requested to give all the help 
* Yesterday we received a letter from Leipzig, for details see below. 
a See this volume, pp. 585-88.— Ed. 
b See this volume, pp. 96-103.—Ed. 
c Johann Dohl.—Ed. 
Kommunistische Zeitschrift. —Ed. 

=====第632页=====
604 Appendices 
they could. Unfortunately here again most promises have been 
confined to words alone. Apart from the Brussels circle, which for 
the time being made a monthly allocation of one pound sterling for 
printing expenses and five francs for propaganda and Brother 
Heide 3 who sent us an article, we have received nothing so far. The 
editorial commission, which from one week to the next was being 
promised the necessary articles, was finally compelled to do 
everything  itself,  so as at least to be able to get the specimen issue out. 
If we do not receive better support in the future than we have 
received so far, we shall not make any progress here either. In order 
to set up our printing-press properly, so that besides the League 
newspaper we can also print leaflets and small pamphlets, we still 
need another 600 francs. We are not in a position to raise this sum in 
London alone. 
Since the Congress Circular was sent out we have received news 
from the following places. 
Sweden. We received a letter dated Upsala, May 23 from our 
emissaryb  who travelled to Sweden via Helsingör, crossing the whole 
country on foot. Here in London, having nothing else, he had filled 
his kitbag with communist leaflets which he successfully took over 
the border into Sweden. He writes that in all towns where there are 
German workers, he called on them in their workshops, distributed 
our leaflets among them and found their response to our ideas most 
enthusiastic. Unfortunately, since he did not find any work he was 
unable to stay in any one place long enough to set up a community. 
In Stockholm he transmitted to the local community (our communist 
outpost in the North) the first two circulars from the Central 
Authority, 349 and his news lent the Brothers there new heart. From 
Stockholm he went to Upsala, from there on to Gävle, where he 
worked for a time, and is now on the way to Umeâ and Tornea. A 
communist emissary among the Lapps! 
A member of the League who arrived in London from Karlskrona 
informed us: Brother C, who was previously working in Paris and 
London, has set up communities in W. and there are already over a 
hundred League members there now. The Brother from Karlskrona 
gave us C.'s address and we shall be sending him this Circular 
together with the New Rules and a special appeal for the League 
members there. From Stockholm we have received a letter dated July 
8 saying that our Brothers there are most zealous supporters of our 
a Wilhelm Wolff.—Ed. 
b Albert August Anders.—Ed. 

=====第633页=====
Appendices 605 
principles. A public attack on communism made by a local priest was 
countered by a League member, Brother Forsell, in a pamphlet 
written in Swedish in which he expounded our principles to the 
people as well. 3 Sweden's biggest newspaper, the Aftonbladet, also 
defends communism against the clerics. We were also told in the 
letter: "The educational society here in Stockholm, which we were 
formerly able to regard as a gateway to communism has now 
unfortunately landed in the clutches of the philistines. On the other 
hand the democratic element within the local Scandinavian society,350 
of which we are all members and which has one of us as President, is 
pure and unsullied and it is from this society that we recruit our 
members." Immediately on receiving this letter we made handwrit­
ten copies of the Congress Circular, the Communist Credo and the 
Rules in Latin characters (since most Swedes cannot read German 
letters) and then sent them everything by post. We are now waiting 
for their reply to this dispatch. 
Germany. Approximately six weeks ago an emissary from here 
went to Berlin taking with him letters from us for the Brothers there, 
and, in order to put new heart into them, exhorting them to be 
steadfast. He was to spend only about a week there and then travel to 
Leipzig, from where he was to send us a report. We are expecting 
news shortly. 
The Brothers in Br.b acknowledged receipt of our letters and 
promised to send us a detailed reply in the immediate future, which 
they have not yet done. 
The Brothers in Hamburg acknowledge receipt of our letters and 
express their regret that the name League of the Just has been 
changed and wish the former name restored: they also inform us 
that it is not at all to their liking when the supporters of W. Weitling 
and Grün are exposed to such hostile criticism, as was the case in the 
Congress Circular. They call for moderation and unity and write: 
"Whether someone stands one rung higher or lower as regards the 
main principle, that is no reason for us to persecute him and cause a 
split, for how do you think we can make an impact if we take such a 
one-sided approach. We attract all forces who wish for progress and 
then seek to win them over to our ideas gradually by persuasion." 
We must reply to the Brothers in Hamburg that the reasons for 
the change in the name notified in the Congress Circular0 are 
Carl Daniel Forsell, Kommunismen och kristendomen... —Ed. 
Probably Breslau or Bremen.—Ed. 
c See this volume, p.  595.—Ed. 

=====第634页=====
606 Appendices 
significant ones and that if no important counter-arguments are put 
forward, the Central Authority will defend the retention of the name 
Communist League at the next Congress. This latter name says 
clearly what we are and what we want, which the previous one did 
not. League of the Just says everything and nothing, but we must be 
definite. The Hamburg Brothers would do well to read the reasons 
given in the Congress Circular once more—if they can refute those 
arguments then we shall agree with them—we have no right to take 
mere emotions into consideration. 
As regards the second point we stress that we are in no way 
persecuting Weitling's and Griin's supporters, but purely and simply 
representing them in their true colours. It is time we came to our 
senses and therefore we can no longer waste time on dreamers and 
system-mongers who have no energy for action—we will drag no 
corpse along behind us. Grün's supporters are people who chatter a 
great deal about equality without knowing what the word means, 
who criticise everything except themselves, in other words, opinion­
ated men who talk a great deal, but do nothing. We are no elegant 
bourgeois and therefore do not beat about the bush but say what we 
think, i. e., call things by their names. 
For over ten years moderation, forbearance and unity have been 
preached in the League and with all this preaching, with all this 
brotherly love we have accomplished virtually nothing, and last year 
the League almost collapsed entirely. We must put an end to this; it is 
wrong to demand that we should spend our whole life on trifles and 
idle dreams. Our opinion is that 100 active members are better than 
1,000 of whom half are indecisive and lukewarm. Instead of looking 
back and helping the lame to catch up, we march boldly forward, 
which will probably get others to their feet somewhat more nimbly as 
well. The Brothers in Hamburg incidentally do not seem to have got 
very far with their moderation, for they make no allusion to the 
dispatch of money for propaganda and printing, and as for the 
League's newspaper they declare that they are only in a position to 
take a few copies in view of growing unemployment. 
We must make it clear here that every member of the League is 
bound to take a copy of the newspaper; if he is not able to pay for it, 
then the community he belongs to must do so for him. 
Once more, Brothers, let us not allow all our strength to be 
undermined through untimely moderation, through lumping to­
gether opposing forces and thus become a laughing-stock for the 
other parties. We can make a powerful impact, if we only have the 
will, and if we do have the will there is only one thing we need: 
courage! courage! and once again courage! If people are unable or 

=====第635页=====
Appendices 607 
unwilling to go as far as we do—all well and good; if their intentions 
are honest, we shall not cease to respect them, but when we are called 
upon to step backwards in order to join up with such people, then we 
reply: Never! 
Not long ago our Brothers in Leipzig wrote that several members 
who had been intimidated by the somewhat stark terms of the 
Central Authority's circular had withdrawn their membership. The 
others promised to remain loyally united and work to the best of 
their ability. We can only congratulate the Brothers in Leipzig on 
having rid themselves of people who lacked the courage to behave as 
men. The letter which we received from Leipzig yesterday was 
already written in a quite different and more forceful style than 
previous letters, which shows that the community there is no longer 
dogged by indecisiveness. 
First of all the community in Leipzig believes that it was necessary 
to phrase the Credo in terms more scientific and more suitable for all 
social classes. They suggest an almost complete recast and give their 
reasons for this. We shall put the suggested changes before the next 
Congress for discussion. The Central Authority agrees with the 
majority of the points listed in their letter. The community states 
further that apart from copies of our newspaper for all the members, 
they wish to take an extra 12 for distribution. If all communities were 
to follow the example provided in Leipzig, the League's newspaper 
could appear weekly and at half the price. We request that all 
contributions for propaganda and printing that have been collected 
should be sent in as soon as possible. We hope that a second 
community can soon be set up in Leipzig; if this does not however 
take place this community could adhere to those in Berlin351; we shall 
take the necessary steps for this. 
From Mna we have received no news, nor do we know any address 
there, for our correspondent in that town is supposed to have left for 
Paris.  We shall try to restore contact with the communities there as 
soon as possible. 
We were unable to send the Congress Circular to Mainz by post. It 
was not until four weeks ago that a member from here left for that 
destination with whom we dispatched everything. Thus we could not 
have received an answer from there yet. In a letter which we received 
from the Mainz members some time back we were informed that a 
second community was about to be set up, which means a circle will 
be formed. Our Brothers in Mainz are being constantly subjected to 
a Probably Munich or Manheim. The Congress Circular to the Communist League 
(June 1847) mentions communities in both cities.—Ed. 

=====第636页=====
608 Appendices 
police harassment, but this only serves to spur them on to work all 
the more energetically for our cause. Credit is due to the gallant 
proletarians in Mainz; if people were as active as that all ovei 
Germany, our prospects would be brilliant. 
Holland. In Amsterdam an educational society has been set up 
which is in touch with us and has competent men. Three weeks ago 
we sent an authorised emissary there to set up a community.352 
America. The emissary who this spring set out for New York from 
here paints us a sad picture of the state of the League in the New 
World. In New York the League had already made remarkable 
progress when Weitling arrived 3 and sowed discord there. The 
meetings were soon the scene of violent disputes and the result was 
that the whole set-up collapsed. The communities in New York had 
earlier always been urging us to be moderate and begging us most 
earnestly to be reconciled with Weitling. After they themselves, a 
fortnight after Weitling's arrival, entered into a bitter conflict with 
him, our correspondents there lost heart to such an extent that they 
no longer wished to write to us any more so as not to have to reveal 
the sad state of the League there. This is what the emissary sent to 
New York writes; in this situation he himself was unable to do 
anything in New York and has now left for the state of Wisconsin, 
where he promises to promote our cause to the best of his ability. 
In Philadelphia there are still several League members whom we 
have earnestly begged to set up communities there again. We have 
instructed the two emissaries who left from here for New York and 
Philadelphia to do their utmost so that the League may be restored in 
the above-mentioned places, in accordance with the improved Rules. 
France. In Marseilles things are as before. A number of members 
from Lyons have gone there, promising to do their very best to inject 
new life into the League. 
From Lyons we have received word that the League members are 
sparing no effort in our work and are discussing the Credo. The 
Lyons circle endorses the new Rules with the exception of Sec­
tion VII, concerning conditions of membership.15 The Lyons mem­
bers believe it to be unnecessary to demand that new members take 
an oath for there are countless cases of people taking all manner 
of oaths and not keeping any of them; attention should be paid 
mainly to conduct. We call the Lyons members' attention to the fact 
that no oath is demanded, but only the new member's word of 
honour. The Lyons members also write: 
a Early in 1847.—Ed. 
b See this volume, p.  588.—Ed. 

=====第637页=====
Appendices 609 
"Since now in September we are again in a critical position, we beg 
you to ask the Parisians if they could not spare a few competent 
members, who would be ready to make a sacrifice for the common 
cause and settle in Lyons for a time. The old members all want to 
leave here and we are therefore short of people who can take over 
the leadership. 
"So try to prevent the possibility of this community breaking up. 
"As for the newspaper which you will be putting out, we cannot yet 
stipulate how many copies we can take, because everything will 
change." 
Not a word about money for printing and propaganda. 
We urgently request our Brothers in Paris to send a few competent 
members to Lyons as soon as possible. 
From Paris we have been informed that the Rules have been 
unanimously endorsed there, that the Credo is being discussed in the 
various communities and that the membership has increased 
considerably. We have not yet heard anything about the results of 
their discussions or any news as to whether money is being collected 
for printing and propaganda. But it must be said to the credit of the 
Parisians that they recently made significant money contributions by 
sending a delegate to the Congress3 and an emissary to Switzerland.0 
It unfortunately emerges from a private letter written by a Parisian 
League member^ and handed to the Central Authority, that there 
are still many people in the Paris communities who have not yet 
shaken themselves free of Grün's nonsense and Proudhon's most 
strange ideas. Oddly enough, these people, who are members of the 
Communist League, seem to reject communism; they want equality 
and nothing else. This inner split also seems to be the reason why we 
so seldom receive any news from Paris. Proudhon has become such a 
truly German philosopher that he no longer knows himself what he 
wants;  Grün has made Proudhon's ideas still more obscure, 353 so it is 
now clearly impossible to demand that the people who follow these 
two really know where they are going. We urge Proudhon's and 
Grün's supporters to read Marx's Misere de la philosophie, which we 
have heard has already been translated into German. 354 Then they 
will see that their state where all are equal and which they demand 
with a great deal of talk and fuss is no different from that of today. 
This leads people round and round in circles, chasing false ideas, 
only to end up where they started. 
a Frederick Engels. —Ed. 
b Stephan Born.—Ed. 
c Probably Frederick Engels. —Ed. 

=====第638页=====
610 Appendices 
We call upon the Communists in Paris to stand firm together and 
to work to rid their communities of these false ideas. If Grün's and 
Proudhon's supporters insist on their principles, then, if they wish to 
remain men of honour, they should leave the League and start 
working on their own. There is only room for Communists in our 
League. As long as there are followers of Grün in our communities, 
neither they nor we can conduct effective propaganda; our forces 
will be divided and our young people low in spirits; so separation is 
better than an internal split. 355 
Weitling's expelled supporters have again sent us a long letter in 
which they inveigh against us and the Paris communities maintaining 
that it is they who are the real Communists. At the end of their letter 
they ask for a reliable address for they have further instructions for 
us. Yet they make no reference to the fact that they, although in the 
minority, appropriated the whole Paris League's treasury which one 
of them had in his keeping. Such behaviour most certainly accords 
with their leader's theory on theft.3 
We wrote to them in very polite terms saying that we had acted in 
accordance with our duty and convinctions and would also insist on 
what we considered to be right. Their abuse could not therefore hurt 
us. We sent them the address they asked for but have not heard 
anything more from them since. 
Switzerland. The Central Authority informed the Brothers in La 
Chaux-de-Fonds of the imminent arrival of an emissary0 and urged 
them to work with all their might towards a reorganisation of the 
League in Switzerland. 
The Berne community has of late appeared in a somewhat 
dubious light. We were informed that they were planning to bring 
out a communist newspaper, Der Wanderer and our support was 
requested. 
We sent off 25 francs and a remittance for 50 francs to Lausanne 
and La Chaux-de-Fonds. However, this money was used by the 
Berne members to print leaflets by Karl Heinzen, who even then had 
already shown himself to be the bitterest enemy of the Communists. 
On June 29 we received another letter from Berne which informed 
us that the Young Germany356  group were making use of all possible 
means to work against the Communists in Switzerland and urged us 
to found a press organ as soon as possible. At the same time they sent 
us a small leaflet entitled Der deutsche  Hunger und die  deutschen  Fürsten 
a An allusion to W. Weitling's book: Das Evangelium eines armen Sünders in which 
he acquits theft as a means of struggle against capitalism (S. 126-33).—Ed. 
Stephan Born.—Ed. 

=====第639页=====
Appendices 611 
and asked for voluntary contributions so that the "Kriegsartikel", 3 
"Vorbereitung", etc., might be more widely distributed. It was 
stated: "Certain members of the republican party may well have 
noble intentions, our worthy Heinzen for example, but his hands are 
tied; he is not the soul of the German republican movement but its 
right hand for the moment, etc." 
Heinzen attacks the Communists most violently; yet the Berne 
community is printing and circulating his pamphlets and seems to be 
in close touch with him. This appeared to us suspicious and indeed 
still does so. We do not want to let ourselves be led by the nose; every 
honest man must hold up his banner for all to see today. So we wrote 
a serious letter to the Berne community asking for a prompt 
explanation, but as yet have received no reply. 
Our emissary writes from Geneva that our affairs are progressing 
in a most heartening way there. Two League members succeeded in 
setting up a community in Geneva this spring. While the emissary 
was there a second came into being and a third was planned. In 
addition there is a public society there which is being used to train 
efficient Communists. In Geneva our party seems once again to have 
found a firm footing, and if our Brothers there continue to work as 
hard as before, then the Communists in Switzerland will soon be 
stronger than ever. Weitling's expelled supporters, our emissary 
writes, have already sent to La Chaux-de-Fonds several letters full of 
the most shameful personal insults to several League members and 
calling upon the local members to join them. However the 
communities in La Chaux-de-Fonds have not complied with those 
people's solicitation and are waiting till our emissary arrives before 
giving them a final answer. From Geneva the emissary contacted 
Petersen in Lausanne who still enjoys quite significant influence 
among the Communists in Switzerland. We hope the former will 
succeed in winning him over for our movement. 
Weitling's followers in Paris have sent a certain Hornschuh as their 
emissary to Switzerland with the money stolen from our League, in 
order to bring the communities there over to their side. This 
Hornschuh is at present in Lausanne. Before that he was in London; 
we therefore know precisely what he is and can assure you that he is 
quite incapable of any kind of propaganda work. He is a horribly 
tedious windbag and in other respects worth precious little as well. 
When he left London he asked his community for a small advance 
for the journey promising to pay the money back in the very near 
a Karl Heinzen, "Dreissig Kriegsartikeln der neuen Zeit für Offiziere und 
Gemeine". —Ed. 
21 — 1826 

=====第640页=====
612 Appendices 
future. The community granted him 25 francs. Two years have 
passed since then and Hornschuh, despite frequent reminders, has 
not paid anything back yet. It is really sad that people like 
Hornschuh, whose sole purpose is to indulge their laziness and 
self-conceit, still find opportunities to squander away the pro­
letarians' hard earned money. 
Our emissary is now touring the towns on Lake Geneva and will 
then visit La Chaux-de-Fonds, etc. He asked us for additional funds 
to be able to make this journey and we immediately sent him 50 
francs, which we were obliged to borrow however, since our 
resources are exhausted. 
Belgium. In Belgium our prospects are good. Since the Congress 
two circles have been set up in that country; we have not yet 
established direct contact with the one based in Liège but are 
expecting letters from them any day. 
The Brussels circle is in touch with the Rhenish Prussia people357 
and working most energetically. It has already set up a singing and 
an educational society358; both are led by League members and serve 
as a preparatory school for the League. 
The Rules were adopted in Brussels; however two alterations were 
proposed for discussion at the next Congress. The first concerns 
letter (e), Article 3, section I and the second—Article 21, Section V.a 
The Brussels members write: "We hold it for unpolitic to forbid 
League members to belong to any political or national organisation, 
since by doing so we deprive ourselves of all opportunities for 
influencing such organisations." Further on in connection with 
Article 21, they add: "If the present period were a more 
revolutionary one, the whole activity of the Congress would be 
hindered by this restriction. We recall that in 1794 the aristocrats put 
the same demand before the Convention, in order to paralyse all 
action."359 
We request the communities to consider these proposals more 
closely and to give their delegates to the next Congress appropriate 
instructions. 
As regards the Communist Credo a good number of important 
alterations were suggested, which we shall put before the Congress 
for discussion. 
As was mentioned above the Brussels circle allocated 25 francs for 
printing and has agreed to send 5 francs for propaganda work each 
month. We call upon the other circles to follow this example as soon 
as possible. 
a See this volume, p. 585 and p.  586.—Ed. 

=====第641页=====
Appendices 613 
London. The new Rules were unanimously adopted in London and 
lively discussion of the Credo is in progress in all communities. The 
local circle authority will be sending us all suggestions for 
amendments and additions as soon as the discussions are Over. 
During the last two months a large number of League members have 
left London but we shall have filled the resulting gaps soon. The 
educational societies provide us with preparatory schools, whose 
great benefit makes itself felt more and more with each passing 
day. 
In the London circle a remarkable sense of unity reigns and 
members are keen to devote all their energies to our cause. In the last 
six months we have spent here over 1,000 francs for pamphlets, etc., 
for the journal,3 postage and printing costs, Congress expenses, 
emissaries, etc. In addition, each member has to pay threepence a 
week into the educational society360 fund and, besides, hardly a 
meeting goes by without private collections being made for the 
needy. Over half our members are out of work and in dire straits, 
which means it is becoming impossible for us to bear all these 
expenses alone as we have done hitherto. We are therefore forced to 
request all circles and communities most earnestly to contribute as 
much as they can and as soon as possible to the complete installation 
of the League printing-press, continued publication of our paper 
and propaganda work: at the present moment our resources are 
completely exhausted. In the past we always used to send out money 
as soon as it was requested and so we believe we can rely on you not 
to leave us in the lurch now. 
The specimen number of our League newspaper sells well in 
London and arouses great interest among the foreigners living here. 
We have displayed it for sale in several bookshops and newsstands. 
We have sent copies to all our regular addresses and have another 
1,000 still available, so that we shall be able to send off copies 
wherever they are required. 
With this we come to the end of our report on the state of the 
League and our work; you can judge now for yourselves how things 
stand and whether the Central Authority has done its duty as the 
executive body of the League over the last three months. 
You will appreciate that although active work is being carried on 
here and there, as we noted at the beginning of this letter, in general 
we are still far from the point we should have reached long since. We 
therefore hope, Brothers, that you will now muster all your strength 
so that we shall make rapid steps forward and that in the next report 
a Kommunistische Zeitschrift. —Ed. 
L)|* 

=====第642页=====
614 Appendices 
we shall be able to give you more encouraging news than has been 
the case so far. 
However, before closing this letter we must ask you to pay par­
ticular attention to the following points. We earnestly request that: 
1) All circles and independent communities, if it is at all possible, 
must elect a delegate to the next congress and see to it that he will be 
able to come to London on November 29 of this year. You know that 
we were unable to adopt any definitive decisions at the First 
Congress361 and that it was thus considered necessary to hold a 
second one this year. The Second Congress will be most important 
because it has not only to formulate the Communist Credo but also to 
determine the final organisation of the League and its press organ 
and the future pattern of our propaganda work. It is therefore 
absolutely essential that as many delegates as possible attend this 
Congress. Brothers! We hope that you will not shrink from any 
sacrifices which the fulfilment of your duty may require; 
2) All circles and communities, which have not yet made any 
collections for printing and propaganda work must do so without 
delay. If everyone contributes something, then we shall be in a 
position to engage in forceful action. Without money we cannot 
carry on any propaganda work. Those circles and communities 
which have already made collections should dispatch the same to us 
as soon as possible; 
3) All circles and communities, which have not yet sent in definite 
replies to the Congress Circular should do so without delay; 
4) All circles and communities, which have not yet informed us 
how many copies of our newspaper they wish to take should do so at 
once.  In addition they should inform us of the best and most reliable 
ways of dispatching the paper to their respective localities; 
5) All circles and communities should inform us whether commu­
nist propaganda is being carried on in their particular region and if 
so what form it takes; 
.6) All members of the League should send to the editorial office 
essays and poems. Several members promised essays for the first 
issue, as observed earlier, but these promises have not been kept: we 
can only attribute this to negligence, which definitely ought not to be 
prevalent in our organisation. 
Hoping to receive favourable and definite news from you soon, we 
greet you in the name and on behalf of the Central Authority. 
Karl Schapper Henry Bauer 
Joseph Moll 
London, September 14, 1847 

=====第643页=====
Appendices 615 
P.S. Just as this letter was to be printed, letters arrived from our 
emissaries in Germany and Switzerland. 
From Germany it was reported that the enthusiasm of our 
Brothers in Berlin is extraordinary, particularly since the important 
events there.362 The government has indeed played straight into our 
hands.  Our principles were made public through the uproar about 
the Communists, and the people, instead of being scared away by 
these principles, became enthusiastic for them. The emissary 
concludes his letter with the words: "Brothers, we can look to the 
future with confidence—there are efficient men on every side who 
are championing the just cause." 
The news from Switzerland also sounds highly favourable. The 
League is organised there and now established in more than ten 
different localities. Petersen has been won over. The emissary writes: 
"In La Chaux-de-Fonds and Le Locle I believe we have the best and 
most devoted members of our League. Their courage is unshak­
able."  Bravo, Brothers—forward! Weitling's expelled followers have 
been turned away wherever they went. The misunderstanding with 
the Berne community has been clarified. We now declare that we 
were unjust towards the Brothers there. They adhere firmly to our 
principles. We are extremely happy to be able to announce this. 
More details will be supplied in the next report. 
The Central Authority 
Karl Schapper Joseph Moll 
Henry Bauer 
First published in the book: Printed according to the manu-
Grundungsdokumente des Bundes script 
der Kommunisten (Juni bis September 1847), 
Hamburg 1969 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第644页=====
THE NORTHERN STAR 
ON THE MEETING IN LONDON ON NOVEMBER 29, 1847 
TO MARK THE 17TH ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE POLISH INSURRECTION OF 1830MS 
The anniversary of the Polish Insurrection of 1830 was celebrated 
on Monday last, the 29th of November, by a public meeting, at the 
German Society's Hall, Drury Lane. 
The meeting had been called by the society of Fraternal 
Democrats, in conjunction with the Democratic Committee for 
Poland's Regeneration. The room was crowded with natives of 
England, Scotland, Ireland, France, Germany, Belgium, and Poland. 
Mr. John Arnott was elected president. Having stated the object of 
the meeting, the Chairman called on Mr. Stallwood to move the first 
resolution. 
Mr. Stallwood, after recounting the heroism of the brave Poles at 
Warsaw, and their unbounded devotion to the cause of liberty, and 
eulogising the "Cracow manifesto" 364 as a model for democratic 
creeds, moved the first resolution as follows:— 
"That we regard the dismemberment of Poland as an atrocious 
crime worthy of the everlasting execration of the human race. That 
we remember with grateful admiration the heroic efforts made by 
the Polish people in 1830-31 for the recovery of their country's 
independence. That we honour the sacred memories of the martyrs 
who have perished in the glorious struggle to redeem their nation 
from slavery; and that we sympathise with all the victims of 
oppression at present suffering in dungeons, chains, and exile." 
The Chairman then introduced 
Mr. Ernest Jones, to second the resolution. Mr. Jones said: 
To-night, seventeen years ago, Poland woke from her death-sleep, 
for her death-struggle; to-night, seventeen years ago, she strained 
her bleeding limbs on the Russian rack, and burst her cords; 
to-night, seventeen years ago, she rose from a province into a nation! 
(Cheers.) Warsaw was silent. Russia never less expected insurrec-

=====第645页=====
Appendices 617 
tion—when the flame burst forth. Mr. Jones then gave a vivid 
description of the progress and triumph of the insurrection in 
Warsaw, particularly dwelling on the circumstance, that until the 
populace were armed, the issue was doubtful. Then the effect was 
electrical, and in a few hours, Constantine, the mighty prince, had 
passed the barrier of Mockstow, with his 11,000 Russians, and spent 
the night a shivering outcast, beneath a leafless tree. (Applause.) The 
speaker then alluded to the subsequent course of the insurrection, 
and expressed his belief that it would have been successful, had it 
been an insurrection of the people, instead of the aristocracy—had it 
been based on a manifesto, like the glorious one of Cracow. (Cheers.) 
But still we need not despond—Poland is ready for a fresh 
struggle—we have an army of martyrs to canonise—we have an army 
of heroes to come—and the aspect of Europe forebodes their 
triumph. The speaker then showed how every country in Europe 
was on the brink of internal change, analysed the secret weakness of 
the great powers, and, after a forcible and stirring allusion to 
Ireland, concluded by calling on his hearers to prepare for the 
approaching struggle at home and abroad. Mr. Jones' speech was 
one of great force and eloquence, and excited enthusiastic applause. 
M. Michelot, in an energetic speech, delivered in the French 
language, supported the resolution, which was carried unanimously. 
Carl Schapper rose, amidst great applause, to move the second 
resolution, and said: Citizens, when men struggle onwards for truth 
and liberty in a great cause, though they may not at first succeed, 
they must ultimately prevail—and such men were worthy of all 
honour—and hence he said honour to the brave Poles. (Loud 
cheers.) Honour to those who died before Warsaw—honour to those 
who died by the hand of the public executioner—honour to those 
who perished in the mines of Siberia, and to those who fell at Cracow, 
and to all the martyrs for liberty. (Great applause.) In July 1830, 
France had her revolution, and in the November following, the cry 
for universal liberty prevailed, and many wished Poland free from 
Russia, but did not wish Polish serfdom abolished; and he verily 
believed, had it not been for this desire on the part of the Polish 
nobles to perpetuate the slavery of the masses, the revolution would 
have succeeded, and the whole Slavonic race would now have been 
free.  (Loud cheers.) But the Polish proletarians asked, "What is it to 
us if Poland be free from Russian domination, whilst I am subject to 
the knout of the Polish noble?" (Hear, hear.) Well, the revolution 
failed and Poland's sons emigrated, carrying the seeds of freedom 
with them to Germany, to France, to England, and other nations, 
and returned with renewed spirit to the Polish soil in 1845; and 

=====第646页=====
618 Appendices 
issued their famous and ever glorious manifesto of democratic 
sentiments from the Republic of Cracow. (Great applause.) But, alas, 
the effort was futile, the bad seed sown in 1830 produced a bad 
harvest, the tyrants were enabled to employ the peasantry against the 
patriots,365 and the revolt was crushed, and the black spirit of 
Metternich again gloated in the blood of the fallen martyrs of 
Poland. (Hear, hear.) But happily fraternity was fast spreading, the 
principles of political and social equality were abroad. (Loud cheers.) 
Look at Switzerland.366  (Great applause.) And liberty would progress 
in spite of the old bloodless spider of the Tuileries. (Groans for "the 
spider".) The Swiss Radicals had beaten Louis Philippe and Guizot. 
Then came the beautiful Lord Palmerston, who said, "Let us have 
the thing settled amicably." "Ay," responded the helpless old spider 
of Paris, "that's just what I wanted." (Laughter.) And not a single 
regiment had entered Switzerland, the old spider dared not send 
them. (Loud cheers.) Well, this was the progress of democracy. Who 
were the conspirators now? Why, Metternich, the bloodless old 
spider in France, Lord Palmerston, and the Jesuits. (Loud cheers.) 
But the people would very quickly put down their conspiracy. (Great 
cheering.) He had some glorious news for them, a Democratic 
Society, 367 that is a Society of Fraternal Democrats, had been 
established in Brussels, and that society had sent a deputy, the 
learned Dr. Marx, to represent them at this meeting. (Great 
applause.) Citizen Schapper here read the following document:— 
" To the Members of the Society of Fraternal Democrats 
"Assembling in London 
"We,  the undersigned members of the committee of the 
Democratic Society, established at Brussels, for advancing the Union 
and Fraternity of all Nations, have the honour to delegate to you, Dr. 
Charles Marx, vice-president of this committee, for the purpose of 
establishing relations of correspondence and sympathy between the 
two societies. M. Marx has full power to act in the name of this 
committee for the purposes above mentioned. 
"We present to you our fraternal salutations. 
"Mellinet (General), honorary president. 
"Jottrand, president. 
"Imbert, vice-president. 
"Picard, secretary. 
"George Weerth. 
"Lelewel. 
"Brussels, Nov. 26th, 1847." 

=====第647页=====
Appendices 619 
The above address was received with enthusiastic applause. 
C. Schapper after highly complimenting the great Polish patriot 
Lelewel, and the grey-haired veteran—"the child of the French 
Republic"—General Mellinet, concluded by proposing the following 
resolution:— 
"That in pledging all the aid in our power to the Polish patriots, we 
desire to express our unqualified dissent from the aristocratic spirit 
which so fatally influenced thç struggle of 1830. We recognise in the 
Cracow Manifesto of 1846 the manifestation of Polish progress, 
embracing the broad principles of political democracy and social 
justice, on which alone can be founded veritable liberty and public 
happiness." 
T. Lucas in seconding the resolution, expressed his pleasure in 
meeting so many of his brother democrats. Certain he was that when 
the English democrats (the Chartists) obtained their liberty, they 
would be enabled to say to "the old spider in Paris", and all other 
tyrants "thus far shall ye go but no farther". (Cheers.) The 
resolution was then unanimously adopted. 
Dr. Marx, the delegate from Brussels, then came forward, and was 
greeted with every demonstration of welcome, and delivered an 
energetic oration in the German language, the substance of which 
was as follows—He had been sent by the Democrats of Brussels to 
speak in their name to the Democrats of London, and through them 
to the Democrats of Britain, to call on them to cause to be holden a 
congress of nations—a congress of working men, to establish liberty 
all over the world. (Loud cheers.) The middle classes, the Free 
Traders, had held a congress, but their fraternity was a one-sided one, 
and the moment they found that such congresses were likely to 
benefit working men, that moment their fraternity would cease, and 
their congresses be dissolved. 368 (Hear, hear.) The Democrats of 
Belgium felt that the Chartists of England were the real Democrats, 
and that the moment they carried the six points of their Charter, the 
road to liberty would be opened to the whole world. "Effect this 
grand object, then, you working men of England," said the speaker, 
"and you will be hailed as the saviours of the whole human race." 
(Tremendous cheering.) 
Julian Harney moved the next resolution as follows:— 
"That this meeting rejoices to learn of the establishment of a 
Society of Fraternal Democrats in Brussels, and responding to the 
alliance offered by that society, receives its delegate, Dr. Marx, with 
every feeling of fraternal regard; and this meeting hails with 
exultation the proposition to hold a Democratic Congress of all 
ations, pledging itself to send delegates to that Congress whenever 

=====第648页=====
620 Appendices 
summoned by the Fraternal Democratic Societies of London and 
Brussels." 
The mover of the resolution then proceeded to address the 
meeting at considerable length, on the Polish insurrection of 1830, 
the progress of Chartism; the prospect of an energetic movement in 
this country for the obtainment of the Charter, the importance of the 
Society of Fraternal Democrats, and the vast utility  Q! the suggested 
Democratic Congress of all nations. His remarks were enthusi­
astically cheered. 
Mr. Stallwood seconded the resolution, which was carried unani­
mously. 
Three thundering cheers were then given for the glorious Lelewel, 
three for the heroic General Mellinet, and three for the democrats of 
Brussels. 
Charles Keen moved the fourth resolution as follows: 
"That recognising the brotherhood of all men, we consider it our 
duty to struggle for the triumph of democratic principles in all 
countries, and believing that the establishment of the 'People's 
Charter' would enable the people of Great Britain to afford aid to 
the Polish cause, more effective than the paper 'protests' hitherto 
employed by the British government, we hail with joy the prospect of 
an energetic effort on the part of the British people to obtain the 
legislative recognition and parliamentary enactment of their long-
withheld rights and franchises." 
The speaker said they taught Universal Brotherhood, because 
they felt the evils resulting from the want of it. Very true, at churches 
and chapels on a Sunday, they were told that "we are all brethren", 
but should it rain on their leaving such churches or chapels, and they 
were to attempt to get into some of their wealthy brethren's 
carriages, what a row there would be. (Loud laughter.) Yet, ten 
minutes before those very same men would have been responding to 
the sentiment, "All men are brethren." (Hear, hear.) Notwithstand­
ing this, Fraternity was a great truism, and before any great lasting 
and practical good could be accomplished, it must be universally 
acknowledged, ay, and practised too. (Loud cheers.) They had met to 
celebrate the Polish Revolution, and the question was, what could 
they do to aid Poland? Without power—nothing. Let them get the 
Charter and they would have power. (Cheers.) 
Citizen Engels (from Paris), in seconding the resolution said—Fel­
low Citizens, this commemoration of the Polish Revolution is not 
only an advantage to Poland, but to the whole world, as it causes the 
principles of democracy to be spread far and wide. (Hear, hear. He, 
as a German, had great interest in Polish success, as it would much 

=====第649页=====
Appendices 621 
hasten liberty in Germany, and freedom Germany had resolved to 
obtain sooner or later. (Loud cheers.) And he firmly believed that no 
one nation could become free without benefitting all others. He had 
resided for some time in England, and was proud to boast himself a 
Chartist "name and all". (Great cheering.) Who were now their chief 
oppressors? Not the aristocracy, but the wealth takers and scrapers, 
the middle classes. (Loud cheers.) Hence, it was the duty of the 
working classes of all nations to unite and establish freedom for all. 
(Rapturous applause.) 
Citizen Tedesco (from Brussels, who addressed the meeting in the 
French language in most eloquent terms, which the following 
abstract does anything but justice to), said the men of Belgium 
looked on the English democrats as a leading party, and trusted they 
would obtain that great measure, the People's Charter. He was 
delighted with the spirit that prevailed. He should return to Brussels, 
and relate the good and enthusiastic feeling with which the 
proletarians of this country were imbued, and their determination to 
proceed until they had obtained their Charter, and sure he was, that 
that measure would carry with it a fair day's wages for a fair day's 
labour. (Hear, hear.) And give such an impulse to the cause of 
progress, that the whole continent would follow, and universal 
liberty be established. (Loud cheers.) 
Colonel Oborski, a Polish exile, said, at the outbreak of the Polish 
Revolution, two hundred non-commissioned officers had kept three 
Russian regiments at bay, and when some of the regiments found it 
was against Poland they were fighting, they turned their arms and 
fought against their oppressors. Although Old Poland was dead, 
Young Poland would arise, and become far mightier than her 
ancestor. (Loud cheers.) He yet hoped to see Poland the first battle­
field for liberty. With grateful thanks to the English people he would 
shout "Hurrah for Democracy!" (Great applause.) 
Citizen Engels here said, that he had but recently come from Paris, 
and that the real democrats in that city were in favour of a Congress 
of Nations. (Loud cheers.) The resolution was then carried 
unanimously. 
Julian Harney again came forward and read extracts from the 
defence of Louis Mieroslawski, one of the chiefs of the insurrection 
of 1846, and now lying in the dungeons of Berlin under sentence of 
death.369  The reading of the said extracts excited great sensation in 
the meeting. J. Harney then said, he had been particularly gratified 
by the remarks of his friend Engels. He was glad to see that the 
feeling of fraternal sympathy for the Poles was strong amongst the 
Germans. He was sure that if once the Germans obtained their 

=====第650页=====
622 Appendices 
liberties, they would hasten to perform a great act of national 
reparation, by undoing the work which the Austrian and Prussian 
despots helped Catherine to accomplish—the destruction of Poland. 
He knew that if Frenchmen were free, if they had broken down that 
disgraceful despotism which had prostrated their country to the 
lowest depths of shame, their first thought would be the liberation of 
Poland. (Cheers.) The next time France marched in the direction of 
Moscow it would not be with an Emperor for her leader. It was a 
maxim of Napoleon's "that a political blunder was worse than a 
political crime". He was guilty of both crime and blunder of the 
worst character; when on reaching Warsaw on his march to Russia, 
he refused to proclaim the restoration of Poland. Had he proclaimed 
the republic of Poland to the full extent of its ancient boundaries, he 
would have re-created the soul of a nation, and twenty millions of 
people would have formed his army of reserve—an army animated 
by an unconquerable spirit of enthusiasm and devotion to their 
emancipator. But no, Napoleon though the scourger of kings was the 
tyrant of the people; though the most deadly enemy of "divine 
right", he was not less the enemy of popular sovereignty. He desired 
to dictate terms to the Northern Autocrat,3 but for  himself,  not for 
Poland, and the other nations trampled under that autocrat's iron 
heel. His selfishness found the reward it merited. When flying before 
the avenging lance of the Cossack, and the still more dreadful shafts 
of the icy tempest and the snow-storm, with their auxiliaries, famine 
and pestilence; then Napoleon found Poland no rampart of defence, 
behind which he might have thrown himself to give his stricken hosts 
time to breathe, and turn upon their pursuers. He had refused to 
recall Poland to life, and so when he needed her living arm to 
save him from the blows of the Muscovite, that arm was not. 
But the coming republic would repair the political crime of the 
Emperor, and the day was nigh at hand when France would be a 
Republic and the people of England have their Charter. (Great 
applause.) The speaker concluded by moving a vote of thanks to 
the chairman.0 
Carl Schapper seconded the vote of thanks, which was supported by 
Mr. Isaac Wilson, who expressed how much more pleased he was with 
the proceedings he had just witnessed, than he was with those of a 
meeting held some fortnight since under the presidency of Dr. 
Bowring, at the Crown and Anchor, at which he was necessitated to 
3 Alexander  I.—Ed. 
John Arnott.—Ed. 

=====第651页=====
Appendices 623 
move an amendment. (Cheers.) The vote of thanks was then carried 
by acclamation. 
The chairman having acknowledged the compliment, three cheers 
were given "for the heroic martyr Mieroslawski"; three for the 
"Réforme and the French Democrats"; three for "The Northern Star 
and the German Brussels Gazette" 3; and three dreadful groans for 
the Times, Journal des Débats, and Austrian Observer* The Marseil­
laise Hymn was then sung in splendid style by Citizen Moll, and 
closed these interesting proceedings. 
First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper 
No. 528, December 4, 1847 
3 Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. Reported erroneously in The Northern Star as "Univer­
sal Gazette".—Ed. 
Österreichischer Beobachter. —Ed. 

=====第652页=====
ADDRESS OF THE DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION 
OF BRUSSELS TO THE SWISS PEOPLE 
THE DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION, ESTABLISHED IN BRUSSELS (BELGIUM), 
WHOSE AIM IS THE UNION AND FRATERNITY OF ALL PEOPLES, 
TO THE SWISS PEOPLE 
Swiss Brothers, 
An unhappy struggle has just ended for you.370 All the nations 
have watched it with the anxiety, blended with sorrow, that generous 
hearts always feel at the sight of a civil war. 
We shall not here discuss the causes of this quarrel. The two 
parties decided to resolve it alone, without calling for intervention 
from anyone. 
Those who, not having been asked, claimed to set themselves up as 
the official judges of your domestic quarrels must incur the reproach 
of a culpable imprudence. 
But this imprudence threatens to change in character. 
All the friends of liberty have the right to be indignant, if not 
alarmed by it. 
More or less ardent, more or less sincere good wishes, and even 
offers of service for one or other cause, could be explained without 
resort to any other motives than those of the diversity of human 
opinions on political or religious matters. 
Today it is a question of something else. 
The intervention of a congress of royalty371 in your affairs can only 
be understood in the sense of an open or hidden attack on your 
institutions and above all on the development that you have given 
them in law during the last fifteen years. 
Guardians, for nearly six centuries, of the repository of liberty 
which was exiled by usurping feudalism successively from nearly all 
other parts of Europe, you owe it to us, Swiss Brothers, you owe it to 

=====第653页=====
Appendices 625 
yourselves, to defend one last time more this precious heritage, at 
this supreme hour when all nations are preparing to claim it from 
you and divide it. 
If you let it be seized from your guardianship, the six centuries of 
persistent vigilance for which we would soon have owed you full 
gratitude would be lost for you and for the rest of Europe. 
Exiled beyond the sea, on the soil of a new world, democratic 
institutions would have ceased for a long time to be a model for our 
constant study and imitation. 
Government of the State by universally elected leaders;—State 
administration without crippling financial debts, without the ruin of 
the worker for the profit of hosts of useless bureaucrats;—the 
defence of the State without standing armies;—the commercial and 
industrial prosperity of the State without tariffs;—freedom of belief 
without theocratic domination;—where shall we find these again, 
and be able to copy the model of this regime for which all Europe 
yearns today, if Switzerland allows a concert of kings, bankers, 
ministers, mercenaries, monopolists, sectarians, to intervene in its 
affairs? 
Their interference can have no other aim but to wipe out once for 
all from the centre of Europe this example—so fatal for them—of a 
nation which governs itself without them. 
We understand this so well, Swiss Brothers, that, assembled here 
from all parts of Europe by the political hazards of recent times, and 
mingling with a small free nation like yours, and rather in your 
manner, we felt it essential unanimously to express the wish to see 
you resist the diplomatic intrigues which are contemplated against 
you. 
We urge you therefore not to listen to those treacherous offers of 
intervention made to you by five Courts (we will not say five peoples) 
combined to tempt you into a fatal trap. 
Fear of their threats, if they carried them out, cannot exist in your 
hearts. It is only their cunning that you must guard against. 
And if their threats were serious, your forces would without 
boasting be equal to those which the courts in fact control in the 
midst of the domestic embarrassments increasing for them every 
day. 
Moreover, if they dreamed of constraining you by force, allies 
would not fail you. Once more, we recommend into your hands, 
Swiss Brothers, the sacred repository of European democratic liberty 
which you have guarded so well up to now, and which in recent times 
you have been able to make flourish to the benefit of the rights and 
interests of the greatest number. 

=====第654页=====
626 Appendices 
We offer you, with the future tribute of our gratitude for the 
firmness which you will show the world,— 
the expression of our most sincere sympathy. 
On behalf of the above-named Democratic Association, and 
by virtue of its deliberations in the general assembly of Novem­
ber 29, 1847 after the Polish commemoration celebrated this day 
at the Hôtel de Ville of Brussels, 
The Committee of the Association. 
General Mellinet, Chief of the civic legions in 1830, Hon. 
President. 
L. Jottrand, barrister, former member of the National 
Congress of Belgium in 1830, President. 
Maynz, barrister at the Court of Appeal at Brussels. 
Imbert, Vice-president, former editor of the Peuple Souve­
rain of Marseilles. 
Karl Marx, former editor of the Rheinische Zeitung, Vice-pre­
sident. 3 
Lelewel, Joachim, member of the National Government. 
George Weerth. 
The Secretary of the society, A. Picard,  barrister at the Court 
of Appeal at Brussels. 
Spilthoorn, barrister at the court of Ghent. Leader of the 
provisional government of Flanders in 1830. 
Pellering, shoe-maker. 
A. von Bornstedt, editor of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. 
The German workers assembled in the society at Brussels372 have 
joined in the present address. This is attested by the undersigned 
members of the committee of this society. 
Chairman— Wallau. 
Vice-chairman—Hess. 
Wolff,  secretary. 
Riedel, treasurer. 
Printed according to the news­
paper 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time Writen on November 29, 1847 
First published in La Réforme, 
December 5, 1847 
a Marx's name was presumably put by proxy for he was in London at that 
time.—Ed. 

=====第655页=====
MINUTES OF ENGELS' LECTURE 
TO THE LONDON GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL 
SOCIETY 
ON NOVEMBER 30, 1847373 
Citizens! When Christopher Columbus discovered America 350 
years ago, he certainly did not think that not only would the then 
existing society in Europe together with its institutions be done away 
with through his discovery, but that the foundation would be laid for 
the complete liberation of all nations; and yet, it becomes more and 
more clear that this is indeed the case. Through the discovery of 
America a new route by sea to the East Indies was found, whereby 
the European business traffic of the time was completely trans­
formed; the consequence was that Italian and German commerce 
were totally ruined and other countries came to the fore; commerce 
came into the hands of the western countries, and England thus 
came to the fore of the movement. Before the discovery of America 
the countries even in Europe were still very much separated from 
one another and trade was on the whole slight. Only after the new 
route to the East Indies had been found and an extensive field had 
been opened in America for exploitation by the Europeans engaged 
in commerce, did England begin more and more to concentrate 
trade and" to take possession of it, whereby the other European 
countries were more and more compelled to join together. From all 
this, big commerce originated, and the so-called world market was 
opened. The enormous treasures which the Europeans brought 
from America, and the gains which trade in general yielded, had as a 
consequence the ruin of the old aristocracy, and so the bourgeoisie 
came into being. The discovery of America was connected with the 
advent of machinery, and with that the struggle became necessary 
which we are conducting today, the struggle of the propertyless 
against the property owners. 
Before machines were invented almost every country produced as 
much as it needed, and commerce consisted only of such products as 

=====第656页=====
628 Appendices 
one or another country was quite unable to produce; but when 
machinery came in, so much was produced that in many places it 
became necessary to stop working and that even people who had 
previously performed similar work with their own hands bought 
machine-made goods for their own use. The position of the former 
workers was thereby completely altered, and the whole of human 
society, which formerly consisted of four to six different classes, was 
divided into two mutually hostile classes. 
Since the English seized world commerce and raised their 
manufacturing business to such a height that they could provide 
almost all the civilised world with their products, and since the 
bourgeoisie came to political power, they have also succeeded in 
making further progress in Asia and the bourgeoisie has risen there 
also;  through the rise of machinery the barbarian condition of other 
countries is constantly being done away with. We know that the Spani­
ards found East Indies at the same stage of development as the English 
did and that the Indians nevertheless went on living in the same way 
for centuries, i.e., they ate and drank and vegetated, and the grandson 
worked the land just as his grandfather had done, except that a 
number of revolutions took place, which, however, were nothing but 
a struggle of various peoples for domination. Since the English came 
and spread their manufactures, the livelihood of the Indians was 
torn from their hands and the consequence was that they abandoned 
their stable condition. The workers are already emigrating from 
there and through mixing with other nations they become accessible 
for the first time to civilisation. The old Indian aristocracy is 
completely ruined and people are there set against one another just 
as here. 
Later we have seen how China, a country which for more than a 
thousand years has defied development and all history, has now been 
turned upside down and drawn into civilisation by the English, by 
machinery. 
Austria, the China of Europe, the only country whose internal 
institutions were not shaken by the French Revolution, and where 
even Napoleon could do nothing, cannot stand up to steam; 
everything there has suddenly been changed by machinery; 
protective tariffs have brought machinery into the country. 
Thereby the petty bourgeoisie has raised itself up and overthrown 
the high aristocracy, thereby something has happened to Metternich 
which he certainly never anticipated; at the last Bohemian Diet 
50,000 guilders in taxes were denied him by the bourgeoisie. The 
classes of society have been changed, the small craftsmen are being 
ruined and forced to become ordinary workers, whereby an element 

=====第657页=====
Appendices 629 
has entered which can become dangerous to Metternich. In Italy also 
industry has raised itself up, the bourgeoisie everywhere sits on 
Metternich's neck, so that the government has got into such a 
dilemma that Metternich has to concede to the Bohemians that they 
need not pay taxes of 50,000 guilders. 
Thus,  through the discovery of America all society has been 
divided into two classes, and without the rise of the world market this 
would not have happened. The workers of the whole world have 
everywhere the same interests; everywhere the different classes 
disappear and the different interests coincide. When, therefore, a 
revolution breaks out in one country it must necessarily affect the 
other countries, and only now can real liberation take place. 
First published in Archiv für die Geschichte Printed according to the Archiv... 
des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, 
Tg. 8, Leipzig 1919 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第658页=====
MINUTES OF MARX'S REPORT 
TO THE LONDON GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL 
SOCIETY 
ON NOVEMBER 30, 1847 
From Belgium I have to report that a workers' society has been 
formed there which at present has 105 members.374 The German 
workers in Brussels, who formerly were quite isolated, are now 
already a power, and whereas formerly they were not asked to take 
part in anything, this year they have already been requested to send 
a representative of the society to the celebration of the Polish 
revolution being arranged in Brussels by the city to speak in the 
name of this society. Should the government press for the 
suppression of the society, because it is certainly bound to exercise an 
influence on the Belgian workers themselves, the society has decided 
to hand over its library, which consists of 300 volumes, and other 
objects to the London society. 
I will now add a few remarks on literature. Louis Blanc now proves 
in one of his works3 that in the French Revolution, at the same 
moment when the proletariat stormed the Bastille, the prison for the 
bourgeois, the bourgeoisie took decisions against those who bought 
the victory for them with their blood. All the leading figures of the 
revolution are now presented in their true character, a mass of 
leaflets are being written in the spirit of the proletariat, which are 
exercising considerable influence on society. The French work more 
in the interest of a party than for gain. Before the July revolution0 
leaflets circulated in the spirit of the bourgeoisie just as they do now 
in the spirit of the proletariat. 
Of all that has been achieved by German philosophy the critique of 
religion is the most important thing; this critique, however, has not 
a L. Blanc, Histoire de la révolution française. —Ed. 
b Of 1830.— Ed. 

=====第659页=====
Appendices 631 
proceeded from social development. Everything that has been 
written hitherto against the Christian religion has limited itself to 
proving that it rests on false principles; how, for example, the 
authors have used one another; what had not yet been examined was 
the practical cult of Christianity. We know that the supreme thing in 
Christianity is human sacrifice. Daumer now proves in a recently 
published work3  that Christians really slaughtered men and at the 
Holy Supper ate human flesh and drank human blood. He finds 
here the explanation why the Romans, who tolerated all religious 
sects,  persecuted the Christians, and why the Christians later 
destroyed the entire pagan literature directed against Christianity. 
Paul himself zealously argued against the admission to the Holy 
Supper of people who were not completely initiated into the 
mysteries. It is then also easy to explain where, for example, the 
relics of the 11,000 virgins came from; there is a document dating 
from the Middle Ages in which the nuns of a French convent made a 
contract with the Abbess to the effect that without the consent of all 
no further relics must be found. The occasion for this was given by a 
monk who was constantly travelling from Cologne to Paris and back 
and every time left relics behind. Everything that happened in this 
respect has been regarded as a fraud of the priests, but that would be 
to attribute to them a skill and cleverness far beyond the time in 
which they lived. Human sacrifice was sacred and has really existed. 
Protestantism merely transferred it to the spiritual man and 
mitigated the thing a little. Hence there are more madmen among 
Protestants than in any other sect. This story, as presented in 
Daumer' s work, deals Christianity the last blow; the question now is, 
what significance this has for us. It gives us the certainty that the old 
society is coming to an end and that the edifice of fraud and 
prejudice is collapsing. 
First published in Archiv für die Geschichte Printed according to the Archiv... 
des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, 
Te 8 Leipzie 1919 Published in English for the first 
time 
a G. F. Daumer, Die Geheimnisse des christlichen Altertums. —Ed. 

=====第660页=====
MINUTES OF ENGELS' LECTURE 
TO THE LONDON GERMAN WORKERS' EDUCATIONAL 
SOCIETY 
ON DECEMBER 7, 1847 
Citizen Engels gives a lecture in which he proves that commercial 
crises are caused only by overproduction and that the stock 
exchanges are the main offices where proletarians are made. 
First published in Archiv für die Geschichte Printed according to the Archiv... 
des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, 
Tg. 8, Leipzig, 1919 Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第661页=====
RULES OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE375 
Working Men of All Countries, Unite! 
SECTION I 
THE LEAGUE 
Art. 1. The aim of the League is the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, 
the rule of the proletariat, the abolition of the old bourgeois society 
which rests on the antagonism of classes, and the foundation of a 
new society without classes and without private property. 
Art. 2. The conditions of membership are: 
A) A way of life and activity which corresponds to this aim; 
B) Revolutionary energy and zeal in propaganda; 
C) Acknowledgement of communism; 
D) Abstention from participation in any anti-communist politi­
cal or national association and notification of participation in 
any kind of association to the superior authority. 
E) Subordination to the decisions of the League; 
F) Observance of secrecy concerning the existence of all League 
affairs; 
G) Unanimous admission into a community. 
Whosoever no longer complies with these conditions is expelled 
(see Section VIII). 
Art. 3. All members are equal and brothers and as such owe each 
other assistance in every situation. 
Art. 4. The members bear League names. 
Art. 5. The League is organised in communities, circles, leading 
circles, Central Authority and congresses. 
SECTION II 
THE COMMUNITY 
Art. 6. The community consists of at least three and at most twenty 
members. 

=====第662页=====
634 Appendices 
Art. 7. Every community elects a chairman and deputy chairman. 
The chairman presides over the meeting, the deputy chairman holds 
the funds and represents the chairman in case of absence. 
Art. 8. The admission of new members is effected by the chairman 
and the proposing member with previous agreement of the 
community. 
Art. 9. Communities of various kinds do not know each other and 
do not conduct any correspondence with each other. 
Art. 10. Communities bear distinctive names. 
Art. 11. Every member who changes his place of residence must 
first inform his chairman. 
SECTION III 
THE CIRCLE 
Art. 12. The circle comprises at least two and at most ten 
communities. 
Art. 13. The chairmen and deputy chairmen of the communities 
form the circle authority. The latter elects a president from its midst. 
It is in correspondence with its communities and the leading circle. 
Art. 14. The circle authority is the executive organ for all the 
communities of the circle. 
Art. 15. Isolated communities must either join an already existing 
circle or form a new circle with other isolated communities. 
SECTION IV 
THE LEADING CIRCLE 
Art. 16. The various circles of a country or province are 
subordinated to a leading circle. 
Art. 17. The division of the circles of the League into provinces 
and the appointment of the leading circle is effected by the Congress 
on the proposal of the Central Authority. 
Art. 18. The leading circle is the executive authority for all the 
circles of its province. It is in correspondence with these circles and 
with the Central Authority. 
Art. 19. Newly formed circles join the nearest leading circk 
Art. 20. The leading circles are provisionally responsible to the 
Central Authority and in the final instance to the Congress. 

=====第663页=====
Appendices 635 
SECTIONV 
THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
Art. 21. The Central Authority is the executive organ of the whole 
League and as such is responsible to the Congress. 
Art. 22. It consists of at least five members and is elected by the 
circle authority of the place in which the Congress has located its 
seat. 
Art. 23. The Central Authority is in correspondence with the 
leading circles. Once every three months it gives a report on the state 
of the whole League. 
SECTION VI 
COMMON REGULATIONS 
Art. 24. The communities, and circle authorities and also the 
Central Authority meet at least once every fortnight. 
Art. 25. The members of the circle authority and of the Central 
Authority are elected for one year, can be re-elected and recalled by 
their electors at any time. 
Art. 26. The elections take place in the month of September. 
Art. 27. The circle authorities have to guide the discussions of the 
communities in accordance with the purpose of the League. 
If the Central Authority deems the discussion of certain questions 
to be of general and immediate interest it must call on the entire 
League to discuss them. 
Art. 28. Individual members of the League must maintain 
correspondence with their circle authority at least once every three 
months, individual communities at least once a month. 
Every circle must report on its district to the leading circle at least 
once every two months, every leading circle to the Central Authority 
at least once every three months. 
Art. 29. Every League authority is obliged to take the measures in 
accordance with the Rules necessary for the security and efficient 
work of the League under its responsibility and to notify the superior 
authority at once of these measures. 
SECTION VII 
THE CONGRESS 
Art. 30. The Congress is the legislative authority of the whole 
League. All proposals for changes in the Rules are sent to the Central 

=====第664页=====
636 Appendices 
Authority through the leading circles and submitted by it to the 
Congress. 
Art. 31. Every circle sends one delegate. 
Art. 32. Every individual circle with less than 30 members sends 
one delegate, with less than 60 two, less than 90 three, etc. The circles 
can have themselves represented by League members who do not 
belong to their localities. 
In this case, however, they must send to their delegate a detailed 
mandate. 
Art. 33. The Congress meets in the month of August of every 
year. In urgent cases the Central Authority calls an extraordinary 
congress. 
Art. 34. The Congress decides every time the place where the 
Central Authority is to have its seat for the coming year and the place 
where the Congress is next to meet. 
Art. 35. The Central Authority sits in the Congress, but has no 
deciding vote. 
Art. 36. After every sitting the Congress issues in addition to its 
circular a manifesto in the name of the Party. 
SECTION VIII 
OFFENCES AGAINST THE LEAGUE 
Art. 37. Whoever violates the conditions of membership (Art. 2) is 
according to the circumstances removed from the League or 
expelled. 
Expulsion precludes re-admission. 
Art. 38. Only the Congress decides on expulsions. 
Art. 39. Individual members can be removed by the circle or 
the isolated community, with immediate notification of the su­
perior authority. Here also the Congress decides in the last in­
stance. 
Art. 40. Re-admission of removed members is effected by the 
Central Authority on the proposal of the circle. 
Art. 4L The circle authority passes judgment on offences against 
the League and also sees to the execution of the verdict. 
Art. 42. Removed and expelled members, like suspect individuals 
in general, are to be watched in the interest of the League, and 
prevented from doing harm. Intrigues of such individuals are at 
once to be reported to the community concerned. 

=====第665页=====
Appendices 
SECTION IX 
LEAGUE FUNDS 
Art. 43. The Congress fixes for every country the minimum 
contribution to be paid by every member. 
Art. 44. Half of this contribution goes to the Central Authority, the 
other half remains in the funds of the circle or community. 
Art. 45. The funds of the Central Authority are used: 
1. to cover the costs of correspondence and administration; 
2. to print and distribute propaganda leaflets; 
3. to send out emissaries of the Central Authority for 
particular purposes. 
Art. 46. The funds of the local authorities are used: 
1. to cover the costs of correspondence; 
2. to print and distribute propaganda leaflets; 
3. to send out occasional emissaries. 
Art. 47. Communities and circles which have not paid their 
contributions for six months are notified by the Central Authority of 
their removal from the League. 
Art. 48. Circle authorities have to render account of their 
expenditure and income to their communities at least every three 
months. The Central Authority renders account to the Congress on 
the administration of League funds and the state of the League 
finances. Any embezzlement of League funds is subject to the 
severest punishment. 
Art. 49. Extraordinary and Congress costs are met from extraordi­
nary contributions. 
SECTION X 
ADMISSION 
Art. 50. The chairman of the community reads to the applicant 
Art. 1 to 49, explains them, emphasises particularly in a short speech 
the obligations which the new member assumes, and then puts to 
him the question: "Do you now wish to enter this League?" If he 
replies "Yes", the chairman takes his word of honour to the effect 

=====第666页=====
638 Appendices 
that he will fulfil the obligations of a League member, declares him a 
member of the League, and introduces him to the community at the 
next meeting. 
London, December 8, 1847 
In the name of the Second Congress of the autumn of 1847 
The Secretary The President 
Signed Engels Signed Karl Schapper 
First published in the Appendix Printed according to the book 
to the book: Wermuth und Stieber, 
Die Communisten-Verschwörungen 
des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, 
Erster Theil, Berlin, 1853 

=====第667页=====
FROM THE REPORT 
OF THE DEUTSCHE-BRÜSSELER-ZEITUNG 
ON THE NEW YEAR'S EVE CELEBRATION 
OF THE GERMAN WORKERS' SOCIETY IN BRUSSELS 
DECEMBER 31, 1847 
...Then Karl Marx took the floor and proposed a toast in French to 
the Brussels Democratic Association, emphasising in an acutely 
drawn, clear analysis the liberal mission of Belgium in opposition to 
absolutism, forcefully expressing appreciation of the benefits of a 
liberal constitution, of a country where there is freedom of 
discussion, freedom of association, and where a humanitarian seed 
can flourish to the good of all Europe. (Loud applause.) 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the news-
Zeitung No. 2, January 6, 1848 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第668页=====
THE ASSOCIATION DÉMOCRATIQUE OF BRUSSELS 
TO THE FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS 
ASSEMBLING IN LONDON 
We received your letter of December last,3 the proposals contained 
in which concerning the Democratic Congress of all nations and the 
establishment of a monthly correspondence between your society 
and ours were immediately taken into consideration.376 
The propositions of holding the first Democratic Congress here in 
Brussels, with a view of calling the second in London; the first 
Congress to be called by our society for the anniversary of the 
Belgian revolution in September next, and the programme of 
business to be prepared by the committee of this society; these 
propositions were agreed to unanimously and enthusiastically. 
The offer of entering into a regular and monthly correspondence 
with our society was equally hailed with the greatest enthusiasm. 
We now proceed to give you an abstract of our progress and 
general situation. 
The state of our society is as prosperous as can possibly be desired. 
The number of our members is increasing weekly, and the interest 
taken by the public in general, and by the working classes in 
particular, in our proceedings is equally on the increase. 
The best  proof,  however, of our progress is the interest excited in 
the provinces of the country by our movements. From the most 
important towns of Belgium we have received summons to send 
delegates for the purpose of establishing democratic societies similar 
to ours, and keeping up constant relations with the metropolitan 
association. 
"The Fraternal Democrats assembling in London to the Democratic Associa­
tion for promoting the fraternity of all nations, assembling in Brussels."—Ed. 

=====第669页=====
Appendices 641 
We have given to these appeals our immediate attention. We sent a 
deputation to Ghent to call a public meeting with a view of 
establishing a branch society.377 The meeting was exceedingly 
numerous, and received our deputation, consisting of members 
belonging to several nations, with an enthusiasm hardly to be 
described. The foundation of a democratic society was immediately 
decided upon, and the names of members taken down. Since then we 
have received from Ghent the news that the society is definitively 
constituted, and has held a second meeting exceeding the first in 
numbers and enthusiasm. More than three thousand citizens were 
present, and, we are happy to say, they mostly consisted of working 
men. 
We consider the ground gained at Ghent as a most important 
progress of our cause in this country. Ghent is the chief manufactur­
ing town of Belgium, numbering above a hundred thousand 
inhabitants, and being in a great measure the centre of attraction for 
the whole labouring population of Flanders. The position taken by 
Ghent is decisive for all working class movement of the country. 
Thus we may accept the adhesion of the factory workers of that 
Belgian Manchester to the revival of a pure democratic movement, 
as implying and foreboding the adhesion of the generality of the 
Belgian proletarians. 
We hope to report in our next further progress in other towns of 
the country, thus arriving by-and-by at the reconstitution of a strong, 
united, and organised democratic party in Belgium. 
We entirely share in the view which in your recent address to 
the working people of Great Britain and Ireland you have taken 
of the question of "National Defences".3 We hope that this ad­
dress will contribute in a great measure to the enlightenment of the 
people of England as to the question who are their veritable 
enemies. 
We have equally seen with great pleasure the steps taken by the 
mass of the English Chartists to arrive, at last, at a close alliance 
between the Irish people and that of Great Britain. We have seen 
that there is a better chance now than ever before to break down that 
prejudice which prompted the Irish people to confound in one 
common hatred the oppressed classes of England with the oppres­
sors of both countries. We hope to see very shortly united in the 
hands of Feargus O'Connor the direction both of the English and the 
a "The Fraternal Democrats (assembling in London), to the Working Classes of 
Great Britain and Ireland" (the document is reproduced in Engels' report; see this 
volume, pp. 466-67).—Ed. 

=====第670页=====
642 Appendices 
Irish popular movement; and we consider this approaching alliance 
of the oppressed classes of both countries, under the banner of 
democracy, as a most important progress of our cause in general. 
We conclude by offering to you our fraternal salutations. 
The Committee of the Association Démocratique 
L. Jottrand, Chairman 
K. Marx, Vice-President 
A. Picard,  Avt., Secretary 
Brussels, 13th February, 1848 
First published in The Northern Star Reprinted from the newspaper 
No. 541, March 4, 1848 

=====第671页=====
FROM THE DEUTSCHE-BRÜSSELER-ZEITUNG'S REPORT 
ON THE MEETING OF THE DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIATION 
OF FEBRUARY 20, 1848 
Brussels. Meeting of the Democratic Association of February 20. 
President: Herr Marx. —Frederick Engels first took the floor to reply 
to an article concerning his expulsion from France, published by the 
French Government in the Moniteur Parisien. He related briefly the 
circumstances in which his expulsion took place. 378 
The association was completely satisfied with the explanations of 
Frederick Engels. Several speakers expressed this satisfaction and 
further added remarks concerning the behaviour of the French 
Government already on the occasion of earlier expulsions of 
foreigners. 
These proceedings were entered in the official report of the 
Democratic Association.... 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the news-
Zeitung No. 16, February 24, 1848 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
22—1826 

=====第672页=====
FROM THE DEUTSCHE-BRÜSSELER-ZEITUNCS REPORT 
ON THE BRUSSELS CELEBRATION 
OF THE SECOND ANNIVERSARY 
OF THE 1846 CRACOW INSURRECTION3 
The Cracow revolution was celebrated by a numerous gathering 
on the evening of the 22nd in the hall of the Old Court at Brussels, rue 
des soeurs noires, which was festively illuminated and decorated with 
Polish and Belgian flags. Several speakers, including Lelewel, Karl 
Marx, F. Engels, Wallau and Lubliner, the lawyer, took the floor and 
spoke passionately for the purely democratic character of the 
Cracow insurrection. We shall report this celebration in detail in our 
next issue b and only remark here that after the public meeting a 
dinner was held in which about 100 persons took part and at which 
several toasts were raised by Belgian and German democrats. Nor 
was the dinner lacking in song. 
First published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler- Printed according to the news-
Zeitung No. 16, February 24, 1848 paper 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a See this volume, pp. 545-52.—Ed. 
This report was never published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung; the sevente­
enth and last issue of the paper appeared on February 27, 1848.—Ed. 

=====第673页=====
TO THE CITIZENS, 
MEMBERS OF THE PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT 
OF THE FRENCH REPUBLIC379 
Brussels, February 28, 1848 
Citizens! 
The Democratic Association having as its aim the union and 
brotherhood of all peoples, established a few months ago at 
Brussels, and composed of members of several European nations 
which enjoy with the Belgians on their soil institutions which have 
long allowed the free and public expression of all political and 
religious opinions, hereby offers you the homage of its congratula­
tions upon the great task the French nation has just accomplished, 
and of its gratitude for the immense service which this nation has just 
rendered the cause of humanity. 
We have already had occasion to congratulate the Swiss for having 
led, as they did not long ago, in the work for the emancipation of the 
peoples2 which it has fallen to you to promote with the vigour which 
the heroic population of Paris always displays when its turn comes. 
We were counting before long on repeating to the French the 
message we had addressed to the Swiss. But France has greatly 
advanced the time when we counted on addressing her. 
This is only one reason why all the nations should hasten to follow 
in your footsteps. 
We believe we can be sure in surmising that the nations nearest to 
France will be the first to follow her in the career on which she has 
just entered. 
This conjecture is all the more certain in that France has just made 
a revolution destined rather to strengthen the bonds which link it to 
all nations than to menace the independence of any of them. We 
a See this volume, pp. 624-26.—£d. 

=====第674页=====
646 Appendices 
salute in the France of February 1848 not the mistress of the peoples 
but an example for them—France will henceforward look for no 
other homage. 
We already see the great nation whose destinies you direct today, 
your sole authority the trust of all, we already see it, citizens, forging 
again, even with peoples whom she has for long regarded as rivals 
for power, an alliance which the hateful policy of certain men 
succeeded in shattering. 
England and Germany stretch out their hands once more to your 
great country. Spain, Italy, Switzerland and Belgium are going either 
to rise or to remain quiet and free under your threefold aegis. 
Poland, like Lazarus, will rise again to the appeal you will make in a 
threefold language. 
It is impossible that Russia itself should not join in, with accents as 
yet only slightly known to the ear of Western and Southern peoples. 
Yours, Frenchmen, yours is the honour, yours is the glory to have 
laid the main foundations of this alliance of peoples so prophetically 
sung by your immortal Beranger. 
We offer you, citizens, in all the flow of feelings of an immutable 
fraternity, the tribute of our deepest gratitude. 
The Committee of the Democratic Association, whose aim 
is the union and brotherhood of all peoples, at Brussels. 
L. Jottrand, barrister, President 
Ch. Marx, Vice-president 
General Mellinet, Honorary president 
Spilthoorn, barrister, President of the Democratic 
Association at Ghent 
Maynz, professor at Brussels University 
Lelewel 
F. Balliu, treasurer 
A. Battaille, Vice-secretary 
J. Pellering, workman 
Labiaux, merchant 
First published in the newspapers Printed according to La Réforme 
Le Débat social, March 1, 1848 
and La Réforme, March 4, 1848 Translated from the French 
Published in full in English for the 
first time 

=====第675页=====
TO MR. JULIAN HARNEY, 
EDITOR OF THE NORTHERN STAR, 
SECRETARY OF THE FRATERNAL DEMOCRATS SOCIETY, 
LONDON 
Brussels, February 28, 1848 
You already know of the glorious revolution which has just been 
carried out in Paris. 
We have to communicate to you that, as a result of this important 
event, the Democratic Association has initiated here a peaceful but 
vigorous agitation, to obtain through the ways proper to Belgian 
political institutions the advantages which the French people have 
won. 
The following resolutions have been passed, with enthusiastic 
acclaim  : 
1. The Democratic Association will hold meetings every evening 
and the public will be admitted; 
2. An address will be sent in the name of the Association to the 
provisional government of France,3 with the aim of expressing our 
warm feelings for the revolution of February 24; 
3. An address will be presented to the municipal council of 
Brussels, inviting it to maintain public peace and to avoid all 
bloodshed by organising the municipal forces generally composed of 
the civil guard, that is to say, the bourgeois who are armed in normal 
circumstances, and the artisans who can be armed in abnormal times, 
according to the laws of the country. Arms will thus be entrusted 
equally to the middle class and the working class. 
We will inform you as often as possible of the measures we shall 
take later, and of our progress. 
We hope that you will soon succeed, on your side, in having the 
People's Charter passed as a law of your country, and that it will 
serve you in making further progress. 
a See this volume, pp. 645-46.—Ed. 

=====第676页=====
648 Appendices 
Finally, we invite you; in this important crisis, to keep in frequent 
communication with us, and to transmit to us all news of your 
country of a nature to exercise a favourable effect on the Belgian 
people. 
(Signatures of Committee Members follow) 
First published in Le Débat social, Printed according to the news-
March 1, 1848 paper 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第677页=====
FERDINAND FLOCON TO MARX 
IN BRUSSELS 
Provisional French Republic 
Government Liberty, Equality, Fraternity 
In the name of the French People 
Paris,  March 1, 1848 
Good and loyal Marx, 
The soil of the French Republic is a field of refuge and asylum for 
all friends of liberty. 
Tyranny exiled you, now free France opens its doors to you and to 
all those who are fighting for the holy cause, the fraternal cause of all 
the peoples. 
Every agent of the French government must interpret his mission 
in this sense. 
Fraternal greetings. 
Ferdinand Flocon, 
Member of the Provisional Government 
First published in the book: Printed according to the manu-
K. Marx, Herr Vogt, London, 1860 script 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 

=====第678页=====
ORDER OF LEOPOLD I, 
KING OF THE BELGIANS, 
FOR MARX'S EXPULSION FROM BELGIUM 
Leopold, King of the Belgians, 
To all present and to come, Greetings 
Considering the laws of September 22, 1835, December 25, 1841 and 
February 23, 1846 
On the proposition of our Minister of Justice, 
We have decreed and now decree: 
Article One and Only 
The here-named Marx, Charles, Doctor of Philosophy, aged about 
28 years, born at Treves (Prussia), is ordered to leave the Kingdom of 
Belgium within twenty-four hours, and forbidden to return in the 
future under the penalties contained in Article Six of the afore-cited 
law of September 22, 1835. 
Our Minister of Justice is charged with the execution of the 
present order. 
Done at Brussels on March 2, 1848 
[Signed:] Leopold 
By the royal hand Certified true copy 
The Minister of Justice The Secretary-General 
[Signed:] De Haussy [Signed:] De Crassier 
Published for the first time Printed from the original 
Translated from the French 

=====第679页=====
DECISION OF THE CENTRAL AUTHORITY 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE, 
MARCH 3, 1848 380 
Working Men of All Countries, Unite! 
The Central Authority of the Communist League, meeting in 
Brussels, in accordance with the decision of the former London 
Central Authority to move the seat of the Central Authority to 
Brussels and to dissolve itself as Central Authority, by which decision 
the circle authority of the Brussels leading circle is therefore 
constituted the Central Authority, considering: 
that in the present circumstances any association of League 
members, in particular of Germans, is impossible in-Brussels; 
that the leading League members there have already been either 
arrested or expelled or are hourly expecting expulsion from 
Belgium; 
that at the present moment Paris is the centre of the entire 
revolutionary movement; 
that present circumstances require a thoroughly energetic leader­
ship of the League, for which temporary discretionary power is 
indispensable, 
decides: 
Art. 1. The Central Authority is transferred to Paris. 
Art. 2. The Brussels Central Authority confers on League 
member Karl Marx full discretionary power for the temporary 
central direction of all League affairs with responsibility to the 
Central Authority to be newly constituted and to the next Congress. 
Art. 3. It instructs Marx, in Paris, as soon as circumstances permit, 
to constitute a new Central Authority from the most suitable League 
members selected by him, and for that purpose even to call to Paris 
League members not resident there. 

=====第680页=====
652 Appendices 
Art. 4. The Brussels Central Authority dissolves  itself. 
Resolved at Brussels, March 3, 1848. 
The Central Authority 
Signed: Engels, F. Fisher, Gigot, H. Steingens, K. Marx 
First published in the book: Wermuth Printed according to the book 
und Stieber, Die Communisten-Ver-
schwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, 
Erster Theil, Berlin, 1853 

=====第681页=====
TRAVEL DOCUMENT ISSUED TO MARX 
ON HIS EXPULSION FROM BELGIUM 
Ministry of Justice 
Administration of Prisons 
and Public Security 
2nd section 
2nd Bureau 
No. 73946 
DESCRIPTION 
AGE 
HEIGHT 1 METRE 
HAIR 28 years'3 
... centimetres 
Black 
FOREHEAD 
EYEBROWS Average 
Black 
EYES Brown 
NOSE 
MOUTH Average 
do. 
BEARD Black 
SIDE WHISKERS Black 
MOUSTACHE Black 
CHIN Round 
FACE do. 
COMPLEXION Tanned 
BUILT 
DISTINGUISHING MARKS Heavy TRAVEL DOCUMENT 
(Law of May 30-June 13, 1790, 
Decree of May 11, 1815)a 
THE ADMINISTRATOR OF PUBLIC 
SECURITY 
invites the civil and military authorities to 
allow free passage 
from Brussels to Quiévrain 
destination France 
to M. Marx, Charles 
Profession  Doctor  of Philosophy 
born at  Trier,  Prussia 
residing at—and to give him aid and 
protection in case of need. 
The present travel document is valid 
for exit from the Kingdom today. 
Done at Brussels, March 4, 1848 
Signature of bearer 
Dr. K.Marx c For THE ADMINISTRATOR OF PUBLIC 
SECURITY 
The Head of the Passport Office 
Becquet 
First published as a facsimile in 
the book: S. Z. Leviova, Marx in the 
German Revolution, 1848-49. 
Moscow, 1970 Printed from the original 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
a This is followed by the Belgian national coat of arms.— Ed. 
b Inaccurate: Marx was born in 1818.— Ed. 
c Signature in Marx's hand.— Ed. 

=====第682页=====
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE PARIS COMMUNITY 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE OF MARCH 8, 1848 
MINUTES OF THE COMMUNITY MEETING OF MARCH 8, 1848 
Elected Chairman: K. Schapper. Secretary: K. Marx. 
Schapper: proposes to constitute ourselves the Paris Circle, no 
longer a single community. 
Supported by Marx and others. Agreed. 
Admitted: Hermann. 
Discussion on the re-admission of removed community members; 
Born gives a report on the meeting in the café l'Europe; so does 
Sterbitzki. Resolved by a large majority not to go into this café, where 
Decker and Venedey hold a meeting. 
Engler, Buchfink and Vogler (Weitlingians) unanimously ad­
mitted. 
Unanimously resolved: the three above-named League members 
instructed to admit members of the Weitling community whom they 
consider suitable. 
Schilling unanimously admitted. 
Admitted to the public workers' society as: 
President: H. Bauer. 
Vice-president: Hermann. 
2 secretaries:  Born and Vogel. 
Treasurer. Moll. 
3 organisers:  Buchfink, Schapper, Home. 
Agreed that the President shall use the form of address: Friends; 
anybody else as he likes. 
Marx to submit draft Rules for the workers' society. 
The public society shall be called German Workers' Club.3S1 
Wilhelm Höger admitted as League member (proposed by 
Schapper, supported by H. Bauer). 

=====第683页=====
Appendices 655 
The meeting place of the public society shall be in the centre of the 
city. Some members are instructed to look for suitable premises. 
The League meeting is to be held at No. 6, St. Louis St. Honoré. 
Sterbitzki proposes Hermann, who is admitted. 
Secretary K. Marx Chairman K. Schapper 
Written by Karl Marx on March 8, 1848 Printed according to the manuscript 
First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Published in English for the first 
ausgäbe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 7, 1935 time 

=====第684页=====
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE PARIS CIRCLE 
OF THE COMMUNIST LEAGUE OF MARCH 9, 1848 
MEETING OF MARCH 9, 9 P.M. 
Marx submits his draft Rules,3 which are discussed. 
Article 1 adopted with a minority of 2 against. Article 2 adopted 
unanimously; also Art. 3, Art. 4, Art. 5 and Art. 6. 
The draft Rules are therefore adopted without amendments. The 
Rules of the Communist League are read out by the Secretary. After 
hearing the Rules the members newly to be admitted declare that 
they enter the Communist League. 
Marx proposes that all members shall give their names and 
addresses. This is discussed and it is finally resolved that every 
League member shall give the name by which he is known here, and 
his address. 
Schapper proposes to add another five members to the President 
and Secretary, so as to form the circle authority of Paris. 
One is to be elected from each of the four communities. The 
elections to be postponed to the next meeting. 
Schapper gives a report on the Central Authority. On Schapper's 
proposal resolved that everybody who speaks rises and removes his 
hat. 
On Marx's proposal the Central Authority will give at the next 
meeting a report on the situation of the League in general. 
Born, who was sent to give a report on the meeting in the manège, 
returns after three-quarters of an hour and describes the miserable 
state of this society. 382 The next meeting will be held next Saturday at 
8 o'clock, café Belge, Rue Grenelle St. Honoré. 
a Draft Rules of the German Workers' Club (see this volume, p. 654).— Ed. 

=====第685页=====
Appendices 657 
At the conclusion of the meeting the members give the Secretary 
their names together with their addresses. Marx proposes that all 
League members shall wear a red ribbon. Agreed unanimously. 
On Schapper's proposal it is agreed that one member shall buy a 
blood-red ribbon for all. B. Sax is instructed to do this. 
Written by Karl Marx on March 9, 1848 Printed according to the manuscript 
First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt- Published in English for the first 
ausgäbe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 7, 1935 time 

=====第686页=====
ANNOUNCEMENT 
BY THE GERMAN WORKERS' CLUB IN PARIS 
The committee of the German Workers' Club will announce in the 
newspaper La Réforme the arrangements that it considers to make in 
order to hold its meetings in public. 
H. Bauer, shoemaker; Hermann, cabinet-maker; J. Moll, watch­
maker; Wallau, printer; Charles Marx; Charles Schapper. 
First published in La Réforme, Printed according to the newspaper 
March 10, 1848 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 
ANNOUNCEMENT OF THE REGULAR MEETING 
OF THE GERMAN WORKERS' CLUB IN PARIS 
German Workers' Club—Meeting on Tuesday, March 14, at the café 
Picard, 93, rue Saint-Denis. Those who wish to join the club are 
asked to give their names to: 
Hermann, rue du Faubourg St. Antoine 55, c/o M. Scheuffer; 
Stumpf,  rue Montorgueil 33, c/o M. Schard; 
Seidel, rue Oblin 9, c/o M. Glass; 
L. Etrich, rue Saint-Marc 5; 
Charles Marx, 3 rue Neuve-Ménilmontant 10; 
Charles Schapper, rue Neuve Saint- Augustin 22. 
First published in La Réforme, Printed according to the newspaper 
March 13, 1848 
Translated from the French 
Published in English for the first 
time 
a The original has a misprint: Clarck.—Ed. 

=====第687页=====
NOTES 
AND 
INDEXES 

=====第688页=====

=====第689页=====
NOTES 
This article deals with a meeting held in London on September 22. 1845 at which an 
international society of Fraternal Democrats was formed. The society embraced 
representatives of Left Chartists, German workers and craftsmen — members of the 
League of the Just—and revolutionary emigrants of other nationalities. During 
their stay in England in the summer of 1845, Marx and Engels helped in preparing 
for the meeting but did not attend it as they had by then left London. Later they 
kept in constant touch with the Fraternal Democrats trying to influence the prole­
tarian core of the society, which joined the Communist League in 1847, and through 
it the Chartist movement. The society ceased its activities in 1853. 
Engels' article, written to show the significance of international unity of the prole­
tarian and revolutionary democratic forces, was directed at the same time against 
"true socialism"—the petty-bourgeois socialist trend current among German intel­
lectuals and craftsmen from the end of 1844 onwards. This was Engels' second 
printed article against "true socialism", the first being "A Fragment of Fourier's On 
Trade" (see present edition, Vol. 4). 
Engels describes the meeting of September 22, 1845 and cites speeches delivered 
at it according to the report published in The Northern Star No. 411, September 27, 
1845.  Excerpts from the article were published in English in The  Plebs  MagazineNo. 
2, March 1922. p. 3 
Carmagnole—a song popular at the time of the French Revolution. Subsequent 
changes made in the words reflected mass sentiments at various stages of the 
popular movement. 
The maximum laws and the law against buying up food supplies (June 26, 1793) were 
adopted by the Convention at the time of deepening food crisis under mass pressures 
and the campaign for fixed prices conducted by the so-called rabid, representatives 
of the most radical plebeian trend in the revolutionary camp. The first maximum 
adopted on May 4, 1793, despite opposition on the part of the Girondists 
introduced fixed prices on grain; the decree of September 11, 1793, fixed a single 
price for grain, flour and fodder; fixed prices on other staple goods (second 
maximum) were introduced on September 29. p. 4 
The Jacobin revolutionary government headed by Robespierre fell as a result of the 
coup of 9-10 Thermidor (July 27-28), 1794. 

=====第690页=====
662 Notes 
The conspiracy of  equality  organised by Babeuf and his followers aimed at provok­
ing an armed uprising of the plebeian masses against the bourgeois regime of the 
Directory and establishing a revolutionary dictatorship as a transitional stage to "pure 
democracy" and "egalitarian communism". The conspiracy was disclosed in May 
1796.  At the end of May 1797 its leaders were executed. p. 5 
The period from May 31, 1793 to July 26, 1794 was one of the Jacobin revolutionary 
democratic dictatorship in France. p- 5 
The reference is to  associations  for improving  the conditions of  the working  classes  set up in 
a number of Prussian towns in 1844-45 ontheinitiativeof the liberal bourgeoisie who 
were frightened by the uprising of the Silesian weavers in the summer of 1844. The 
aim of their founders was to divert the German workers' attention from the struggle 
for their class interests. p. 6 
At Jemappes (November 6, 1792) and Fleurus (June 26, 1794) the French revolution­
ary army defeated the forces of the first coalition of the European counterrevolu­
tionary monarchies. P- 6 
Democratic Association—a workers' organisation founded in London by the most 
revolutionary elements among the Chartists (George Julian Harney and others) in 
1838;  it advocated the revolutionary implementation of the Chartist programme. 
Many of its members were republicans and supported Babeufs trend of Utopian 
communism. p. 6 
Cosmopolitan — here and below is to be understood as meaning: free from all national 
limitations and national prejudices. p. 7 
The reference is to the meeting of Chartists and heads of the London communities of 
the League of the Just with the leading figures of the democratic and revolutionary 
movements in a number of countries; the meeting took place in London in August 
1845.  Marx and Engels who were in London at the time took an active part in it. Ac­
cording to a report published in The Northern Star No. 406, August 23,  1845,  the parti­
cipants adopted the following resolution proposed by Thomas Cooper and support­
ed by Engels: "That a public meeting of the democrats of all nations, residing in 
London, be called to consider the propriety of forming an Association for the 
purpose of meeting each other at certain times, and getting by this means a better 
knowledge of the movements for the common cause going on in their respective 
countries." 
This event marked an important step towards organising the international 
meeting held on September 22, 1845 and described by Engels in this article. 
P. 7. 
The reference is to revolutionary events of August 1842 in England when in condi­
tions of economic crisis and increasing poverty violent working-class disturbances 
broke out in the industrial regions. In Lancashire and a large part of Cheshire 
and Yorkshire strikes became general, in some places growing into spontaneous 
insurrections. The government retaliated with massive arrests of Chartist leaders, 
who afterwards received severe sentences. p. 8 
The reference is to the July revolution of 1830 in France which resulted in the 
overthrow of the Bourbon dynasty. Decisive events took place on July 27-29 in Paris. 
p. 9 
" August 10, 1792 — the day when the monarchy in France was overthrown as a result 
of a popular insurrection. p. 9 

=====第691页=====
Notes 663 
16 
17 Julian Harney refers to calls for war against England raised in the French Chamber 
of Deputies and the French bourgeois press due to strained Anglo-French relations 
in the mid-forties caused by the colonial rivalry between the two powers in West In­
dies after the establishment of the French protectorate over Tahiti, the annoyance 
of the English bourgeoisie at French expansion in North Africa (war against 
Morocco) and the sharp British reaction against the projected Franco-Belgian-
Luxembourg customs union. The planned marriage of the son of Louis Philippe to 
the Spanish Infanta, opening up the prospects for union of the two monarchies 
under the Orleans crown, added to the tension. p.  1 1 
The trial of April 1834—trial of 167 participants in the French workers' and 
republican movement, accused of high treason in connection with the uprising in 
Lyons and revolutionary actions in Paris and other towns in April 1834. Among 
the accused were the leaders of the secret republican Société des droits de l'homme. 
p. 13 
The Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation was founded in 962 and lasted till 
1 806. At different periods it included the German, Italian, Austrian, Hungarian 
and Bohemian lands, Switzerland and the Netherlands, forming a motley conglo­
meration of feudal kingdoms and principalities, church lands and free towns with 
different political structures, legal standards and customs. p. 15 
Imperial Court Chamber (Reichskammergericht) was the supreme court of the Holy 
Roman Empire. It was established in 1495 and abolished in 1806; initially it had no 
fixed seat, but from 1693 to 1806 was permanendy located in Wetzlar. p. 16 
Here the word "metaphysics" is used to denote philosophy as a speculative science 
transcending practical experience. p. 17 
Constitution of 1791, approved by the Constituent Assembly, established a constitu­
tional monarchy in France, giving the king full executive powers and the right of 
veto.  This constitution was annulled as a result of the popular uprising of August 
10, 1792, which brought about the fall of the monarchy. After the Girondist 
government (Girondists—the party of the big bourgeoisie) had been overthrown by 
the uprising of May 31-June 2, 1793 and the revolutionary dictatorship of the 
Jacobins established, the National Convention adopted a new democratic consti­
tution of the French Republic. p. 18 
The reference is to the Constituent Assembly's decision to repeal feudal services, 
passed on the night of August 4, 1789 under the impact of peasant uprisings all over 
the country. p. 18 
See Note 3. p. 19 
After the defeat of Austria in 1805 and of Prussia in 1806 by Napoleon and the estab­
lishment of the French protectorate over the German states the latter were obliged 
to declare war on Britain and join the continental blockade proclaimed by the 
French Emperor in November 1806, which prohibited all trade with Britain.pl9 
In his articles "The State of Germany" Engels tried to refute the reactionary 
nationalistic interpretation of German history and, in particular, the glorification 
of the role played by the German ruling classes in the wars of 1813-14 and 1815 
against Napoleonic France. But he gave a somewhat one-sided appraisal of the war 
itself.  The war to liberate Germany from French domination following the defeat 
of Napoleon's army in Russia in 1812 was, indeed, of a contradictory nature. Its 
character was affected by the counter-revolutionary and expansionist aims and 

=====第692页=====
664 Notes 
policy of the ruling circles in the feudal monarchical states. But especially in 1813, 
when the struggle was aimed at liberating German territory from French occupa­
tion, it assumed the character of a genuinely popular national liberation war 
against foreign oppression. Later, when he once again considered that period in 
the history of Germany, Engels in a series of articles entitled "Notes on the War" 
(1870) stressed the progressive nature of the people's resistance to Napoleon's 
rule and in his work The Role of  Force  in History (1888) he wrote: "The peoples' 
war against Napoleon was the reaction of the national feeling of all the peoples, 
which Napoleon had trampled on." p. 20 
The reference is to the Spanish Constitution of 1812 adopted at the time of the na­
tional liberation war against Napoleonic rule. Expressing the interests of the liberal 
nobility and liberal bourgeoisie the constitution limited the king's power by the 
Cortes, proclaimed the supreme power of the nation and did away with certain 
survivals of feudalism. The overwhelming power of the feudal and clerical 
reactionary forces after Napoleon's defeat in 1814 led to the repeal of the constitu­
tion, which then became the banner of the liberal-constitutional movement in 
Spain and other European countries. p. 22 
The Holy Alliance—an association of European monarchs founded on September 
26, 1815 on the initiative of the Russian tsar Alexander I and the Austrian 
Chancellor Metternich to suppress revolutionary movements and preserve feudal 
monarchies in European countries. p. 22 
Peterloo  was the name given at the time (by analogy with the battle of Waterloo) to the 
massacre by the troops of unarmed participants in a mass meeting for electoral re­
form at St. Peter's Field near Manchester, on August 16, 1819. p. 23 
The Fundamental Federative Act (Bundesakte) — a part of the Final Act of the 
Congress of Vienna held by European monarchs and their ministers in 1814-15, 
which established the political organisation of Europe after the Napoleonic wars. 
This Act was signed on June 8, 1815 and proclaimed a German Confederation con­
sisting initially of 34 independent states and four free cities. The Act virtually sanc­
tioned the political dismemberment of Germany and the maintenance of the 
monarchical-estate system in the German states. From 1815 to 1866 the central 
organ of the German Confederation was the Federal Diet consisting of 
representatives of the German states. 
The promise to introduce constitutions in all the states of the German Confedera­
tion, which was stated in Article 13 of the Bundesakte, was never fulfilled. Article 18 
of the Act, which vaguely mentioned a forthcoming drafting of uniform instructions 
providing for "freedom of the press" in the states of the German Confederation, 
also remained on paper. p. 26 
Vendée  — a department in Western France; during the French Revolution a centre of 
largely peasant-based royalist uprising. The word "Vendée" came to denote coun­
ter-revolutionary actions. p. 26 
The Corn Laws (first introduced in the 15th century) imposed high tariffs on agricul­
tural imports in order to maintain high prices on agricultural products on the home 
market. By the Act of 1815 imports of grain were prohibited as long as grain prices in 
England remained lower than 80 sh. per quarter. Later further Acts were adopted 
(1822,  1828 and others) changing the terms for grain imports. 
The struggle between the industrial bourgeoisie and the landed aristocracy over 
the Corn Laws ended in their repeal in June 1846. p. 28 28 

=====第693页=====
Notes 665 
The reference is to the revolution in Spain which began in January 1820, and also to 
revolutionary actions in Naples and Palermo in July 1820, in Portugal in August 
1820 and Piedmont in March 1821 under the slogan of a constitution and bourgeois 
reforms. The revolutionary movements were suppressed by the Holy Alliance 
powers which sanctioned the Austrian intervention in Italy and the French 
intervention in Spain, and by domestic reaction. 
The first secret society of carbonari in France was founded in late 1820-early 
1821 after the pattern of the Italian societies of the same name. The society included 
representatives of diverse political trends and sought to overthrow the Bourbon 
monarchy. It was smashed by the police in 1822. Some carbonari organisations 
existed till the early 1830s, participated in the July revolution of 1830, and soon 
afterwards merged with republican societies. 
In 1816-19 an upsurge of the democratic movement for an electoral reform 
took place in England. However, no reform was accomplished until 1832. p. 31 
At the first stage of the national liberation uprising of the Greek people in 1821 the 
European governments were hostile to the insurgents. However, under pressure 
from public opinion and as a result of rivalries in the Balkans and the Middle East 
their attitudes changed. In 1827 Britain, France and Russia signed an agreement un­
dertaking to demand jointly that the Turkish government should stop war in Greece 
and grant the country autonomy. The refusal of the Sultan to meet these demands 
led to a military conflict between the European powers and Turkey. The defeat of 
the Turks in the battle of Navarino (1827) was of great importance for the libera­
tion of Greece. Finally the issue was decided by the Russo-Turkish war of 1828-29. 
The Sultan was compelled to recognise the autonomy of Greece, and soon after­
wards its independence. However, the European powers imposed a monarchical 
form of government on the newly liberated country. p. 31 
31 See Note 11. p. 31 30 
32 
33 
34 The Polish national liberation uprising of November 1830-October  1831,  whose par­
ticipants belonged mostly to the revolutionary gentry and whose leaders were mainly 
from aristocratic circles, was crushed by tsarist Russia aided by Prussia and 
Austria — the states which had taken part in the partition of Poland at the end of the 
eighteenth century. Despite the defeat the uprising was of a major international sig­
nificance as it diverted the forces of the counter-revolutionary powers and frustrated 
their plans to intervene against the bourgeois revolutions of 1830 in France and of 
1830-31 in Belgium. As a result of the revolution,Belgium, which had been incorpo­
rated into Holland in 1815 by the decision of the Congress of Vienna, became an 
independent kingdom. For Marx's and Engels' appraisal of the Polish uprising of 
1830-31 see pp. 545-52 of this volume. p. 31 
The 1832 Reform Act in England granted the franchise, to property owners and 
leaseholders with no less than £ 10 annual income. The proletariat and the petty 
bourgeoisie, who were the main force in the struggle for the reform, remained 
unenfranchised. p. 32 
The conference of the representatives of German states held in June 1834 in Vienna 
passed a decision which obliged the sovereigns to render mutual support in their 
struggle against liberal and democratic movements. This decision was recorded in 
the final protocol of the conference of June 12, 1834, the contents of which were long 
kept secret. p. 32 

=====第694页=====
666 Notes 
In 1844 the British Home Secretary, Sir James Graham, to please the Austrian 
government ordered the post office to let the police inspect the correspondence of 
Italian revolutionary immigrants. p. 33 
The editorial board of The Northern Star altered the date from "February 20" to 
"March 20". Harney gave this explanation to Engels in a letter of March 30, 1846: 
"On Saturday I received a long letter from you through We[e]rth, or rather two let­
ters.  The one for the Star I like very much, it will appear this week. I have altered the 
date from Febr. 20th, to March 20th, it will thereby not look so stale." p. 33 
This is a circular of the Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee founded 
by Marx and Engels early in 1846 for the propaganda of communist ideas and cor­
respondence with advanced workers and revolutionary intellectuals in various coun­
tries of Europe (similar committees were founded shortly afterwards in London, Pa­
ris, Cologne and some other  cities).  The Brussels Communist Correspondence Com­
mittee made use of such circulars, as Engels stated later, "on particular occasions, 
when it was a question of internal affairs of the Communist Party in process of for­
mation" (F. Engels, "On the History of the Communist League", 1885). 
The "Circular Against Kriege" was directed against "true socialism", a trend fol­
lowed by the German journalist Hermann Kriege who had emigrated to New 
York in the autumn of 1845. It was also to a considerable extent directed against 
the egalitarian communism of Weitling, which had found a number of advocates 
among the supporters of Kriege and the staff of Der Volks-Tribun of which he 
was editor. 
It seems likely that the principal part ot the "Circular Against Kriege", which was 
written by Marx and Engels when they were completing the main part of the work on 
the manuscript of The German Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5), was originally 
intended for inclusion in Vol. II of that work. 
The document against Kriege was circulated in lithographic copies (in Wilhelm 
Wolff's hand without title). 
A copy was sent to New York with a covering letter written by Edgar von 
Westphalen: "To Herr Hermann Kriege, Editor of Der Volks-Tribun. — On behalf 
of the local communist  society  and as chairman of the meeting which took place on 
May 11,1 am forwarding to you the decision in which our opinion of Der Volls-
Tribun is expressed. In case you do not publish the decision together with its moti­
vation in your paper it will nevertheless be published in the press of Europe and 
America. We, however, expect that in the nearest future you will send us the issue 
of Der Volks-Tribun containing our resolution to: M. Gigot, rue de Bodenbroek, 
No. 8, Brussels, May 16, 1846. Edgar von Westphalen" Kriege was compelled to 
comply with this demand and publish the "Circular" in Der Volks-Tribun Nos. 23 
and 24 of June 6 and 13, 1846, adding his own insinuations against the authors and 
the ironical title Eine Bannbulle. It was also published in the July issue of Das West-
phälische Dampfboot under the title of "Der Volkstribun, redigirt von Hermann 
Kriege in New York" without the authors' name. However, the editor of the 
journal, the "true socialist" Otto Liming subjected the document to biased re-
editing, adding his own introduction and conclusion, in contradiction to the ideas 
and spirit of the original document and in some cases changing the text arbitrarily. 
The original text was for a long time unavailable to scholars; in the book Am dem 
literarischen Nachlass von Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels und Ferdinand Lassalle, pub­
lished by Franz Mehring, the document was printed according to the text in Das 
Westphälische Dampfboot. The authentic version was for the first time reproduced 
according to the lithographic copy of the "Circular" in Marx/Engels, Gesamtaus­
gabe, Erste Abteilung, Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932. 

=====第695页=====
Notes 667 
In October 1846, the Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee issued a 
second circular against Kriege written by Marx, the text of which has not yet been 
found. p. 35 
Young America — an organisation of American craftsmen and workers; it formed the 
nucleus of the mass National Reform Association founded in 1845. In the second 
half of the 1840s the Association agitated for land reform, proclaiming as its aim free 
allotment of a plot of 160 acres to every working man; it came out against slave-
owning planters and land profiteers. It also put forward demands for a ten-hour 
working day, abolition of slavery, of the standing army,  etc. Many German emigrant 
craftsmen, including members of the League of the Just, took part in the movement 
headed by the National Reform Association. By 1846 the movement among the Ger­
man workers began to subside. One of the reasons for this was the activity of Kriege's 
group whose "true socialism" diverted the German emigrants from the struggle for 
democratic aims. p. 41 
The reference is to the following passage from Emmanuel Sieyès'  Qu'est-ce que le  tiers-
état? published in Paris in 1789 on the eve of the French Revolution:  "1. What is the 
third estate? Everything. 2. What was it until now in the political respect? Nothing. 3. 
What is it striving for? To be something." p. 48 
40 Essenes  — a religious sect in ancient Judea (2nd century B. C.-3rd century A. D.). 
p. 50 
The article was published with an introduction by The Northern Star editors inform­
ing readers of the supposedly forthcoming publication of the Prussian constitution 
(the interpretation given in the press to the intention of the King of Prussia to insti­
tute a state representative organ on the basis of the united provincial diets) and giv­
ing a brief account of the situation in Prussia. The introduction, in particular, 
stated: "Silesia is in a disordered state, the unhappy people showing every inclina­
tion to imitate the Polish peasantry in engaging in an agrarian revolt. Last, not 
least, financial difficulties add to the embarrassments of the Government and have 
given rise to a measure involving a further departure from the solemn pledges 
given by the Crown to the people. On this subject we have been favoured with the 
following communication from our German correspondent." p. 52 
According to Verordnung wegen der künftigen Behandlung des gesammten Staatsschul­
den-Wesens (Decree on the future handling of all state debts) issued in Prussia on 
January 17, 1820, new loans and state debts had to be guaranteed by the 
forthcoming Prussian assembly of the estates as well as by the government. 
p. 52 
43 The reference is to the  Preussische  Seehandlungsgesellschaft (Prussian sea trade soci­
ety)—  a trade credit society founded in Prussia in 1772 which enjoyed a number of 
important state privileges. It offered large credits to the government and actually 
played the part of banker and broker. ïn 1904 it was officially made the Prussian 
State Bank. p. 52 
44 This letter was written by Marx and Engels on behalf of the Brussels Communist 
Correspondence Committee in reply to a statement by the Elberfeld socialist G. A. 
Köttgen, who tried to unite the supporters of socialist and communist views in Wup­
pertal (the joint name of Barmen and Elberfeld, in the Rhine province, which subse­
quently merged). Köttgen's statement, written on May 24, 1846 was sent to Brussels 
only on June 10 with a covering letter to Engels. 
Their internal dissension prevented the socialists and Communists of Wuppertal 
from following Marx's and Engels' advice concerning, in particular, the organisation 
of a communist correspondence committee. p. 54 

=====第696页=====
668 Notes 
46 
47 
48 
49 The article was supplied with an editorial introduction beginning with the following 
words: "Again, rumours are rife in Germany, that the long projected Prussian Consti­
tution is at last framed, and will be immediately published. For ourselves, we will beli­
eve when we see. The King of Prussia is such a liar that none but asses would repose 
faith in his most solemn promises. One thing is certain that, if a Constitution is 
granted, it will be so worthless as to be utterly inadequate to satisfy the popular 
demands. From our 'German correspondent' we have received the following  brief-
but interesting communication which exhibits his Prussian kingship in a new but 
not very respectable character. He is about to turn swindler on a large scale. He will 
borrow, and then 'repudiate'." p. 57 
The address of the Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee to the 
Chartist leader Feargus O'Connor was written in connection with his victory at the 
Nottingham election meeting early in July 1846, when he stood for election to the 
House of Commons. Voting at such meetings (up to 1872) was by show of hands, 
and all present took part in it. However, only "legitimate" electors (those having 
property and other qualifications) could take part in subsequent ballot — in which, 
consequently, candidates who had been outvoted by show of hands could be 
declared elected. Despite this anti-democratic system, O'Connor was duly elected 
to Parliament at the August 1847 ballot. 
The address of the Brussels Communists was read at a regular meeting of the 
Fraternal Democrats held on July 20, 1846 and was warmly received there (see The 
Northern Star No. 454, July 25, 1846). p. 58 
The reference is to the Repeal of the Corn Laws passed in June 1846. (On the Corn 
Laws see Note 28.) The movement for the repeal of the Corn Laws was led by the 
Anti-Corn Law League founded in 1838 by the Manchester manufacturers Cobden 
and Bright. Acting under the slogan of unrestricted free trade the League fought to 
weaken the economic and political position of the landed aristocracy and at the same 
time to reduce workers' wages. p. 58 
The People's Charter, which contained the demands of the Chartists, was published 
on May 8, 1838, in the form of a Bill to be submitted to Parliament. It consisted of 
six clauses: universal suffrage (for men of 21 years of age), annual elections to Par­
liament, secret ballot, equal constituencies, abolition of property qualifications for 
candidates to Parliament, and salaries for M.P.s. In 1839 and 1842 petitions for the 
Charter were rejected by Parliament. In 1847-48 the Chartists renewed a mass 
campaign for the Charter. p. 58 
Early in June 1846 Thomas Cooper started a campaign against O'Connor. In partic­
ular he accused him of misusing the funds of the Chartist Cooperative Land Society 
(later called the National Land Company) founded by the Chartist leader in 1845 
(see Note 162). 
Cooper set forth his accusations in an open letter "To the London Chartists" 
(published in June 1846 in Lloyd's Weekly Newspaper) and in other statements. In 
answer to this, O'Connor wrote two letters: "To the Members of the Chartist Co­
operative Land Society" and "To the Fustian Jackets, the Blistered Hands, and 
Unshorn Chins", published in The Northern Star Nos. 448 and 449, of June 13 and 
20, 1846. The latter issue carried also numerous statements by Chartist organisa­
tions expressing confidence in O'Connor. p. 59 
The Tuileries Palace in Paris was the residence of the French monarchs. p. 61 

=====第697页=====
Notes 669 
The reference is to the rescripts by Frederick William IV of February 3, 1847 
convening the United Diet—a united assembly of the eight provincial diets insti­
tuted in 1823. The United Diet as well as the provincial diets consisted of represen­
tatives of the estates: the curia of gentry (high aristocracy) and the curia of the 
other three estates (nobility, representatives of the towns and the peasantry). Its 
powers were limited to authorising new taxes and loans, to voice without vote 
during the discussion of Bills, and to the right to present petitions to the King. The 
dates of its sessions were fixed by the King. 
The United Diet opened on April 11, 1847, but it was dissolved as early as June 
because the majority refused to vote a new loan. p. 64 
52 See Note 28. p. 65 
53 The Customs Union (Zollverein) of the German states (initially including 18 states), 
which established a common customs frontier, was founded in 1834 and headed by 
Prussia. By the 1840s the Union embraced most of the German states with the excep­
tion of Austria, the Hanseatic towns (Bremen, Lübeck, Hamburg) and some small 
states.  Brought into being by the necessity for an all-German market the Customs 
Union subsequently promoted Germany's political unification. p. 65 
States-general —  a body representing the estates in medieval France. It consisted of 
representatives of the clergy, nobles and burghers. They met in May 1789 — after a 
175-year interval  — at the time of maturing bourgeois revolution and on June 17 
were transformed by the decision of the deputies of the third estate into the 
National Assembly which proclaimed itself the Constituent Assembly on July 9 and 
became the supreme organ of revolutionary France. p. 69 
55 
56 
58 The reference is to the national liberation uprising in the Cracow republic which by 
the decision of the Congress of Vienna was controlled jointly by Austria, Russia and 
Prussia  — who had partitioned Poland at the end of the eighteenth century. The 
seizure of power in Cracow by the insurgents on February 22, 1846 and the estab­
lishment of a National Government of the Polish republic, which issued a manifesto 
abolishing feudal services, were part of the plan for a general uprising in the Polish 
lands whose main inspirers were the revolutionary democrats (Dembowski and 
others). In March the Cracow uprising, lacking active support in other parts of 
Poland, was crushed by the forces of Austria and tsarist Russia; in November 1846, 
Austria, Prussia and Russia signed a treaty incorporating the "free town of Cracow" 
into the Austrian Empire. p. 71 
Karl Grün translated into German Proudhon's work  Systeme des  contradictions  écono­
miques, ou Philosophie de la misère. The book was published in Darmstadt in 1847 un­
der the title Philosophie der Staatsökonomie  oder  Notwendigkeit  des  Elends. p. 72 
The reference is to Proudhon's letter to Marx of May 17, 1846 (published in  Corres­
pondance de P. J. Proudhon précédée d'une notice sur P. J. Proudhon par J. A. Lang-
lois, T. II, Paris, 1875), which was an answer to Marx's letter to him of May 5, 
suggesting that he correspond with the Brussels Communist Correspondence 
Committee in the capacity of a representative of the French proletariat. While in 
fact rejecting this proposal, Proudhon nevertheless wrote to Marx that he was 
eager to know Marx's opinion of his latest work. p. 73 
The review of Marx's work in the  Deutsch-Französische  Jahrbücher quoted here has 
been taken from Karl Grün's article "Meine Stellung zur Judenfrage" published in 
the Neue Anekdota. 

=====第698页=====
670 Notes 
59 
60 
61 
64 Neue Anekdota —a collection which appeared in Darmstadt late in May 1845 
under the editorship of Karl Grün. It contained newspaper articles by Moses Hess, 
Karl Grün, Otto Lüning and others, written mainly in the first half of 1844 and 
banned by the censors. Soon after the publication of the collection Marx and En-
gels,  as can be judged from Grün's letters to Hess, made a number of severe cri­
tical remarks about its content. p. 74 
Engels intended to publish this work in 1847 as a pamphlet. In the spring of 1847 he 
sent the manuscript from Paris (where he arrived in August 1846 to organise com­
munist propaganda) to Marx in Brussels to be forwarded to the publisher C.G. Vog­
ler, who had connections with communist circles. Vogler, however, had meantime 
been arrested (see Marx's letter to Engels of May 15, 1847). Marx gave a high ap­
praisal of this pamphlet, especially of its first part, but was of the opinion that the 
other two parts were lacking in precision. The extant manuscript is incomplete. 
Only seven sheets, each folded in four (28 pages altogether), with the author's 
paging on the first page of each sheet (1, 5, 9, etc.) have been preserved. Pages 
21-24 and the last sheets are missing. There is no title to the manuscript. The 
extant part was first published in the USSR in 1929 in the first edition of Marx's 
and Engels' Works in Russian under the title "The Constitutional Question in Ger­
man Socialist Literature" and in 1932 in German in Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe 
under the title "Der Status quo in Deutschland". 
The present title is given according to Engels' letter to Marx of March 9,  1847,  in 
which this work was called "a pamphlet on the constitutional question". p. 75 
Réformistes —a political party grouped round the Paris newspaper La Réforme, 
which included radical opponents of the July monarchy—republican democrats 
and petty-bourgeois socialists. The leaders of the Réforme party, which also called 
itself "social-democratic", were Ledru-Rollin, Louis Blanc and others (see K. Marx 
and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, this volume, p. 518). p. 76 
Some of the French legitimists, advocates of the Bourbon dynasty overthrown in 
1830,  who upheld the interests of the big hereditary landowners (Villeneuve-
Bargemont and others), resorted to social demagogy in their struggle against the 
financial and industrial bourgeoisie, passing themselves off as defenders of the 
working people. 
Young England was a group of conservative writers and politicians, including 
Disraeli and Ferrand, who were close to the Tory philanthropists and founded a 
separate group in the House of Commons in 1841. Voicing the discontent of the 
landed aristocracy at the growing economic and political power of the bourgeoisie, 
they criticised the capitalist system and supported half-hearted philanthropic 
measures for improving the conditions of the workers. Young England disinte­
grated as a political group in 1845 and ceased to exist as a literary circle in 1848. 
In the Communist Manifesto Marx and Engels describe the views of Young 
England and the above-mentioned ideologists of legitimism as "feudal socialism" 
(see this volume, pp. 507-08). p. 77 
See Note 21. p. 80 
See Note 53. p. 80 
Apparently, the condition of the working classes of Germany, and primarily the Ger­
man proletariat, was described in the third, non-extant part of the work. p. 83 

=====第699页=====
Notes 671 
See Note 51. p. 92 
See Note 53. p. 92 
The name of the Spandau fortress near Berlin — a drill hall and a place of imprison­
ment for "state criminals" in Prussia — is used here as a symbol of the Prussian politi­
cal system. p. 92 
The reference is to the Prussian Government's consent to the incorporation of Cra­
cow into the Austrian Empire after the suppression of the Cracow uprising of 1846 
(see Note 55). This act led to the inclusion of Cracow within the Austrian customs 
frontier and to high import duties there on Prussian goods. p. 93 
This document is the draft programme discussed at the First Congress of the Com­
munist League in London on June 2-9, 1847. 
The Congress was a final stage in the reorganisation of the League of the 
Just — an organisation of German workers and craftsmen, which was founded in Pa­
ris in 1836-37 and soon acquired an international character, having communities in 
Germany, France, Switzerland, Britain and Sweden. The activity of Marx and Engels 
directed towards the ideological and organisational unity of the socialists and ad­
vanced workers prompted the leaders of the League (Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll, 
Heinrich Bauer), who resided in London from November 1846, to ask for their 
help in reorganising the League and drafting its new programme. When Marx and 
Engels were convinced that the leaders of the League of the Just were ready to 
accept the principles of scientific communism as its programme they accepted the 
offer to join the League made to them late in January 1847. 
Engels' active participation in the work of the Congress (Marx was unable to go 
to London) affected the course and the results of its proceedings. The League was 
renamed the Communist League, the old motto of the League of the Just "All men 
are brothers" was replaced by a new, Marxist one: "Working Men of All Countries, 
Unite!" The draft programme and the draft Rules of the League were approved at 
the last sitting on June 9, 1847. 
The full text of the "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith" (Credo) became 
known only in 1968. It was found by the Swiss scholar Bert Andréas together with the 
draft Rules and the circular of the First Congress to the members of the League (see 
this volume, pp. 585-600) in the archives of Joachim Friedrich Martens, an active" 
member of the Communist League, which are kept in the State and University Libra­
ry in Hamburg. This discovery made it possible to ascertain a number of important 
points in the history of the Communist League and the drafting of its programme 
documents. It had been previously assumed that the First Congress did no more than 
adopt a decision to draw up a programme and that the draft itself was made by the 
London Central Authority of the Communist League (Joseph Moll, Karl Schapper 
and Heinrich Bauer) after the Congress between June and August 1847. The new 
documents show that the draft was ready by June 9, 1847 and that its author was 
Engels (the manuscript found in Martens' archives, with the exception of some in­
serted words, the concluding sentence and the signatures of the president and the 
secretary of the Congress, was written in Engels' hand). 
The document testifies to Engels' great influence on the discussion of the 
programme at the Congress — the formulation of the answers to most of the 
questions is a Marxist one. Besides, while drafting the programme, Engels had to 
take into account that the members of the League had not yet freed themselves 
from the influence of Utopian ideas and this was reflected in the formulation of the 
first six questions and answers. The form of a "revolutionary catechism" was also 
commonly used in the League of the Just and other organisations of workers 

=====第700页=====
672 Notes 
and craftsmen at the time. It may be assumed that Engels intended to give greater 
precision to some of the formulations of the programme document in the course of 
further discussion and revision. 
After the First Congress of the Communist League the "Draft of a Communist 
Confession of Faith" was sent, together with the draft Rules, to the communities for 
discussion, the results of which were to be taken into account at the time of the final 
approval of the programme and the Rules at the Second Congress. When working 
on another, improved draft programme, the Principles of Communism, in late Octo­
ber 1847 (see this volume, pp. 341-57), Engels made direct use of the "Confession of 
Faith", as can be seen from the coincidences of the texts, and also from references in 
the Principles to the earlier document when Engels had apparently decided to leave 
formulations of some of the answers as they were. 
The "Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith" was published in English for 
the first time in the book: Birth of  the Communist Manifesto, International Publishers, 
New York, 1971. p. 96 
In their works of the 1840s and 1850s, prior to Marx having worked out the theory of 
surplus value, Marx and Engels used the terms "value of labour", "price of labour", 
"sale of labour" which, as Engels noted in 1891 in the introduction to Marx's 
pamphlet Wage Labour and Capital, "from the point of view of the later works were 
inadequate and even wrong". After he had proved that the worker sells to the capita­
list not his labour but his labour power Marx used more precise terms. In later works 
Marx and Engels used the terms "value of labour power", "price of labour power", 
"sale of labour power" p. 100 
The Poverty of  Philosophy.  Answer  to the "Philosophy  of Poverty"  by M. Proudhon is one of 
the most important theoretical works of Marxism and Marx's principal work di­
rected against P.-J. Proudhon, whom he regarded as an ideologist of the petty 
bourgeoisie. Marx decided that he must criticise Proudhon's economic and philo­
sophical views and at the same time clear up a number of questions relating to the 
theory and tactics of the revolutionary proletarian movement from the scientific-
materialist standpoint at the end of 1846, as a result of his reading Proudhon's 
Système des contradictions  économiques,  ou Philosophie de la  misère,  which had appeared 
a short time earlier. In his letter of December 28, 1846 to the Russian man of letters 
P. V. Annenkov Marx expounded a number of important ideas which later formed 
the core of his book against Proudhon. In January 1847, as can be judged from 
Engels' letter of January 15, 1847 to Marx, the latter was already working on his 
reply to Proudhon. In writing this book Marx extensively used notes he had made 
in 1845-47 from works by various authors, primarily economists. (A description of 
Marx's notebooks was published in Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Erste Abteilung, 
Bd. 6, Berlin, 1932.) By the beginning of April 1847 Marx's work was completed in 
the main and had gone to press (see this volume, p. 72). On June 15, 1847 he wrote 
a short foreword. 
The book was published in Brussels and Paris early in July 1847. Marx's followers 
saw it as a theoretical substantiation of the platform of the proletarian party which 
was taking shape at the time. While establishing contact on behalf of this party in the 
autumn of 1847 with the French socialists and democrats grouped around the 
newspaper La Réforme, Engels, speaking to Louis Blanc, one of its editors, called 
Marx's book against Proudhon "our programme" (see Engels' letter to Marx of 
October 25-26, 1847). Ferdinand  Wolff,  a member of the Communist League, 
published a detailed review of The Poverty of Philosophy in Das Westphälische 
Dampfboot for January and February 1848. 

=====第701页=====
Notes 673 
The book was not republished in full during Marx's lifetime. Excerpts from §5 
("Strikes and Combinations of Workers") of Ch. II appeared in different years, 
mosdy between 1872 and 1875, in workers' and socialist publications such as La 
Emancipation, Der Volksstaat, Social-Demokrat (New York) and others. In 1880 Marx 
attempted to publish his Poverty of Philosophy in the French socialist newspaper 
L'Egalité, the organ of the French Workers' Party, but only the foreword and §1 
("The Opposition Between Use Value and Exchange Value") of Ch. I were 
published. 
The first German edition was made in 1885. The translation was edited by En-
gels,  who also wrote a special preface and a number of notes to it. He mentioned in 
the preface that while editing the translation he had taken into account corrections 
made in Marx's hand in a copy of the 1847 French edition. (This copy, which con­
tains also numerous underlinings and vertical lines in the margins, is kept in the 
library of the North-Eastern University at Sendai, Japan; and a photocopy was 
presented by Japanese scholars to the Institute of Marxism-Leninism in Moscow.) It 
is still not known when Marx made these corrections and alterations. But it was 
certainly prior to 1876, as a copy presented by Marx to Natalia Utina, wife of 
N. I. Utin, a member of the Russian Section of the First International, on 
January 1, 1876 is extant in which almost all of these corrections and 
alterations are reproduced in an unknown hand. 
In 1886, the Russian Marxist Emancipation of Labour group published the first 
Russian edition of The Poverty of Philosophy in a translation made by Vera Zasulich 
from the German edition of 1885. In 1892 a second German edition appeared. It was 
provided with a short preface by Engels, dealing with corrections of certain inaccura­
cies in the text (see Note 75). Engels planned a second French edition for the mid-
eighties. With this aim in view he made a list of necessary corrections to be inserted 
("Notes et changements") using for this purpose the copy bearing the corrections in 
Marx's hand. However, this plan was implemented only after Engels' death by 
Marx's daughter Laura Lafargue in 1896. The corrections were made in the text 
according to the list drawn up by Engels. 
In the present edition all corrections and changes made by Marx in the copy of 
the 1847 edition and reproduced in the copy presented to Natalia Utina, as well as 
the relevant corrections in the German 1885 and 1892 editions and in the French 
1896 edition, have been taken into account. The changes affecting meaning and 
the stylistic improvements made in these copies and editions are introduced in the 
text itself,  the original version being given in a footnote. Where the author's cor­
rections and remarks are intended to revise or give greater precision to the origi­
nal formulations and terminology, owing to the further development of Marxist 
economic theory, they are given in footnotes, the original text being left unaltered. 
This will enable readers to appreciate actual level attained by Marxist economic 
theory by 1847. 
Italics in quotations are as a rule Marx's. In some cases the editors have inserted 
periods to indicate an omission by Marx in quotations and give in square brackets 
page references which are not in the original. References in square brackets are 
made to pages in the following English editions of works of English authors quoted 
by Marx from French translations: D. Ricardo. On the Principles of  Political  Economy, 
and Taxation. Third edition. London, 1821; A. Smith. An Inquiry into the Nature and 
Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Vol. I, London, 1835; Ch. Babbage. On the Economy 
of Machinery and Manufactures. Second edition. London, 1832; A. Ferguson. An 
Essay on the History of Civil  Society.  Edinburgh, 1767; J. M. Lauderdale. An Inquiry 
into the Nature and Origin of Public Wealth. Edinburgh, 1804; J. Steuart. An Inquiry 
into the Principles of Political Œconomy... Vol. I, London, 1767; A. Ure. The  Philosophy 
of Manufactures..., Second edition. London, 1835. 

=====第702页=====
674 Notes 
72 
73 
75 The first English edition of The  Poverty  of Philosophy-was  published in London in 
1900 by the Twentieth Century press. The translation was made by Harry Quelch. 
Since then the work has been republished several times in English. p. 105 
The reference is to the period which followed the termination of the Napoleonic 
wars in 1815 and the restoration of the Bourbon dynasty in France. p. 121 
See present edition, Vol. 3, pp.  424-31,  440-43 and Vol. 4, pp. 375-88. p. 125 
74 See Note 70. p. 127 
The 1847 edition and the German 1885 edition mistakenly have the name of Hop­
kins,  and lower an inexact date of publication of W.Thompson's book (1827 instead 
of 1824). This served as a pretext for the Austrian economist Anton Menger to re­
proach Marx with wrong quoting (see A. Menger, Das Recht auf den vollen 
Arbeitsertrag in  geschichtlicher  Darstellung, Stuttgart, 1886, S. 50). Engels corrected 
the mistakes by writing in the preface to the second German edition of The Poverty 
of Philosophy  in 1892 the following: "For the second edition I have only to remark 
that the name wrongly written Hopkins in the French text has been replaced by the 
correct name Hodgskin and that in the same place the date of the work of William 
Thompson has been corrected to 1824. It is to be hoped that this will appease the 
bibliographical conscience of Professor Anton Menger. London, March 29, 1892. 
Frederick Engels." p. 138 
The Ten-Hours' Bill was submitted to Parliament several times. In 1847 after a 
prolonged struggle the Bill was passed, and applied only to children and women. 
However, many factory owners ignored it. p. 143 
Equitable-labour-exchange bazaars were organised by Owenites and Ricardian 
socialists (John Gray, William Thompson, John Bray) in various towns of England 
in the 1830s for fair exchange without a capitalist intermediary. The products were 
exchanged for labour notes, or labour money, certificates showing the cost of the 
products delivered, calculated on the basis of the amount of labour necessary for 
their production. The organisers considered these bazaars as a means for 
publicising the advantages of a non-capitalist form of exchange and a peaceful 
way — together with cooperatives — of transition to socialism. The subsequent and 
invariable bankruptcy of such enterprises proved their Utopian character 
p. 144 
The reference is to the following passage from Adam Smith's work, An Inquiry into 
the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations: "In a tribe of hunters or shepherds a 
particular person makes bows and arrows, for example, with more readiness and 
dexterity than any other. He frequently exchanges them for cattle or for venison 
with his companions; and he finds at last that he can in this manner get more cattle 
and venison, than if he himself went to the field to catch them. From a regard to his 
own interest, therefore, the making of bows and arrows grows to be his chief busi­
ness,  and he becomes a sort of armourer." (Vol. I, Book I, Chapter II.) p. 147 
Marx refers to the first edition of Cooper's book. In his notebook dating to July-
August 1845, this passage is quoted from a second enlarged edition published in 
London in 1831. p. 153 
The full text of the passage from Hegel's Wissenschaft der Logik quoted here is as fol­
lows:  "Die Methode ist deswegen als die ohne Einschränkung allgemeine, innerliche 
und äußerliche Weise, und als die schlechthin unendliche Kraft anzuerkennen, 79 
80 

=====第703页=====
Notes 675 
84 
85 welcher kein Objekt, insofern es sich als ein Äußerliches, der Vernunft fernes und 
von ihr unabhängiges präsentiert — Widerstand leisten, gegen sie von einer beson­
deren Natur seyn und von ihr nicht durchdrungen werden könnte.... Sie ist darum 
die höchste Kraft oder vielmehr die einzige und absolute Kraft der Vernunft, nicht 
nur, sondern auch ihr höchster und einziger Trieb, durch sich  selbst  in Allem  sich selbst 
zu finden und zu erkennen." (Bd. III, Abschnitt 3, Kap. 3). p. 164 
81 Marx refers to Chapter VIII "De la responsabilité de l'homme et de dieu, sous la loi 
de contradiction, ou solution du problème de la providence". p. 173 
2 Le Creusot (Burgundy) — since the 1830s a big centre of the French metallurgical, 
machine-building and war industry; at the time referred to, the Creusot works 
belonged to Schneider and Co. founded in 1836. p. 182 
The reference is to the first cyclic crisis of overproduction which began in England in 
1825.  The crisis involved all branches of industry, textiles in particular. It was fol­
lowed by stagnation in trade, reduction of exports by 16 per cent and imports by 15 
per cent and the insolvency of several banks. p. 188 
In partibus infidelium — beyond the realm of reality (literally "in the country of in­
fidels")—  an addition to the title of Catholic priests appointed to a purely nominal 
diocese in non-Christian countries. p. 192 
Quoting from the French edition of J. Steuart's book published in 1789 (the first En­
glish edition: J. Steuart. An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Œconomy, being an 
Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in  Free  Nations was published in two volumes in 
London in 1767), Marx made some explanatory additions and changes. Thus he 
added the words "impôt sur la production" (taxes on production), "impôts sur la 
consommation" (taxes on consumption) and the last sentence: "Chacun est imposé 
à raison de la dépense qu'il fait" (Everyone is taxed according to his expenditure). 
He changed the place of the sentence "Chacun est imposé à raison du profit qu'il 
est censé faire" (Everyone is taxed in proportion to the gain he is supposed to 
make),  which Steuart has after "Ainsi le monarque met un impôt sur l'industrie" 
(Thus the monarch imposes a tax upon industry). Instead of "le gouvernement 
limité" Marx used "le gouvernement constitutionnel". p. 196 
See notes 28 and 47. p. 208 
In 1836-38 a new cyclic crisis of overproduction swept over Britain and other capital­
ist countries. p. 208 
In 1824 under mass pressure Parliament repealed the ban on the trade unions. How­
ever, in 1825 it passed a Bill on workers' combinations, which confirming the repeal 
of the ban on the trade unions at the same time greatly restricted their activity. In 
particular, mere agitation for workers to join unions and take part in strikes was re­
garded as "compulsion" and "violence" and punished as a crime. p. 209 
The laws in operation at that time in France—the so-called Le Chapelier law adopted 
in 1791 during the bourgeois revolution by the Constituent Assembly, and the penal 
code elaborated under the Napoleonic^m pire in 1810 (Code pénal) —forbade work­
ers to form labour unions or go on strike under pain of severe punishment. The pro­
hibition of trade unions in France was abolished only in 1884. p. 209 
The National Association of United Trades was established in England in 1845 by trade 
union delegates from London, Manchester, Sheffield, Norwich, Hull, Bristol, and 89 
90 
23-1826 

=====第704页=====
676 Notes 
91 
92 other cities. Its activity was limited to the struggle for improved conditions of sale of 
labour power ("a fair wage for a fair day's work") and for improved factory legisla­
tion. The association existed until the early sixties, but it ceased to play any big part in 
the trade union movement after 1851. p. 210 
The term "instruments of production" is still used by Marx in a broader sense here 
than in his later works. Subsequently he drew a more strict distinction between 
"forces of production" in general and "instruments of production" as a component 
part of the former. p. 211 
Engels had in mind first of all Ferdinand Lassalle who widely used the term "work­
ers' estate" in his writings, in particular in his pamphlet Arbeiterprogramm (Workers' 
Programme) published in 1862. The substitution of the terms "workers" or "fourth 
estate" for "working  class"  was characteristic of a number of other representatives of 
petty-bourgeois socialism. p. 212 
93 See Note 50. p. 213 
The reference is to the conservative majority in the French Chamber of Deputies 
who supported Guizot. 
Further on Engels used materials published in Le Moniteur Universel for June 4, 
18, 23 and 26, 1847. p. 214 
95 See Note 47. p. 217 
96 This article was written by Marx in reply to the propaganda of feudal and Christian 
socialism carried on by the conservative Prussian newspaper Rheinischer  Beobachter. 
This propaganda was aimed at diverting the popular masses from revolutionary 
struggle against the absolutist regime and at using them in the struggle against the 
bourgeois opposition. Such ideas permeated, in particular, the article criticised by 
Marx, which was published anonymously in the Rheinischer  Beobachter  No. 206, July 
25, 1847 as the eighth part in the series Politische Gänge. On September 2, 1847 this 
article was reprinted in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung without a title but with intro­
ductory words quoted by Marx. It is probable that the author of this article was Herr 
Wagener, a consistorial councillor in Magdeburg, subsequently a conservative 
leader, who enjoyed the protection of the Prussian Minister of Religious Worship, 
Education and Medicine, Eichhorn. 
Later, in the mid-sixties, while exposing Lassalleans' advances to Bismarck's Gov­
ernment, Marx and Engels referred to this article by Marx as a document demon­
strating the firm standpoint of the workers' party in relation to "royal-Prussian gov­
ernment socialism" (see Statement by Marx and Engels to the editorial board of the 
newspaper Social-Demokrat, February 23, 1865). 
The article "The Communism of the Rheinischer Beobachter" bore the sign 
1 I instead of a signature. The publication of this article and also of the first 
part of Engels' essays "German Socialism in Verse and Prose" (see this volume, 
pp. 220-49) marked the beginning of Marx's and Engels' regular contribution to 
the newspaper of the German emigrants, the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung. A special 
editorial note in the preceding issue of the newspaper of September 9, 1847 an­
nounced the forthcoming publication of these articles without mentioning, 
however, the authors' names. Prior to this, Marx and Engels contributed only 
occasionally to the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung (see this volume, pp. 72-74, 92-95), 
though they approved their associates— Wilhelm Wolff and Georg Weerth and 
others—doing so. Prior to their regular contribution the paper followed mainly the 

=====第705页=====
Notes 677 
line of its editor-in-chief, the petty-bourgeois democrat Adalbert Bornstedt, who 
tried to combine eclectically various oppositional ideological trends. But by the 
autumn of 1847 the influence of the proletarian revolutionaries in the paper 
gained momentum and soon it became a mouthpiece of the proletarian party which 
was being organised at the time, in fact the organ of the Communist League. 
An excerpt from this article was published in English in K. Marx and F. Engels, 
On Religion, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1957. p. 220 
97 See Note  51. p. 225 
In his speech from the throne at the opening of the United Diet in Prussia on April 
11, 1847, Frederick William IV declared that he would never let the "natural rela­
tions between the monarch and the people" turn into "conditioned, constitutional" 
relations and a "written sheet of paper" be a substitute for a "genuine sacred loy­
alty", p. 232 
Under this common title two essays by Engels were published in the Deutsche-
Brusseler-Zeitung in which he analysed the poetry and literary-critical work and also 
the aesthetic views of representatives of "true socialism". The first essay dealt with 
Karl Beck's book, Lieder vom armen Mann (Songs of the Poor Man), published at the 
end of November 1845 as a sample of the poetry of "true socialism". There are 
grounds for assuming that Engels' essay on Beck may initially have been included as 
Chapter 3, the manuscript of which is not extant, in Volume II of The German 
Ideology (see present edition, Vol. 5). This work was most probably written in the 
first half of 1846 in Brussels. 
The second essay analysed Karl Griin's book, Über Göthe vom menschlichen 
Standpunkte (About Goethe from the Human Point of View), published at the end of 
April 1846, as a sample of the prose or literary critique of "true socialism". Engels' 
letter of January 15, 1847 to Marx shows that he intended to revise it for Volume II 
of The German  Ideology  (judging by its contents it was to follow Chapter 4 devoted to 
the analysis of Karl Grün's book: Die soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien, 
Darmstadt, 1845 [The Social Movement in France and Belgium] as a sample of the 
historiography of "true socialism"). This essay was most probably written by Engels 
after he had moved from Brussels to Paris, i.e., between August 15, 1846 and 
January 15, 1847. p. 235 
The words "Wahrheit und Recht, Freiheit und Gesetz" (Truth and Right, Freedom 
and Law) were used as an epigraph to the progressive German newspaper Leipziger 
Allgemeine Zeitung, banned in Prussia in 1842, and in Saxony early in 1843. p 236 
101 Restoration—see Note 72. 
Carbonari—see Note 29. The carbonari held their meetings under the guise of 
charcoal sales (Ventes). p. 237 
1 Ventrus —representatives of the "belly" of the French Chamber (see Note 94). 
p. 238 
103 An allusion to "Young Germany"—a literary group which appeared in Germany in 
the 1830s and was under the influence of Heinrich Heine and Ludwig Börne. The 
group included such writers as Gutzkow, Wienbarg, Mundt, Laube and Jung, 
whose stories and articles voiced the opposition sentiments of petty-bourgeois and 
intellectual advocates of freedom of conscience and the press, the introduction of a 
constitution, emancipation of women, etc. Some of them advocated granting civil 
2Î» 

=====第706页=====
678 Notes 
104 
105 rights to Jews. Their political views were vague and inconsistent; most of them soon 
became ordinary liberals. p. 243 
The reference is to a spontaneous rising of textile workers in Prague in the latter 
half of June 1844. The events in Prague led to workers' uprisings in many other 
industrial centres of Bohemia. The workers' movement, which was accompanied by 
factory and machine wrecking, was suppressed by government troops. p. 244 
The Friends of Light was a religious trend opposed to the pietism predominant in the 
official church and supported by Junker circles. p. 248 
The first edition of P. H. Holbach's  Système de la nature,  ou des loix  du monde  physique et 
du monde moral (London 1770) bore, for conspirational reasons, the name of the Sec­
retary of the French Academy J. B.Mirabaud, who died in 1760, as its author. 
p. 251 
1 Joseph Addison's tragedy Cato was written in 1713; Goethe's Leiden des jungen 
Werthers m 1774. p. 252 
The Federal Decrees  of 1819 (the Karlsbad decisions) were drawn up on the insistence 
of the Austrian Chancellor Metternich at the conference of the German Confedera­
tion in Karlsbad in August 1819 and were endorsed by the Federal Diet on Sep­
tember 20, 1819. These decisions envisaged a number of strict measures against the 
liberal press, the introduction of preliminary censorship in all German states, strict 
surveillance over universities, prohibition of students' societies, establishment of an 
investigation commission for the prosecution of participants in the oppositional 
movement (so-called demagogues). p. 253 
I 9 Thermidor —see Note 3. 
18 ßrumaire —the coup d'état of November 9, 1799 which completed the 
bourgeois counter-revolution and led to the personal rule of General Napoleon 
Bonaparte. p. 253 
In one of the scenes in Goethe's comedy Der Bürgergeneral a rural barber who pre­
tended he was a Jacobin general drank a jug of milk and thus angered the master of 
the house. p. 261 
111 See Note  53. p. 266 
II Ghibellines—a political party in Italy formed in the 12th century in the period of 
strife between the popes and the German emperors. It included mostly feudal lords 
who supported the emperors and furiously opposed the papal party of the Guelphs, 
which represented the upper trade and artisan strata of Italian towns. The parties 
existed till the 15th century. Dante, who hoped that the emperor's rule would help 
to overcome the feudal dismemberment of Italy, joined the party of the Ghibellines 
in 1302. p. 271 
The International Congress of Economists held in Brussels on September 16-18, 
1847 discussed the attitude towards the movement for the repeal of trade restric­
tions between individual countries started by the British Anti-Corn Law League (see 
Note 47). 
The Communist League members headed by Marx attended the congress, 
intending to use it for open criticism of bourgeois economics and for defence of 
working-class interests. 

=====第707页=====
Notes 679 
114 
115 
116 Marx's name was put on the official list of the congress participants (see Journal 
des économistes,  t. XVIII, October 1847, p. 275). 
During the congress a sharp controversy arose between the bourgeois majority 
and a group of Brussels Communists, especially after Georg Weerth's speech cri­
ticising the free traders' statements about the benefits of free trade to the work­
ing class. The organisers of the congress did not let Marx make his speech and 
closed the discussion. In reply to this Marx and Engels and their followers 
carried on the polemic with bourgeois economists in the democratic and prole­
tarian press. p. 274 
An allusion to the fulfilment of Bentham's will by John Bowring (Bentham 
bequeathed his body for use for scientific purposes). p. 277 
The report on other sittings of the congress was not published in the Deutsche-
Brüsseler-Zeitung. On these see Engels' article "The Free Trade Congress at Brus­
sels"  (this volume, pp. 282-90). p. 278 
This work is a part of a speech Marx intended to deliver at the International Con­
gress of Economists in Brussels on September 18, 1847. Not being allowed to do so, 
Marx rewrote it for the press and sent it to a number of Belgian newspapers. It was 
published only in the Atelier Démocratique, September 29, 1847 in French. An­
nouncing the publication of this article the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung wrote on Oc­
tober 7, 1847: "Unfortunately, not a single big Belgian newspaper had the courage 
or intelligence to print the speech sent to it." Extant are only a preliminary draft of 
the speech bearing the author's heading "Protectionists" (see this volume, p. 573) 
and the German translation of its beginning published in Hamm in 1848 by J. 
Weydemeyer, a friend of Marx and Engels, together with another speech by Marx 
on the freedom of trade (see this volume, pp. 450-65). Weydemeyer omitted the 
end of the speech saying that it was repeated in the speech of January 9. 
Engels gives the content of Marx's speech in his article "The Free Trade 
Congress at Brussels" (see this volume, pp. 282-90). p. 279 
117 See Note 47. p. 283 
11 The full text of Weerth's speech (Engels quotes parts of it word for word, and gives a 
free account of others) was published in a number of newspapers, in particular, in 
French (the language in which it was delivered) in the Atelier Démocratique and in 
German in Die Ameise (Grimma) on October 15, 1847. The text published in Die 
Ameise is reproduced in the book: Georg Weerth, Sämtliche Werke, Zweiter Band, 
Berlin, 1956, S. 128-33. In some places the text differs from the passages cited by 
Engels. Apparently Engels recorded facts more exactly; in particular, in the first 
passage cited by him he corrected the number of the English proletariat (5 million 
instead of 3 million as in Weerth), and in the second passage the date on which the 
Chartists concluded an agreement with the free traders (1845 instead of 1843). 
p. 283 
1 The reference is to provocations on the part of the Anti-Corn Law League which 
sought to use for its own ends the workers' unrest in the industrial districts of Eng­
land in August 1842. (On the general strike of 1842 see Note 10.) The free traders 
encouraged the workers' action during the first stage of the strike hoping to direct 
their movement towards the struggle for the repeal of the Corn Laws. However, the 
independent class and political character which this strike assumed as it became 
general led to the direct and active participation of the free trade bourgeoisie in 
suppressing the movement. p. 285 

=====第708页=====
680 Notes 
121 120 See Note 46. p. 285 
This refers to the movement for Parliamentary reform in England in 1830-31, to 
the July revolution of 1830 in France and the revolution of 1830-31 in Belgium 
which led to the separation of Belgium from Holland. p. 285 
122 
123 
124 
125 
126 The reference is to the brutal suppression of workers' risings in Lyons in 1831 and 
1834 and to atrocities perpetrated by government troops against starving workers 
in Buzançais (Indre Department) who had looted corn shipments and storehouses 
belonging to profiteers early in 1847. p. 285 
On the precision subsequently given by Marx and Engels to these terms which ex­
press the relations between the worker and the capitalist, see Note 70. p. 289 
The two articles by Engels against Karl Heinzen were written in reply to this petty-
bourgeois democrat's slanderous attacks against the Communists and communism 
as a social trend. In particular, the Polemik column of the  Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung 
No. 77 for September 26, 1847 contained Heinzen's statement in which, among 
other things, he accused the Communists of seeking to split the German revolu­
tionary movement. Heinzen used as a pretext an editorial note in No. 73 of the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, September 12, 1847, in which, while refuting the 
allegation of a certain German newspaper that the article "Der deutsche Hunger 
und die deutschen Fürsten" published in the  Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung  (No. 49, 
June 20, 1847) was of a communist character, the editors pointed out that the 
author of the said article was Heinzen who "as is known ... repeatedly attacked 
communism". Publishing Heinzen's reply to this note, Adalbert Bornstedt, the 
paper's editor-in-chief, instead of refuting the insinuations it contained called for 
appeasement between "various shades of German revolutionaries abroad"; in 
particular he wrote on behalf of the editors: "We consider it our duty to advise 
both parties in case polemic arises in some other place to give it up." 
As is seen from Engels' letter of September 30,1847 to Marx the first article with 
a reply to Heinzen was submitted to the  Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung  on September 27. 
However, Bornstedt, despite his agreement with Marx and Engels on their 
regularly contributing to the paper, did not publish Engels' article in the next issue 
(No.  78) on the pretext of lack of space. Compelled to publish it in No. 79 on 
October 3, 1847 in the Polemik column he again repeated in the editorial note his 
appeal to both parties to avoid mutual accusations. p. 291 
Heinzen visualised the future Germany as a republican federation of autonomous 
lands,  similar to the Swiss Confederation. This was the meaning given by many 
petty-bourgeois democrats to the slogan of German unity, the symbol of which was 
the black-red-and-gold banner. Marx and Engels considered such an interpretation 
of the slogan inconsistent with the struggle against the survivals of medieval seclu­
sion and political disunity. To oppose this they put forward the demand of a single, 
centralised democratic republic of Germany. p. 293 
Engels enumerates some major peasant rebellions of the Middle Ages: the rebel­
lions of Wat Tyler (1381) and Jack Cade (1450) in England, the peasant revolt in 
France in 1358 (Jacquerie) and the peasant war in Germany (1524-25). In later 
years as a result of studying the history of the peasant struggle against feudalism 
and drawing on the experience of revolutionary actions of the peasantry during the 
revolution of 1848-49 Engels changed his estimate of the peasant movements' 
character. In The Peasant War in Germany (1850) and other works he showed the 

=====第709页=====
Notes 681 
revolutionary liberation character of peasant revolts and their role in shaking the 
foundations of feudalism. p. 295 
127 
The Illuminati (from the Latin illuminatus) — members of a secret society founded 
in Bavaria in 1776, a variety of Freemasonry. The society consisted of 
oppositional elements from the bourgeoisie and nobility, who were dissatisfied 
with princely despotism. At the same time a characteristic feature of this society 
was the fear of the democratic movement, reflected in the rules, which made 
rank-and-file members blind tools of their leaders. In 1785 the society was banned 
by the Bavarian authorities. Similar societies existed also in Spain and France. 
p. 303 
128 With this article Engels began contributing to the newspaper of the French republi­
can democrats and petty-bourgeois socialists La Réforme. Determined to use the 
French radical press to spread communist ideas and to promote international unity 
of revolutionary proletarian and democratic circles in the European countries, 
Engels established close contacts with the editors of La Réforme in the autumn of 
1847.  In his letter to Marx of October [25-]26, 1847 he wrote that he had made 
arrangements with Ferdinand Flocon, one of the editors, for the weekly publica­
tion of an article on the situation in England. Engels intended to popularise in 
Fi ance the Chartist movement and the material from the Chartist press, primarily 
The Northern Star. The article Engels proposed to Flocon (at first it was intended 
for Flocon's personal information) was published, as Engels himself stated, 
without any alterations. 
After this the newspaper carried almost every week Engels' articles or sum­
maries of The Northern Star reports on the Chartist movement which he translated 
into French. These summaries, as a rule, bore no title. Sometimes they were pub­
lished in the column "The Chartist Movement", or "The Chartist Agitation", and 
usually began with the words "They write from London...". Engels contributed to 
La Réforme up to January 1848. Despite differences in views with the editors (in par­
ticular Louis Blanc and Alexandre-Auguste Ledru-Rollin), Engels' articles and his 
propaganda of Chartism helped to overcome to some extent this paper's national 
exclusiveness and had a revolutionising influence on its readers—the French work­
ing class and radical-minded middle sections. p. 307 
1 The intended publication of the Chartist daily newspaper Democrat did not 
materialise. p. 308 
13 Only a narrow circle of persons with electoral qualifications took part in the ballot 
(see Note 46). p. 308 
131 On the general strike in England in 1842, see Note 10. p. 309 
13 The editors of  L'A teller prefaced Engels' article with the following  note:  "A German 
worker who has been living in England for a long time has sent us a letter we are 
giving below concerning one of the articles which was published last month. We has­
ten to print this letter which deserves being printed for a number of reasons." 
On his contacts with L'Atelier editors who were under the influence of Christian 
socialism Engels wrote to Marx on October [25-J26, 1847 in connection with the 
publication of this article: "I was ... at L'Atelier. I brought a correction to my article 
on the English workers in the last issue.... These gentlemen were very cordial.... 
They kept on suggesting to me to contribute. However, I shall agree only in the last 
resort...." 
This article was published in English in Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Articles 
on Britain. Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. p. 310 

=====第710页=====
682 Notes 
The work is a continuation of the polemic with Karl Heinzen. The latter replied to 
Engels (see this volume, pp. 291-306) with a long article "Ein 'Repräsentant' der 
Kommunisten" full of rude abuse of his opponent and of the theory of scientific 
communism in general (Marx ironically called this article "Heinzen's Manifesto 
Against the Communists"). After the publication of this article in full in the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung (No. 84, October 21, 1847) Bornstedt, the editor of the 
newspaper, again appealed to the contending parties to take the polemic elsewhere 
as the newspaper could not afford to publish such long articles. However, the 
editorial board had to agree to publish Marx's reply to Heinzen in full. When they 
began to publish the reply in No.86 on October 28, 1847 the editors even censured 
Heinzen in an editorial note for the harsh tone of his attacks. On November 14, 
before the whole of Marx's article had appeared, the editors published a special 
note in answer to Heinzen's attempt to continue the polemic: "We refuse to publish 
in the Deutsche-Briiseller-Zeitung Heinzen's letter of November 1 from Geneva in 
which he attacks the editorial board of this paper in an infamous way and tries to 
involve the paper and Karl Marx, for his first article in No. 86, without waiting for 
the continuation, in a vile private squabble. We declare that this is the way we shall 
deal with Heinzen's subsequent letters, despite his philistine assertions that he has a 
right to use our paper to express his views. We shall reply to possible public accusa­
tions in the proper time and place if we deem it necessary." 
Marx's work was published in the Polemik column in several issues. There were 
some editorial notes to the first part of it (to the expression "grobian literature", 
literary personages "Solomon and Marcolph", "goose preacher"). Subsequently, 
however, author's notes were provided. Nos. 92 and 94 of November 18 and 25, 
1847 contained errata. All the corrections, some of which are author's improve­
ments, have been taken into account in the present edition. 
This work was published in English abridged in K. Marx, Selected  Essays,  Parsons, 
London,1926. p.312 
This note (to the title of the second instalment of the article) published in the 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 87, October 3 1, 1847 was evidently written by Marx 
in reply to the editorial appeal to the contending parties (see Note 133) to abstain 
from private polemics. p. 313 
Here and below Marx cites Shakespeare from August Schlegel and Ludwig 
Tieck's edition: Shakspeare's dramatische Werke, Th. 1-9, Berlin, 1825-33. 
p.313 
Communes—self-governing urban communities in medieval France and Italy. For 
their description see Engels' note to the 1888 English edition and the 1890 German 
edition of the Manifesto of  the Communist Party (this volume, p. 486). p. 320 
By the German war of liberation is meant the struggle for liberation from Napoleonic 
rule in 1813-14 (for more details, see Note 22). In this war as well as in the campaign 
of 1815, after Napoleon's short-lived restoration, the German states, including 
Austria and Prussia, which were members of the Holy Alliance (see Note 24), 
fought against Napoleonic France in the 6th anti-French coalition, the main orga­
niser of which was Britain. p. 320 
Marx refers to the "true Levellers" or "Diggers" who broke away from the demo­
cratic republican Levellers' movement during the English bourgeois revolution of 
the mid-17th century. Representing the poorest sections of the population and  suf­
fering from feudal and capitalist exploitation in town and countryside, the 
Diggers, in contrast to the rest of the Levellers, who defended private property, 

=====第711页=====
Notes 683 
141 carried on propaganda for community of property and other ideas of egalitarian 
communism, attempting to establish common ownership of the land through 
collective ploughing of communal waste land. p. 321 
On the struggle of the English bourgeoisie against the Corn Laws, see Note 47. 
p. 322 
Marx cites the report of the commission under the chairmanship of William 
Morris Meredith to investigate the operation of the Poor Law. The report 
submitted to the Pennsylvania Congress on January 29, 1825 was published in The 
Register of Pennsylvania on August 16, 1828. p. 323 
Apparently Marx is citing the following edition: Th. Cooper, Lectures on the 
Elements of Political Etonomy, London, 1831. (The first edition was published in 
Columbia in 1826.) This is proved by the coincidence of the pages referred to and 
the relevant passages in the above-mentioned edition, and also by the excerpts 
copied out by Marx (including the passage cited) in his preparatory notebooks (see 
MEGA,  Abt. I, Bd. 6, Berlin 1932, S. 604). p. 324 
See Note 38. P- 324 
The reference is to the failure of the Peasant War in Germany (1524-25)p. 326 
Thirty Years' War, 1618-48—a European war, in which the Pope, the Spanish and 
Austrian Hapsburgs and the Catholic German princes rallied under the banner of 
Catholicism fought the Protestant countries: Bohemia, Denmark, Sweden, the 
Republic of the Netherland and a number of German states which had become 
Protestant. The rulers of Catholic France—rivals of the Hapsburgs—supported 
the Protestant camp. Germany was the main arena of this struggle, the object of 
plunder and territorial claims. The Treaty of Westphalia concluded in 1648 sealed 
the dismemberment of Germany. p. 327 
The September laws promulgated by the French government in September 1835, 
restricted the rights of jury courts and introduced severe measures against the 
press.  They provided for increased money deposits for periodical publications 
and introduced imprisonment and large fines for publishing attacks on private 
property and the existing political system. The enactment of these laws in 
conditions of the constitutional July monarchy which had formally proclaimed 
freedom of the press, emphasised the anti-democratic nature of the bourgeois 
system. p. 331 
Fontanel—an artificial ulcer practised in medieval medicine for the discharge of 
harmful tumours from the body. p. 331 
The reference is to the uprising of the Silesian weavers on June 4-6, 1844 — the 
first big class batde between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie in Germany, 
which assumed the greatest scope in the Silesian villages of Langenbielau and 
Peterswaldau, and to the uprising of the Bohemian workers in the second half 
of June 1844. (On this see Note 104.) 332 
The reference is to the appeals for unity of all Germans against the German 
monarchs in the name of bourgeois freedoms and constitutional reforms, which 
were advanced by the participants in the Hambach festival — a political event that 
took place near the castle of Hambach in the Bavarian Palatinate on May 27, 1832. 
p. 332 
Movement for the repeal of the Corn Laws — see Note 47. On the election of the 
Chartist leader Feargus O'Connor to Parliament—see Note 46. p. 333 

=====第712页=====
684 Notes 
The reference to Mably is not exact: the draft constitution for the Corsicans was 
drawn up by Rousseau and not by Mably. (J. J. Rousseau,  Lettres  sur la législation de 
la Corse, Paris, 1765). Mably, as well as Rousseau, drew up the draft constitution 
for the Poles. (G. Mably, "Du gouvernement et des lois de Pologne" in: Collection 
complète des œuvres, t. 8, Paris, 1794 à 1795.) p. 334 
An allusion to the conduct of the representatives of the party of the big 
bourgeoisie — the Girondists — after they had been removed from government 
and the Jacobins established their dictatorship in France following the popular 
uprising of May 31-June 2, 1793. In the summer of the same year the Girondists 
rose in revolt against the Jacobin government to defend the rights of the depart­
ments to autonomy and federation. After the revolt had been suppressed many 
Girondist leaders (Barbaroux among them) were sentenced by the revolutionary 
tribunal and executed. p. 335 
Le Comité de salut public (The Committee of Public Safety) established by the 
Convention on April 6, 1793 during the Jacobin dictatorship (June 2, 1793-July 
27, 1794) was the leading revolutionary government body in France. It lasted till 
October 26, 1795. p. 335 
The reference is to the stories for children written by the German pedagogue 
J. H. Campe, in particular his book Die Entdeckung von Amerika, a section of which 
was devoted to the Peruvian Incas and the Spanish conquest of Peru. p. 336 
An allusion to articles which appeared in the Allgemeine Zeitung, distorting the 
ideas of Utopian communism and socialism and attempting to ascribe communist 
views to the radical organs of the German press. Marx exposed this attempt in his 
article "Communism and the Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung" published in the 
Rheinische Zeitung of October 16, 1842 (see present edition, Vol. 1). p. 337 
Engels' work Principles of Communism reflects the next stage in the elaboration of 
the programme of the Communist League following the "Draft of a Communist 
Confession of Faith". This new version of the programme was worked out by 
Engels on the instructions of the Paris circle authority of the Communist League. 
The decision was adopted after Engels' sharp criticism at the committee meeting, 
on October 22, 1847, of the draft programme drawn up by the "true socialist" 
M. Hess, which was then rejected. 
Comparison of the text of the Principles of Communism with that of the "Draft 
of a Communist Confession of Faith" proves that the document written by Engels 
at the end of October 1847 is a revised version of the Draft discussed at the First 
Congress of the Communist League. The first six points of the Draft were com­
pletely revised. Engels had felt compelled at that time to make some concessions in 
them to the as yet immature views of the League of the Just leaders. Some of these 
points were omitted in the Principles, others substantially changed and put in a  dif­
ferent order. In the rest the arrangement of both documents coincides, though 
there are several new questions in the Principles: 5, 6, 10-14, 19, 20 and 24-26. 
The Principles of Communism constituted the immediate basis for the 
preliminary version of the Communist Manifesto. In his letter of November 23-24, 
1847 to Marx Engels wrote about the advisability of drafting the programme in 
the form of a communist manifesto, rejecting the old form of a catechism. In 
writing the Manifesto the founders of Marxism used some propositions formulated 
in the Principles of Communism. 

=====第713页=====
Notes 685 
The Principles of Communism were published for the first time in English in The 
Plebs-Magazine, London, in July 1914-January 1915; a separate edition was put out 
in Chicago in 1925 (The Daily Workers Publishing C°), in subsequent years they 
were published several times together with the Communist Manifesto. p. 341 
156 See Note 70. p. 341 
The reference is to class-divided societies. Subsequendy Engels thought it 
necessary to make special mention of the fact that in their works written in the 
1840s, while touching upon the problem of class antagonisms and class struggle in 
history, Marx and he made no mention of the primitive classless stage of human 
development because the history of that stage had as yet been but little studied. 
(See Engeis' note to the English edition of the Communist Manifesto, 1888, this 
volume, p. 482). p. 341 
In the Appendix to the 1887 American edition of The Condition of the Working 
Class in England (first published in 1845) and also in the Preface to the English 
edition and in the Preface to the Second German edition (1892), Engels wrote 
about the recurrence of crises: "The recurring period of the great industrial crisis 
is stated in the text as five years. This was the period apparendy indicated by the 
course of events from 1825 to 1842. But the industrial history from 1842 to 1868 
has shown that the real period is one of ten years; that the intermediate revulsions 
were secondary, and tended more and more to disappear." p. 347 
The conclusion that the victory of the proletarian revolution was possible only 
simultaneously in the advanced capitalist countries, and hence impossible in one 
country alone, first made by Marx and Engels in The German  Ideology  (see present 
edition, Vol. 5, Ch. I, 2[5]) and most definitely formulated in the Principles of 
Communism, was arrived at in the period of pre-monopoly capitalism. However, in 
their later works Marx and Engels found it necessary to give this proposition a 
more flexible form stressing the fact that a proletarian revolution should be 
understood as a considerably prolonged and complex process which could 
develop initially in several main capitalist countries. See, for example, K. Marx, 
"Revelations about the Cologne Trial" (1853), Marx's letter of February 12, 1870 
to Engels and Engels' letter of September 12, 1882 to Kautsky. Under new 
historical conditions, Lenin, proceeding from the law of the uneven economic 
and political development of capitalism in the era of imperialism, came to the 
conclusion that the socialist revolution could first triumph either in only a few 
countries or even in a single country. This conclusion was first formulated by 
Lenin in his article "On the Slogan of the United States of Europe" (1915). 
p. 352 
160 See Note 38. p. 356 
161 This article, written by Engels for La Réforme was reprinted in The Northern Star 
No. 524, November 6, 1847 with the following editorial introduction: "The 
following article, translated from the Réforme, the most able of the French 
journals, and a consistent supporter of the rights of labour in all countries, 
will cheer the working classes of England with the proud consolation, that 
henceforth the battle of universal liberty is not to be confined within the 
limits of our Sea-bound dungeon". p. 358 
The reference is to the Chartist Land Cooperative Society founded on the 
initiative of O'Connor in 1845 (later the National Land Company, it lasted till 
1848).  The aim of the Society was to buy plots of land with the money collected 
and to lease them to worker shareholders on easy terms. Among the positive 

=====第714页=====
686 Notes 
aspects of the Society's activity were its petitions to Parliament and printed 
propaganda against the aristocracy's monopoly on land. However, the idea of 
liberating the workers from exploitation, of reducing unemployment, etc., by 
returning them to the land proved Utopian. The Society's activity had no practical 
success. 
Subsequendy, in the "Third International Review" written in autumn 1850 
Marx and Engels stressed that the failure of the Land Society  was inevitable. They 
emphasised at the same time that for a while the workers could mistake O'Con­
nor's project for a revolutionary measure only because objectively it was directed 
against big landownership and thus accorded with the tendency of bourgeois 
revolutions to break up the big landed estates; only the demand for nationalisation 
of land put forward somewhat later by the Chartists revolutionary wing (O'Brien, 
Ernest Jones and others) corresponded to the true interests of the working class (it 
was included into the Chartist programme of 1851). 
Engels thought of sending a detailed report on the activities of the Land 
Society to La Réforme as can be seen from the second part of the article; but 
apparently he never wrote it, though he reproduced the content of petitions 
adopted later by this Society in his report "Chartist Agitation" (see this volume, 
pp. 412-14). p. 358 
The banquet in London on October 25, 1847 was to celebrate the election of the 
Chartist leader Feargus O'Connor and a number of radicals to Parliament. The 
elections took place on August 5, 1847 in Nottingham. The account of the banquet 
used by Engels in this article was published in The Northern Star No. 523, October 
30, 1847. ' p. 361 
The demand for so-called  complete  suffrage,  expressed vaguely in a way capable of 
varying interpretation, was proposed by the representatives of the English radical 
bourgeoisie in the early 1840s to counter the Chartist social and political pro­
gramme laid down in the People's Charter and the Chartist petitions. Early in 1842 
the radical J. Sturge, who was close to the free traders, tried to found a universal 
suffrage league in Birmingham with the aim of diverting the workers from revolu­
tionary struggle for the Charter. However, the efforts of Sturge and his adherents 
to influence the Chartist movement and use it for their own ends were resolutely 
rebuffed by the Chartist revolutionary wing. 
Later, however, the radicals went on trying to replace the Chartists' struggle 
for universal suffrage and fundamental reform of the parliamentary system with 
a movement for moderate parliamentary reforms. p. 361 
The reference is to the July revolution of 1830 in France. p. 362 
The National Chartist Association, founded in July 1840, was the first mass workers' 
party in the history of the working-class movement. In the years of its upsurge it 
numbered up to 50,000 members. It was headed by an Executive Committee which 
was re-elected at congresses and conferences of delegates. The Association initiated 
many political campaigns and Chartists' conventions. However, its work was 
hindered by lack of ideological and political unitv and a certain organisational 
vagueness. After the defeat of the Chartists in 1848 and the ensuing split in their 
ranks the Association lost its mass character, but nevertheless under the leader­
ship of the revolutionary Chartists waged a struggle for the revival of Chartism 
on a socialist basis. It ceased its activities in 1858. p. 362 
On the parliamentary reform of 1831-32 in England see Note 33. p. 363 

=====第715页=====
Notes 687 
8 The reference is to the Constitution of the French Republic adopted by the Conven­
tion during the Jacobins' revolutionary rule, the most democratic of bourgeois 
constitutions in the 18th and 19th centuries: it established the republican system, 
proclaimed freedom of the individual, of conscience, of the press, of petitioning, 
of legislative initiative, the right to education, social relief in case of inability, resis­
tance to oppression. p. 363 
169 The Northern Star No. 523, October 30, 1847, published excerpts from Alphonse 
Lamartine's article "Déclaration de principes", originally printed in the newspaper 
Le Bien Public in Mâcon. p. 364 
170 See Note 18. p. 364 
171 
The reference is to comments of the Paris newspapers La Démocratie pacifique, 
October 25 and 26, 1847, La Presse,  October 24, 1847 and others on Lamartine's 
programme. p. 361 
172 
173 This article was occasioned by the civil war in Switzerland unleashed by the seven 
economically backward Catholic cantons which in 1843 formed a separatist union 
—the Sonderbund —to resist progressive bourgeois reforms and defend the priv­
ileges of the church and the Jesuits. The reactionary actions of the Sonderbund 
headed by the Catholics and the city patricians were opposed by bourgeois radicals 
and liberals who in the mid-40s were in the majority in most of the cantons and in 
the Swiss Diet, the supreme legislative body of the Swiss Confederation. In July 
1847 the Diet decreed the dissolution of the Sonderbund, and this served as a pre­
text for the latter to start hostilities against other cantons early in November. On 
November 23 the Sonderbund army was defeated by the Federal forces. As a result 
of this victory and the adoption of a new constitution in 1848, Switzerland, formerly 
a union of states, became a federal state. 
The struggle between radicals on the one side and reactionary patriarchal patri­
cians and clericals on the other attracted Engels' attention as early as 1844, when he 
described it in his article, "The Civil War in the Valais", published in The Northern 
Star No. 344, June 15, 1844 (see present edition, Vol. 3). 
In the present article Engels contrasted modern civilisation to patriarchal 
backwardness, exposing the Swiss reactionaries and their attempts to link counter­
revolutionary separatist aims with the historical traditions of the Swiss people. 
Engels considered Switzerland's past from this point of view. As a result he presen­
ted a somewhat distorted picture of certain periods of its history, particularly the 
struggle against Austria and Burgundy in the Middle Ages which was anti-feudal 
on the whole. In his later works of 1856-59 on the history of warfare ("Mountain 
Warfare", "Infantry", etc.) Engels showed the great historical significance of 
Switzerland's struggle for independence in the 14th and 15th centuries. Engels 
also changed his view of the peasants' role in Norway (in the article the stress was 
laid on their patriarchal traditions). In "Reply to Herr Paul Ernest" (1890) 
Engels pointed out in particular that the existence of free peasants who had not 
experienced serfdom had a positive effect on Norway's historical development 
though it was a backward country due to isolation and natural peculiarities, p 367 
In the battle of Sempach (Canton of Lucerne) on July 9, 1386 the Swiss defeated the 
Austrian troops of Prince Leopold III. 
At Murten (Canton of Freiburg) on June 22, 1476 the Swiss defeated the troops 
of Carl the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. p. 367 

=====第716页=====
688 Notes 
Engels uses this term in relation to the mountain cantons which in the 13th and 14th 
centuries formed the nucleus of the Swiss Confederation. p. 367 
The battle in the Teutoburg  Forest  (9 A.D.) ended in the rout of the Roman legions by 
the Germanic tribes who had risen against the Roman conquerors. p. 367 
The battle of Morgarten between the Swiss volunteers and the troops of Leopold of 
Hapsburg on November 15, 1315 ended in victory for the volunteers. 
Marathon, Plataea and Salamis —sites of important battles won by the Greeks 
during the wars between Greece and Persia (500-449 B.C.). p. 368 
The Griitli oath—one of the legends woven round the foundation of the Swiss 
Confederation, the origin of which dates back to the agreement of the three 
mountain cantons of Schwyz, Uri and Unterwaiden in 1291. According to this 
legend representatives of the three cantons met in 1307 in the Grütli (Rütli) 
meadow and took an oath of loyalty in the joint struggle against Austrian rule. 
p. 369 
At Granson (Canton of Vaud), on March 2, 1476, the Swiss infantry defeated Carl 
the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. At Nancy (Lorraine), on January 5, 1477, the troops of 
Carl the Bold were routed by the Swiss, the Lorrainians, the Alsatians and the 
Germans. p. 369 
The account of the banquet at Château-Rouge was published in The Northern Star 
No. 508, July 17, 1847. p. 376 
The quotation consists of extracts from the leading articles of the Journal  des Débats, 
July 13, 15, 18, 19, and August 7, 1847. p. 376 
181 See Note 90. p. 377 
182 See Note 11. p. 378 
The events described here took place in Paris at the end of August and the begin­
ning of September 1847. They were provoked by a conflict between shoemakers at a 
workshop in the Rue St. Honoré and their master, who tried to defraud one of the 
workers of part of his pay. p. 381 
184 See Note 50. p. 381 
This article was first published in English in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, On 
Britain, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1953. p. 383 
The session of Parliament opened on November 18, 1847. The democratic forces 
were represented by the Chartist leader, Feargus O'Connor. p. 383 
187 See Note 166. p. 383 
188 See Note 1. p. 384 
The International League, or the People's International League, was founded in 
1847 by English radicals and free traders. Among its foundation and active mem­
bers were Thomas Cooper, Sir William Fox, Sir John Bowring and the democratic 
publicist, poet and engraver William James Linton. The League was also joined by 
several Italian, Hungarian and Polish emigrants, Giuseppe Mazzini in particular, 
who was one of its initiators. Its activity was limited to organising meetings and lec-189 

=====第717页=====
Notes 689 
tures on international problems and distributing pamphlets, and ceased completely 
in 1848. p. 384 
In this article Engels used material from La Réforme, November 9, 13, 14 and 16, 
1847. The banquets of Lille, Avesnes and Valenciennes were held on November 7, 
9 and 11, 1847 respectively. p. 385 
In 1840, under the pretext of fortifying the capital against the external enemy, the 
French Government began to erect a number of separate forts around Paris. The 
July monarchy intended them to help safeguard itself against people's revolts. The 
democratic circles strongly protested against new "Bastilles" being built in Paris. 
Most of the bourgeois opposition, however, including the followers of the National, 
supported the construction of the forts, justifying it by national defence interests. 
p. 387 
Marx's and Engels' participation in the international meeting organised by the Fra­
ternal Democrats to mark the anniversary of the Polish uprising of 1830 showed 
their eagerness to use their stay in London during the Second Congress of the Com­
munist League (end of November-beginning of December 1847) to strengthen con­
tacts with the democratic and workers' organisations in England. As Vice-President 
of the Brussels Democratic Association Marx was empowered to establish corre­
spondence between the Association and the Fraternal Democrats and to enter into 
negotiations on the organisation of an international democratic congress (for 
details see Note 206). 
Concerning the Polish meeting and the reception accorded the German demo­
crats,  see this volume, pp. 391-92. 
Apart from the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung, the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 
140, December 3, 1847 and The Northern Star No. 528, December 4, 1847 also gave 
an account of the speeches made by Marx and Engels at the meeting. p. 388 
This item was in the form of a letter to the editor of La Réforme. p. 391 
The Democratic Association (Association démocratique) was founded in Brussels in 
the autumn of 1847 and united proletarian revolutionaries, mainly German emi­
grants and advanced bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats. Marx and Engels 
took an active part in setting up the Association. On November 15, 1847 Marx was 
elected its Vice-President (the President was Lucien Jottrand, a Belgian democrat), 
and under his influence it became a centre of the international democratic move­
ment. During the February 1848 revolution in France, the proletarian wing of the 
Brussels Democratic Association sought to arm the Belgian workers and to intensify 
the struggle for a democratic republic. However, when Marx was banished from 
Brussels in March 1848 and the most revolutionary elements were repressed by the 
Belgian authorities its activity assumed a narrower, purely local character and in 
1849 the Association ceased to exist. 
Fraternal Democrats—see Note 1. p. 391 
195 See Note 189. p. 392 
196 See Note 145. p. 394 
197 The banquet of Dijon, described by Engels, was held on November 21, 1847 and a 
report on it was given in La Réforme on November 24 and 25. Engels repeated his 
criticism of Louis Blanc's banquet speech somewhat later in the  Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung (see this volume, pp. 409-11). p. 397 

=====第718页=====
690 Notes 
199 
202 198 The reference is to the military alliance concluded in 1778 between Louis XVI and 
the United States of America during the American War of Independence  ( 1775-83) 
and to the participation of the French expeditionary corps and navy in the hostilities 
against England—France's trade and colonial rival. p. 398 
The reference is to the entry of the French republican army into the Netherlands in 
January 1795 in support of a local uprising against the aristocratic regime of the 
Stadholder Wilhelm V. The latter was deposed and the Batavian Republic was 
established (1795-1806), which soon became dependent on Napoleonic France. 
p.398 
For the meaning in which Engels uses the word "cosmopolitism" see Note 8. 
p. 398 
In his polemic with Blanc Engels made no attempt to disclose the real nature of the 
bourgeois "civilisation" the capitalist states were spreading in the economically 
backward countries. He concentrated here on exposing Louis Blanc's nationalistic 
bombast about France's so-cajled civilising role. In their later articles and letters de­
voted to India, Ireland, China and Iran, Marx and Engels showed that these coun­
tries were drawn into the orbit of capitalist relations through their colonial enslave-
ment by capitalist states. They were turned into agrarian and raw material 
appendages of the metropolis, their natural resources were plundered and their 
peoples cruelly exploited by the colonialists. The disastrous consequences of 
English rule in India were described by Marx, in particular, in his "Speech on the 
Question of Free Trade" (see this volume, pp. 460-61 and 464). p. 399 
In the latter half of the 16th century the struggle between England and Spain 
caused by colonial rivalry was closely interwoven with the Netherlands revolution 
of 1566-1609. The defeat of the Invincible Spanish Armada in 1588 and other 
victories scored by England over Spain made it easier for the Dutch republic (the 
United Provinces) to resist the attempts of Spanish absolutism to restore its 
domination in that region of the Netherlands. In the war against Spain at that 
period the English and the Dutch often acted as allies. p. 399 
The reference is to the English revolution of the mid-17th century which led to the 
eventual establishment of the bourgeois system in the country. p. 399 
This rhyme was popular among the peasant rebels led by Wat Tyler in 1381 in 
England. It was widely used by John Ball, one of the leaders of the rebel peasants, in 
his sermons. It is apparently a paraphrase of the verse by the 14th-century English 
poet, Richard Rolle de Hampole: 
When Adam dalfe and Eve spanne 
To spire of Hou may spede, 
Where was then the pride of man, 
That now marres his meed? p. 400 
Covenanters—the Scottish Calvinists of the 16th and 17th centuries who concluded 
special agreements and alliances covenants) to defend their religion against en­
croachments on the part of the aristocratic circles tending to Catholicism. On the 
eve of the 17th-century English revolution the Covenant became for the Scots the 
political and ideological rallying point of struggle against the absolutism of the 
Stuarts, for their country's independence. p. 400 203 
204 

=====第719页=====
Notes 691 
206 
207 
208 
209 
210 
211 
212 From the autumn of 1847 onwards the Brussels Democratic Association (see Note 
194) discussed the question of convening an international democratic congress to 
rally the European revolutionary forces in view of impending revolutionary events. 
Marx and Engels took an active part in preparing for that congress. When in Lon­
don, at the Second Congress of the Communist League, Marx had talks on the sub­
ject with the Chartist leaders and representatives of the proletarian and democratic 
emigrants. Engels apparently had similar talks with French socialists and demo­
crats.  In the beginning of 1848 an agreement was reached to convene the congress 
in Brussels. It was scheduled for August 25, 1848, the 18th anniversary of the Bel­
gian revolution (see this volume, p. 640). These plans did not materialise, how­
ever, because in February 1848 a revolution began in Europe. p. 400 
This item is Marx's reply to an article by a Belgian publicist, Adolph Bartels, pub­
lished in the Journal de Charleroi on December 12, 1847. Bartels distorted the 
activity of the revolutionary emigrants resident in Belgium and attacked in 
particular the communist views of the proletarian German emigrants, their 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung and the international meeting which they helped to 
organise in London on November 29, 1847 to mark the 17th anniversary of the 
Polish uprising of 1830. 
Bartels' article reflected bourgeoisie's dissatisfaction at the growing influence of 
the proletarian revolutionaries in the Belgian democratic movement, particularly in 
the Brussels Democratic Association (see Note 194; Bartels was a foundation mem­
ber but soon broke away). The article coincided in time with a campaign of slander 
launched by the Belgian clerical and conservative press, and primarily by the Jour­
nal de Bruxelles, against the revolutionary German emigrants. p. 402 
The German Workers'  Society  was founded by Marx and Engels in Brussels at the end 
of August 1847, its aim being the political education of the German workers who 
lived in Belgium and dissemination of the ideas of scientific communism among 
them. With Marx, Engels and their followers at its head, the Society became the 
legal centre rallying the revolutionary proletarian forces in Belgium. Its best 
activists were members of the Communist League. The Society played an 
important part in founding the Brussels Democratic Association. It ceased to exist 
soon after the February 1848 revolution in France when the Belgian police 
arrested and banished many of its members. p. 402 
The Journal de Bruxelles of December 14, 1847, gave a distorted account of Marx's 
speech at the Polish meeting in London on November 29, 1847. p. 403 
Congregatio de propaganda fide—a Catholic organisation founded by the Pope in 
1622 with the aim of spreading Catholicism in all countries and fighting heresies. 
p. 403 
Marx refers to the report published in The Northern Star oi December 4, 1847 on the 
London meeting of November 29 in support of fighting Poland. Marx's speech was 
abridged and inaccurately rendered. p. 403 
Lamartine's letter was published in a number of other papers besides Le Bien Public, 
in particular in La Presse,  L'Union monarchique, and as a leaflet entitled Opinion du 
citoyen  Lamartine sur  le communisme. It was a reply to Etienne Cabet who through the 
newspaper Populaire requested Lamartine to give his opinion of Cabet's communist 
views.  P- 404 

=====第720页=====
692 Notes 
Engels' articles in support of the newspaper La Réforme in its dispute with the 
moderate republicans of Le National drew the attention of the staff of La Réforme 
and met with their approval, especially that of Ferdinand Flocon, one of its editors. 
He praised Engels' articles on this subject in The Northern Star (see this volume, 
pp. 375-82, 385-87, 438-44) and in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung (this article), as 
Engels informed Marx in a letter of January 14. 1848 from Paris. p. 406 
The dynastic opposition—an oppositional group in the French Chamber of Deputies 
during the July monarchy (1830-48). The group headed by Odilon Barrot ex­
pressed the sentiments of the liberal industrial and commercial bourgeoisie, and 
favoured a moderate electoral reform, which they regarded as a means to prevent 
revolution and preserve the Orleans dynasty. p. 406 
5 Octrois—city tolls on imported consumer goods, existed in France from the 13th 
century up to 1949. p. 407 
The conspiratorial Society of Materialistic Communists was founded by French 
workers in the 1840s. Its members were influenced by the ideas of Theodore 
Dézamy, a representative of the revolutionary and materialist trend in French 
Utopian communism. 
The trial mentioned by Engels took place in July 1847. The members of the 
Society were sentenced to long terms of imprisonment. p. 407. 
7 The article "Louis Blanc's Speech at the Dijon Banquet" is a version of Engels' re­
port "Reform Movement in France.—Banquet of Dijon" published in The Northern 
Star No. 530, December 18, 1847 (see this volume, pp. 397-401). The Deutsche-
Brüsseler-Zeitung published its own version in the form of extracts from The Northern 
Star report. The introductory lines were written by Engels specially for this 
version, the rest of the text, including the quotation from Louis Blanc's speech, 
was a translation into German of the part of the report where this speech was 
criticised. The translation was made almost word for word with but slight 
deviations which are reproduced here. 
For comments on the text, see notes 197-203. p. 409 
The translation of the National Petition was not published in La Réforme. p. 414 
In the latter half of December 1847 Marx delivered several lectures on political 
economy in the German Workers' Society in Brussels and intended to prepare 
them for publication in pamphlet form. However, as he later pointed out in the 
preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859), he did not 
manage to publish his work Wage-Labour, written on the basis of these lectures, 
because of the February 1848 revolution and his subsequent expulsion from 
Belgium. Marx's intention to publish these lectures in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeit­
ung did not materialise either, though on January 6, 1848 the newspaper carried 
the following note: "At one of the previous meetings of the German Workers' 
Society Karl Marx made a report on an important subject, 'What Are Wages?' in 
which the question was presented so clearly, pertinently and comprehensibly, the 
present situation so sharply criticised and practical arguments cited that we 
intend soon to make it known to our readers." 
Marx's lectures appeared in their final form only in April 1849 in the Neue 
Rheinische Zeitung as the series of articles Wage-Labour and Capital (see present 
edition, Vol. 9). This series was not finished and did not embrace the whole con­
tent of Marx's lectures. 

=====第721页=====
Notes 693 
225 Published below is a draft outline of the concluding lectures which Marx had no 
time to prepare for the  press.  The manuscript, whose cover bears the words: "Brus­
sels, December 1847", completes Wage-Labour and Capital. 
The quotations cited in the original in German are either a free translation or 
paraphrase of writings by various economists and are taken by Marx, as a rule, from 
his notebooks of 1845-47. 
For the use of terms "commodity labour", "value of labour" and "price of 
labour", see Note 70. p. 415 
The first four points refer to those of Marx's lectures which were published in the 
articles entitled Wage-Labour and Capital. p. 415 
The data on the working hours and the number of weavers were taken by Marx 
from Th. Carlyle's Chartism, London, 1840, p. 31, where we read: "Half-a-million 
handloom weavers, working fifteen hours a day, in perpetual inability to procure 
thereby enough of the coarsest food...". p. 416 
An excerpt from Bowring's speech in the House of Commons was used by Marx in 
his "Speech on the Question of Free Trade" (see this volume, pp. 460-61). p. 416 
Marx had in mind Carlyle's words about the English Poor Laws: "If paupers are 
made miserable, paupers will needs decline in multitude. It is a secret known to all 
rat-catchers: stop up the granary-crevices, afflict with continual mewing, alarm, and 
going off of traps, your 'chargeable labourers' disappear, and cease from the 
establishment. A still briefer method is that of arsenic; perhaps even a milder..." 
(Th. Carlyle, Chartism, p. 17). The words "chargeable labourers" are in English in 
the manuscript. p. 416 
Marx meant the following passage in J. Wade's History of the Middle and Working 
Classes, p. 252: "The quantity of employment is not uniform in any branch of 
industry. It may be affected by changes of seasons, the alterations of fashion, or 
the vicissitudes of commerce." p. 419 
The reference is to piece-rate wages (see J. Wade, op. cit., p. 267). p. 420 
Concerning the truck system (Marx used the English term in the manuscript) Bab-
bage wrote: "Wherever the workmen are paid in goods, or are compelled to pur­
chase at the master's shop, much injustice is done to them, and great misery results 
from it." "...The temptation to the master, in times of depression, to reduce in ef­
fect the wages which he pays (by increasing the price of articles at his shop), without 
altering the nominal rate of payment, is frequently too great to be withstood" 
(Ch. Babbage, On the Economy of Machinery and Manufactures, second edition, 
Ld., 1832, p. 304). At the time Marx apparently used the French translation of 
Babbage's book (Paris, 1833). p. 420 
' Marx gave part of this paragraph in a more extended form in his Wage-Labour  and 
Capital, Article V. p. 422 
228 See Note 225. p. 424 
In his notes from Th. Carlyle's Chartism, Marx quotes the following passage: "Ire­
land has near seven millions of working people, the third unit of whom, it appears 
by Statistic Science, has not for thirty weeks each year as many third-rate potatoes as 
will suffice them" (p. 25). p. 425 

=====第722页=====
694 Notes 
The reference is to the war waged by the German people against Napoleon's rule in 
1813-14. p. 425 
Later, when Marx had worked out the theory of surplus value and made a more 
thorough study of the nature of wages, and the laws determining their rate and 
level, he came to the conclusion that, contrary to bourgeois economists' opinion, 
the trade union struggle for higher wages and a shorter working day was of great 
economic importance and could obtain for the workers more favourable terms for 
the sale of their labour power to the capitalists. Marx set forth his new point of 
view in Wages, Price and Profit (1865) and in Volume I of Capital (1867).p. 435 
2 2 In 1846 the Guizot Government managed to arrange the marriage of the Spanish 
infanta and Louis Philippe's youngest son and thwart England's plans to marry 
Leopold of Coburg to Isabella II of Spain. In 1847, during the civil war in Switzer­
land, the British Foreign Secretary Palmerston avenged this failure of English 
diplomacy. He persuaded Guizot to espouse a project according to which the five 
powers were to interfere on the side of the Sonderbund but at the same time se­
cretly assisted the latter's defeat. Guizot's diplomatic manoeuvres suffered a com­
plete failure. p. 438 
233 The workers were shot at Lyons during the weavers' uprisings in 1831 and 1834. 
Clashes between workers and troops at  Preston  took place in August 1842, when 
spontaneous Chartist disturbances swept through industrial England. 
Langenbielau (Silesia) was a centre of the weavers' uprising in June 1844. 
Government troops shot down the rebels. 
In Prague government troops suppressed the workers' revolt in the summer of 
1844.  p.440 
The reference is to the Declaration of  the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (Déclaration 
des droits de l'homme et du citoyen) —the first part of the French republican consti­
tution of 1793 adopted by the National Convention after the overthrow of the 
monarchy on August 10, 1792. p. 442 
Chant du départ (Marching Song)—one of the most popular songs of the French 
Revolution (its authors were Chénier and Méhul). It also remained popular later. 
p. 442 
236 See Note 191. p. 443 
The reference is to the Constitutional Charter (Charte constitutionnelle) adopted af­
ter the 1830 revolution. It was the fundamental law of the July monarchy, p. 443 
238 This article was first published in English in the book, Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 
p. 445 
King's County was the name given by the English conquerors to the county of Offaly 
(Central Ireland) in honour of Philip II of Spain, husband of Mary Tudor, Queen 
of England. At the same time the neighbouring county of Laoighis (Leix) was 
renamed Queen's County. p. 445 
The Anglo-Irish Union was imposed on Ireland by the English Government after the 
suppression of the Irish rebellion of 1798. The Union, which came into force on 
January 1,  1801,  abrogated the autonomy of the Irish Parliament and made Ireland 
even more dependent on England. After the 1820s the demand for the repeal of the 
Union was a mass issue in Ireland, but the Irish liberals who headed the national 

=====第723页=====
Notes 695 
movement, O'Connell among them, regarded agitation for the repeal only as a 
means to wrest concessions from the English Government in favour of the Irish 
bourgeoisie and landowners. In 1835, O'Connell came to an agreement with the 
English Whigs and discontinued agitation altogether. Under the pressure of the 
mass movement, however, the Irish liberals were compelled in 1840 to set up the 
Repeal Association, which they tried to direct towards compromise with the 
English ruling classes. 
The repeal of the Union was put up for discussion in Parliament on November 
18, and the Coercion Bill on November 29, 1847. Accounts of O'Connor's part in 
the debates, his suggestions and petitions demanding the repeal of the Union and 
protesting against the Coercion Bill were given in The Northern Star Nos. 528 and 
529, December 4 and 11, 1847. p. 446 
This article was first published in English in the book, Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 
p. 448 
Repealers were advocates of the repeal of the Anglo-Irish Union and restoration of 
the Irish Parliament's autonomy. p. 448 
243 See Note 240. p. 448 
244 Conciliation Hall—a public hall in Dublin where meetings were often organised by 
the Repeal Association. p. 449 
" The reference is to the second national petition presented to Parliament by the 
Chartists in May 1842. Together with the demand for the adoption of the People's 
Charter, the petition contained a number of other demands, including that of the 
repeal of the Union of  1801.  The petition was rejected by Parliament. p. 449 
2 The basis of this "Speech on the Question of Free Trade" was the material Marx 
prepared for a speech he was to have delivered at the Congress of Economists in 
September 1847 (see this volume, pp. 270-81 and 287-90 and also Note 116), with 
the addition of new facts and propositions. The Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung of Janu : 
ary 6 announced in advance that Marx was to speak on free trade. At the same 
meeting of January 9 at which Marx made his speech, the Brussels Democratic 
Association decided to have it published in French and Flemish at the Association's 
expense. On January 16,1848, the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung published a report on 
the meeting and a detailed summary of Marx's speech. "Thanks to Karl Marx's 
speech on the question of free trade," the report said, "this meeting turned out to 
be one of the most interesting of all held by the Association. The report in French 
took more than an hour, and the audience listened with unflagging attention all 
the time." La Réforme of January 19, 1848, also carried an item by Bornstedt on 
Marx's speech. 
The speech was published as a pamphlet in French  (Discours  sur la question du 
libre échange. Prononcé à l'Association Démocratique de Bruxelles, dans la séance 
publique du 9 Janvier 1848, par Charles Marx. Imprimé aux frais de l'Association 
Démocratique) at the end of January 1848. The Flemish edition apparently did not 
materialise. The Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung published its first notification of the 
publication on February 3. That same year the pamphlet was translated into Ger­
man and published in Hamm (Germany) by Joseph Weydemeyer together with the 
beginning of the speech Marx was to have delivered at the Congress of Economists 
(Zwei Reden über die Freihandels- und Schutzzollfrage von Karl Marx. Aus dem Franzö­
sischen übersetzt und mit einem Vorwort und erläuternden Anmerkungen ver­
sehen von J. Weydemeyer. Hamm, 1848). In 1885 this work was republished on 

=====第724页=====
696 Notes 
Engels' wish as a supplement to the first German edition of The Poverty of Philo­
sophy which he had prepared, and since then it has repeatedly been republished 
with that work. 
"The Speech on the Question of Free Trade" was first published in English in 
1888 in Boston (USA) under Engels' supervision. He actually edited the translation 
made by Florence Kelley-Wischnewetzky, an American socialist. In a letter of May 
2, 1888, Engels wrote to her that he had brought her translation, made from the 
German version of 1885, nearer to the French original and in several place« had 
"for the sake of clearness taken more liberties". Engels wrote a preface for this edi­
tion which was published earlier (July 1888) in German in the journal Die Neue Zeit 
as an article entitled "Protectionism and Free Trade". The American edition of the 
pamphlet appeared in September 1888 (1889 on the title page). Its title was: Free 
Trade. A Speech Delivered before the Democratic Club, Brussels, Belgium, Jan. 9, 
1848.  With Extract from La Misere de la  Philosophie  by Karl Marx. Engels was satis­
fied with the edition (see his letter of September 18, 1888 to Kelley-Wischne­
wetzky). In this volume "The Speech on the Question of Free Trade" is given in 
the English translation edited by Engels, except for the title which corresponds to 
the original. Retained are some technical peculiarities of the Boston edition, e.g., 
paragraphing which somewhat differs in this respect from the French edition 
of 1848. Where the texts of the 1888 and 1848 editions differ in meaning this is 
pointed out in a footnote. Pages of sources quoted by Marx are given in brackets. 
Reference is also made for the reader's convenience to the English editions of Ri­
cardo and Ure (Third Edition, London, 1821 and Second Edition, Lon­
don,  1835—respectively) which Marx made use of in French translations at that 
time. p. 450 
247 See Note 28. p. 450 
248 See Note 47. p. 454 
249 See Note 76. p. 456 
The address "The Fraternal Democrats (assembling in London), to the working 
classes of Great Britain and Ireland" was adopted at the Society's meeting on 
January 3, 1848 and published in The Northern Star No. 533, January 8, 1848. It 
is quoted below abridged. p. 466 
251 Luneau's interpellation in the Chamber of Deputies concerning the sale of ap­
pointments in the Finance Ministry was answered in the negative by the then 
Minister of Finance, Lacave-Laplagne, on June 13, 1846. The publication of Petit's 
pamphlet and the sharp reaction to it on the part of the public caused La Réforme 
to publish extracts from the above interchange between Luneau and the Minister 
of Finance, and also the speech on this subject made by H. M. Dupin, an 
opposition deputy (quoted by Engels below). p. 470 
The liberation struggle of the Algerians led by Emir Abd-el-Kader against the 
French colonialists lasted with short interruptions from 1832 to 1847. Between 
1839 and 1844, the French used their considerable military superiority to conquer 
Abd-el-Kader's state in Western Algeria. However, he continued guerrilla warfare 
relying on the help of the sultan of Morocco, and when the latter was defeated in the 
Franco-Moroccan war of 1844, Abd-el-Kader hid in the Sahara oases. The last stage 
of this struggle was an insurrection in Western Algeria in 1845-47 which was put 
down by the French colonialists. 

=====第725页=====
Notes 697 
In one of his reports published in The Northern Star in 1844 Engels commended 
the resistance of the local population to the French colonisation of Algeria (see 
present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 528-29). In this article (1847) Engels considered the 
Algerian movement under Abd-el-Kader from a different angle. As the text below 
shows, he denounced the barbaric methods used by bourgeois France in the con­
quest of Algeria, but saw this as the inevitable way in which capitalist relations 
superseded more backward feudal and patriarchal ones and regarded any opposi­
tion to this process as doomed to failure. Engels' judgment was undoubtedly 
influenced by the ideas he then had of the proximity of a socialist revolution in 
the developed countries, which was to put an end for ever to all social and national 
oppression. He thought that favourable preconditions for this revolution were 
created by backward countries being drawn into the orbit of capitalism with its 
centralising and levelling tendencies, despite all their negative aspects. This 
judgment was not final, however. Later, after a deeper study of the history of.co-
lonial conquests and the resistance of the oppressed masses to colonial domination, 
Engels emphasised the liberating and progressive nature of the struggle of op­
pressed peoples against the capitalist colonial system which helped create 
favourable conditions for the working class to overthrow the capitalist system. It 
was from this point of view, in particular, that he described the liberation 
movement of the Algerians in the article "Algeria" written for the New American 
Encyclopaedia in 1857. p. 470 
Here the editors of The Northern Star gave the following note: "This letter should 
have reached us last week, but was only delivered to us, by the friend who brought it 
from Paris, on Tuesday last. Before this time our correspondent will have discov­
ered his error in imagining for a moment the possibility of Louis Philippe, or his 
man of all work, performing a just or generous action. Abd-el-Kader will not be 
sent to Egypt; he is to be kept a close prisoner in France. Another specimen of the 
honour of kings!—the honour of Philippe the Infamous!" 
Abd-el-Kader was held in France as a prisoner for about five y ears.  Only in 1852 
was he permitted to move to Damascus, Syria. p. 470 
254 See Note 162. p. 474 
St. Stephen's Chapel, where the House of Commons sat since 1547, was destroyed by 
fire in 1834. p. 474 
'Change Alley—a street in London, where the Board of South Sea Company 
(founded in the beginning of the 18th century) had its offices; a place where all 
kinds of money operations and speculative deals were conducted. p. 475 
257 The Manifesto of  the Communist  Party  was written by Marx and Engels as the Commu­
nist League's programme on the instruction of its Second Congress (London, No­
vember 29-December 8, 1847), which signified a victory for the followers of the new 
proletarian doctrine who had upheld its principles during the discussion of the 
programme questions. 
When Congress was still in preparation, Marx and Engels arrived at the conclu­
sion that the final programme document should be in the form of a Party mani­
festo (see Engels' letter to Marx of November 23-24, 1847). The catechism form 
usual for the secret societies of the time and retained in the "Draft of a Communist 
Confession of Faith" and Principles of Communism (see this volume, pp. 96-103 
and 341-57), was not suitable for a full and substancial exposition of the new 
revolutionary world outlook, for a comprehensive formulation of the proletarian 
movement's aims and tasks. 

=====第726页=====
698 Notes 
Marx and Engels began working together on the Manifesto while they were still 
in London immediately after the congress, and continued until about December 13 
when Marx returned to Brussels; they resumed their work four days later (Decem­
ber 17) when Engels arrived there. After Engels' departure for Paris at the end of 
December and up to his return on January  31, Marx worked on the Manifesto alone. 
Hurried by the Central Authority of the Communist League which provided 
him with certain documents (e. g., addresses of the People's Chamber (Halle) of the 
League of the Just of November 1846 and February 1847, and, apparently, docu­
ments of the First Congress of the Communist League pertaining to the discussion 
of the Party programme), Marx worked intensively on the Manifesto through almost 
the whole of January 1848. At the end of January the manuscript was sent on to 
London to be printed in the German Workers' Educational Society's printshop 
owned by a German emigrant J. E. Burghard, a member of the Communist 
League. 
The manuscript of the Manifesto has not survived. The only extant materials 
written in Marx's hand are a draft plan for Section III, showing his efforts to im­
prove the structure of the Manifesto, and a page of a rough copy (both are published 
in this volume in the section "From the Preparatory Materials", pp. 576 and 
577-78). 
The Manifesto came off the press at the end of February 1848. On February 29, 
the Educational Society decided to cover all the printing expenses. 
The first edition of the Manifesto was a 23-page pamphlet in a dark green cover. 
In April-May 1848 another edition was put out. The text took up 30 pages, some 
misprints of the first edition were corrected, and the punctuation improved. 
Subsequently this text was used by Marx and Engels as a basis for later authorised 
editions. Between March and July 1848 the Manifesto was printed in the Deutsche 
Londoner Zeitung, a democratic newspaper of the German emigrants. Already that 
same year numerous efforts were made to publish the Manifesto in other European 
languages. A Danish, a Polish (in Paris) and a Swedish (under a different title: 
"The Voice of Communism. Declaration of the Communist Party") editions 
appeared in 1848. The translations into French, Italian and Spanish made at that 
time remained unpublished. In April 1848, Engels, then in Barmen, was translat­
ing the Manifesto into English, but he managed to translate only half of it, and the 
first English translation, made by Helen Macfarlane, was not published until two 
years later, between June and November 1850, in the Chartist journal The Red 
Republican. Its editor, Julian Harney, named the authors for the first time in the 
introduction to this publication. All earlier and many subsequent editions of the 
Manifesto were anonymous. 
The growing emancipation struggle of the proletariat in the 60s and 70s of the 
last century led to new editions of the Manifesto. The year 1872 saw a new German 
edition with minor corrections and a preface by Marx and Engels where they drew 
some conclusions from the experience of the Paris Commune of 1871. This and 
subsequent German editions (1883 and 1890) were entitled the Communist Mani­
festo.  In 1872 the Manifesto was first published in America in Woodhull & 
Claflin's Weekly. 
The first Russian edition of the Manifesto, translated by Mikhail Bakunin with 
some distortions, appeared in Geneva in 1869. The faults of this edition were re­
moved in the  1 882 edition (translation by Georgi Plekhanov), for which Marx and 
Engels, who attributed great significance to the dissemination of Marxism in 
Russia, had written a special preface. 
After Marx's death, the Manifesto ran into several editions. Engels read through 
them all, wrote prefaces for the 1883 German edition and for the 1888 English edi-

=====第727页=====
Notes 699 
tion in Samuel Moore's translation, which he also edited and supplied with notes. 
This edition served as a basis for many subsequent editions of the Manifesto in 
English—in Britain, the United States and the USSR. In 1890, Engels prepared a 
further German edition, wrote a new preface to it, and added a number of notes. In 
1885,  the newspaper Le Socialiste published the French translation of the Manifesto 
made by Marx's daughter Laura Lafargue and read by Engels. He also wrote pre­
faces to the 1892 Polish and 1893 Italian editions. 
The 1888 English edition is taken as the basis for the present publication. All the 
differences in reading between this and the German editions and also Engels' notes 
to it and to the 1890 German edition are given in footnotes. p. 477 
258 See Note 70. p. 491 
The Ten-Hours' Bill, the struggle for which was carried on a number of years, was 
passed in 1847 (see Note 76) in the atmosphere of acute contradictions between the 
landed aristocracy and the industrial bourgeoisie caused by the repeal of the Corn 
Laws in 1846 (see notes 28 and 47). To avenge themselves on the industrial bour­
geoisie some of the Tories supported this Bill. A detailed description of the stand 
taken by various classes on the problem of limiting the working day was given by 
Engels in his articles "The Ten Hours Question" and "The English Ten-Hours' 
Bill" (present edition, Vol. 10). p. 493 
In the Preface to the 1872 German edition of the Communist Manifesto the authors 
particularly pointed out that "no special stress is laid" on the transitional revolu­
tionary measures proposed at the end of Section II, and that the concrete cha­
racter and practical application of such measures would always depend on the 
historical conditions of the time. p. 505 
261 See Note  61. p. 508 
An allusion to Immanuel Kant's Kritik  der praktischen Vernunft (Critique of Practical 
Reason), published just before the French Revolution (1788). p. 510 
263 Réformistes (referred to below as Social-Democrats, this volume, p. 518)—see 
Note 60. p. 517 
264 See Note 38. p. 518 
265 See Note 55. p. 518 
266 
267 This article was first published in English in the book, K. Marx and F. Engels, The 
Communist Manifesto, Lawrence, London, 1930. p. 520 
The reference is to the Prussian United Diet convened in April 1847 (see Note 51), 
which the Prussian ruling circles considered as the maximum constitutional conces­
sion to the liberal bourgeoisie. To counter the demands of the opposition the 
Prussian king and his supporters tried to substitute this assembly representing the 
estates for a genuinely representative one. The fact that the majority of the Diet 
refused to vote the new loans and taxes showed, however, how far the conflict 
between the monarchy and the bourgeoisie had gone. p. 520 
See Note 172. p. 520 

=====第728页=====
700 Notes 
The reference is to the bourgeois revolution in Belgium (autumn 1830) which re­
sulted in Belgium's secession from the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the estab­
lishment there of the constitutional monarchy of the Coburg dynasty. 
After the July 1830 revolution in France, the movement for liberal reforms in­
tensified also in Switzerland. In a number of cantons, the liberals and radicals suc­
ceeded in having the local constitutions revised in a liberal spirit. p. 520 
270 See Note 32. p. 520 
271 
272 
278 In the beginning of February 1831, revolts took place in a number of provinces of 
the Papal states—Romagna, Marca and Umbria—and also the dukedoms of Mode­
na and Parma. They were instigated by the carbonari, members of bourgeois and 
aristocratic revolutionary secret societies. In the course of this bourgeois revolution 
in Central Italy an attempt was made to abolish the absolute monarchy (in Modena 
and Parma), to deprive the Pope of temporal power (in Romagna) and to form a 
new, larger state—an Alignment of Italian Provinces. The revolt was suppressed by 
the Austrian army at the end of March 1831. p. 520 
From 1833 a moderately liberal constitution was in force in Hanover. A prominent 
part in drawing it up was played by the historian Dahlmann. In 1837 the King of 
Hanover, supported by the landowners, abolished the constitution and in 1840 
passed a new constitutional Act, which reproduced the main principles of the State 
Law of 1819 and minimised the rights of the representative institutions. 
p. 521 
The Vienna Conference of ministers of a number of German states was called in 1834 
on the initiative of the Austrian Chancellor Metternich and the ruling circles of 
Prussia to discuss measures to be taken against the liberal opposition and the demo­
cratic movement. The conference decided to restrict the rights of the representative 
institutions which existed in some German states, to intensify censorship, to intro­
duce more strict control over universities and to repress oppositional students' or­
ganisations, p. 521 
On July 12, 1839, the English Parliament rejected the Chartist petition demanding 
the adoption of the People's Charter. The Chartists failed in their attempt to 
organise in reply a general strike and other revolutionary actions, including 
armed struggle. The miners' revolt in Newport (Wales) in early November 1839, 
which the Chartists organised, was crushed by troops, and severe repressions 
followed. p. 521 
See Note 28. p. 521 
Sans-Souci (literally "Without Care")—a summer residence of the Prussian kings in 
Potsdam (near Berlin). p. 521 
The reference is to the so-called United Committees consisting of the representa­
tives of the Provincial Diets which met in January 1848 to discuss the draft of a 
new criminal code. Convening these committees, the Prussian government hoped 
that the apparent preparation of reforms would calm down the growing public 
unrest. The work of the committees was interrupted by the revolutionary out­
bursts that swept over Germany at the beginning of March. p. 522 
Engels alludes to the speech of Frederick William IV at the opening of the United 
Diet on April 11, 1847: "As the heir to an unimpaired crown which I must and will 
preserve unimpaired for those that shall succeed me...." p. 522 

=====第729页=====
Notes 701 
279 
280 
281 
282 
284 
285 The reference is to the patriotic and reform movement among the liberal nobility 
and bourgeoisie in Prussia during the country's dependence on Napoleonic 
France. p. 523 
Roman consulta, or Roman State Council—a consultative body inaugurated by Pope 
Pius IX in the end of 1847. It included representatives of the liberal landowners and 
the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie. p. 523 
Pifferari (from "piffero"—pipe)—herdsmen in the Apennines in Central Italy; a 
common name for Italian wandering singers. 
Lazzaroni—a contemptuous nickname for declassed proletarians, primarily in 
the Kingdom of Naples. Lazzaroni were repeatedly used by the absolutist govern­
ments in their struggle against the liberal and democratic movements, p. 523 
Pietists—adherents of a mystical Lutheran trend which arose in Germany in the 
17th century and placed religious feeling above religious dogmas. Pietism was 
directed against the rationalist thinking and philosophy of the Enlightenment and 
in the 19th century was distinguished by extreme mysticism and hypocrisy. 
p. 524 
The reference is to the war of 1846-48 between the United States of America and 
Mexico, as a result of which the USA seized almost half the Mexican territory, 
including the whole of Texas, Upper California, New Mexico and other regions. 
In assessing these events in his article Engels proceeded from the general con­
ception that it was progressive for patriarchal and feudal countries to be drawn into 
the orbit of capitalist relations because, he thought, this accelerated the creation of 
preconditions tor a proletarian revolution (see Note 252). In subsequent years 
however, he and Marx investigated the consequences of colonial conquests and the 
subjugation of backward countries by large states in all their aspects. In particular, 
having made a thorough study of the US policy in regard to Mexico and other coun­
tries of the American continent, Marx in an article, "The Civil War in the North 
America" (1861), described it as expansion in the interests of the then dominant 
slave-owning oligarchy of the Southern States and of the bourgeois elements in the 
North which supported it, whose overt aim was to seize new territories for 
spreading slavery. p. 527 
The project of connecting the Pacific Ocean with the Gulf of Mexico by means of a 
canal through the Isthmus of Tehuantepec was repeatedly put forward in the USA, 
which strove to dominate the trade routes and markets in Central America. How­
ever, in the 1870s the American capitalists rejected this project, preferring to 
invest their capital in less expensive railway construction in Mexico. p. 527 
The reference is to the French army's invasion of Austria during the wars of the 
European coalitions against the French Republic and Napoleonic France. In March 
1797 General Bonaparte's troops defeated the Austrian army in Northern Italy, in­
vaded Austria and launched an offensive on Vienna. This impelled the Austrian 
government to sign an armistice. In 1805, during the war of England, Austria and 
Russia against Napoleonic France, most of Austria was occupied by French troops 
following the capitulation of the Austrian army at Ulm (October 1805). During the 
Austro-French war of 1809 hostilities took place mainly on Austrian territory and 
ended in the defeat of the Austrians at Wagram (near Vienna), on July 5 and 6, 
1809.  p.530 

=====第730页=====
702 Notes 
In July 1820 the carbonari, aristocratic and bourgeois revolutionaries, rose in revolt 
against the absolutist regime in the Kingdom of Naples and succeeded in having a 
moderate liberal constitution introduced. In March 1821, a revolt took place in the 
Kingdom of Sardinia (Piedmont). The liberals who headed it proclaimed a constitu­
tion and attempted to make use of the anti-Austrian movement in Northern Italy 
for the unification of the country under the aegis of the Savoy dynasty then in 
power in Piedmont. Interference by the powers of the Holy Alliance and the 
occupation of Naples and Piedmont by Austrian troops led to the restoration of 
absolutist regimes in both states. 
For details about the suppression of the revolt in Romagna in 1831 by the 
Austrians, see Note 271. 
During the Polish uprising in the free city of Cracow in 1846 (see Note 55) the 
Austrian authorities provoked clashes between Ukrainian peasants and 
detachments of the insurgent nobles in Galicia. 
In July 1847, fearing the people's movement in the Papal states, the Austrian 
authorities brought in troops to the frontier town of Ferrara. In Rome itself they 
supported the circles which strove to abolish the liberal reforms of Pius IX. How­
ever, the general discontent in Italy caused by the occupation of Ferrara forced 
the Austrians to withdraw their troops. p. 532 
The Sonderbund, a separatist alliance of patriarchal and aristocratic cantons, which 
unleashed civil war in Switzerland in November 1847 (see Note 172), received 
money and armaments from Austria and France, under the pretext that they 
were guarantors of Switzerland's neutrality (under the Paris Treaty of 1815), and 
counted on their military interference on its side. p. 534 
In the atmosphere of growing revolutionary unrest in Hungary the Austrian 
government attempted to seize from the progressive national opposition the ini­
tiative in carrying through a number of bourgeois reforms with the aim of 
splitting its ranks. In 1843 and 1844 Bills were introduced on the development of 
credit, road construction, the abolition of customs barriers between Austria and 
Hungary, the regulation of navigation on the Danube, greater representation of 
cities in the assemblies of the estates, etc. The manoeuvres of the Austrian govern­
ment could not, however, halt the national movement or make the opposition 
renounce its demands for radical changes. p. 535 
28 Prater—a park in Vienna. p. 535 
290 Below Marx gives a critical analysis of the article, "Les Associations démocra­
tiques. — Leur principe.—Leur but" ("Democratic Associations. —Their Princi­
ples.—Their Aim"), published in the Belgian radical newspaper Débat social 
(editor-in-chief A. Bartels) on February 6. 1848. 
About the Brussels Democratic Association, see Note 194. p. 537 
Alliance (founded in 1841) and Association liberale (founded in 1847)—liberal 
bourgeois political organisations in Belgium. p. 538 287 
288 
292 Marx has in mind Robert Peel's speech in the House of Commons on June 29, 1846, 
when the government's resignation was discussed. p. 538 
The reference is to the  People's  Charter—the main programme of political changes 
proposed by the Chartists (see Note 48). p. 539 

=====第731页=====
Notes 703 
The reference is to the discussion on free trade held at the meetings of the Brussels 
Democratic Association in January and early February 1848. It was initiated by 
Marx's speech on the question of free trade on January 9 (see this volume, pp. 450-
65), in which he opposed the tendency of certain bourgeois democrats to idealise 
free trade. In this speech Marx expressed the opinion not only of the proletarian 
section but of the majority of the Democratic Association. p. 539 
Marx refers to the articles published in the Débat social of February 6, 1848: 
"Opinion de M. Cobden, sur les dépenses de la guerre et de la marine" ("M. 
Cobden's opinion of the Expenses on the War and the Navy") and "Discours 
prononcé par M. Le Hardy de Beaulieu, à la dernière séance de l'Association 
Belge pour la liberté commerciale" ("Speech by M. Le Hardy de Beaulieu at the 
Last Meeting of the Belgian Association in Defence of Free Trade"). p. 539 
In November 1847 the King of Sardinia, the Pope and the Duke of Tuscany agreed 
to convene a conference of Italian states to form a Customs Union. The project of  a 
Customs Union met the interests of the bourgeois circles which strove to unite the 
country "from above" in the form of a federation of states under the Pope or the 
Savoy dynasty. However, this plan was frustrated by the 1848-49 revolution in Italy 
and its defeat in 1849. p. 540 
297 On the events of 1823 and 1831 in Italy, see notes 271 and 286. p. 541 
Prior to the 1848 revolution the movement among the German population in the 
duchies of Schleswig and Holstein against a common constitution with Denmark 
(the draft constitution was made public on January 28, 1848) was a separatist one 
and did not go beyond moderate bourgeois opposition. Its aim was to create in the 
north of Germany yet another small German state dependent on Prussia. During 
the 1848-49 revolution the situation changed. The events in Germany imparted to 
the national movement in Schleswig and Holstein a revolutionary, liberation 
character. The struggle for the secession of these duchies from Denmark became 
an integral part of the struggle for the national unification of Germany and was 
resolutely supported by Marx and Engels. p. 542 
299 See Note 26. p. 543 
.wo -pne  reference  is to tne rescripts of Frederick William IV convening a United Diet in 
Prussia (see Note 51). p. 543 
301 The report on the meeting in Brussels to mark the second anniversary of the 
Cracow uprising (see Note 55) was published in the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung on 
February 24, 1848 (see this volume, p. 644). After the meeting a pamphlet in 
French was issued, containing the reports of the main speakers. The letters of 
C. G. Vogler, a German publisher in Brussels, member of the Communist League, 
to Marx, who on March 5, 1848 moved to Paris after his expulsion from Belgium, 
show that Marx and Engels took a direct part in the publication of this pamphlet. 
It came out about March 15, 1848 under the title: "Celebration, à Bruxelles, du 
deuxième anniversaire de la Révolution Polonaise du 22 février  1846.—  Discours 
prononcés par MM. A. J. Senault, Karl Marx, Lelewel, F. Engels et Louis 
Lubliner, Avocat, Bruxelles, C. G. Vogler, Libraire-Editeur, 1848." The 
pamphlet was prefaced with the following short introductory note (possibly 
written by Marx or Engels): 
"Together with the Polish democrats, the Brussels Democratic Association 
consisting of representatives of various nations celebrated at a public meeting the 

=====第732页=====
704 Notes 
302 second anniversary of the Polish revolution of 1846. The hall was crowded out, 
and the public most enthusiastically expressed its sympathy for the event. 
"Unfortunately, we were unable to reproduce the ardent speeches in Flemish 
made by two workers, MM. Kats and Pellering. M. Wallau, President of the 
German Workers' Society in Brussels, himself a working man, spoke in German. 
His extemporaneous and highly enthusiastic speech testified that the German 
workers fully share the sentiments of their brothers in France and in England. 
"The speeches are given here in the order they were made. They are preceded 
by the Manifesto of the Provisional Government formed in Cracow on February 
22, 1846." 
Extracts from Marx's speech were first published in English in the journal 
Labour Monthly, February 1948, and in the collection, Karl Marx and Frederick 
Engels, Ireland and the Irish Question, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1971. 
p. 545 
The reference is to the constitution of May 3, 1791 adopted by the Four Years'Diet 
(1788-92). "The Party of Patriots" which constituted a majority in the Diet strove, 
through a new constitution and reforms, to undermine the rule of feudal anarchy 
and the domination of the magnates, to strengthen the Polish state (demands to 
establish a hereditary constitutional monarchy, to abolish the right of every deputy 
of the nobility to veto the décisions of the Diet) and also to adapt the feudal system to 
the needs of bourgeois development (the demand to extend the rights of the urban 
population, and recognise a moderate form of certain bourgeois freedoms). The 
constitution preserved serfdom, but gave the peasants a certain opportunity to 
establish state-guaranteed contractual relations with the landowners. The 
constitution was opposed by the big land magnates, on whose call Prussia and 
Russia occupied Poland in 1793 and partitioned it for the second time (it was 
first partitioned by Prussia, Russia and Austria in 1772). After the suppression 
of the Polish insurrection of 1794 (the insurgents aimed at restoring the 1791 
constitution), the Polish state ceased to exist in 1795 as a result of the third 
partition of Poland by Austria, Prussia and tsarist Russia. p. 545 
The Congress of Vienna (September 1814-June 1815) composed of European 
monarchs and their ministers established, after the war of the European powers 
against Napoleonic France, a system of general treaties embracing the whole of 
Europe (with the exception of Turkey). The Congress decisions helped to restore 
feudal order and a number of former dynasties in the states previously conquered 
by Napoleon, sanctioned the political fragmentation of Germany and Italy, the 
incorporation of Belgium into Holland and the partition of Poland and outlined 
repressive measures to be taken against the revolutionary movement. p. 545 
304 See Note 172. p. 546 
305 See Note 72. p. 546 
On the Reform Bill of 1832 in England—see Note 33; on the abolition of the Corn 
Laws—see Note 28. p. 546 
An allusion to the results of the liberation war of 1813-15 against Napoleon's rule. 
The victory was taken advantage of by the aristocracy and nobility of the German 
states to help preserve the political fragmentation of Germany (see Note 26). 
p. 549 
The reference is to the Irish Confederation founded in January 1847 by the radical 
and democratic elements in the Irish national movement who had broken away 303 

=====第733页=====
Notes 705 
from the Repeal Association (see Note 240). The majority of them belonged to the 
Young Ireland group which was formed in 1842 by the Irish bourgeois and petty-
bourgeois intellectuals. The Left, revolutionary wing of the Irish Confederation 
advocated a people's uprising against English rule and tried to combine the 
struggle for Irish independence with the campaign for democratic reforms. The 
Irish Confederation ceased to exist in the summer of 1848 after the English 
authorities crushed the uprising in Ireland. p. 549 
309 See note 32. p. 550 
The Congress of Vienna in 1814-15 liquidated the so-called duchy of Warsaw which 
depended on Napoleonic France. It was formed by Napoleon in 1807, after the de­
feat of Prussia, on the Polish territory seized by Prussia as a result of the three parti­
tions of Poland. The Congress repartitioned the duchy between Prussia, Austria 
and Russia with the exception of the free city of Cracow, which was under the joint 
protection of the three powers up to 1846. The part incorporated into Russia was 
called the Kingdom of Poland with Warsaw as its capital. p. 550 
311 Engels refers to the editorial in La Riforma No. 14, February 11, 1848 in reply to 
the article "Von der italienischen Gränze" published in the Augsburg Allgemeine 
ZeitungNo. 31, January 31, 1848. p. 553 
312 Treaties of 1815—see Note 303; on the liberation wars against Napoleonic France 
and Engels' opinion of them in the forties and subsequent years—see Note 22. 
p. 554 
' " The reference is to the plan of deployment and operation of government troops in 
case of a revolt in Paris. It was adopted in 1840. p. 557 
When the Guizot government fell on February 23, 1848, the supporters of the 
House of Orleans attempted to form a ministry consisting of moderate 
monarchists (the Orleanists) Thiers, Billault, and others and headed by Count 
Mole. The victorious people's insurrection in Paris, however, thwarted the plan to 
retain the Orleans monarchy. p. 558 
The posts in the French Provisional Government formed on February 24, 1848, 
were held mainly by moderate republicans (Lamartine, Depont de l'Eure, 
Crémieux, Arago, Marie, and the two men mentioned by Engels from the 
National, Marrast and Garnier-Pagès). There were three representatives of the 
Réforme in the government—Ledru-Rollin, Flocon and Louis Blanc, and a 
mechanic Albert (real name Martin). p. 558 
The editor George Julian Harney added the following introductory note when pub­
lishing this letter in The Northern Star, March 25, 1848: "The following letter was 
received at the time the editor was in Paris; hence its non-appearance until now. 
Thank God, the days of the contemptible, 'constitutional' tyranny of Belgium are 
numbered. Leopold is packing his carpet bag." p. 559 
The Brussels Association Démocratique and the Alliance—see notes 194 and 291. 
p. 559 
See Note 208. p. 560 
The reference is to the double-faced policy of the French Orleanists on the Belgian 
question in the early 1830s. During the period of the 1830-31 revolution they fos-315 
316 

=====第734页=====
706 Notes 
tei ed plans of annexing Belgium and incited the Belgians to fight for secession from 
Holland. Simultaneously, at the London Conference of the five powers (Britain, 
France, Russia, Austria and Prussia) held with intervals in 1830 and 1831, they col­
luded, at the expense of Belgium, with the powers supporting Holland. As a result 
the Belgians had to accept the unfavourable terms of the agreement with the Dutch 
King (finally signed in May 1833) and cede part of their territory to him. p. 564 
By order of the French authorities Marx was expelled from France at the beginning 
of February 1845 together with other editors of the radical newspaper Vorwärts! 
published in Paris. Its closure was demanded by the Prussian ruling circles. For de­
tails about Marx's expulsion and his move to Belgium, see present edition, Vol. 4, 
p. 235. p. 565 
In this article Marx used notes which he had made at the beginning of March 1848 
on the arrest, maltreatment and expulsion of Wilhelm Wolff by the Brussels police 
(see this volume, pp. 581-82). p. 567 
The laws on  suspects—the decree passed by the French Convention on September 17, 
1793 and other measures of the Jacobin revolutionary government which declared 
suspect and subject to arrest all persons who in one way or another supported the 
overthrown monarchy, including all former aristocrats and royal officials who had 
not testified their loyalty to the revolution. These laws were drawn up in such a form 
that even people not involved in counter-revolutionary activity could be placed in 
the category of "suspects". p. 567 
This article was written by Engels shortly before he left Brussels for Paris and was 
apparently intended for La Réforme. However, it was never published and 
survived only as a manuscript. p. 569 
This is apparently a rough outline of a speech Marx intended to make on 
September 18, 1847 at the Congress of Economists in Brussels (see this volume, 
pp. 287-89 and notes 113 and 116). The outline was written on the last page of the 
tenth notebook containing extracts Marx made in the latter half of 1845 and in 
1846.  Some places in the manuscript are indecipherable because of ink blots (in 
the text they are marked by periods in square brackets). At the bottom of the text 
itself and in the margins there are several drawings by Engels apparently of 
participants in the Congress (see illustration between p. 578 and p. 579).p. 573 
This extract is in Marx's notebook which contains his manuscript "Wages" and is 
dated December 1847. There is no direct indication of its purpose in the extant 
manuscripts or letters. It might have been a preparatory outline either for the 
"Speech on the Question of Free Trade" which Marx delivered on January 9, 
1848 at the meeting of the Brussels Democratic Association, or for lectures on 
political economy which he delivered in December 1847 to the German Workers' 
Society in Brussels (see notes 219 and 246). It may also have been intended for a 
non-extant economic work by Marx. 
Marx made a few references in the text to one of his notebooks of excerpts 
dating to the summer of 1847. The notebook contains a synopsis of G. Gülich's 
book, Geschichtliche Darstellung des Handels, der Gewerbe und des Ackerbaus der 
bedeutendsten handeltreibenden Staaten unserer Zeit, Bd. 1-5, Jena, 1830-45. The 
passages referred to are in Vol. 1. Marx usually wrote the author's name as Jülich 
and in the manuscript used only the initial letter "J" to denote the author. 
p. 574 
The draft plan is written on the cover of Marx's notebook containing the manu­
script "Wages" (see this volume, pp. 415-37) and dated "Brussels, December 
1847".  p. 576 

=====第735页=====
Notes 707 
327 
S28 
329 In the final version of the Communist Manifesto points 5 and 6 were not elaborated. 
p. 576 
This is the only extant page of the rough version of the Communist Manifesto. The 
fair copy sent to London at the end of January 1848 to be printed did not survive. 
The page of the rough copy refers in part to the first and mainly to the second sec­
tion of the Manifesto. p. 577 
Petits Carmes —a prison in Brussels. p. 581 
330 See Note 208. p. 581 
Permanence—a police station at the Town Hall in Brussels open all round the clock. 
Amigo—a preliminary detention jail in Brussels, situated near the Town Hall 
(it derived its name from the Flemish word "vrunte"—a fenced place, interpreted 
by the Spaniards during their domination in the Netherlands as "vriend"— 
friend, and rendered in Spanish as "amigo"). p. 581 
332 This document is a draft of the Rules of the Communist League adopted at its 
First Congress in the beginning of June 1847 (see Note 69) and distributed among 
the circles and communities for discussion. It shows the reorganisation work done 
by the League of the Just leaders as agreed with Marx and Engels, who consented 
early in 1847 to join the League on the condition that it would be reorganised on a 
democratic basis and all elements of conspiracy and sectarianism in its structure 
and activity would be eliminated. Engels, who was present at the Congress, took a 
direct part in drawing up the Rules. The draft recorded the change in the 
League's name, and it is referred to here as the Communist League for the first 
time.  The new motto, "Working Men of All Countries, Unite!" was also used for 
the first time. The former leading body, the narrow People's Chamber (Halle), was 
replaced by the supreme body—the Congress, composed of delegates from local 
circles; the executive organ was to be the Central Authority. The relations between 
all the League organisations were based on principles of democratism and 
centralism. At the same time a number of points in the draft showed that the 
reorganisation was not yet complete and that former traditions were still alive, 
namely: Art. 1 formulating the aims of the League; one of the points in Art. 3, 
making the sectarian stipulation that members were not to belong to any other 
political organisation; Art. 21, limiting the powers of the Congress by the right of 
the communities to accept or reject its decisions, etc. On the insistence of Marx 
and Engels these points were later deleted or altered. The Second Congress 
(November 29-December 8, 1847) adopted the Rules in an improved and more 
perfect form, which finally determined the structure of the Communist League 
according to the principles of scientific communism. 
This document was discovered, together with the "Draft of a Communist 
Confession of Faith" in 1968 among the papers of Joachim Friedrich Martens, a 
member of the Communist League in Hamburg. p. 585 
333 
334 The Circular, or report of the First Congress of the Communist League to its mem­
bers,  also discovered among Martens' papers, brings to light important details of the 
convening and proceedings of the Congress and gives an idea of the process of 
reorganising the League of the Just. p. 589 
In February 1847 the leading body of the League of the Just—the People's Cham­
ber (in November 1846 its seat was transferred from Paris to London)—called upon 

=====第736页=====
708 Notes 
the League's local organisations to elect delegates to the congress which was to as­
semble in London on June 1. The People's Chamber address also defined the agen­
da of the congress. London remained the seat of the League's executive body which, 
however, in accordance with the adopted draft Rules, then began to function as the 
Central Authority. p. 589 
Being an illegal organisation, the Communist League could not hold its congresses 
openly or publish their materials. p. 589 
The London German Workers' Educational Society was founded in February 1840 by 
Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll and other members of the League of the Just. After the 
Communist League had been founded the leading role in the Society belonged to 
the League's local communities. At various periods of its activity the Society had 
branches in the workers'districts in London. In 1847 and 1849-50 Marx and Engels 
took an active part in the Society's work. But on September 17, 1850, Marx, Engels 
and a number of their followers withdrew because the Willich-Schapper sectarian 
and adventurist faction had increased their influence in the Society. In the late 
1850s Marx and Engels resumed work in the Educational Society. It existed up to 
1918,  when it was closed down by the British Government. 
Fraternal Democrats—see Note 1. p. 590 
The reference is to the French secret workers' societies of the 1840s in which 
Utopian ideas, both socialist and communist, were current. Some of the societies' 
members were influenced by the pacifist communism of Cabet, some supported 
the revolutionary Utopian Communists Théodore Dézamy and Auguste Blanqui. 
p. 590 
The description given below of the situation in the Paris communities of the League 
of the Just in 1845-46 corresponds to the information which Engels (he had been in 
Paris since August 15, 1846) sent to Marx and other members of the Communist 
Correspondence Committee in Brussels (see Engels' letters of August 19, Septem­
ber 18, October 18 and 23, and December 1846 to Marx and of August 19, Septem­
ber 16, October 23, 1846 to the Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee). 
This part of the report was apparently based on information received from Engels, 
whose role was decisive in overcoming the ideological confusion within the League's 
Paris communities and in drawing the demarcation line between their revolutiona­
ry wing and the petty-bourgeois elements tending towards "true socialism" and 
Weitling's egalitarian Utopian communism. Possibly this section as a whole was writ­
ten by Engels, p. 590 
This refers apparently to the money collected by the Paris members of the League 
of the Just for the Cracow insurgents of 1846. p. 591 
The reference is to the revolutionary conspiratorial organisation of German emi­
grants in Switzerland in the 1830s and 1840s. Initially it consisted mainly of petty-
bourgeois intellectuals. Later members of the workers' unions gained influence in 
Young Germany. In the mid-30s, under pressure from Austria and Prussia, the 
Swiss government expelled the German revolutionaries and the craftsmen's unions 
were closed down. Young Germany actually ceased to exist, but its followers re­
mained in the cantons of Geneva and Vaud. In the 1840s Young Germany was 
resurrected. Influenced by the ideas of Ludwig Feuerbach, its members carried on 
mainly atheist propaganda among the German emigrants and resolutely opposed 
communist trends, especially that of Weitling. In 1845 Young Germany was again 
suppressed. p. 594 

=====第737页=====
Notes 709 
The reference is apparently to the proposal made to Marx and Engels by the leaders 
of the League of the Just to join the League and take part in its reorganisation on the 
basis of the principles of scientific communism. On behalf of the People's Chamber, 
Joseph Moll had talks with Marx in Brussels and with Engels in Paris at the end of 
January and the beginning of February 1847. p. 594 
This reference is apparently to the circumstances which led to the formation of the 
League of the Just as a result of  a split in the Outlaws' League, a secret conspiratorial 
organisation of German emigrants. The latter was set up in Paris in 1834 and 
headed by petty-bourgeois democrats (Jakob Venedey and others) and socialists 
(Theodor Schuster and others). The conflict which arose in the Outlaws' League 
between the artisan-proletarian elements tending towards Utopian communism 
and the petty-bourgeois republican democrats led to the withdrawal of the 
supporters of communism, who founded the League of the Just. p. 595 
The reference is to the changes in the Rules of the League of the Just which were in 
force prior to the First Congress where it was reorganised into the Communist 
League. The Rules of the League of the Just have come down to usin the versions of 
1838 and 1843, which contained very vague and immature formulations typical of 
purely conspiratorial organisations. There was possibly yet another, later version of 
the Rules which is referred to here. p. 595 
The attempt made by the London Central Authority to arrange for the publication 
of a regular newspaper or journal of the Communist League failed through lack of 
funds.  It managed to put out only a specimen number of Kommunistische Zeitschrift, 
which appeared in London early in September 1847. It was printed in the print-
shop of the London German Workers' Educational Society owned by J. E. 
Burghard. The influence of Marx and Engels can be traced in its contents. The ar­
ticles by Wilhelm  Wolff,  Karl Schapper and others were critical of "true socialism" 
and various Utopian socialist trends, gave a rebuff to Karl Heinzen's attacks on the 
Communists and expounded a number of points concerning the tactics of the prole­
tarian movement. It was in the specimen number that the motto, "Working Men of 
All Countries, Unite!", was first used in the press as the epigraph of the journal. 
When the editing of the Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung devolved to a considerable extent 
upon Marx and Engels (see Note 96), this newspaper became in fact the Communist 
League's regular organ. p. 597 
An allusion to the crude egalitarian tendencies in the views of Weitling and his sup­
porters and also Utopias of "true socialists". p. 598 
The Address of the Central Authority of the Communist League dated September 
14, 1847 is a quarterly report on the activity of the League after the First Congress 
(June 1847). It describes the situation in the League in general and the measures 
taken by the Central Authority to prepare for the Second Congress. Giving impor­
tant data on the discussion of the draft Rules and the "Draft of a Communist Con­
fession of Faith", the Address reveals the ideological struggle in the local com muni-
ties between the supporters of Marx and Engels and those of Weitling and Griin. 
The document testifies to the growing activity of the Brussels circle authority 
headed by Marx, and to its influence on the affairs of the League as a whole and 
the elaboration of its programme and organisational principles. 
This document, like other documents of the First Congress of the Communist 
League, was discovered in Hamburg among the papers of J.F. Martens. A note 
made by Karl Schapper on the last page and addressed to Martens shows that 

=====第738页=====
710 Notes 
this copy was intended for the Hamburg community, of which he was a member 
(it is not reproduced in this volume). p. 602 
347 The reference is to the letter which the Communist League's Central Authority 
elected at the First Congress sent with other Congress documents, in particular its 
Circular (see this volume, pp. 589-600), to the League's communities in various 
countries in June 1847. Extant is a version of the letter addressed to the Hamburg 
community and dated June 24. In this letter the Central Authority asked the Com­
munist League members in the localities whether they were satisfied with the deci­
sions of the First Congress, whether they accepted or rejected the new Rules, 
whether they could allot funds for the general needs of the organisation, whether 
they had formed circles in compliance with the Rules, how many copies of the 
Kommunistische Zeitschrift then being prepared they could distribute and to what 
extent they had managed to launch communist propaganda among the masses. 
The letter also proposed that the League members should discuss the "Draft of a 
Communist Confession of Faith" and give their opinion of this programme docu­
ment, and also take steps to appoint delegates to the next congress. p. 602 
348 See Note 344. p. 603 
The reference is to the documents of the leading body of the League of the 
Just—the People's Chamber—issued prior to its reorganisation as the Communist 
League at the First Congress in June 1847: the Address of the People's Chamber of 
the League of the Just to the League, November 1846 and February 1847. p. 604 
The Scandinavian Society—a radical democratic society in the latter half of the 
1840s. It was in contact with the Communist League and consisted mainly of work­
ers and craftsmen. Its chairman was the League member Per Görtrek, a translator, 
publisher and bookseller. p. 605 
According to the Communist League's Rules adopted at the First Congress, indi­
vidual communities in a given locality had either to form a circle or, if there were 
no other communities, join a circle already in existence (see this volume, p. 586). 
p. 607 
Johann Dohl, sent to Amsterdam in August 1847, reported to the Central 
Authority in October on the foundation in Amsterdam of a Communist League 
community of eight members. 
The Workers' Educational Society in Amsterdam was set up on February 
14, 1847. Members of the Communist League played an active part in its founda­
tion and work. In March 1848 the London German Workers' Educational Society 
sent its counterpart in Amsterdam a hundred copies of the Communist Manifesto. 
The leaders of the Educational Society in Amsterdam, who were also Communist 
League members, were subjected to severe police persecution for organising a 
mass meeting in Amsterdam on March 24, 1848 in support of the revolution in 
France and Germany. p. 608 
The reference is to Karl Grün's propaganda of Proudhon's views among German 
workers in Paris and to his free translation into German of Proudhon's  Systeme des 
contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère, which he published in Darm­
stadt in 1847 (see Note 56). p. 609 
Marx's intention to publish a German translation of The  Poverty  of Philosophy  did not 
materialise. During his lifetime only extracts from Chapter II were published in 

=====第739页=====
Notes 711 
355 
358 
359 German (see Note 71). The first German edition of this work, edited by Engels, 
appeared in 1885. p. 609 
By the autumn of 1847 a complicated situation had arisen in the League's communi­
ties in Paris. The followers of Weitling, expelled by the First Congress, allied them­
selves with those of Grün. A split took place in October. One of the communities 
opposed the communist principles and was expelled from the League by a decision 
of the Central Authority. Engels, then in Paris, wrote to Marx on October 25-26, 
1847:  "A few days before my arrival the last Grün followers were thrown out, a 
whole community, half of which, however, will come back. We are only 30 strong. 
I have at once organised a propaganda community and have been running 
around all day and beating the drums. I have at once been elected to the circle 
authority and entrusted with correspondence. Some 20-30 candidates have been 
nominated for admission. We shall soon be stronger again." p. 610 
The reference is to the former members of Young Germany, a secret democratic 
organisation of German emigrants in Switzerland, suppressed by the police in 1845 
(see Note 340). They fought against the adherents of communist ideas. p. 610 
The reference is to the communist groups in Cologne, Westphalia, Elberfeld, 
which had earlier been in contact with the Brussels Communist Correspondence 
Committee founded by Marx and Engels, and set up Communist League 
communities after the League's First Congress. p. 612 
The reference is to the German Workers' Society in Brussels (see Note 208). 
p. 612 
The amendments made by the Brussels circle authority to the draft Rules of the 
Communist League were adopted at the League's Second Congress. They revealed 
Marx's efforts to work out better organisational principles of the proletarian party 
and overcome survivals of sectarianism in its structure. The article concerning the 
approval of Congress decisions by the communities was deleted and the ban of 
League members belonging to other political organisations was restricted to 
organisations hostile to the League (see this volume, p. 633). 
By aristocrats in the Convention are probably meant the counter-revolutionary 
elements who opposed the Jacobin centralisation measures aimed at strengthening 
the revolutionary government. p. 612 
The reference is to the London German Workers' Educational Society (see Note 336). 
p. 613 
The "Draft pf a Communist Confession of Faith" and the Rules adopted by the 
First Congress were regarded as preliminary drafts to be discussed in the localities, 
improved and finally approved at the next congress. p. 614 
The reference is to the trial of the members of the League of the Just arrested in 
Berlin in the spring of 1847. The main witness, Friedrich Mentel, who betrayed the 
League, withdrew his previous evidence (see this volume, pp. 593-95) and the court 
was compelled to pass only light sentences on some of the accused and to acquit 
others. p. 615 
The Chartist Northern Star published a report on the international meeting in 
London organised by the Fraternal Democrats at the premises of the London 
German Workers' Educational Society (about these organisations, see notes 1 and 

=====第740页=====
712 Notes 
365 
366 
367 336).  It was entitled "The Polish Revolution. Important Meeting". Speeches by 
Marx and Engels were repo'rted rather abridged (for the authorised publication of 
these speeches, see this vofcime, pp. 388-90). The report gave details about the 
meeting which supplemented Engels' short correspondence about it published in 
La Réforme (see this volume, pp. 391-92). p. 616 
The Manifesto issued by the National Government set up on February 22, 1846 in 
the course of the national liberation uprising in the Cracow republic (see Note 55) 
called upon the people to fight resolutely for national independence, proclaimed 
democratic rights, the abolition of feudal services, and the transfer of land allot­
ments to the peasants. p. 616 
See Note 286. p. 618 
The reference is to the victory of the progressive forces in the civil war in Switzer­
land (see Note 172) and to the failure of the Sonderbund's attempts to secure mili­
tary interference by the European powers in its own interests. p. 618 
369 See Note 194. p. 618 
368 Marx counterposes the proposal to call an international democratic congress (on 
the preparations for it, see Note 206) to the International Congress of Economists 
held in Brussels from September 16 to 18, 1847 (see this volume, pp. 274-90 and 
Note 113). p. 619 
In 1845 Ludwik Mieroslawski, in his capacity as a member of the "Centralisation" 
(the governing body of the Polish Democratic Society), was sent to Posen to orga­
nise an uprising in the Polish lands. He was arrested by the Prussian authorities 
shortly before the scheduled time of the uprising (February 1846) and sentenced to 
death. The sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment. He was set free 
after the revolution began in Germany in March 1848. p. 621 
About the civil war in Switzerland, see this volume, pp. 367-74 and Note 172. 
p. 624 
The reference is to the attempts to organise diplomatic and military interference by 
the five European powers (France, Britain, Russia, Austria and Prussia) in the civil 
war in Switzerland in the interests of the Sonderbund. They were initiated by the 
Austrian Chancellor Metternich and supported by the Guizot government. Metter-
nich and Guizot planned to call a conference of the five great powers on the Swiss 
question to dictate peace terms to the belligerent parties in Switzerland. However, 
the speedy rout of the Sonderbund's troops and the negative attitude of the British 
government thwarted theseiplans. p. 624 
The reference is to the German Workers'  Society  in Brussels (see Note 208). p. 626 
During their stay in London as delegates to the Second Congress of the Communist 
League in late November and early December 1847, Marx and Engels also took 
part in the meetings of the London German Workers' Educational Society (see 
Note 336). They made several reports to the members of the Society. The extant 
records of their speeches, very laconic and of poor quality, are given here and 
below in the same sequence as in the Minutes of the Society. p. 627 373 
See Note 208. p. 630 

=====第741页=====
Notes 713 
376 
377 
378 These Rules of the Communist League are based on the draft Rules elaborated by 
the League's First Congress (see this volume, pp. 585-88). Marx and Engels, who 
exerted considerable influence on the elaboration of the League's new organisa­
tional principles, greatly contributed to improving the text of the Rules and gave it 
greater precision. In particular, it was they, in all probability, who drew up the new 
formulation of Article 1 defining the aim of the League. The Rules in their present 
version were adopted by the Second Congress of the Communist League. 
This document was first published in English in the book: Karl Marx and Frede­
rick Engels, The Communist Manifesto, Lawrence, London, 1930. p. 633 
Proposals to establish more regular contacts between the democrats of different 
countries and to prepare an international democratic congress were discussed by 
the representatives of the Fraternal Democrats with Marx acting on behalf of the 
Committee of the Democratic Association, during his and Engels' stay in London at 
the end of November and the beginning of December 1847 (see also notes 192 and 
206).  p.  640 
The Democratic Association's deputation sent to Ghent for the opening of the As­
sociation's local affiliation included Marx. p. 641 
In mid-December 1847 Engels arrived in Brussels from London, where he had 
spent some time after the Second Congress of the Communist League, and at the 
end of December he returned to Paris with the authority of the Brussels Democra­
tic Association to represent it in the capital of France. The French authorities were 
alarmed by Engels' resumption of revolutionary propaganda among the Paris 
workers and craftsmen. At the end of January 1848 the Paris police proceeded 
against Engels under the pretext that his speech at the New Year's Eve banquet of 
the German revolutionary emigrants on December 31, 1847 contained political 
allusions hostile to the French government. On January 29, 1848 Engels was 
ordered to leave France within 24 hours under the threat of extradition to Prussia. 
Simultaneously with Engels' expulsion and the police breaking into his flat at 
night, arrests were made among the German emigrant workers. Despite the 
slander circulated by the governmental press (accusations of defiant behaviour, 
and of fighting duels), information about the real reasons behind Engels' 
expulsion filtered into the oppositional newspapers. p. 643 
The original of this document is kept in the National Archives in Paris among the 
papers of the Provisional Government of the French Republic of 1848. The 
Address was published in the Belgian Le Débat social on March 1, 1848, and 
reprinted in La Réforme on March 4. The texts differ slightly. In this edition use is 
made of the text in La Réforme. 
In English the Address was published with abbreviations in the Labour 
Monthly No. 2, February 1948. p. 645 
The Second Congress of the Communist League retained the seat of the Central 
Authority in London. However, in view of the revolution starting in France, Schap-
per, Bauer, Moll and other members of the London Central Authority intended to 
move to the Continent and decided to transfer their powers of general guidance of 
the League to the Brussels circle authority headed by Marx. But the persecution of 
revolutionaries which had begun in Belgium, the order for Marx's expulsion and 
the arrest of other activists of the League compelled the Brussels Central Authority 
that had been formed to adopt the decision (published below) to dissolve itself and 
to em power Marx to form a new Central Authority in Paris. Marx arrived in Paris on 379 
380 

=====第742页=====
714 Notes 
March 5 and wrote to Engels (he still remained in Brussels for some time) around 
March 12, 1848 that the new Central Authority had been recently set up and con­
sisted of Marx (chairman), Schapper (secretary), Wallau,  Wolff,  Moll, Bauer 
(members). Engels was appointed in his absence. 
An abridged version of this document was first published in French in Annales 
parlementaires belges.  Session 1847-1848. Chambre des représentants, séance du 31 
mars 1848, p. 1203. This document was first published in English in the Labour 
Monthly No. 3, March 1948. p. 651 
1 The German Workers' Club was founded in Paris on March 8 and 9, 1848 on the 
initiative of the Communist League's leaders. The leading role in it belonged to 
Marx. The Club's aim was to unite the German emigrant workers in Paris, ex­
plain to them the tactics of the proletariat in a bourgeois-democratic revolution 
and also to counter the attempts of the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois democrats 
(among them, Herwegh, Venedey and Decker, the last two being mentioned in the 
minutes) to stir up the German workers by nationalist propaganda and enlist them 
into the adventurist march of volunteer legions into Germany. The Club was 
successful in arranging the return of German workers one by one to their own 
country to take part in the revolutionary struggle there. p. 654 
The German Democratic Society, formed in Paris after the February revolution of 
1848,  held its meetings in a riding school. The Society was headed by petty-
bourgeois democrats, Herwegh, Bornstedt, Decker and others who campaigned to 
raise volunteer legions of German emigrants with the aim of marching into Ger­
many. In this way they hoped to carry out a revolution in Germany and establish 
a republic there. Marx and Engels resolutely condemned this adventurist plan of 
"exporting revolution". p. 656 

=====第743页=====
NAME INDEX 
A 
Abd-el-Kader (1808-1883) —Emir of 
Algeria, one of the Arab leaders in the 
national liberation wars of 1832-47 in 
Morocco and Algeria against the 
French conquerors.— 469, 470, 471 
Abd-ur-Rahman II (c. 1790-1859) —Em­
peror of Morocco (1822-59).—471 
Abyberg, Johann Theodor (1795-1869) — 
leader of the Conservative Party in the 
Swiss canton of Schwyz.— 368 
Ackersdijk, Jan (1790-1861) —Dutch 
economist, professor in Utrecht.— 286 
Addison, Joseph (1672-1719) — English 
essayist and politician.— 252 
Albert (pseudonym of Martin, Alexandre) 
(1815-1895) — French worker, mem­
ber of secret revolutionary societies 
during the July monarchy, member 
of the Provisional Government 
(1848)..—558 
Albert, Prince Consort of Queen Victoria 
(1819-1861).—414 
Alembert, Jean Le Rond d' (1717-1783) — 
French philosopher and mathemati­
cian, Encyclopaedist and leading 
figure of the French Enlightenment 
of the 18th century.—399, 410 
Alexander I (1777-1825) — Russian em­
peror (1801-25).—26, 622 
Allard — French democrat, emigrated to 
24—1826 Belgium in 1840s for political 
reasons.— 568 
Anders, Albert August — German journal­
ist, emigrated to London, member of 
the Communist League and its 
plenipotentiary emissary to Norway 
and Sweden in June 1847.— 604 
Anderson, Adam (c. 1692-1765) — Scot­
tish economist, author of a treatise on 
the history of commerce.— 116 
Antinous (d. 130 A.D.) — favourite of the 
Roman Emperor Hadrian (117-138), a 
youth of matchless beauty.— 371 
Arago,  Etienne Vincent (1802-1892) — 
French author, democrat, member of 
the Provisional Government in 
1848.—  387, 395, 397 
Arago,  François Victor Emmanuel (1812-
1896) — French politician, republi­
can.— 401 
Ariosto, Lodovico (1474-1533) — Italian 
poet of the Renaissance.— 324 
Arkwright, Sir Richard (1732-1792) — 
English industrialist, invented the cot­
ton spinning machine named after 
him.— 188 
Arnott, John — a Chartist.— 391, 616, 
622 
Arnstein und Eskeles  — representative of a 
banking firm, founded by Arnstein, 
Adam Isaak (1715-1785) and Eskeles, 

=====第744页=====
716 Name Index 
Bernhard, Freiherr von (1753-1839).— 
533 
Asher, Karl Wilhelm (1798-1864) —Ger­
man lawyer and economist.— 286 
Atkinson, William — English economist 
of the 1830s-50s, protectionist.— 137, 
415 
Aumale, Henri Eugene Philippe Louis 
d'Orléans, duc d' (1822-1897) — son of 
Louis Philippe, king of the French, 
participated in the campaigns in 
Algeria in the 1840s as a general.— 
470-71 
B 
Babbage, Charles (1792-1871) —English 
mathematician, mechanician and 
economist.— 186, 420 
Babeuf,  François Noël (Gracchus) (1760-
1797) — French revolutionary, advo­
cate of Utopian egalitarian commu­
nism, organiser of the conspiracy of 
"equals".—5,  6, 11, 321, 514, 576 
Balliu, Felix (b. 1802) — Belgian demo­
crat, treasurer of the Brussels Demo­
cratic Association.— 646 
Barbaroux, Charles Jean Marie (1767-
1794) — participant in the French Rev­
olution, deputy to the Convention, 
Girondist.— 10, 335 
Barrot, Camille Hyacinthe Odilon (1791-
1873)—French lawyer, leader of 
the liberal dynastic opposition during 
the July monarchy.—62, 216, 376, 
378, 382, 385-87, 406, 439, 442, 443, 
556. 
Bartels, Adolphe (1802-1862) —Belgian 
publicist, democrat  ; editor of the news­
paper Le Débat social from 1844 to 
1846.—402, 403 
Bartels, Jules Théodore (1815-1855) — 
Belgian lawyer and publicist, liberal.— 
274 
Bastiat, Frédéric (1801-1850)—French 
economist and politician.— 276, 283 
BattailU,  Arnold (d. 1858) —Belgian 
worker, participant in "the working-
class movement, vice-secretary of the Brussels Democratic Association.— 
646 
Bandeau, Nicolas (1730-1792) — French 
abbot, economist, follower of the 
Physiocrats.— 162 
Bauer, Bruno (1809-1882) —German 
philosopher, Young Hegelian.— 73 
Bauer, Heinrich (b. 1813) — prominent 
figure in the German and internation­
al working-class movement, a leader of 
the League of the Just, member of the 
Central Authority of the Communist 
League, a shoemaker by trade.— 614-
15, 654, 658 
Beaumont de la Bonninière, Gustave Au­
guste de (1802-1866) — French liberal 
journalist and politician, author of 
works on slavery in the United 
States.— 378, 382 
Beck, Karl Isidor (1817-1879) — German 
poet, in the mid-1840s "true social­
ist".— 235-48 
Becquet—head of the passport office of 
Public Security in Belgium.— 653 
Bentham, Jeremy (1748-1832) — English 
sociologist, theoretician of "utilitarian­
ism".— 277 
Béranger, Pierre Jean de (1780-1857) — 
French poet and song writer, author 
of political satires, democrat.— 395, 
646 
Bernard, H.—a Frenchman, emigrated 
to London, represented France in the 
committee of the Fraternal Democrats 
society in London.— 467 
Berrier-Fontaine, Camille (born c. 1806) 
— French physician, democrat.— 11, 
13 
Billault, Adolphe Augustin Marie (1805-
1863) — French politician, moderate 
monarchist, subsequently a Bonapar-
tist.— 558 
Blanc, Jean Joseph Louis (1811-1882) — 
French petty-bourgeois socialist, his­
torian.—13,  381, 387, 397-400, 409-
11,518,630 
Blanqui, Jérôme-Adolphe (1798-1854) — 
French vulgar political economist.— 
125, 252, 277, 278, 282 

=====第745页=====
Name Index 717 
Blessington, Marguerite,  countess  of (1789-
1849) — English writer with liberal 
leanings.— 59 
Blum,  P.—represented Russia on the 
committee of the Fraternal Democrats 
society in London in 1847-48.— 467 
Boisguillebert, Pierre Le Pesant, sieur de 
(1646-1714) — French economist, pre­
decessor of the Physiocrats, founder of 
classical bourgeois political economy in 
France.—137, 151 
Bolingbroke, Henry St. John, 1st Viscount 
(1678-1751) — English deist philos­
opher, politician.— 399, 410 
Bonald,  Louis Gabriel Ambroise,  Vicomte  de 
(1754-1840) — French politician and 
journalist, ideologist of the 
reactionary aristocracy and monarch­
ists during the Restoration.— 546 
Born,  Stephan (real name Buttermilch, 
Simon) (1824-1898) —German type­
setter, member of the Communist 
League; leaned towards reformism 
during the 1848-49 Revolution.— 306, 
340, 609, 610, 654, 656 
Börne, Ludwig (1786-1837) —German 
critic and writer.—41, 259, 273 
Bornstedt, Adalbert von (1808-1851) — 
German journalist, founder and 
editor of the  Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung 
(1847-48), a leader of the German 
Democratic Society, member of the 
Communist League, expelled from the 
League in March 1848; agent 
provocateur of the Prussian police in 
the 1840s.— 626 
Bourbon — French dynasty (1589-1792, 
1814-1815, 1815-1830).— 372 
Bowring, Sir  John  (1792-1872) — English 
politician, linguist and man of letters, 
follower of Bentham, a Free Trader.— 
277, 282, 283, 285-87, 384, 416, 422, 
450,  455, 458, 460-61, 622 
Bray, John Francis (1809-1897) — English 
economist, Utopian socialist, follower 
of Robert Owen, developed the theory 
of "labour money"; printer by 
trade.—138-42, 144, 421 
Bright, John (1811-1889) — English 
24* manufacturer, Free Trade leader, a 
founder of the Anti-Corn Law 
League.—285, 450, 525-26 
Brouckere, Charles de (1796-1860) — Bel­
gian economist, participant in the 
1830-31 revolution in Belgium; Minis­
ter of Finance (1830-31); Minister of 
the Interior and War (1831-35); Free 
Trader, professor at Brussels Univer­
sity.— 287 
Brown, Sir William,  Bart.  (1784-1864) — 
English merchant and banker, Free 
Trader.— 282-83 
Brunswick (Braunschweig), Karl Wilhelm 
Ferdinand, Duke of (1735-1806) — 
Prussian general, participated in the 
wars against revolutionary and 
Napoleonic France.— 9 
Bûchez, Philippe Joseph Benjamin (1796-
1865) — French politician and his­
torian, Christian socialist.— 253, 263 
Buchfink — member of the Communist 
League in Paris.— 654 
Bugeaud de la Piconnerie, Thomas Robert, 
Due d'Isly (1784-1849) —French 
marshal from 1843, Orleanist, during 
the July monarchy an organiser of the 
wars of conquest in Algeria and 
Morocco, in 1841-47, governor-
general of Algiers.— 471 
Buonarroti, Filippo Michèle (1761-1837) 
— Italian revolutionary, Utopian com­
munist, a leader of the revolutionary 
movement in France in the late 18th 
and early 19th centuries, Babeufs 
comrade-in-arms.—11, 321 
s C 
Cabet, Etienne (1788-1856) —French 
writer, Utopian communist, author of 
Voyage en Icarie.—13, 41, 76, 404, 407 
516, 576 
Cade, Jack (d. 1450) — leader of the 
anti-feudal uprising of peasants and 
artisans in the south of England in 
1450.—  295 
Campan—member of the Board of 
Trade in Bordeaux in late 1840s, 
Free Trader.—277 

=====第746页=====
718 Name Index 
Campe, Joachim Heinrich (1746-1818) — 
German teacher and linguist, author 
of books for children and adoles­
cents.—  336 
Camphausen, Ludolf (1803-1890) — Ger­
man banker, a leader of the Rhenish 
liberal bourgeoisie; Prime Minister of 
Prussia from March to June of 1848.— 
333 
Carlyle, Thomas (1795-1881) —British 
writer, historian, philosopher, Tory; 
preached views bordering on feudal 
socialism up to 1848; later relentless 
opponent of the working-class move­
ment.— 10, 416 
Carnot, Lazare Hippolyte (1801-1888) — 
French writer and politician.— 406, 
443 
Carnot, Lazare Nicolas (1753-1823) — 
French mathematician, political and 
military figure in the French Revolu­
tion, Jacobin; took part in the Ther­
midor coup in 1794.— 443 
Carrel, Armand (1800-1836) — French 
journalist, moderate republican, a 
founder and editor of the newspaper 
Le National.— 214 
Catherine II (1729-1796) — Russian em­
press (1762-96).— 622 
Charles I (1600-1649) — King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1625-49), exe­
cuted during the English revolution of 
the 17th century.— 233, 474 
Charles II (1630-1685) — King of Great 
Britain and Ireland (1660-85).— 206 
Charles V (1500-1558) — Holy Roman 
Emperor (151-9-56) and King of Spain 
as Charles I (1516-55).— 16 
Charles X (1757-1836) — King of France 
(1824-30).—371 
Charles Albert (Carlo Alberto) (1798-
1849) —King of Sardinia (1831-49).— 
522,541 
Charles Augustus (Karl August) (1757-
1828) — grand duke of Saxe-
Wei mar-Eisenach.— 270 
Charles the Great (Charlemagne) (c. 742-
1814) —from 768 King of the Franks; Holy Roman Emperor (800-814).— 
148 
Chateaubriand, François René, Vicomte de 
(1768-1848) —French romantic 
writer, statesman and diplomat, sup­
ported the policy of the Holy Al­
liance.— 395 
Cherbuliez, Antoine-Elisée (1797-1869) — 
Swiss economist, tried to combine the 
teaching of Sismondi with elements of 
Ricardo's theory.—203, 421 
Christian VIII (1786-1848) —King of 
Denmark (1839-48).— 542 
Clarendon, George William Frederick, 
fourth Earl of, fourth Baron Hyde  ( 1800-
1870) — English statesman, Whig, 
Viceroy of Ireland (May 1847-early 
1852).—445 
Clark, Thomas — a Chartist leader, in 
1847 member of the committee of the 
Fraternal Democrats society, after 
1848 a reformist.— 467, 473 
Cloots, Jean Baptiste (Anacharsis) (1755-
1794) — participant in the French Rev­
olution, Dutch by birth, was close to 
Left Jacobins, prior to the Revolu­
tion— Prussian baron.— 403 
Cobbett, William (1762-1835) — English 
politician and radical writer.— 359 
Cobden, Richard (1804-1865) — English 
manufacturer, a leader of the Free 
Traders and founder of the Anti-Corn 
Law League.— 5, 285, 539 
Coburg —dukes of the Saxe-Coburg-
Gotha dynasty, ruled a number of 
European states.— 568 
Code, Celestino Maria (1783-1857) — 
Italian theologian and statesman, 
father confessor of Ferdinand II of 
Naples.— 541 
Colbert, Jean Baptiste (1619-1683) — 
French statesman, Controller-General 
of Finances (1665-83), actually di­
rected France's foreign and domestic 
policy.— 192 
Columbus, Christopher (Christobal Colon) 
(1451-1506) — Genoa-born navigator, 
discoverer of America.— 627 

=====第747页=====
Name Index 719 
Condorcet, Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas de 
Caritat, Marquis de (1743-1794) — 
French sociologist, Enlightener, par­
ticipant in the French Revolution, 
Girondist.— 10 
Constancio, Francisco Solano (1772-
1846) — Portuguese physician, diplo­
mat and writer, translated works of 
English economists into French.— 
114,121 
Conze, Alexander — German emigrant to 
the USA.—42, 50 
Cooper, Thomas ( 1759-1840) — American 
economist and politician.— 153, 323 
Cooper, Thomas (1805-1892) — English 
poet and journalist, a Chartist in the 
early 1840s, subsequently a non­
conformist lay-preacher.— 8, 59 
Couthon, Georges (1755-1794) — partici­
pant in the French Revolution, deputy 
to the Convention, Jacobin, adherent 
of Robespierre.— 10 
Crassier de —Chief Secretary of the 
Ministry of Justice of Belgium.— 650 
Cubières, Amédée-Louis-Despans de (1786-
1853) — French general, Orleanist, 
War Minister in 1839 and 1840, de­
graded in 1847 for bribery and shady 
dealings.— 213 
D 
Dahlmann, Friedrich Christoph (1785-
1860) — German liberal historian and 
politician.— 222, 520 
Daire, Louis François Eugène (1798-
1847) — French economist, publisher 
of works on political economy.— 
137,152 
Dairnvaell, G. M. — French worker, au­
thor of the pamphlet Histoire édifiante 
et curieuse de Rothschild l-er, roi des 
juifs. — 62 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321) —Italian 
poet.—271 
Danton, Georges Jacques (1759-1794) — 
prominent figure in the French 
Revolution, leader of the Right wing 
of the Jacobins.— 6 Darthé, Augustin Alexandre  Joseph  (1769-
1797) — French lawyer, participant in 
the French Revolution, Jacobin, fol­
lower of  Babeuf. — 11 
Dassy, Thomas J. (b. 1819) —Belgian 
democrat, member of the Brussels 
Democratic Association.— 562 
Daumer, Georg Friedrich (1800-1875) — 
German writer, author of works on the 
history of religion.— 631 
David, Christian Georg Nathan (1793-
1874) — Danish economist and politi­
cian, liberal.— 275 
David d'Angers, Pierre-Jean (1788-
1856) — French sculptor.— 395 
Decker  — German petty-bourgeois demo­
crat, emigrated to Paris.— 654 
Degeorge, Frederic (1797-1854) — French 
journalist, moderate republican.— 
406 
Delangle, Claude Alphonse (1797-1869) — 
French lawyer and politician; from 
1847 till the February revolution of 
1848 Procurator-General at the Court. 
—407 
Del Carretto, Francesco Saverio, marchese 
(1777-1861) — Italian politician, Minis­
ter of Police in the Kingdom of Naples 
(1831-January 1848). —541 
De Witt—see Witt, John de. 
Dézamy, Théodore (1803-1850) — French 
writer, Utopian communist.— 41 
Dickens, Charles (1812-1870) — English 
journalist and novelist.— 59 
Diderot, Denis (1713-1784) — French 
philosopher of the Enlightenment, 
atheist; leader of the Encyclopaed­
ists.—  399, 410 
Diergardt, Friedrich, Freiherr von (1795-
1869) — German textile manufac­
turer, politician.— 6 
Dietsch, Andreas (d. 1846) — a German 
emigrant to the USA, follower of 
Weitling, founded a communist colony 
in the State of Missouri in 1844; brush-
maker by trade.— 48 
Dixon, William — member of the Execu­
tive Committee of the National Char­
tist Association.— 473 

=====第748页=====
720 Name Index 
Dohl, Johann Balthasar — member of the 
Cgmmunist League, emissary to Hol­
land in the autumn of 1847.— 603, 
608 
Drouyn de Lhuys, Edouard  ( 1805-1881) — 
French politician, Minister of Foreign 
Affairs (1848-49, 1851, 1852-55, 1862-
66).—  378 
Droz, François Xavier Joseph (1773-1850) 
— French historian, philosopher and 
economist.— 125 
Duchateau—French industrialist, protec­
tionist.—277, 283 
Duchâtel, Charles Marie Tanneguy, comte 
(1803-1867) — French statesman, Or-
leanist, Minister of Trade (1834-36), 
Minister of the Interior (1839 and 
from 1840 till February  1848).—61, 
213-19,  238, 365, 556, 565 
Duesberg, Franz von (1793-1872) — Prus­
sian Minister of Finance (1846-March 
1848).—  230 
Dumas, Jean Baptiste André (1800-1884) 
— French chemist.— 251 
Duncombe, Thomas Slingsby (1796-
1861) — English politician, radical, 
participated in the Chartist movement 
in the 1840s.— 13, 213, 285, 414 
Dunoyer, Barthélémy Charles Pierre Joseph 
(1786-1862) — French economist and 
politician.— 132, 278, 282 
Dupin, André Marie Jacques  (1783-
1865) — French lawyer, politician; 
Orleanist.— 470 
Dupont de l'Eure, Jacques Charles (1767-
1855) — French politician, liberal, par­
ticipant in the French revolutions of 
the 18th century and 1830; was close 
to the moderate republicans in the 
1840s, President of the Council of 
Ministers in the Provisional Govern­
ment in 1848.— 401, 558 
Duquesnoy, Ernest Dominique François 
Joseph (1749-1795) — participant in 
the French Revolution, Jacobin.— 11 
Duroy, Jean Michel (1753-1795) — par­
ticipant in the French Revolution, 
deputy to the Convention, Jacobin.— 
11 Duvergier de Hauranne, Prosper (1798-
1881) — French liberal politician and 
journalist.—376, 439 
E 
Edmonds, Thomas Rowe (1803-1889) — 
English economist, Utopian socialist, 
drew socialist conclusions from Ricar-
do's theory.— 138 
Eichhorn, Johann Albrecht Friedrich (1779-
1856) — Prussian statesman, Minister 
of Worship, Education and Medicine 
(1840-48).— 222, 233 
Ellis, William—Chartist, was sentenced 
on August 6, 1842, to 20 years' depor­
tation to Australia for participation in 
workers' disturbances.— 13 
Engels, Frederick (1820-1895)  —8,  14, 32, 
35, 55, 56, 60, 70, 73, 274, 278, 310, 
314-19,  330, 335-36, 338, 380, 385, 
388, 391, 392, 414, 482,  563,  592, 609, 
620, 621, 632, 644, 652 
Engler—member of the Communist 
League in Paris.— 654 
Epps, John (1805-1869) — English physi­
cian and public figure, radical.— 
361-63 
Eskeles — see Arnstein und Eskeles. 
Etrich, L.— member of the German 
Workers' Club in Paris founded in 
March 1848.— 658 
Ewart, William ( 1798-1869) — English 
politician, Free Trader.— 277, 282, 
283 
F 
Faider, Victor—Belgian lawyer and 
politician, moderate democrat.— 
274-75 
Faraday, Michael (1791-1867) — English 
scientist, physicist and chemist.— 251 
Faucher, Léon ( 1803-1854) — French 
journalist, politician, moderate liber­
al.—  207 
Ferdinand I (1793-1875) —Emperor 
of Austria (1835-48).—26, 366, 532, 
553 

=====第749页=====
Name Index 721 
Ferdinand II (1810-1859) —King of the 
Two Sicilies (1830-59).—372,523, 541 
Ferguson, Adam (1723-1816) —Scottish 
historian, philosopher and sociolo­
gist.—181 
Feuerbach, Ludwig Andreas  ( 1804-1872)— 
German materialist philosopher.— 
73, 249, 256, 258, 292, 293 
Fichte, Johann Gottlieb (1762-1814) — 
German classical philosopher of the 
late 18th century-early 19th centu­
ry.—17 
Fischer, F.— member of the Communist 
League in Brussels.— 652 
Flocon, Ferdinand (1800-1866) — French 
politician and journalist, democrat, an 
editor of the newspaper La Réfor­
me.—  385, 386, 387, 397, 400, 438, 
442, 558, 649 
Florian, Jean Pierre Claris de (1755-
1794) — French fabulist and drama­
tist, author of a poem about William 
Tell.—368 
Folien, August Adolf Ludwig (1794-
1855) — German journalist and poet, 
participated in the war against Na­
poleonic France, was close to the 
student movement after 1815.— 554 
Fontaine — see Berrier-Fontaine, Camille 
Forsell, Carl Daniel—member of the 
Communist League in Sweden.— 605 
Forster, Johann Georg (1754-1794) — 
German democratic writer, founder of 
the Jacobin Club in Mainz, member of 
government of the Mainz Republic of 
1792;  emigrated to France where he 
took part in revolutionary events.— 27 
Fould,  Achille (1800-1867) —French 
banker and politician, Orleanist, sub­
sequently Bonapartist.— 61, 375 
Fourier, François Marie Charles (1772-
1837) — French Utopian socialist.— 
256, 514, 516, 517, 576 
Franz (Francis) 7(1768-1835) — Emperor 
of Austria (1804-35), the last emperor 
of the Holy Roman Empire known as 
Franz II (1792-1806).—21, 530, 
532, 534, 535 
Frederick VII (Frederik Carl Christian VII) (1808-1863) —King of Denmark 
(1848-63) — 542, 
Frederick William II (1744-1797) — King 
of Prussia (1786-97).— 264 
Frederick William III (1770-1840)— 
King of Prussia (1797-1840).—23, 26, 
27, 31, 64 
Frederick William IV  ( 1795-1861 )  — King 
of Prussia (1840-61).— 23, 52, 55, 57, 
64, 65, 69, 71, 92, 93, 232, 233, 333, 
521, 522, 526, 542 
Freiligrath, Ferdinand (1810-1876) — 
German romantic and later revolu­
tionary poet, member of the Com­
munist League.— 292 
Fröbel, Julius (1805-1893) —German 
radical writer and publisher of pro­
gressive literature.— 298 
Frost, John (1784-1877) —English radi­
cal; joined the Chartist movement in 
1838,  sentenced to deportation for life 
to Australia for organising a miners' 
uprising in Wales in 1839, was par­
doned in 1856 and returned to 
England.—13 
Fulchiron, Jean .Claude (1774-1859) — 
French big capitalist and conservative 
politician.— 365, 375 
Fussel, John A.— a Chartist leader in 
Birmingham.— 473 
G 
Garnier-Pagès, Etienne Joseph Louis 
(1801-1841)—French politician, head­
ed the republican opposition after 
the revolution of 1830, brother of 
Gamier-Pages, Louis Antoine. — 440 
Garnier-Pagès, Louis Antoine  (1803-
1878) — French politician, moderate 
republican, in 1848 member of the 
Provisional Government.— 406, 438, 
439, 442, 443, 558 
Gérard,  Etienne Maurice, comte  (1773-
1852) — Marshal of France and states­
man, Orleanist.— 557 
Gervinus, Georg Gottfried (1805-1871) — 
German historian, liberal.— 222 
Gescheidtle, Karl — a German worker 
from Baden, emigrated to the USA.— 
49 

=====第750页=====
722 Name Index 
Gessner, Salomon (1730-1788) —Swiss 
poet and artist.— 318 
Gigot, Philippe Charles (1819-1860)— 
participant in the Belgian working-
class and democratic movement, mem­
ber of the Communist League, close 
to Marx and Engels in the 1840s.— 
35, 55, 56, 60, 562, 565, 601, 652 
Girardin, Alexandre, comte de (1776-
1855) — French general, father of 
Emile de Girardin.— 215 
Girardin, Emile de  ( 1806-1881 )  —French 
journalist and politician, editor of La 
Presse; lacked principles in politics; in 
1847 opposed the Guizot Govern­
ment.— 213-16, 375, 439 
Glass — a house-owner in Paris.— 658 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von (1749-
1832) —German poet.—17, 249-52, 
255-73,  316 
Graham, Sir James Robert George 
(1792-1861) —English statesman, a 
Whig at the beginning of his political 
career; later supported Peel; Home 
Secretary (1841-46) in Peel's Cabi­
net.— 33,213,217 
Greg, William Rathbone (1809-1881) — 
English manufacturer and journalist, 
a Free Trader.— 454, 455, 464 
Grün,  Karl Theodor Ferdinand (pen name 
Ernst von der Haide) (1817-1887) — 
German writer, became a "true social­
ist" in the mid-1840s.— 72-74, 250-58, 
260-73,  300, 338, 513, 590-93, 605, 
609, 610 
Guasco, Charles Theodore de (b. 1812) — 
member of the Belgian democratic 
and working-class movement; a joiner 
by trade.—562 
Gudin, Charles Gabriel César (1798-
1874) — adjutant of Louis Philippe; 
from 1846 Marshal of France; was 
dismissed from his post in 1847 for 
swindling.— 213 
Guizot, François Pierre Guillaume (1787-
1874) — French historian and states­
man; from 1840 up to the February 
revolution of 1848 actually directed 
the foreign and domestic policy of France.— 61, 214, 215, 217, 219, 365, 
438-40, 468, 469, 472, 481, 521, 538, 
539, 546, 556-58, 618 
Gülich, Gustav von (1791-1847) — Ger­
man historian and economist; protec­
tionist.— 279, 280, 573 
H 
Hansemann, David Justus (1790-1864) — 
German capitalist, one of the leaders 
of Rhenish liberal bourgeoisie; Minis­
ter of Finance of Prussia from March 
to September 1848.— 333 
Harcourt, François Eugène Gabriel, duc d' 
(1786-1865) — French politician and 
diplomat, liberal, advocate of Free 
Trade.— 287 
Hardenberg, Karl August von, Prince 
(1750-1822) — Prussian statesman, 
Minister of Foreign Affairs (1804-06, 
1807),  Chancellor (1810), one of the 
sponsors of moderate reforms, sup­
ported the policy of the Holy Alliance 
after 1815.— 23 
Harney, George Julian (1817-1897) — 
prominent figure in the English 
labour movement, a leader of the 
Chartist Left wing.—8-11. 13, 308, 
363, 392, 413, 414, 466, 467, 473, 
474-75,  486, 619, 621, 647 
Harring, Harro Paul (1798-1870)— 
German writer, radical, emigrated in 
1828 and lived in various countries of 
Europe and America, including the 
USA.— 46, 47, 50 
Harvey, William (1578-1657) — English 
physician, one of the founders of 
scientific physiology, discovered the 
circulation of the blood.— 194 
Haussy de — Belgian Minister of Justice 
in 1848.— 650 
Haxthausen, August Franz Ludwig Maria, 
Freiherr von (1792-1866) — Prussian 
official and economist, author of 
Studien über die innern Zustände des 
Volkslebens, und insbesondere die 
ländlichen Einrichtungen Russlands. — 
482 
Hébert, Michel Pierre Alexis (1799-1887) 

=====第751页=====
Name Index 723 
— French lawyer and statesman, Or-
leanist, Minister of Justice (1847-
February 1848).— 217, 556 
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-
1831) — German classical philoso­
pher.—4,  17, 161, 164-68, 169, 254, 
256, 258, 265, 270, 292, 317 
Heilberg, Louis (Lazarus) (b. 1818) — 
German journalist, emigrated to Brus­
sels, member of the Brussels Com­
munist Correspondence Committee in 
1846.—  35 
Heine, Heinrich (1797-1856) — German 
revolutionary poet.— 244 
Heinrich LXXII (1797-1853) —sover­
eign of the German principality Reuss-
Lobenstein-Ebersdorf (1822-48).— 
339 
Heimen, Karl (1809-1880) — German 
journalist, Radical.— 291-306, 312-22, 
324-26,  328, 330-40, 610, 611 
Henri, Joseph (b. about 1795) — French 
merchant; attempted on Louis Phi­
lippe's life on July 29, 1846, and 
was sentenced to penal servitude for 
life.—61 
Hermann — member of the Communist 
League, member of the German 
Workers' Club in Paris founded in 
March 1848.— 654, 655, 658 
Hess, Moses (1812-1875) — German radi­
cal journalist, one of the main rep­
resentatives of "true socialism" in the 
mid-1840s.— 256, 626 
Hilditch, Richard — English economist in 
the mid-19th century.— 203 
Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679) —English 
philosopher.— 233 
Hobhouse, John Cam, Baron Broughton de 
Gyfford (1786-1869) — British states­
man, liberal.— 58 
Hobson,  Joshua  — English journalist, 
Chartist.— 8 
Hodgskin, Thomas  ( 1787-1869) — English 
economist and journalist, Utopian 
socialist, drew socialist conclusions 
from the Ricardian theory.— 138 
Hody, Alexis Guillaume, baron (1807-
1880) — chief of the secret police in Brussels in the 1840s.—567, 568, 581 
Hofer, Andreas (1767-1810) — leader ol 
guerrilla warfare against the French 
army in Tirol in 1809.—26 
Höger, Wilhelm —member of the Com­
munist League in Paris.— 654 
Holbach, Paul Henri Dietrich, baron d' 
(1723-1789) — French philosopher of 
the Enlightenment, atheist.—  251, 
254, 255 
Holm,  Peter—Danish socialist; in 1847-
48 member of the committee of the 
Fraternal Democrats society, secretary 
for Scandinavia.— 467 
Homer— semi-legendary Greek epic 
poet.—314, 315 
Hope, George (1811-1876) — English 
farmer, Free Trader.— 454, 464 
Home—member of the Communist 
League and German Workers' Society 
in Paris.— 654 
Hornschuh—member of the League of 
the Just, Weitlingian.— 611-12 
Huskisson, William (1770-1830) — British 
statesman, Tory, Secretary of the 
Board of Trade (1823-27).—209 
I 
Iff land,  August Wilhelm (1759-1814) — 
German actor, dramatist and theatri­
cal manager.— 247 
Imbert, Jacques (1793-1851) —French 
journalist, democrat and socialist, par­
ticipant of the July revolution of 1830; 
in 1847 vice-president of the Brussels 
Democratic Association.— 618, 626 
Itzstein, Johann Adam von (1775-1855) — 
German statesman, a leader of the 
liberal opposition in the Baden Diet.— 
265 
J 
Jackson, Charles Thomas (1805-1880) — 
American physician, chemist, dis­
covered anaesthetic effect of ether.— 
260 
Jacoby, Johann (1805-1877) —German 

=====第752页=====
724 Name Index 
radical journalist and politician, physi­
cian, was close to the Social-Democrats 
in the 1870s.— 297 
Jefferson, Thomas (1743-1826) —US 
statesman and author, Enlightener, 
ideologist of democratic circles during 
the War of Independence, President 
of the USA (1801-09).— 325 
Jerrold,  Douglas William (1803-1857) — 
English author, dramatist and wit.— 
59 
Jones, Ernest Charles (1819-1869) —a 
leading figure in the English working-
class movement, proletarian poet and 
journalist, a leader of the Left Chart­
ists, friend of Marx and Engels. —13, 
362, 391, 413, 467, 473, 616, 617 
Joseph II (1741-1790) — German Em­
peror (1765-90).—293, 330 
Jottrand, Lucien Leopold (1804-1877) — 
Belgian lawyer and journalist, demo­
crat; in 1847 President of the Brussels 
Democratic Association.—  561,  565, 
618, 626, 642, 646 
Junge, Adolf Friedrich — German worker, 
member of the League of the Just and 
the Communist League; emigrated to 
America early in 1848.— 601 
Juvenal (Decimus Junius Juvenalis) (b. c. 
60 A.D.-d. after 127) —Roman sa­
tirist and poet.—131 
K 
Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804) — German 
philosopher.— 17, 182, 259 
Keen,  Charles — Chartist, a leader of the 
Fraternal Democrats society.— 392, 
413, 467, 473, 620 
Kleist, Bernd Heinrich Wilhelm von (1777-
1811).  — German romantic poet and 
dramatist.— 242 
Klopstock,  Friedrich  Gottlieb (  1724-1803) — 
German poet, representative of the 
German Enlightenment.— 256 
Koch,  Heinrich (1800-1879) — German 
Utopian Communist, emigrated to the 
USA, published several radical and 
atheist newspapers, Der Antipfaff 
among them.— 48, 50 Köchlin —manufacturer in Württem­
berg. — 5 
Konstantin Pavlovich (Constantine) (1779-
1831) — Russian grand duke, brother 
of Emperor Nicholas I, army com­
mander-in-chief in Warsaw and actu­
ally viceroy of the Kingdom of Poland 
from 1814.—617 
Köttgen, Gustav Adolf  ( 1805-1882) — Ger­
man artist and poet; took part in the 
working-class movement in the 1840s, 
was close to "true socialism".— 54, 55 
Kotzebue, August Friedrich Ferdinand von 
(1761-1819) —German writer and 
journalist, extreme monarchist.— 247 
Krell, H. (from Lucerne) — member of 
the Fraternal Democrats society in 
London, secretary for Switzerland.— 
467 
Kriege, Hermann (1820-1850)—German 
journalist, "true socialist", founder 
and editor of the New York emigrant 
newspaper Der Volks-Tribun.— 37, 39-
51, 593 
Kuhlmann, Georg (b. 1812) — agent 
provocateur of the Austrian govern­
ment; preached "true socialism" in 
the 1840s among the German Weit-
lingian artisans in Switzerland, using 
religious terminology and passing 
himself off as a "prophet".— 594 
L 
Labiaux, J. L.— Belgian commercial 
traveller, democrat, member of the 
Brussels Democratic Association.— 
646 
Lacave-Laplagne, Jean  Pierre Joseph  (1795-
1849) — French Minister of Finance in 
1837-39, 1842-47.—470 
La Fayette, Marie Joseph Paul Ives Roch 
Gilbert Motier, marquis de (1757-
1834) — prominent figure in the 
French Revolution, one of the leaders 
of the moderate constitutionalists 
(Feuillants); subsequently participated 
in the July revolution of 1830.— 9 
Laffitte, Jacques (1767-1844) —French 
banker and liberal politician, Prime 

=====第753页=====
Name Index 725 
Minister (1830-31) under the July 
monarchy.—31,61,238 
Lagentie de Lavaïsse —translator of Eng­
lish authors, Lauderdale in particular, 
into French.—114 
Lally-Tollendal, Trophime  Gerard,  marquis 
de (1751-1830)—French politician, 
during the French Revolution be­
longed to a group of moderate roya­
lists in the Constituent Assembly.— 
333 
Lamartine, Alphonse Marie Louis de (1790-
1869) — French poet, historian and 
politician; one of the leaders of the 
moderate republicans in the 1840s; 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and de 
facto head of the Provisional Govern­
ment in 1848.— 364-66, 395, 404,405, 
558 
Lamennais, Hugues Félicité Robert de 
(1782-1854) —French abbot, writer, 
Christian socialist.—  41, 49,401 
La Sagra, Ramon de ( 1798-1871  ) — Span­
ish economist, historian and naturalist; 
liberal.— 282 
Lassalle, Ferdinand (1825-1864) — Ger­
man writer and lawyer, petty-bour­
geois socialist, founder of the General 
Association of German Workers 
(1863),  a founder of the opportunist 
trend in German Social-Democra­
cy.—125 
Lauderdale, James  Maitland,  8th Earl of 
(1759-1839) —British politician and 
economist, criticised Adam Smith's 
theory from the viewpoint of vulgar 
political economy.— 114, 123, 156-57 
Ledru-Rollin, Alexandre Auguste (1807-
1874) — French writer and politician, a 
petty-bourgeois democratic leader, 
editor of the newspaper La Réforme; in 
1848,  Minister of the Interior in the 
Provisional Government.— 385, 386, 
387, 393, 395, 397, 400, 438, 441-43, 
518,568 
Le Hardy de Beaulieu, Jean Charles Marie 
Joseph (1816-1871) —Belgian econom­
ist, professor of mineralogy; Free 
Trader.—274,539 
Lelewel,  Joachim (1786-1861) — Polish his­torian and revolutionary; participant 
in the Polish insurrection of  1830-31,  a 
leader of the democratic wing of the 
Polish emigrants in 1847-48, a Com­
mittee member of the Brussels Demo­
cratic Association.—  551,  618-20, 626, 
644, 646 
Lemontey, Pierre Edouard (1762-1826) — 
French historian and economist.— 
180,190 
Leopold I (1790-1865) —King of the Bel­
gians (1831-65).—564, 565, 567-70, 
650 
Leopold II (1797-1870) —Grand Duke of 
Tuscany (1824-59).—522 
Lessing, Gotthold Ephraim (1729-1781) — 
German writer, dramatist, critic and 
philosopher; early Enlightener.— 256, 
257 
Leverrier, Urbain Jean Joseph  (1811-
1877) —French astronomer.—260 
Liebig, Justus von, baron (1803-1873) — 
German scientist, agrochemist.— 251 
List, Friedrich (1789-1846) —German 
economist, adherent of protection­
ism.—279, 280, 287, 324, 573 
Louis XI (1423-1483) —King of France 
(1461-83).—398, 400, 410, 411 
Louis XIV (1638-1715) — King of France 
(1643-1715).—151,271 
Louis XV (1710-1774) —King of France 
(1715-74).—161,219 
Louis XVI (1754-1793) — King of France 
(1774-92), guillotined during the 
French Revolution.—9, 232-34, 333, 
371 
Louis Philippe I (1773-1850) —Duke of 
Orleans, King of the French (1830-
•48).—62,  213, 215, 219, 238, 376-78, 
386-87,  397, 400, 411, 438, 472, 530, 
557,618 
Lubliner, Ludwik Ozeasz (1809-1868) — 
Polish revolutionary, emigrated to 
Brussels; a lawyer by profession.— 644 
Lucas, T.— democrat, participant in the 
international meeting on November 
29, 1847 in London to mark the 17th 
anniversary of the Polish insurrection 
of 1830.—619 

=====第754页=====
726 Name Index 
Lucretius (Titus Lucretius Cams) (99-55 
B.C.) — Roman philosopher and 
poet.—166 
Ludwig (Louis) I (1786-1868) —King of 
Bavaria (1825-48).—236, 243, 257 
Ludwig (Louis) 1 (1753-1829) —Land­
grave of Hesse-Darmstadt; from 1806 
to 1829 — Grand Duke of Hesse and 
Rhein.— 25 
Luneau, Sébastien (1800-1880) —French 
politician, member of the Chamber of 
Deputies in  1831  -48.—  470 
Luntberg, J.— member of the Fraternal 
Democrats society, secretary for Scan­
dinavia.— 467 
M 
Mably, Gabriel Bonnot de (1709-1785) — 
French sociologist, representative of 
Utopian egalitarian communism.— 
334 
MacAdam — secretary of the royal society 
for the improvement of flax-growing 
in Ireland, Free Trader.— 286 
MacCulloch, John Ramsay (1789-1864) — 
British economist who vulgarised 
David Ricardo's theories.— 252,416 
MacGrath, Philip—Chartist, member of 
the Executive Committee of the Na­
tional Chartist Association.— 362 
Maistre, Joseph Marie, comte de  (1753-
1821) — French writer, monarchist, an 
ideologist of aristocratic and clerical 
reaction.— 546 
Malouet, Pierre Victor, baron (1740-
1814) — French politician, during the 
French Revolution belonged to the 
group of moderate royalists in the Con­
stituent Assembly.— 333 
Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834) — 
English clergyman, economist, found­
er of the misanthropic theory of popu­
lation.—290,426,428 
Marat, Jean Paul ( 1743-1793) — a Jacobin 
leader in the French Revolution.— 6, 
11,386 
Marie de Saint-Georges, Alexandre Thomas 
(1795-1870)—a French lawyer and politician, liberal, moderate republi­
can, in 1848 member of the Provisional 
Government.—378, 387 
Marie Louise (1791-1847) — daughter of 
Francis I of Austria; was married to 
Napoleon I in 1810.—21 
Marrast, Armand (1801-1852) —French 
journalist and politician, leader of 
moderate republicans, editor of Le Na­
tional; in 1848 member of the Provi­
sional Government and Mayor of 
Paris.—558 
Marx, Edgar (1847-1855) —Karl Marx's 
son.— 562 
Marx, Jenny (née von Westphalen) (1814-
1881) —Karl Marx's wife.—562, 
565-66 
Marx, Jenny (1844-1883) —Karl Marx's 
eldest daughter.— 562 
Mane, Karl (1818-1883) — 34-37, 55, 56, 
60,72-74,125, 287,298,300,331,391, 
560-62,  565-66, 601, 618-19, 626, 639, 
642-44,646,649-58 
Marx, Laura (1845-1911) —Karl Marx's 
second daughter.— 562 
Masaniello, properly Tommaso Anielb 
(1620-1647) —an Italian fisherman; 
leader of the popular anti-feudal re­
volt in July 1647 against the Spanish 
Viceroy of Naples.— 395 
Maurer, Georg Ludwig (1790-1872) — 
German historian, studied the social 
system of ancient and medieval Ger­
many.— 482 
Maynz, Karl Gustav (1812-1882) — Ger­
man lawyer, professor at Brussels Uni­
versity, member of the Brussels Demo­
cratic Association.— 626,646 
Mellinet, François Aimé (1768-1852) — 
Belgian general, participant in the 
democratic movement and the revolu­
tion of 1830 in Belgium, honorary 
president of the Brussels Democratic 
Association.— 618-20,626,646 
Mentel, Christian Friedrich (b. 1812) — 
German tailor, member of the League 
of the Just; was arrested by the Prussian 
authorities and betrayed the organisa­
tion.— 593,595 
Menzel, Wolfgang (1798-1873) — German 

=====第755页=====
Name Index 727 
conservative writer and literary cri­
tic—  259,273 
Meredith, William Morris (1799-1873) — 
American lawyer, held several state of­
fices,  Secretary of the Treasury in 
1849-50.—323 
Metternich-Winneburg, Clemens Wenzel 
Lothar, Fürst von (1773-1859) — Au­
strian statesman and diplomat, Minis­
ter of Foreign Affairs (1809-21), Chan­
cellor (1821-48), an organiser of the 
Holy Alliance.— 366, 481, 520, 530, 
534,535,541,542,549,618,628,629 
Meyen, Eduard (1812-1870) —German 
writer, Young Hegelian; in 1847, Ber­
lin correspondent of the Trier'sche 
Zeitung.— 72-7'4 
Michelot, Jean A.— French democrat, 
emigrated to London, in 1847-48 sec­
retary for France in the Fraternal 
Democrats society.— 391, 467,617 
Mieroslawski, Ludwik (1814-1878) — 
prominent figure in the Polish nation­
al liberation movement, participant 
in the insurrection of  1830-31,  in the 
preparation of a revolt in Poland 
in 1846 and the revolution of 1848-49; 
later, a leader of the moderate wing 
among the Polish democratic emig­
rants,  sided with Bonapartism.—  621, 
623 
Mill, James (1773-1836) —English eco­
nomist and philosopher, adherent of 
Ricardo's theory, follower of Ben-
tham in philosophy.— 203 
Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873) —English 
economist, utilitarian and positivist 
philosopher.—152 
Milton, John (1608-1674) — English poet 
and journalist, prominent figure in the 
17th-century English revolution.— 
399,410 
Mirabeau, Honoré Gabriel Victor Riqueti 
comte de (1749-1791) — a leading fig­
ure in the French Revolution, constitu­
tional monarchist.— 10, 333 
Mole, Louis Mathieu, comte (1781-1855) — 
French statesman, Orleanist, Prime 
Minister (1836-37, 1837-39).—219, 
468,558 Moll,  Joseph  (1812-1849) — a figure in the 
German and international working-
class movement, a leader of the League 
of the Just, member of the Central Au­
thority of the Communist League; par­
ticipant in the 1848-49 revolution; a 
watchmaker by trade.— 467, 591,614, 
623,654, 658 
More, Sir Thomas (1478-1535) — English 
statesman, Lord Chancellor (1529-32), 
humanist writer, representative of Uto­
pian communism.— 254 
Morgan, Lewis Henry (1818-1881) — 
American ethnographer, archaeologist 
and historian of primitive societv. 
— 482 
Morse, Arthur — English Free Trader.— 
454,464 
Mounier, Jean Joseph (1758-1806) — 
French politician, headed a group of 
moderate royalists in the Constituent 
Assembly during the French Revolu­
tion.— 333 
Müller, Johannes von (1752-1809) — Swiss 
conservative historian.— 368 
Münzer, Thomas (c. 1490-1525) — leader 
of the urban plebeians and poor peas­
ants during the Reformation and the 
Peasant War in Germany, advocated 
ideas of egalitarian Utopian commu­
nism.— 27 
Murner, Thomas (1475-1537) — German 
satirist, theologian, opponent of the 
Reformation.—313 
N 
Napoleon I Bonaparte (1769-1821) — Em­
peror of the French (1804-14,1815).— 
10, 19-24, 26, 27, 28, 80, 81, 167, 254, 
259,394,523,530, 534, 536, 622, 628 
Nelson, Horatio Nelson, Lord (1758-1805) 
— English admiral.— 371 
Nicholas I (1796-1855) —Emperor of 
Russia (1825-55).—366, 542 
Niles, Hezekiah (1777-1839)— American 
journalist, publisher of Niles' Weekly 
Register.— 323 
Noakes, John — English radical journal­
ist.—307-08 

=====第756页=====
728 Name Index 
O 
Oborski, Ludwik (1787-1873) —Polish 
political emigrant resident in London, 
member of the Fraternal Democrats 
society.— 392,467,621 
Ochsenbein, Johann Ulrich (1811-1890) — 
Swiss general, leader of the radicals 
and liberals, head of the Federal Gov­
ernment (1847-48).—534 
O'Connell,  Daniel (1775-1847) —Irish 
lawyer and politician, leader of the lib­
eral wing in the national liberation 
movement.— 445-46,448, 549 
O'Connell,  John (1810-1858) —Irish 
politician, liberal, third son of Daniel 
O'Connell, head of the Repeal Asso­
ciation after his father's death.— 
445, 446, 449 
O'Connell,  Maurice (1803-1853) —Irish 
liberal, eldest son of Daniel O'Con­
nell.— 445 
O'Connell,  Morgan (1804-1885) —Irish 
politician, second son of Daniel O'Con­
nell. opposed the campaign for the re­
peal of the Union of  1801.—  445 
O'Connor,  Feargus Edward  ( 1794-1855) — 
a leader of the Left wing in the Chartist 
movement, editor of the newspaper 
The Northern Star.— 8, 13, 58, 59, 285, 
308,358-62,383,412,413,446-49,641 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858) —British 
Utopian socialist.— 514, 517, 576 
P 
Paine, Thomas (1737-1809) —English au­
thor, republican, participant in the 
American War of Independence and 
the French Revolution.— 13, 27 
Palmerston, Henry John Temple, 3rd Vis­
count (1784-1865) — British statesman, 
Foreign Secretary (1830-34,  1835-41, 
1846-51), Home Secretary (J852-55) 
and Prime Minister  ( 1855-58 and 1859-
65); a Tory at the beginning of his 
career, from 1830 onwards, a Whig.— 
308,438,472,542,618 
Parny, Evariste Désiré de  Forges,  vicomte de 
(1753-1814) —French poet.—273 Peel, Sir Robert (1788-1850)—British 
statesman, moderate Tory, Prime 
Minister (1841-46), in 1846 repealed 
the Corn Laws.—521, 538, 539 
Pellering, Jean (1817-1877) —member of 
the working-class movement in Bel­
gium and of the Brussels Democratic 
Association; a shoemaker by trade.— 
626,646 
Pericles (c. 490-429 B.C.) — Greek states­
man, head of the Athenian demo­
crats.—  365 
Petersen, Niels Lorenzo (1814-d. after 
1889) — Danish socialist, Weitlingian 
in the 1840s, later member of the Com­
munist League; active member of the 
First International; subsequently, one 
of the leaders of the Left-wing Danish 
Social-Democrats.— 611 
Petit — tax collector in Corbeil (depart­
ment of Seine-et-Oise).— 469, 470 
Petit, Madame — wife of M. Petit.— 469 
Petty, Sir William (1623-1687) — English 
economist and statistician, founder of 
English classical political economy.— 
206 
Philip I (c. 1052-1108) — King of France 
(1060-1108).—148,149 
Picard,  Albert — Belgian lawyer, member 
of the Brussels Democratic Associa­
tion.—618,642 
Pitt, William (1759-1806) —British 
statesman, Tory; Prime Minister 
(1783-1801 and 1804-06).— 9 
Pius IX (Giovanni Maria Mastai-Ferretti) 
(1792-1878) — Pope (1846-78).— 521, 
522,541 
Plato (c. 427-c. 347 B.C.) —Greek 
philosopher.— 365 
Playfair, Lyon Playfair, 1st Baron (1818-
1898) — British chemist, liberal politi­
cian.— 251 
Pohse, Carl — in 1847-48 representative 
of Russia on the committee of the Fra­
ternal Democrats society.— 467 
Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865) — 
French journalist, economist and 
sociologist, one of the founders of 

=====第757页=====
Name Index 729 
anarchism.—41,  72-74, 105,  107-21, 
123-37,  138, 142, 144-73, 177-84, 
186-88,  190-99, 201-09, 260, 268, 
305, 426, 434, 513, 590, 591, 609-10 
Q 
Quesnay, François (1694-1774) — French 
economist, founder of the school of 
Physiocrats; a physician by profes­
sion.—161,462 
R 
Ricardo, David (1772-1823) —English 
classical economist.—113, 114, 
120-25,  127, 128, 135, 138,  150-51, 
156, 161, 176, 198-202, 289, 290, 
329, 337, 457, 462 
Richelieu, Armand Jean Du Plessis, duc de 
(1585-1642) — French statesman dur­
ing the period of absolutism, Cardinal. 
— 398,  410 
Riedel, Richard—German upholsterer, 
emigrated to Brussels, member of the 
Democratic Association and the Ger­
man Workers' Society, member of the 
Communist League from 1847.— 626 
Rietz (Ritz) — valet of Frederick William 
II of Prussia.— 264 
Rittinghausen, Moritz (1814-1890) —Ger­
man journalist and politician, petty-
bourgeois democrat, participant in the 
revolution of 1848-49, later a member 
of the German Social-Democratic 
Party — 276, 283 
Robespierre, Maximilien François Marie 
Isidore de (1758-1794) —a leading fig­
ure, in the French Revolution, Jacobin 
leader, head of the revolutionary gov­
ernment (1793-94)—5, 10. 386 
Roebuck, John Arthur (1801-1879) — Brit­
ish radical politician and publicist.— 
213 
Rogier, Charles Latour (1800-1885) — 
Belgian Minister of the Interior  ( 1848-
52), liberal.— 564, 567, 568 
Roland de la Platière, Jean Marie (1734-
1793) — a leading figure in the French Revolution, deputy to the Convention, 
Minister of the Interior, a Girondist 
leader.—10 
Roland de la Platière, Jeanne Marie (Manon 
Phlipon) ( 1754-1793) — French 
authoress, participant in the French 
Revolution, Girondist.—10 
Romme, Gilbert (1750-1795) —partici­
pant in the French Revolution, Jaco­
bin.— 11 
Ronge, Johannes (1813-1887) — German 
pastor, a founder of the "German 
Catholics" movement.— 248 
Rossi, Pellegrino Luigi Edoardo, Count 
1787-1848) — Italian economist, law­
yer, politician; in 1848, head of go­
vernment in the Papal states.—125, 
195, 421, 426, 434 
Rothschilds—dynasty of bankers.— 5, 
235-41 
Rothschild,  Jacob (James), baron de (1792-
1868) — head of the Rothschild bank­
ing house in Paris.—  61-63,  219, 365, 
375 
Rothschild,  Charles (Karl Mayer) (1788-
1855) member of the Rothschild 
banking house.— 535 
Rothschild,  Salomon Mayer (1774-1855) — 
head of the Rothschild banking house 
in Vienna.— 533, 542 
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques (1712-1778) — 
French philosopher, writer of the En­
lightenment.—278, 334, 399, 410 
Rowcliffe William (1803-1874) —English 
radical, sided with the Chartists in the 
1840s.—308 
Ruge, Arnold (1802-1880) —German 
radical journalist and philosopher, a 
Young Hegelian.— 222, 292, 293, 3Q1, 
302, 336, 338 
Rumigny, Marie Hippolyte Gueilly, marquis 
de (1784-1871) —French diplomat.— 
559 
Russell, John Russell, 1st Earl of (1792-
1878) — British statesman, leader of 
the Whigs, Prime Minister (1846-52 
and 1865-66), Foreign Secretary 
(1852-53 and 1859-65).—473 

=====第758页=====
730 Name Index 
S 
Sadler, Michael Thomas (1780-1835) — 
English economist and politician, 
philanthropist, sided with the Tory 
party.—153 
Saint-Just, Antoine Louis Léon de (1767-
1794) — a Jacobin leader in the French 
Revolution.— 6, 10 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de Rouvroy, 
comte  de ( 1760-1825) — French Utopian 
socialist.— 514, 576 
Sand,  George (pseudonym of Amandine 
Lucie Aurore Dupin, baronne Dudevant) 
(1804-1876) — French novelist, rep­
resentative of the democratic trend in 
romanticism.— 212 
Sauzet, Jean Pierre (1800-1876) — French 
politician, Orleanist, chairman of the 
Chamber of Deputies  ( 1839-February 
1848).—  238 
Sax — member of the Communist Lea­
gue in Paris.— 657 
Say, Horace Emile (1794-1860) — French 
economist, son of Jean Baptiste Say.— 
282 
Say, Jean Baptiste (1767-1832) — French 
economist, one of the founders of the 
"three production factors" theory, an 
apologia of capitalist exploitation.— 
115, 121, 129, 151, 180, 181,282,289 
Scaevola, Gaius Mucins—legendary Ro­
man warrior in the struggle of the Ro­
mans against the Etruscans (late 6th-
early 5th century B.C.); to prove his 
fortitude and scorn for death he was 
said to have held his right hand in the 
fire until it was consumed under the 
eyes of the king of Etruria. Hence his 
nickname Scaevola ("left-handed").— 
238 
Schabelitz, Jacob (1827-1899) —Swiss 
publisher and bookseller; from 1846, 
member of the Fraternal Democrats 
society, member of the Communist 
League.— 467 
Schapper, Karl (c. 1812-1870) —promi­
nent figure in the German and inter­
national working-class movement, a 
leader of the League of the Just, member of the Communist League 
Central Authority; participant in the 
revolution of 1848-49; after the rev­
olution a leader of a sectarian group 
in the Communist League, later a 
member of the General Council of the 
First International.—103, 391-92, 
413, 467, 588, 600, 614, 617-19, 622, 
638, 654-58 
Schard — a house-owner in Paris.— 658 
Scharnhorst, Gerhard Johann David von 
(1755-1813) — Prussian general and 
politician, War Minister (1807-10) and 
Chief of Staff (1807-13), reorganised 
the Prussian army.— 23 
Scheuffer—a house-owner in Paris.— 
658 
Schiller, Johann Christoph Friedrich von 
(1759-1805) — German poet, historian 
and philosopher.—17, 241, 243, 256, 
257, 259, 368, 371 
Schilling — German emigrant resident in 
Paris,  member of the Communist 
League.— 654 
Schlegel, August Wilhelm von (1767-1845) 
— German romantic poet, translator, 
literary historian and critic.— 314 
Schön, Heinrich Theodor von (1773-1856) 
— Prussian statesman, helped to carry 
out moderate reforms.— 23 
Seidel — member of the German Work­
ers' Club in Paris founded in March 
1848.—  658 
Seiler, Sebastian (c. 1810-c. 1890) —Ger­
man journalist, in 1846 member of the 
Brussels Communist Correspond­
ence Committee, member of the 
Communist League, participant in the 
revolution of 1848-49 in Germany.— 
35 
Senior, Nassau William (1790-1864) — 
English economist, vulgarised Ricar-
do's theory, opposed shortening the 
working day.— 152, 329 
Shaftesbury, Anthony Ashley Cooper, 3rd 
Earl of (1671-1713) —English moral 
philosopher, politician, Whig.— 399, 
410 
Shakespeare, William (1564-1616) — En­
glish playwright, poet.—250, 313, 314, 
325 

=====第759页=====
Name Index 731 
Sieyès, Emmanuel Joseph (1748-1836) — 
French abbot, took an active part in 
the French Revolution, moderate con­
stitutionalist (Feuillant). — 48 
Signard (Signart), Nicolas (1803-1889) — 
French physician and politician, 
democrat.— 397 
Sina — representatives of a banking 
house in Vienna founded by Sina, 
Georg Simon, Freiherr von (1782-
1856).—  533 
Sismondi, Jean Charles Leonard Simonde de 
(1773-1842) — Swiss economist, expo­
nent of economic romanticism.— 
114, 135, 137, 181, 509 
Skelton, John—Chartist.— 473 
Smith,  Adam (1723-1790) —British clas­
sical economist.—113, 120-22, 128, 
147, 176, 180, 186, 189, 196,289,329, 
337 
Sollta  — German emigrant resident in 
New York, follower of Hermann 
Kriege— 40, 41, 44 
Soubrany, Pierre Amable or Soubrany de 
Benistant (1752-1793) — took an active 
part in the French Revolution, Jaco­
bin.— 11 
Spilthoorn, Charles Louis (1804-1872) — 
Belgian lawyer, republican, member 
of the Brussels Democratic Associa­
tion, Chairman of the Democratic 
Association in Ghent.— 626, 646 
Stallwood —Chartist, member of the Ex­
ecutive Committee of the National 
Charter Association.— 616, 620 
Stauffacher, Werner— semi-legendary he­
ro in the liberation war of the Swiss 
against the Hapsburgs in the late 18th 
and early 19th centuries; according to 
tradition one of the founders of the 
Swiss Confederation.— 371, 372 
Steffens, Henrik (1773-1845) —German 
naturalist, writer, philosopher; Nor­
wegian by birth.— 371 
Stein,  Heinrich Friedrich Karl, Baron vom 
und zum (1757-1831) — Prussian 
statesman, initiated and helped to 
carry out moderate reforms.— 23 Steingens, Luitbert (Suitbert) Heinrich Her­
mann (born c. 1817) — German house 
decorator, emigrated to Brussels, 
member of the Communist League.— 
652 
Sterbitzki — member of the Communist 
League in Paris.— 654, 655 
Stern,  Johann —German worker from 
Mecklenburg, emigrated to the USA. 
— 49 
Steuart, Sir James, afterwards Denham 
(1712-1780) — British economist, one 
of the last representatives of mercan­
tilism.— 196 
Stirner, Max (real name Johann Caspar 
Schmidt) (1806-1856) —German phi­
losopher, Young Hegelian, one of 
the ideologists of individualism and 
anarchism.— 73, 292 
Storch, Heinrich Friedrich von (1766-1835) 
— Russian economist, statistician and 
historian; German by birth.— 117 
Stumpf,  Paul (c. 1827-1913) — figure in 
the German working-class movement, 
i n 1847 member of the German Work­
ers' Society in Brussels and of .the 
Communist League, participant in the 
revolution of 1848-49 in Germany, 
subsequently member of the First 
International.— 658 
Sydney (or Sidney) Algernon (1622-1683) 
— English writer and politician, par­
ticipant in the English revolution, 
constitutional monarchist.— 399, 410 
T 
Talleyrand-Périgord, Charles Maurice de 
(1754-1838) —French diplomat, Mi­
nister of Foreign Affairs (1797-99, 
1799-1807, 1814-15), France's rep­
resentative at the Congress of Vienna 
(1814-15).— 530 
Tedesco, Victor André (1821-1897) — Bel­
gian lawyer, socialist, an organiser 
of the Brussels Democratic Associa­
tion; in 1847-48, an associate of Marx 
and Engels, member of the Commu­
nist League.—392, 562, 621 

=====第760页=====
732 Name Index 
Terence (Publius Terentius Afer) (c. 190-
c. 159 B.C.) — Roman writer of come­
dies.—215 
Tex, Cornellis Anne den (1795-1854) — 
Dutch lawyer, also studied problems of 
political economy.— 286 
Thiers, Louis Adolphe (1797-1877) — 
French historian and statesman, Prime 
Minister (1836-40), head of the Or-
leanist monarchist party after 1848, 
hangman of the Paris Commune, Pres­
ident of the Republic (1871-73).— 62, 
219, 386, 387, 439, 443, 468 
Thompson, Thomas Perronet (1783-1869) 
— British politician and economist, 
Free Trader.—278, 282, 283, 384 
Thompson, William (c. 1785-1833) — 
Irish economist, drew socialist conclu­
sions from Ricardo's theory, follower 
of Owen.—138 
Thorvaldsen, Bertel (1768-1844) —Dan­
ish sculptor.— 372 
Tooke, Thomas (1774-1858) —English 
economist, adherent of the classical 
school in political economy.— 152 
Tschudi, Giles or Aegidius (1505-1572) — 
Swiss historian and politician, oppo­
nent of Reformation.— 368 
Tyler, Wat (or Walter) (d. 1381) — leader 
of the peasant revolt in England in 
1381.—  295 
U 
Ure, Andrew (1778-1857) —English 
chemist and economist, Free Trader. 
— 188-89, 420, 461 
V 
Van de Casteele  — manufacturer in Lille, 
France, Free Trader.— 286 
Venedey, Jakob (1805-1871) —German 
journalist and politician, at first radi­
cal, and after the 1848 revolution, 
liberal.— 292, 654 
Victoria (1819-1901) —Queen of Eng­
land (1837-1901).—413 Villeneuve-Bargemont, Jean Paul Alban, 
vicomte de (1784-1850) —French 
politician and economist, an ideologist 
of feudal socialism.— 174 
Virgil (Publius Vergilius Maro) (70-19 
B.C.) —Roman poet.—137 
Vogel —member of the Communist 
League and of the German Workers' 
Club in Paris founded in March 
1848.—  654 
Vogler — German worker, emigrated to 
Paris,  member of the Communist 
League.— 654 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet de (1694-
1778) — French philosopher, histo­
rian of the Enlightenment.—148, 
197, 278, 410 
W 
Wade, John (1788-1875) —English publi­
cist, economist and historian.— 419 
Wakley, Thomas (1795-1862) —English 
physician and politician, radical.— 
445 
Wallau, Karl (1823-1877) — German 
emigrant resident in Brussels, in 1848 
member of the Central Authority of 
the Communist League, chairman of a 
workers' union in Mainz.— 626, 644, 
658 
Walpole, Sir Robert, Earl of Oxford (1676-
1745) — British Prime Minister  (1721-
42), Whig.— 286 
Weerth, Georg (1822-1856) — German 
poet and writer, member of the Com­
munist League; one of the founders of 
proletarian poetry in Germany.— 55, 
275, 283-87, 618, 626 
Weitling, Wilhelm Christian (1808-1871) 
— one of the early leaders of the 
working-class movement in Germany, 
theoretician of Utopian egalitarian 
communism, a  tailor.—11,  13, 35, 
338, 426, 576, 590-92, 605, 606, 608, 
610 
Welcker, Carl Theodor (1790-1869) — 
German lawyer and journalist, liberal, 
deputy to the Baden Provincial Diet.— 
265 

=====第761页=====
Name Index 733 
West — Chartist in Macclesfield. - 473 
Westphalen, Edgar von (1819-c. 1890) — 
brother of Jenny Marx; from 1846, 
member of the Brussels Communist 
Correspondence Committee.— 35 
Wieland, Christoph Martin (1733-1813) — 
German writer.— 256 
William of Orange (1650-1702) —stadt-
holder of the Netherlands (1672-
1702),  King of England (1689-1702). 
— 196 
William, Zephaniah (c. 1794-1874) — 
Chartist, an organiser of the miners' 
revolt in Wales in 1839, sentenced to 
life deportation to Australia.— 13 
Wilson, Isaac — Chartist.— 392, 622 
Wilson, James (1805-1860) —British 
economist and politician, Free Trader, 
founder and editor of the newspaper 
The Economist.— 282, 283, 287 
Winkelried, Erni (Arnold) (d. 1386) — 
semi-legendary hero in the liberation war of the Swiss against the Haps-
burgs;  tradition has it that he secured 
victory over Duke Leopold of Austria 
at the cost of his life in the battle of 
Sempach (1386).— 367, 369-72 
Witt, John de (1625-1672) —Dutch states­
man, actually ruler of the Province 
of Holland (1653-72).—286 
Wolff,  Friedrich Wilhelm (1809-1864) — 
German proletarian revolutionary, 
leading figure in the Communist 
League; in 1848-49 an editor of 
the Neue Rheinische Zeitung; friend 
and associate of Karl Marx and Frede­
rick Engels.— 36, 55, 103, 559, 562, 
581, 582, 588, 598/600, 601, 604, 
626 
Wolowski, Louis François Michel Raymond 
(1810-1876) — French economist and 
politician; professor of law; Polish 
by birth.—276, 277, 282, 283, 286, 
287 
Wyatt, John (1700-1766) —English in­
ventor.—188 
INDEX OF LITERARY AND MYTHOLOGICAL NAMES 
Achilles (Greek myth.) — a Greek warrior 
during the Trojan War, a character in 
Homer's Iliad and Shakespeare's 
tragedy Troilus and Cressida.— 313, 
314 
Adam (Bib.) —400 
Ajax Telamonian (Greek myth.) — hero 
of the Trojan War, one of the main 
characters in Homer's  Iliad;  a charac­
ter in Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressi­
da.— 314, 335 
Aladdin—a character from the Arabian 
Nights, owner of a magic lamp.— 240 
Augeas, Augeias or Augias (Greek myth.) 
— King of Elis, at whose order Her­
cules performed one of his exploits — 
cleaned his stables.— 259 Berowne (or Biron) — a character in 
Shakespeare's comedy Love's Labour's 
Lost.— 313 
Bottom — a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy A Midsummer Night's Dream 
and Goethe's poem Warnung; a 
weaver.— 273 
Boyet—a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy Love's Labour's Lost.— 313 
Cato — the title character in a tragedy by 
Joseph Addison.— 253 
Charybdis — see Scylla and Charybdis. 
Christ, Jesus (Bib.) — 237, 262, 455 

=====第762页=====
7 M Name Index 
D 
David — according to biblical legend, 
slew the Philistine giant Goliath; later 
King of Judah.— 314 
Don Quixote — the title character in 
Miguel Cervantes' novel.— 313, 521 
Dorothea  — a character in Goethe's poem 
Hermann und Dorothea.— 265 
Dumaine — a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy Love's Labour's Lost.— 313 
E 
Enceladus (Greek myth.) — one of the 
giants who made war on the Olympian 
gods.—236 
Eve (Bib.) —400 
F 
Falstaff,  Sir John—a character in Shake­
speare's history play Henry IV and his 
comedy The Merry Wives of Windsor. 
— 325 
Faust — doctor, a character in medieval 
legend and the title character of the 
tragedy by Goethe.— 258, 270, 271 
Fixlein, Quintus — the main character in 
the satirical novel by Jean Paul, Life  of 
Quintus Fixlein; a schoolteacher.— 315 
G 
Götz von Berlichingen — the title charac­
ter of a drama by Goethe.— 258 
Goliath — the Philistine giant reputed in 
the Bible to have been slain by 
David.— 314, 335 
H 
Hector (Greek myth.) — a son of the 
Trojan King Priam, defender of Troy, 
one of the main characters in Homer's 
Iliad.—  313, 314 Hereules (Heracles) (Greek and later 
Roman myth.) — famous for his enor­
mous strength and courage.—188, 
264, 266. 335, 338 
I 
Isegrim —a wolf in Goethe's poem Rei-
neke the Fox.— 316, 338 
J 
Jesus — see Christ, Jesus 
John,  Saint (the Apostle) — according to 
the New Testament one of the twelve 
aDostles of Christ, author of one of the 
Gospels and the Revelation of John 
(Apocalypse).— 270 
L 
Lazarus (Bib.) — 646 
Lotta — a character in Goethe's novel 
Leiden des Jungen Werthers. — 261 
M 
Marcolph (Markolf) —one of the title 
characters in the German Volksbuch 
Solomon und Marcolph.— 313 
Mary (Bib.) — mother of Jesus Christ.— 
236 
Meister, Wilhelm — the main character in 
Goethe's novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehr­
jahre.— 262, 268, 270-72 
Mephistopheles—a character in Goethe's 
tragedy Faust.— 258 
Minos (Greek myth.) — a legendary king 
of Crete and a wise judge.— 260 
P 
Pandora — a character in Greek mytholo­
gy who, out of curiosity, opened a box 
which contained all human evils and 
let them out.— 214 

=====第763页=====
Name Index 735 
Paul—author of many of the epistles in 
the New Testament.— 631 
Prometheus (Greek myth.) — a Titan who 
stole fire for men from the Olym­
pus.—157-59, 160, 254, 258, 260 
R 
Reineke—the fox, the main character in 
Goethe's Reineke the  Fox.—  316, 338 
Robinson Crusoe—the title character of 
Daniel Defoe's novel. The name was 
later used to denote an individual 
isolated from society.— 112, 143 
S 
Sancho Panza (Pansa) —a character in 
Cervantes' Don Quixote.— 313 
Saul—a biblical character; also the title 
character in the tragedy by Karl 
Beck.—236 
Scylla and Charybdis (Greek myth.) — two 
female monsters living on either side 
of narrow straits (Gibraltar) and bring­
ing death to all mariners.— 533 
Solomon — one of the title characters in 
the German Volksbuch Solomon und 
Marcolph.— 313 Stentor — the character in Homer's  Iliad; 
a warrior endowed with an extraordi­
narily loud voice.— 297 
T 
Tell, William (Wilhelm) —a legendary 
hero in stories about the liberation war 
waged by the Swiss against the Haps-
burgs in the late 13th and early 14th 
centuries; the title character in works 
by Schiller and Florian.— 367-69, 371, 
372, 374 
Thersites — a character in Homer's Iliad 
and Shakespeare's Troilus and Cressi-
da; embodiment of querulousness and 
abusiveness.— 314, 335 
Thraso — a character in Terence's com­
edy Eunuchus; a stupid, boastful sol­
dier.— 312 
Titania — a character in Shakespeare's 
comedy A Midsummer Night's Dream 
and Goethe's poem Warnung; the 
queen of the fairies.— 273 
W 
Werner—a character from Goethe's 
novel Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre. — 
262 
Werther —the main character in 
Goethe's novel Leiden des Jungen 
Werthers.— 251, 252, 261, 262 

=====第764页=====

=====第765页=====
INDEX OF QUOTED 
AND MENTIONED LITERATURE 
WORKS BY KARL MARX AND FREDERICK ENGELS 
Marx, Karl 
Capital. A Critical Analysis of Capitalist Production, Vol. I 
— Das Kapital. Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. Bd. I, Hamburg, 1867.— 125 
Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Law. Introduction (present edition, 
Vol. 3) 
— Zur Kritik der Hegeischen Rechtsphilosophie. Einleitung. In: Deutsch-
Französische Jahrbücher, hrsg. von A. Rüge und K. Marx, 1-ste und 2-te 
Lieferung. Paris, 1844.—74, 332 
Declaration Against Karl Grün (this volume) 
— Erklärung gegen Karl Grün. In: Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 28, April 8, 
1847 and Trier'sche Zeitung No. 99, April 9, 1847.—300 
Karl Grün: The Social Movement in France and Belgium (Darmstadt, 1845) or the 
Historiography of True Socialism (present edition, Vol. 5) 
— Karl Grün: Die soziale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien (Darmstadt, 1845) 
oder die Geschichtsschreibung des wahren Sozialismus. In: Das Westphälische 
Dampßoot, Paderborn, August-September 1847.—  73, 300 
On the Jewish Question (present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Zur Judenfrage. In: Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, hrsg. von A. Rüge und 
K. Marx, 1-ste und 2-te Lieferung. Paris, 1844.—74, 254, 255 
Speech on the Question of Free Trade (this volume) 
— Discours sur la question du libre échange. Bruxelles, 1848.— 416 
The Poverty of Philosophy. Answer to the "Philosophy of Poverty" by M. Proudhon (this 
volume) 
— Misère de la philosophic Réponse à la philosopnie de la misère de 
M. Proudhon. Paris-Bruxelles, 1847.—72, 298, 609 
Engels, Frederick 
The Condition of the Working Class in England. From Personal Observation and Authentic 
Sources (present edition, Vol. 4) 
— Die Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England. Nach eigner Anschauung und 
authentischen Quellen. Leipzig, 1845.— 125 

=====第766页=====
738 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
The Decline and Approaching Fall of Guizot.— Position of the French Bourgeoisie 
(this volume). In: The Northern Star No. 506, July 3, 1847.—380 
Draft of a Communist Confession of Faith (this volume) 
— Entwurf des Kommunistischen Glaubensbekenntnis. — 354, 595, 598, 603,605, 
607-09,  612-14 
Louis Blanc's Speech at the Dijon Banquet (this volume) 
— Louis Blancs Rede auf dem Banque« zu Dijon. In: Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung 
No. 104, December 30, 1847.—387 
The Movements of 1847 (this volume) 
— Die Bewegungen von 1847. In: Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 7, January 23, 
1848.—540 
The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State 
— Der Ursprung der Familie, des Privateigentums und des Staats. 2. Aufl., 
Stuttgart, 1886.—482 
Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy (present edition, Vol. 3) 
— Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie. In: Deutsch-Französische 
Jahrbücher, hrsg. von A. Rüge und K. Marx, 1-ste und 2-te Lieferung. Paris, 
1844.—125 
The Prussian Bank Question (this volume). In: The Northern Star No. 451, July 4, 
1846.—70 
Reform Movement in France.— Banquet of Dijon (this volume). In: The Northern Star 
No. 530, December 18, 1847.—387, 409, 410-11 
The Reform Movement in France (this volume). In: The Northern Star No. 526, November 
20, 1847.— 385 
Violation of the Prussian Constitution (this volume). In: The Northern Star 
No. 446, May 30, 1846.—69 
Marx, K. and Engels, F. 
The German Ideology. Critique of Modern German Philosophy According to Its Representa­
tives Feuerbach, Bruno Bauer and Stirner, and of German Socialism According to Its 
Various Prophets (present edition, Vol. 5) 
— Die deutsche Ideologic Kritik der neuesten deutschen Philosophie, in ihren 
Repräsentanten, Feuerbach, B. Bauer und Stirner, und des deutschen 
Sozialismus in seinen verschiedenen Propheten. — 73, 300 
The Holy Family or Critique of Critical Criticism. Against Bruno Bauer and Co. (present 
edition, Vol. 4) 
— Die heilige Familie oder Kritik der kritischen Kritik. Gegen Bruno Bauer und 
Konsorten. Frankfurt a.M., 1845.— 72, 255 
On Poland.  Speeches at the International Meeting Held in London on November 
29, 1847 to Mark the 17th Anniversary of the Polish Uprising of 1830 (this volume) 
— Reden von Marx und Engels über Polen in London am 29. November 1847. In: 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 98, December 9, 1847.—403 

=====第767页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 739 
WORKS BY DIFFERENT AUTHORS 
Addison, J. Cato. A tragedy.— 252 
Anderson, A. An Historical and Chronological Deduction of the Origin of  Commerce  from 
the Earliest Accounts to the Present Time. Vol. I-IV. London, 1764.—116 
Arago, É. V. Les Aristocraties.— 397 
Ariosto, L. L'Orlando furioso.— 324 
Atkinson, W. Principles of Political Economy; or, the Laws of the Formation of National 
Wealth : Developed  by Means of  the Christian Law of Government; Being  the Substance of a 
Case Delivered to the Hand-Loom Weavers' Commission. London, 1840.—137, 416 
Babbage, Ch. Traité sur l'économie des machines et  des manufactures. Traduit de l'anglais 
sur îa troisième édition. Paris,  1833.—  186, 420 
Bartels, A. On Revolutionary Emigrants' Activity in Belgium. In: Journal de Charleroi, 
December 12, 1847. Summary of the article is published in Deutsche-Brüsseler-
Zeitung, December 16, 1847.—402, 403 
Bastiat, F. Sophismes économiques. First edition appeared in Paris in 1846.— 276, 283 
Baudeau, N. Explication du Tableau économique, à madame de ***.... In: Éphémérides du 
citoyen ou Bibliothèque raisonnée des sciences morales et politiques. T. XI, XII, 1767; 
T. III, 1768, T. II, 1770; separate edition — Paris, 1776.—162 
Beck, K. Lieder vom armen Mann. Leipzig, 1846.— 235-48 
— Saul. Tragödie in 5 Aufzügen. Leipzig, 1840.— 237 
Bible 
The Old Testament 
Genesis.— 110, 132 
Exodus. — 94 
Isaiah.— 528 
Psalms.— 528 
The New Testament 
Luke.— 370 
Matthew.— 232 
Revelation.—270 
Blanc, L. Geschichte der zehn Jahre von 1830 bis 1840. Th. 1-5. Zürich und 
Winterthur, 1843-1845.—13 
— Histoire de dix ans. 1830-1840. T. I-V, Paris, 1841-1844.—13 
— Histoire de la révolution française. T. I-II, Paris, 1847.— 630 
— Organisation du travail. First edition appeared in Paris in 1839.— 381 
— [Critique of "Declaration de principes" by A. Lamartine.] In: La Réforme, 
October 25, 1847.—365, 366 
Boisguillebert, P. Dissertation sur la nature des  richesses,  de l'argent et des tributs, ou l'on 
découvre la fausse idée qui régne dans le monde à l'égard de ces trois articles. In: 
Economistes-financiers du XVIII siècle. Précédés de notices historiques sur chaque 
auteur, et accompagnés de commentaires et de notes explicatives par Eugène 
Daire. Paris, 1843.—136, 151 
[Born, S.] Der Heinzen'sche Staat. Eine Kritik von Stephan. Bern, 1847.— 306, 339 

=====第768页=====
740 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Börne, L. 51. Brief aus Paris vom 8. Oktober 1831. In: Gesammelte Schriften, von 
Ludwig Börne. 2-te Auflage. Bd. XIII, Hamburg, 1832.—259, 273 
Bowring, J. [Speech in the House of Commons, July 1835.] Quoted from: 
Atkinson, W. Principles of Political Economy. London, 1840.— 416, 422, 460, 461 
— [Speech at the Congress of Economists, September 18, 1847.] Summary in: 
Journal des économistes, t. XVIII, Paris, 1847.—285, 458, 460 
Bray, J. Fr. Labour's Wrongs and Labour's Remedy; or, the Age of Might and the Age of 
Right. Leeds, 1839.—138-42, 144, 421 
Bûchez, P. J. B. et Roux, P. C. Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française, ou 
Journal des Assemblées Nationales, depuis 1789 jusqu'en 1815..., 40 vols. Paris, 1834-
38.-253 
Buonarroti, Ph. Conspiration pour l'égalité dite de  Babeuf,  suivie du procès auquel elle 
donna lieu, et des pièces justificatives, etc., etc. T. I-II, Bruxelles, 1828.— 321 
Byron, G. Childe Harold's iàgrimage. — 8 
Cabet, [E.] Voyage en Icarie, roman philosophique et social. Paris, 1842.— 516 
Campe, J. H. Die Entdeckung von Amerika. Ein Unterhaltungsbuch für Kinder und 
junge Leute. 5. Aufl., Th. 1-3, Braunschweig, 1801.—336 
Carlyle, Th. Chartism. London, 1840.^-416 
— The  French  Revolution: a History. In three volumes. Vol. III. London, 1837.— 10 
Carmagnole (a French revolutionary song).— 4 
Carnot, L.-H. Les Radicaux et la charte. Paris, 1847.— 443 
Chant du départ —see Chénier, Méhul. Chant du départ. 
Chénier, Méhul. Chant du départ (a French revolutionary song).— 442 
Cherbuliez, A. Riche ou Pauvre. Exposition succincte des  causes et des  effets de la distribution 
actuelle des  richesses  sociales. Paris-Genève, 1840.— 421 
Cooper, Th. Lectures on the Elements of Political Economy. Columbia, 1826.— 153, 323 
— 2nd edition. London, 1831.—153 
Cooper, Th. The Purgatory of Suicides. A Prison-Rhyme. In ten books. London, 
1845.—8 
[Dairnvaell, G. M.] Histoire édifiante et curieuse de Rothschild I-er, roi des juifs. Paris, 
1846.—62 
Dante Alighieri. La Divina commedia. — 271 
Daumer, G. F. Die Geheimnisse des christlichen Altertums. Bd. 1-2, Hamburg, 
1847.—631 
Duesberg, F. von. Denkschrift, betreffend die Aufhebung der Mahl- und  Schlachtsteuer,  die 
Beschränkung der Klassensteuer und die Erhebung einer Einkommensteuer. In: Der Erste 
Vereinigte Landtag in Berlin 1847. Th. I, Berlin, 1847.—230 
Dunoyer, Ch. De la liberté du travail, ou simple  exposé des  conditions dans  lesquelles.les forces 
humaines s'exercent avec le plus de puissance. T. I-II, Paris, 1845.— 278 
Edmonds, T. R. Practical Moral and Political Economy; or the Government, Religion, and 
Institutions, Most Conducive to Individual Happiness and to National Power. London, 
1828.—138 

=====第769页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 741 
Faucher, L. Les coalitions condamnées par les ouvriers anglais. In: Journal des économistes, 
No. 46, September 1845.—207 
Ferguson, A. Essai sur l'histoire de la société civile. Ouvrage traduit de l'anglais par 
M. Bergier. T. II, Paris, 1783.—181 
Flocon, F. [Speech at the Châlon Banquet, December 19, 1847] In: La Réforme, 
December 24, 1847.—442 
Fourier, Ch. Traité de l'association  domestique-agricole.  T. I, Paris-Londres, 1822.— 256 
Friedrich-Wilhelm IV. Thronrede am 11. April 1847. In: Der Erste  Vereinigte Landtag in 
Berlin 1847. Th. I, Berlin, 1847.—232 
Friedrichsen, J. F. W. Mag alles Wunder von dem Lande singen. — 554 
Fröbel, J. System der  socialen  Politik.  2. Auflage der Neuen  Politik.  Th. I-II, Mannheim, 
1847.—298 
Genesis — see Bible. The Old Testament 
Girardin, Emile de. [Article criticising the government.] In: La Presse, May 12, 
1847.—215 
— [Speeches in the Chamber of Deputies, June 17 and 25, 1847.] In: Le Moniteur 
Universel, June 18 and 26, 1847.—215-17 
Goethe, J. W., von. Alexander von Joch über Belohnung und Strafen nach türkischen 
Gesetzen. In: Frankfurter Gelehrte Anzeigen No. 103, December 25, 1772.— 263 
— Aus meinem Leben. — 267 
— Belagerung von Mainz. — 264 
— Briefe aus der Schweiz. — 261 
— Der Bürgergeneral. — 260, 264 
— Campagne in Frankreich 1792.— 263 
— Catechisation. — 260 
— De Legislatoribus. — 263 
— Egmont.— 268 
— Eigenthum. — 268 
— Faust.— 250, 255, 257, 270, 271 
— Götz von Berlichingen. — 18, 269 
— Hermann und Dorothea. — 265 
— Iphigenie auf Tauris. — 259 
— Leiden des jungen Werthers. — 261,  263, 267 
— Maskenzüge. — 258 
— Die natürliche Tochter. — 263 
— Prometheus (Gedicht).— 44, 260 
— Reineke Fuchs. — 314 
— [Römische] Elegieen. — 273 
— Stella. Ein Trauerspiel. — 262 
— Tag- und Jahreshefte als Ergänzung meiner sonstiger Bekenntnisse. — 252 
— Über Naturwissenschaft im Allgemeinen, einzelne Betrachtungen und Apho­
rismen. — 266 
— Ultimatum. — 252 
— Unterhaltungen deutscher Ausgewanderten. — 264 
— Vanitas! vanitatum vanitas! —271 
— Venezianische Epigramme. — 264 
— Die Wahlverwandtschaften. — 272 

=====第770页=====
742 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Warnung (Zyklus "Epigrammatisch"). — 273 
— Wilhelm Meisters Lehrjahre.—  262, 268, 270-72 
— Zahme Xenien.—  259, 266, 268 
Greg, W. R. Agriculture and the Corn Law. Prize  Essay.  Showing  the Injurious Effects of  the 
Corn Law upon Tenant Farmers and Farm Labourers. In: The Three Prize Essays on 
Agriculture and the Corn Law. Manchester-London, 1842.— 454-55, 464 
Grün, K. Bausteine. Darmstadt, 1844.— 74 
— Meine Stellung zur Judenfrage. In: Neue Anekdota. Darmstadt, 1845.— 74 
— Politik und Sozialismus. In: Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform. 
I. Band, Darmstadt, 1845.—255 
— Die preussischen Landtags-Abschiede. Ein Wort zur Zeit. Birwinken, 1846.— 591 
— Die sociale Bewegung in Frankreich und Belgien. Briefe und Studien. Darmstadt, 
1845.—73,  74, 249, 254, 339. 
— Über Goethe vom menschlichen Standpunkte. Darmstadt, 1846.— 249-58, 260-73 
Guizot, F. Histoire generale de la civilisation en Europe, depuis la chute de l'empire romain 
jusqu'à la révolution française. First published in the book: Guizot, F. Cours d'histoire 
moderne. Paris, 1828.—538 
Gülich, G. Geschichtliche Darstellung des Handels, der Gewerbe und des Ackerbaus der 
bedeutendsten  handeltreibenden Staaten unserer Zeit. Bd. 1-5, Jena, 1830-45.— 279, 573 
Harney, G. J. [Speech at the Chartist meeting in London, December 20, 1847]. In: 
The Northern Star No. 531, December 25, 1847.—413-14 
Hegel, G. W. F. Phänomenologie des Geistes. In: Werke, 2-te Aufl., Bd. 2, Berlin, 
1841.—271 
— Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie. Einleitung, Th. III. In: Werke, 
2-te Aufl., Bd. 15, Berlin, 1844.—254 
— Vorlesungen über die Philosophie der  Geschichte.  In: Werke, 2-te Aufl., Bd. 9, Ber­
lin, 1840.—265 
— Wissenschaft der Logik. Bd. III. In: Werke, 2-te Aufl., Bd. 5, Berlin,  1841.—  164 
Heine, H. Atta Troll. Ein Sommernachtstraum. — 306 
— Ritter Olaf (Romanze).— 529 
— Zur Beruhigung. — 4 
Heinzen, K. Die Preußische Büreaukratie . Darmstadt, 1845.— 292 
— Ein "Repräsentant" der Kommunisten. In: Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 84, 
October 21, 1847.—313-20, 322-26, 328-36, 338-40 
— Steckbrief —see Heizen, K. Teutsche Revolution. 
— Teutsche Revolution. Gesammelte Flugschriften. Bern, 1847.— 294, 316, 338 
— [A statement with the editorial title Karl Heinzen und die Kommunisten.] In: 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 77, September 26, 1847.—291, 292, 296-97, 
299-306, 316 
Henneke Knecht (Low German popular song). In: Des Knaben Wunderhom. Alte 
deutsche Lieder, gesammelt von L. A. v. Arnim und Clemens Brentano. Bd. 2, 
Heidelberg, 1808.—313 
Hobbes, Th. Elementa phüosophica de cive. Amsterodami, 1657.— 233 
Hodgskin, Th. Popular Political  Economy.  Four  Lectures  Delivered at  the London Mechanic's 
Institution. London, 1827.—138 

=====第771页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 743 
[D'Holbach, P. H. D.]  Système de  la nature, ou des loix du monde  physique et  du monde moral, 
par M. Mirabaud. Partie 1-2. Londres, 1770.—251 
Hope, G. Agriculture and the Corn Law. Prize Essay. Showing the Injurious Effects of the 
Corn Law upon Tenant Farmers and Farm Labourers. In: The Three Prize Essays on 
Agriculture and the Corn Law, Manchester-London, 1842.— 454, 464 
Jefferson, Th. Memoirs, Correspondence, and Private Papers. Vols. I-IV, London, 
1829.—325 
Juvenalis Satirae.—131 
Köttgen, G. A. [Address to the Brussels Communist Correspondence Committee, 
May 24,  1846.]  —54 
Kriege, H. Antwort an Cattanio. In: Der VoUts-Tribun No. 13, March 28, 1846.—44 
— Antwort an Koch, den Antipfaffen. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 12, March 21, 
1846.—48,  50 
— Antwort an Sollta. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 13, March 28, 1846.—40,41,44,45 
— Hermann Kriege an Harro Hairing. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 10, March 7, 
1846.—4L 46-48, 51 
[Kriege, H.] An die Frauen. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 13, March 28, 1846.—36-40, 43 
— Andreas Dietsch. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 8, February 21, 1846.— 48 
— Antwort [an Alexander Conze]. In: Der Volhs-Tribun No. 14, April 4, 1846.— 
42, 50 
— Arbeit! Arbeit! Arbeit! In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 8, February 21, 1846.—49 
— Durch! In: Der VoUts-Tribun No. 14, Aprii 4, 1846.—49 
— Frühling. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 11, March J4, 1846.— 51 
— Was ist das Proletariat? In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 8, February 21, 1846.— 48 
— Was wir wollen. In: Der Volks-Tribun No. 10, March 7, 1846.— 42, 43, 44, 46 
Lamartine, A. Déclaration de principes. In: Le Bien Public, before October 25, 
1847.—364, 365 
— [Manifesto on the foreign policy of France.] In: Le Bien Public, late October 
1847.—365-66 
— Letter to M. Cabet [Protestation contre le communisme], December 17, 1847. In: Le 
Bien Public, December 19, 1847 and L'Union monarchique, December 23, 
1847.—404, 405 
Lauderdale, J. Recherches sur la nature et l'origine de la richesse publique. Traduit de 
l'anglais, par E. Lagentie de Lavaïsse. Paris. 1808.—114, 123, 156 
Ledru-Rollin, A. [Speech at the Châlon Banquet, December 19, 1847.] In: La Ré­
forme, December 23, 1847.—441 
Le Hardy de Beaulieu, C. Discours prononcé par M. Le Hardy de Beaulieu, à la dernière 
séance de l'Association Belge pour la liberté commerciale. In: Le Débat social No. 32, 
February 6, 1848.—539 
Lemontey, P. E. Influence morale de la division du travail,  considérée  sous le rapport de la 
conservation du gouvernement et de la stabilité des institutions sociales. In: Œuvres 
complètes. T. I, Paris, 1840.—180, 190 

=====第772页=====
744 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
— Raison, folie, chacun son mot; petit cours de morale mis à la  portée  des vieux enfants. 
Paris,  1801.—180 
List, F. Dos nationale System der politischen Oekonomie. Stuttgart und Tübingen, 
1841.—324 
Lucretius, De rerum natura. — 166 
Ludwig I. König von Bayern. Florenz. Distichen über den  Frescogemälden  unter Bogen des 
Münchner Hofgartens. In: Gedichte Ludwigs des Ersten, Königs von Bayern. Dritter 
Theil. München, 1839.—236, 257 
Mably, G. Du gouvernement et des lois de Pologne. In: Collection complète des oeuvres de 
l'abbé de Mably. T. 8, Paris, 1794 à 1795.—334 
McCulloch, J. R. The Principles of Political Economy. The first edition appeared in 
Edinburgh, 1825.—252, 416 
Marseillaise (French revolutionary  song).—11,  238, 265, 392, 623 
Menzel, W. Die deutsche Literatur. Th. MI, Stuttgart, 1828.—259, 273 
Mill, J. St. Essays on Some Unsettled Questions of Political Economy. London, 1844.— 152 
Morse, A. Agriculture and the Corn Law. Prize Essay. Showing the Injurious Effects of the 
Corn Law upon Tenant Farmers and Farm Labourers. In: The Three Prize Essays on 
Agriculture and the Corn Law. Manchester-London, 1842.— 454, 464 
Morus, Thomas. De optimo statu rei publicae deque nova insula Utopia. Louvain, 1516. 
The first English translation was published in  1551.—  254 
Noakes, J. The Right of the Aristocracy to the Soil, Considered. London, 1847.— 307, 308 
O'Connor, F. Speech at the Nottingham Nomination Meeting. July 8, 1846. In: The 
Northern Star No. 452, July 11, 1846: Nottingham Election.—59 
O'Connor, F. [Speeches in the House of Commons, November 29 and December 
10, 1847.] In: The Northern Star, Nos. 528 and 529, December 4 and 11, 1847: 
Parliamentary Review.—446, 448 
— [Petition Concerning the Chartist Land Company.] In: The Northern Star 
No. 531, December 25, 1847.—412, 413 
— To the Editors of the "Nottingham Mercury", the "Non-conformist", the "Dispatch", 
the "Globe", the "Manchester Examiner", and "Lloyds' Trash". In: The Northern Star 
No. 522, October 23, 1847.—359 
— "To the Irish People". In: The Northern Star No. 532, January 1, 1848.—448, 
449 
— To the Members of the National Land Company.— 359 
— [OConnor, F., Esq., (Treasurer) in Account with the National Land Company.] In: 
The Northern Star No. 515, September 4, 1847.—359 
Parny, E. D. Goddam.—273 
Petit. Réponse de M. Petit, ex-receveur des finances à Corbeil, aux calomnies répandues à 
l'occasion de son procès en séparation. [1848].— 469, 470 
Petty, W. Political Arithmetick. In: Several Essays in Political Arithmetick. London, 
1699.—206 

=====第773页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 745 
Proudhon, P.-J. À M. Marx, May 17, 1846. Later published in: Correspondance de 
P.-J. Proudhon précédée  d'une  notice sur P.-J. Proudhon par J.-A. Langlois, 
T. II, Paris, 1875.—72, 73 
— Philosophie der Staatsökonomie oder Notwendigkeit des Elends. Deutsch bearb. von 
Karl Grün, Bd. 1-2, Darmstadt, 1847.—72, 73, 590 
— Qu'est-ce que la propriété? Ou  recherches  sur le principe du droit et du gouvernement. 
Paris,  1841.—260 
— Système des contradictions économiques, ou Philosophie de la misère. T. I-II, Paris, 
1846.—72, 73, 105, 110-22, 123-25, 127-37, 139, 144-60, 162, 165-73, 178-
84, 186-88, 190-99, 200-09, 513, 590 
Quesnay, F. Analyse du Tableau économique. In: Eugène Daire.  Physiocrates.  Quesnay, 
Dupont de Nemours, Mercier de la Rivière, UAbbé Baudeau, Le Trosne, avec une 
introduction sur la doctrine des physiocrates, des commentaires et des notices 
historiques. P. I, Paris, 1846.—161 
— Tableau économique. Remarques sur les variations de la distribution des revenus 
annuels d'une nation. Versailles, 1758.— 161 
Ricardo, D. Des principes de l'économie politique et de  l'impôt.  Traduit de l'anglais par 
F.-S.  Constancio avec des notes explicatives et critiques par J. B. Say. Seconde 
édition. T. I-II. Paris; 1835.—114, 122-25, 128, 135, 151-52, 156, 457 
— On the Principles of Political Economy, and Taxation. London, 1817.—121 
Rossi, P. Cours d'économie politique, année 1836-1837. T. I-II, Paris, 1840-1841.—195, 
421, 434 
Rousseau, J.-J. Considérations sur le gouvernement de  Pologne et  sur sa réformation  projettée. 
In: Collection complète des oeuvres de J.-J. Rousseau, citoyen de Genève. T. 2, Genève, 
1782.—334 
— Lettres à M. Butta-Foco sur la législation de la Corse. Paris, 1765.— 334 
Sadler, M. Th. The Law of Population: A Treatise, in Six Books, in Disproof of the 
Superfecundity of Human Beings, and Developing the Real Principle of Their Increase. 
London, 1830.—153 
Sand, George. Jean Ziska. Episode de la guerre des hussites. Introduction. Bruxelles, 
1843.—212 
Schiller, F. Don Karlos, Infant von Spanien. — 241 
— Der Jüngling am Bache. — 243 
— Die Räuber. Ein Schauspiel. — 17 
Senior, N.W. Political Economy. In: Encyclopaedia Metropolitana, or Universal Dictionary 
of Knowledge. Vol. VI, London, 1836.—152 
Shakespeare, W. Hamlet, Prince of Denmark.— 250 
— König Heinrich der Vierte. In: Shakspeare's dramatische Werke übersetzt von Aug. 
Wilh. v. Schlegel und Ludwig Tieck. Bd. I, Berlin, 1839.—325 
— Liebes Leid und Lust. Ibid., Bd. VIII, Berlin, 1839.—313 
— Troilus und Cressida. Ibid., Bd. XI, Berlin, 1840.—314 
Sheridan, R. B. The School for Scandal. A Comedy in Five Acts.— 213 

=====第774页=====
746 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Sismondi, J. C. L. Simonde de. Études sur l'économie politique. T. II, Bruxelles, 
1837-1838.—114, 135 
Sièyes, E. J. Qu'est-ce que le tiers-état? [Paris], 1789.— 48 
Smith, A. An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Vol. 1, London, 
1776.—122, 128, 147, 196 
— Recherches  sur la nature et les causes  de la  richesse  des nations. Traduction nouvelle, 
avec des notes et observations; par Germain Garnier. T. I, Paris, 1802.— 180 
Steuart, J. Recherche des principes de l'économie politique ou Essai sur la  science  de la police 
intérieure des nations libres... T. II, Paris, 1789. The first English edition appeared in 
London in 1767.—196 
Storch, H. Cours d'économie politique, ou Exposition des principes qui déterminent la 
prospérité des nations. T. I, Paris,  1823.—  117 
Terence. Andria.— 215 
Thompson, W. An Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth Most Conducive 
to Human Happiness; Applied to the Newly Proposed System of Voluntary Equality of 
Wealth. London, 1824.—138 
Thomson, J. Rule, Britannia! (A song in the masque  Alfred,  composed by Thomson, J. 
and Mallet, D.) —22 
Tooke, Th. A History of Prices, and of the State of the Circulation, from 1793 to 1837, 
Preceded by a Brief Sketch of the State of the Corn Trade in the Last Two Centuries. 
Vol. MI, London, 1838.—152 
Ure,  A. Philosophie des manufactures, ou économie industrielle de la fabrication du coton, de 
la laine, du lin et de la soie, avec la description des diverses machines  employées  dans les 
ateliers anglais. Traduit sous les yeux de l'auteur. T. I, Bruxelles, 1836.— 188-89, 
420, 461 
Venedey, J. Preussen und Preussenthum. Mannheim, 1839.— 292 
Villeneuve-Bargemont, A. de. Histoire de l'économie politique, ou Etudes historiques, 
philosophiques et religieuses sur l'économie politique  des peuples anciens et modernes. The 
first edition appeared in Brussels in 1839.—174 
Virgil, Aeneid.—137 
Voltaire. Histoire du Parlement. Paris, 1842.—148 
— L'homme aux quarante écus. In: Oeuvres complètes de Voltaire, T. 45, Gotha, 
1787.—197 
Wade, J. History of the Middle and Working Classes: with a Popular Exposition of the 
Economical and Political Principles..., Third Edition. London, 1835.— 419 
Weerth, G. [Speech at the Congress of Economists in Brussels, September 18, 1847]. 
In: Die Ameise. Vaterländische Blätter für Haus und Leben. Grimma, October 15, 
1847.—284-86 
Weitling, W. Garantien der Harmonie und Freiheit. Vivis, 1842.— 590 

=====第775页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 747 
DOCUMENTS 
Code Napoléon. Edition originale et seule officielle. Paris, 1808.—19 
Constitution votée par la Constituante et  acceptée  par le Roi en 1791. In: Bûchez, P. J. B. 
et Roux, P. C. Histoire parlementaire de la Révolution française, ou Journal 
u?s Assemblées Nationales, depuis 1789 jusqu'en 1815..., 40 vols. Paris, 1834-1838. 
Vol. IL— 364 
Denkschrift, betreffend die Aufhebung der Mahl- und Schlachtsteuer, die Beschränkung der 
Klassensteuer und die Erhebung einer Einkommensteuer. In: Der Erste Vereinigte 
Landtag in Berlin 1847. Th. I, Berlin, 1847.—230 
The Executive Committee to the Chartists of the United Kingdom. November 18, 1847. In: 
The Northern Star No. 526, November 20, 1847.—383-84 
The Fraternal Democrats Assembling in London, to "the Democratic Association for 
Promoting the Fraternity of All Nations", Assembling in Brussels. In: The Northern Star 
No. 529, December 11, 1847—640 
The Fraternal Democrats (Assembling in London), to the Working  Classes  of Great Britain 
and Ireland.  January 3, 1848. In: The Northern Star No. 533, January 8, 1848.— 
466-67,  641 
Karlsbader Protokoll, den 6. August 1819. In: Welcker, C, Wichtige Urkunden für den 
Rechtszustand der deutschen Nation. Mannheim, 1844.— 253 
Der Kongreß an den  Bund,  den 9ten Juni 1847.—602-07, 614 
Patent die ständischen Einrichtungen betreffend; Verordnung über die Bildung des 
Vereinigten Landtages; Verordnung über die periodische Zusammenberufung des 
Vereinigten ständischen Ausschusses und  dessen  Befugnisse; Verordnung  über  die Bildung 
einer ständischen Deputation für das Staats-Schuldenwesen. Vom 3. Februar 1847. In: 
Der Erste Vereinigte Landtag in Berlin 1847. Th. I, Berlin, 1847.—64, 92, 93, 
522 
Das Schlussprotokoll der Wiener Ministerial-Konfereni vom 12. Juni 1834. In: Vorworts/ 
No. 7, January 24, 1844, Supplement. Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher, 1-ste und 
2-te Lieferung, Paris, 1844; Welcker, C, Wichtige Urkunden für den Rechtszustand 
der deutschen Nation, Mannheim, 1844.— 32 
Statuten des Bundes der Kommunisten, den 9ten Juni 1847.—  589,  594-96, 603-05, 608, 
609, 63 2 
Verordnung über die zu bildende Repräsentation des Volks. Vom 22sten Mai 1815. In: 
Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten No. 9 (Ausgegeben 
zu Berlin den 8ten Juni 1815).—26 
Verordnung wegen der künftigen Behandlung des gesammten Staatsschulden-Wesens. Vom 
17. Januar 1820. In: Gesetz-Sammlung für die Königlichen Preussischen Staaten. 
Berlin, 1820.—52 
Die Zentralbehörde an den Bund in Hamburg, den 24ten Juni 1847.— 602 
Address of the Central Authority of the League of the Just to the League. February 1847. In: 
Demokratisches Taschenbuch für 1848, Leipzig, 1847.— 590, 599 
'_'.ri—ISL>rt 

=====第776页=====
748 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
[Chartist Petition on the Return of Uncultivated Lands to  the People].  In: The Northern Star 
No. 531, December 25, 1847: Great Meeting in St. Andrew's  Hall,  Norwich.—413 
Cracow manifesto, February 22, 1846.— 616, 619 
[National Petition for  the People's  Charter], In: The Northern Star No. 531, December 25, 
1847: The  People's  Charter. Public Meeting.—412, 413 
Order of Leopold I, King of the Belgians, for Marx's Expulsion from Belgium, March 2, 
1848.—561,  566 
Report of the Poor Laws Commission, Chairman W. M. Meredith, to the Pennsylvania 
Congress, January 29, 1825. In: Hazard's Register of Pennsylvania, August 16, 
1828.—323 
[Resolution  of the Fraternal  Democrats,  November 15, 1847]. In: The  Northern  Star No. 526, 
November 20, 1847: The Fraternal  Democrats.—  384 
ANONYMOUS ARTICLES AND REPORTS 
PUBLISHED IN PERIODIC EDITIONS 
Allgemeine Zeitung No. 31, January 31, 1848: Von der italienischen Gräme. — 553 
L'Atelier No. 1, October 1847: Les maîtres et les ouvriers en Angleterre. — 310 
Le Débat social 
— No. 32, February 6, 1848: Les Associations  démocratiques. — 537-39 
— ibid., Opinion de M. Cobden sur les dépenses de la guerre et de la marine. — 539 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung No. 70, September 2, 1847: Article "Politische Gänge. 
Achter Gang", reprinted without title from the Rheinischer  Beobachter  No. 206, July 
25, 1847.—220-25, 226-32 
The Globe and Traveller, September 2, 1847: General Suspension of Labour in Cotton 
Factories.—  311 
Journal de Bruxelles, December 14, 1847: [Article on Marx's speech at meeting in 
London on November 29, 1847.]—403 
Journal des Débats, July 13, 15, 18, 19, August 7, 1847 (extracts from the leading 
articles).— 376 
The Manchester Guardian, September 1, 1847: General Suspension of Labour in Cotton 
Factories.—  311 
Le Moniteur Parisien, late January or early February 1848: [Article on Engels' 
expulsion from France.] — 643 
Le Moniteur Universel No. 169, June 18, 1847: Chambre des Pairs.— 214 
— No. 177, June 26, 1847: Chambre des Députés.— 215-16 
Le National, August 12, 1847: [Article with quotations from the Journal du duc du 
Chartre.]  — 376 
— December 1847: [Article with attacks on A. Ledru-Rollin.] — 443 
Niles' Weekly Register, Vol. XXXI (From September 1826 to March 1827). 
Chronicle.—  323 

=====第777页=====
Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 749 
The Northern Star 
— No. 411, September 27, 1845: Commemoration of the  French  Republic— 8-13 
— No. 508, July 17, 1847: France.— 376 
— No. 51u, September 4, 1847: General Suspension of Labour in Cotton Fac­
tories.—  311 
— No. 521, October 16, 1847: [Reports on the Chartist Meetings.J—307 
— No. 522, October 23, 1847: [Announcement of the publication of The Right 
of the Aristocracy to the  Soil,  Considered. By John  Noakes.]  — 307 
— No. 523, October 30, 1847: Grand Demonstration in CJ-ebration of the  People's 
Triumphs at the Recent General  Elections.—  362,  363 
— ibid.: France.— 364 
— ibid.: The Press-Gang.— 360 
— No. 528, December 4, 1847: The Polish Revolution.—Important Public 
Meeting.—403 
— No. 534, January 15, 1848: The  People's  Charter.— Important public meeting.— 
473-75 
La Réforme 
— September 10, 1847: [Le banquet de Strasbourg...]— 377-78 
— September 14, 1847: Banquet de Bar-le-Duc—377 
— October 1, 1847: Banquet réformiste du département du Loiret. — 377 
— October 3, 1847: Le Banquet de  Coulommiers.—  378 
— October 17, 1847: [Article on the banquet at Cosne.] — 378 
— October 27, 1847: Programme de M. Lamartine. —366 
— November 9, 1847: Banquet de Lille.— 385 
— ibid.: [Article on press polemic over democrats' banquet at Lille.] — 386 
— November 10, 1847: [Report on the banquet at  Lille.]  —393-96 
— November 13, 1847: Paris, 12 Novembre.— 386 
— ibid.: Banquet de Valenciennes.—  386 
— November 14, 1847: Paris, 13 Novembre. [Polemic with the National in 
connection with the banquet at Lille.]—387 
— November 16, 1847: On lit dans le "National".— 387 
— November 24, 1847: Banquet de Dijon.— 397 
— November 25, 1847: Banquet de Dijon.— 397-400 
— December 15, 1847: Les derniers  banquets.—  Castres,  Montpellier. — 442 
— December 17, 1847: Paris, 16 Décembre [Polemic with the National in connec­
tion with the banquets at Lille and Montpellier.] —406, 440-43 
— December 18, 1847: Paris, 17  Décembre  [Polemic with the National in connection 
with the banquets at Lille and Montpellier.] — 406 
— December 19, 1847: Paris, 18  Décembre  [Polemic with the National in connection 
with the banquet campaign.]—443 
— December 20, 1847: Paris, 19 Décembre [Polemic with the National in 
connection with the banquet campaign.] — 443 
— December 21, 1847: Paris, 20  Décembre  [Polemic with the National in connection 
with the banquet campaign.] — 406-07 
— January 2 and 3, 1848: Soumission d'Abd-el-Kader.—471 
— January 5, 1848: [La manière dont la soumission d'Abd-el-Kader....] — 471 
— January 6, 1848: Paris, 5 Janvier [On Réponse de M. Petit... aux calomnies....]. — 
469 
— January 7, 1848: [Excerpt from verbatim report on sitting of Chamber of 
Deputies on the M. Petit  case.]  — 471 
— January 13, 1848: Vénalité des  charges.—  469 

=====第778页=====
750 Index of Quoted and Mentioned Literature 
Rheinischer Beobachter No. 18, January 18, 1846 [On Trier'sche Zeitung mentioning 
Marx as a contributor.]—34 
— No. 206, July 25, 1847: Politische Gänge. Achter Gang.— 220-25, 226-32 
Rhein- und Mosel-Zeitung, before March 20, 1846 [Correspondence on forthcoming 
publication of Marx's Poverty of Philosophy, Proudhon's Philosophy of Poverty, 
etc.]—72 
La Riforma No. 14, February 11, 1848: "Lucca, Leppiano nella Gazzetta d'Augusta..." — 
553, 554 
The Times No. 19,659, September 20, 1847: Free Trade Congress in Brussels.— 285 
Trier'sche Zeitung No. 84, March 25, 1847: Berlin, den 20. März. [On forthcoming 
publication of Marx's Poverty of  Philosophy.]  — 72-74 
L'Union monarchique, December 23, 1847: France.—405 

=====第779页=====
INDEX OF PERIODICALS 
Aftonbladet — a daily published in Stockholm from 1830; in the 19th century was a 
liberal-bourgeois newspaper.— 605 
Allgemeine Zeitung —a German conservative daily newspaper, founded in 1798; 
published in Augsburg from 1810 to 1882.—337, 392, 553 
L'Atelier, organe spécial de la classe laborieuse, rédigé par des ouvriers exclusivement — a 
monthly of the French artisans and workers who were influenced by the ideas of 
Christian socialism; published in Paris from 1840 to 1850.— 310, 311 
Berliner politisches Wochenblatt — a conservative weekly published from 1831 to 1841, 
sponsored and patronised by Frederick William IV of Prussia.— 520 
Le Bien Public—a moderate republican newspaper published from 1843 to 1848 in 
Mâcon, and from May 1848 in Paris; one of its founders was Alphonse Lamar­
tine.— 366, 405 
Le Constitutionnel — a daily newspaper; in the 1840s it was the mouthpiece of the 
moderate Orleanists, published in Paris from 1815 to 1817, and from 1819 to 
1866.—  378, 386, 439, 470 
Le Débat social, organe de la démocratie — a weekly newspaper of the Belgian radical 
republicans, published in Brussels from 1844 to 1849.— 537-39, 646, 648 
Débats — see Journal des Débats politiques et littéraires. 
Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher — a German-language annual published in Paris and 
edited by Arnold Ruge and Karl Marx. Only one double issue appeared in 
February 1844. It carried a few works by Marx and Engels. — 74, 122, 254, 255, 
331 
Deutsche-Brüsseler-Zeitung —a newspaper founded by German political emigrants in 
Brussels; published from January 1847 to February 1848. From September 1847 
Marx and Engels regularly contributed to the newspaper which, under their 
influence, became the organ of revolutionary communist propaganda.— 74, 95, 
220, 234, 235, 241, 249, 258, 261, 265, 269, 273, 278, 291, 298, 306, 312, 313, 
315-16,  318, 321, 324, 334, 339, 374, 390, 392, 403, 405, 408, 411, 449, 468, 529, 
536, 539, 544, 555, 558, 560, 623, 626, 639, 643, 644 

=====第780页=====
752 Index of Periodicals 
The Economist — a weekly journal on problems of economics and politics, published in 
London from  1843.—  282 
L'Epoque, journal complet et universel —a newspaper of the French moderate conser­
vatives, published in Paris from 1845 to 1847.— 215-17 
Frankfurter Gelehrte Anzeigen —a literary journal, disseminated the ideas of the 
progressive Sturm und Drang movement, published in Frankfort on the Main 
from 1772 to 1790.— 263 
The Globe — see The Globe and Traveller. 
The Globe and Traveller — a daily newspaper published from 1803 to 1921 in London; 
up to 1866 it was the mouthpiece of the Whigs, later of the Conservatives.— 64, 
311, 359 
L'Indépendance Belge. Journal mondial d'informations politiques et littéraires —a liberal 
daily founded in Brussels in  1831.—  537 
Journal de Bruxelles. Politique, Literature et Commerce—a conservative newspaper, 
mouthpiece of Catholic circles, published from 1820.— 403 
Journal des Débats  politiques et  littéraires  — a daily founded in Paris in 1879; organ of the 
government during the July monarchy.— 64, 376, 392, 438, 439, 546, 623 
Kommunistische Zeitschrift — press organ of the Communist League; the only issue, a 
specimen number, came out at the beginning of September 1847 in London.— 
597, 603, 613 
The League. The Exponent of the Principles of Free Trade and the Organ of the National 
Anti-Corn Law League — a journal of the English Free Traders, published in 
London between 1843 and 1846.— 283 
Leipziger Allgemeine Zeitung —a daily published from 1837; in the early 1840s ex­
pressed radical views, was suppressed by the government in Prussia as from Jan­
uary and in Saxony as from April  1843.—  236 
Lloyd's Weekly London Newspaper — a liberal weekly newspaper founded in 1842; was 
published under this title from 1843 to 1918.— 359 
Manchester Examiner—a daily newspaper of the English radical bourgeoisie; pub­
lished under this title from January 1846 to October 1848, and then under var­
ious titles up to 1894.— 359 
The Manchester Guardian—a daily newspaper of the Free Traders, founded in 
Manchester in 1821; organ of the Liberal Party from the middle of the 19th 
century.—283,  311 
Le Moniteur Parisien — a semi-official evening daily of the 1840s.— 643 
Le National — a newspaper published in Paris from 1830 to 1851; mouthpiece of the 
moderate republicans in the 1840s.—62, 64, 214, 376, 377, 380, 385-87, 406-08 
438-44, 470, 472, 558 
Niles' Weekly Register—an American journal dealing with politics, economy, history 
and geography; published in Baltimore from 1811 to 1849.— 323 

=====第781页=====
Index of Periodicals 753 
Nonconformist — a newspaper of the English radical bourgeoisie, published under this 
title in London from 1841 to 1879.— 359 
The Northern Star—Central Organ of the Chartists, published weekly from 1837 to 
1852,  first in Leeds, then in London; founded and edited by Feargus O'Connor; 
one of its editors was George Harney; Engels contributed to it from 1843 to 
1850.—8,  13, 15, 21, 27, 33, 52, 53, 57, 59, 63, 64, 70, 71,219, 290, 307, 308, 311, 
358-60, 362, 366, 382, 387, 391-92, 396, 401, 403, 409, 410, 412, 413, 444, 
448, 466, 472, 559, 501, 616, 623, 642, 647 
The Nottingham Mercury — mouthpiece of the English radical bourgeoisie, published 
in Nottingham from April 1841 to September 1852.— 359 
Österreichischer Beobachter  — unofficial newspaper of the Austrian Court, published in 
Vienna in 1810-48; from April 1, 1848 took the title of  Österreichische  Zeitung and 
became oppositional to the emperor.— 623 
The People's  Journal — a radical weekly published in London from 1846 to 1849.— 59 
Le Peuple Souverain — a republican newspaper published in Marseilles in the 1840s.— 
626 
La Presse  — ? ^ailv published in Paris from 1836; was the organ of the circles opposing 
the July monarchy in the 1840s.— 214-15, 310, 311, 438, 471 
La Réforme —a daily published in Paris from 1843 to 1850, mouthpiece of the 
republican democrats and petty-bourgeois socialists.— 62, 64, 76, 309, 360, 363, 
365, 366, 377, 380, 384-87, 392, 393, 397, 406-08, 414, 438-44, 447, 467, 471-72, 
475, 518, 558, 564, 568, 623, 626, 646, 658 
Register — see Niles' Weekly Register. 
Rheinischer  Beobachter  — a conservative daily published in Cologne from 1844 to the 
beginning of 1848.— 34, 220, 221, 225, 226-29, 233 
Rheinische Jahrbücher zur gesellschaftlichen Reform —a journal of German "true 
socialists", published by Hermann Püttmann, only two volumes appeared, the 
first in Darmstadt in August 1845, the second at Bellevue on the German-Swiss 
border at the end of 1846.—14, 254 
Rheinische Zeitung für Politik, Handel und Gewerbe —a daily founded on January 1, 1842 
as an organ of the oppositional Rhine bourgeoisie, published up to March 31, 1843 
in Cologne. Marx was its editor-in-chief from October 15, 1842 to March 17, 1843, 
and the newspaper acquired a distinct revolutionary-democratic character, which 
became the reason for its suppression; Engels was one of its contributors.— 72, 73, 
626 
Rhein- und Mosel-Zeitung —a Catholic daily published in Koblenz from 1831 to 
1850.—72 
La Riforma—a democratic newspaper published in Lucca from November 1847 to 
the beginning of 1850.— 553-55 
Le Siècle —a daily newspaper, in the 1840s it was an oppositional organ which 
demanded electoral and other reforms; published in Paris from 1836 to 1939.— 
238, 378, 386, 387, 439 
Star—see The Northern Sear. 

=====第782页=====
754 Index of Periodicals 
The Sun — a liberal daily newspaper published in London from 1798 to 1876.— 471 
The Times — a conservative daily founded in London in 1785.— 64, 285, 392, 623 
Trier'sche Zeitung — a daily founded in 1757; published under this title since 1815; in 
the early 1840s it was a radical organ, later influenced by "true socialism".— 34, 
72-74,  227, 300, 302 
L'Union.  Bulletin des ouvriers rédigé et publié par eux-mêmes — a monthly published in 
Paris from December 1843 to September 1846 by a group of workers influenced by 
Saint-Simon's ideas.— 8 
L'Union monarchique — a Catholic daily newspaper of monarchist trend, published in 
Paris in 1847 and 1848.— 405 
Der Volks-Tribun. Organ des Jungen Amerika — a weekly newspaper founded by the 
German "true socialists" in New York, published from January 5 to December 31, 
1846 and edited by Hermann Kriege.— 35, 36, 40-44, 46, 48, 49, 50, 593 
The Weekly Dispatch — a newspaper of the English radical bourgeoisie, published 
under this title in London from 1801 to 1928.— 359 
Das Westphälische Dampfboot — a monthly of the German "true socialists"  ; published 
and edited by Otto Luning in Bielefeld from January 1845 to December 1846, and 
in Paderborn from January 1847 to March 1848. It carried some works by Marx 
and Engels.— 73, 300 

=====第783页=====
SUBJECT INDEX 
A 
Absolute monarchy — 65, 75, 86, 94, 211, 
233-34, 317-319, 321, 328, 329, 346, 
355, 465, 486, 495, 529, 540, 542 
— origin —320, 326 
— and the working-class struggle — 
322, 356 
— in France — 161 
— in Prussia and Germany — 78, 92, 
326, 331-33, 356, 465, 511 
Abstraction — 117, 119,162-64,166,179, 
197, 253, 289, 337 
See also Categories 
Africa — 399, 410 
Agrarian reformers—see National reform­
ers, National Reform Association 
Agrarian question —  42,43,  358,413,518 
Agriculture — 42, 78, 81, 84, 96, 133, 
186, 187, 193, 199-206, 279, 288, 296, 
304, 322, 327, 349-54, 505, 509 
Algeria, Algiers — 399, 410, 471 
Alienation — 113, 511 
Alsace — 420, 424 
America — 179, 185, 252, 399, 410, 485, 
574, 627, 629 
American War of Independence, 1775-83 
— 293 
Amsterdam — 575 
Analysis — 163, 184 
Ancient Egypt — 487 
Ancient Greece — 4, 18, 158, 258, 325 
Ancient Rome—4, 18, 325, 368, 485, 
487 Ancient world — 503 
Antagonism — 212, 353, 389, 499, 504, 
516, 519 
See also Contradictions 
Anti-Corn Law League — 277, 283, 287, 
333, 454, 457 
Antwerp — 575 
Appropriation — 495, 498-50 
Aristocracy 
— feudal  —27,  28, 94, 95, 345 
— its ideologists — 355, 507-08 
— its struggle with bourgeoisie— 27, 
28, 30, 58, 94, 217, 232, 345, 355, 
362, 493, 494 
— in bourgeois society — 58, 59, 71, 
217, 389-90 
— and proletariat — 507-08 
— landed — 58, 217, 307, 358, 362, 
453, 508 
— financial — 61 
— in Austria — 531, 533 
— inEngland — 20,21,58,59,81,85, 
201, 202, 217, 358, 389-90,507-08, 
526 
— in France — 27, 61, 217, 507 
— in Germany — 27, 30, 94, 508 
— in India — 628 
— in Poland — 551 
See also Nobility 
Asia—179, 399, 410, 628 
Atheism — 20, 46, 292 
Austria, Austrian Empire 
— in the Middle Ages — 368, 531, 
533 

=====第784页=====
756 Subject Index 
— during the French Revolution and 
the Napoleonic wars — 530, 533, 
554 
— in 1815-47 — 373, 530-36, 542 
— economic development—552 '^4 
— prospects of revolution — 26, 2^' 
535 
— and the national question — 535, 
536 
— and the oppressed Slav peoples — 
535, 536 
— foreign policy -- 552 
— and other European states — 25, 
27, 71, 368, 371-72, 373-74, 520, 
523, 531-32, 33-36, 540-43, 
552-55 
See also Austro-Swiss wars of the 14th 
century, Bohemia, Bourgeoisie in Austria, 
Hungary, Polish question, Working class 
in Austria 
Austro-Swiss wars of the 14th century— 
367-69,  371 
B 
Babouvism — 5, 321, 514, 576 
Baden — 78 
Banks, bankers — 52, 57, 61, 80, 85, 86, 
90, 144, 218, 227, 231, 235-40, 351, 
375, 422, 542 
Basle — 524 
Belgium —  16,41,  74, 275, 331, 355, 390, 
520, 521, 527, 530, 537, 538, 546, 
559-68,  569, 581-82, 592, 630, 640, 
641 
See also Antwerp, Bourgeoisie in  Bel­
gium,  Brussels, Workers' movement in 
Belgium 
Berne — 524 
Blanquism — 125, 252, 277-78 
Bohemia — 244, 332, 441, 533-35 
Bolton — 207, 208 
Book-printing— 342, 404, 411 
Bourgeoisie, middle  classes  — 28-30, 85-90, 
176, 342, 350, 482-90 
— origin and formation—79, 185, 
211, 212, 268, 337, 341-42, 345-
46, 485-86, 488 
— role in developing productive 
forces — 372, 487-89 — role in fighting feudalism — 28, 29, 
174, 211, 328, 329-33, 337, 345, 
482, 489, 503 
— economic and political domination 
— 28-30, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81, 83, 
84-86,  89, 90, 92, 94, 185, 196, 
248-49,  268, 319, 342-43, 345-46, 
449, 486, 488-89, 495, 508, 519, 
527-28 
— liberal — 28, 29, 59, 70, 221, 225, 
333, 356 
— and proletariat — 6, 29, 94-95, 
175-77,  212, 296, 319, 331-33, 343-
47, 352, 356-57, 372, 388, 482-90, 
497-98,  504-06 
— and peasantry — 83-84, 525, 527 
— and nobility — 28, 65, 71, 82, 84, 
89, 90, 507-08 
— and petty bourgeoisie — 79, 82, 83, 
87-90,  267, 509, 512 
— rural —82, 89, 201, 322 
— as a brake on historical develop­
ment — 29, 218, 489-90 
— its national limitation — 6 
See also Bourgeoisie in Austria, 
Bourgeoisie in Belgium, Bourgeoisie in 
England,  Bourgeoisie in France, 
Bourgeoisie in Germany, Bourgeoisie in 
Prussia, Bourgeoisie in Russia, Bourgeois 
revolution, Class struggle, Proletarian re­
volution 
Bourgeoisie in Austria—530, 531, 532, 
535 
Bourgeoisie in Belgium — 31, 331, 521, 
527, 537, 546, 559, 569, 570 
Bourgeoisie in England — 29, 78, 80, 86, 
121, 196, 208, 217, 218, 322, 389-90, 
391-92,  461, 522, 526, 532 
Bourgeoisie in France — 5, 7, 17, 18, 19, 
24, 25, 27, 31,69, 77, 78, 80-82, 85, 86, 
161, 218, 239, 319, 333, 364,  380-81, 
385, 387, 467 
Bourgeoisie in Germany — 17, 18, 20, 24, 
25, 30, 32, 76, 78-95, 245, 248, 294, 
297, 326, 327, 332,334,356,465, 510, 
511, 519, 521-22, 530, 543-44 
Bourgeoisie in Prussia — 53, 65,  66-71,  80, 
88, 89, 90, 511, 523 
Bourgeoisie in Russia — 527 
Bourgeois revolution — 71, 212, 319, 
323-33,  335, 485, 558 

=====第785页=====
Subject Index 757 
— as a prerequisite of a proletarian 
revolution — 333, 519, 543-44 
See also English revolution of the 17th 
century, French Revolution, July revolu­
tion of 1830 in France, Revolution of 
1848 in France, Revolution of 1848 in 
Italian states, Revolutions of 1848 in 
Europe 
Bourgeois society— 212, 246, 355, 485, 
495, 497-500 
— rise  —211,  322-23, 337, 355, 485, 
489 
— its economic foundations—137, 
143, 166, 183, 194, 322-23, 324, 
345-46,  487-90 
— class structure—159, 204, 212, 
345-46,  352, 389, 485, 491-92, 
494-95,  505-06, 509, 515, 539-40, 
551, 633 
— and class struggle — 352, 440, 485, 
491-95,  539-40 
— and the state—322, 324, 326, 328, 
489, 505, 511-12 
— inevitability of its revolutionary 
transformation — 356, 389, 436, 
489-90, 493, 495-96, 515 
See also Bourgeoisie, Capitalist mode of 
production, Civil society, Working class 
Brazil— 167 
Bremen — 86 
Brussels — 275, 276 
Brussels Democratic Association—391, 
402, 537-39, 560, 566, 567, 624-26, 
640-42 
Brussels Communist Correspondence Com­
mittee— 54 
Bureaucracy— 16, 30, 62, 65, 69, 77, 79, 
84, 86-92, 94, 222-27, 230, 294, 318, 
333, 512, 522-23 
Burghers in Germany—  31, 85, 326-27, 
345-46,  368, 485, 493, 500, 508-09 
Burgundian wars of the 15th century— 
367-68 
C 
Capital 
— as a social power — 346, 381, 499 
— as accumulated labour— 122, 125, 
132, 346, 434, 499 
— and labour — 143, 178, 185, 186, 
211, 288, 310, 318, 362, 377, 428-29, 430, 432-33, 458-59, 463, 490, 
498-99,  500, 514, 573 
— and bourgeoisie  — 84, 346, 490, 
495-96 
— and proletariat — 433, 490, 499 
— productive — 428-33, 435, 459-60 
— industrial — 196 
— concentration of—80, 86, 188, 
296, 303, 429, 459, 509 
— accumulation of—122, 124, 159, 
185, 295, 429, 459 
— competition of capitals — 82, 199, 
281, 288, 429 
— fixed — 122, 206, 431 
— circulating — 122, 431 
— profit on — 99, 199, 232, 341, 430 
— interest on — 199, 203, 204, 429 
— outflow and inflow of, in various 
branches of production— 134, 157 
— investment of, in land — 200, 
203-05,  455 
Capitalist mode of production — 122, 123, 
162, 167, 174, 175, 193, 197, 199,202, 
203, 209, 319, 348, 488, 500 
Carbonari — 31 
Castes — 179, 184 
Categories 
— as a theoretical expression of real 
relations — 162, 165, 176-78, 179, 
197, 202 
— and dialectics—165, 168-70, 178 
— critique of idealist conceptions of 
— 4, 162-72, 179, 185, 192, 197 
— economic— 164-68, 171, 172, 183, 
193, 195 
See also Gause and effect, Chance and 
necessity, Essence and appearance, Fo-,m 
and content, Quality and quantity 
Catholicism — 41, 172, 173, 218, 309, 
331, 521, 546 
See also Jesuits 
Cause and effect — 21, 169, 180, 197, 354 
Censorship — 28, 32, 73, 75, 77 
Chance and necessity— 167, 292, 294, 295, 
304, 349, 435 
Chartism — 3, 7, 331, 333, 389, 392,442, 
446 
— as the first independent political 
party of the working class — 210, 
324, 517 

=====第786页=====
758 Subject Index 
— uprising of 1842 — 7 
— and bourgeois and petty-bourgeois 
radicals — 361 
— and the Anti-Corn Law campaign 
— 285, 452 
— Land Cooperative Society — 358-
60 
— and the Irish question — 445-50 
— and Owenism — 516 
— before 1848 — 58-59, 307-08, 361-
63, 383-84, 435-37, 521 
See also Fraternal Democrats (society), 
National Charter Association, People's 
Charter 
Chemistry — 204, 489 
China — 345, 485, 628 
Christianity — 45-46, 48, 49, 163, 164, 
231, 258, 403, 503, 508, 510, 527, 630, 
631 
See also Catholicism, Essenes, Protestan­
tism 
Church—217-18, 283, 508, 525 
See also Clergy, Religion 
Civil society—3, 100, 175, 253, 346 
Civil list—233, 328 
Classes, the 
— general characteristics — 66-70, 85, 
99-102,  211-12, 322, 330, 337, 341, 
342-43,  345, 348-49, 389-90, 485-
86, 495,  499-501,  573, 577, 629 
— formation of—175, 178, 185-86, 
211-12,  3-^, 389-90, 493, 515, 
533 
— and division of labour — 353 
— abolition of, as a result of pro­
letariat's victory —  95, 102, 212, 
353, 389, 505-06 
See also Bourgeoisie, Peasantry, Working 
class 
Class struggle, the 
— general characteristics — 85, 133, 
159, 174-78, 210-12, 330-33, 352-
53, 391-92, 436, 482-84, 493, 497-
98, 505-06, 633 
— and history of society—133, 
174-75,  482-84, 495, 503 
— and mode of production—133, 
144, 159, 174-78, 212, 293, 389-90, 
436, 498, 514-15, 627-28, 633 
— political nature of —211,212,292, 
306, 493, 507 — revolution as the apex of—212, 
290, 482-84, 495 
— between bourgeoisie and feudal 
aristocracy — 28, 94, 174, 211, 332, 
337-38,  350, 465, 485, 493 
— between bourgeoisie and prole­
tariat—29, 56, 58, 94, 126, 175-78, 
210-12,  222, 296, 303-04, 332, 352, 
356, 389-90, 415, 435-36, 440,463, 
465, 485, 492-93, 495, 497-98, 
505-06,  628, 633 
— internationalist character of pro­
letariat's class struggle — 6, 290, 
351-52,  389-90, 392, 629 
— its disappearance in communist 
society — 134, 212, 332, 352-53, 
389, 435, 503, 505-06, 545, 633 
See also Classes 
Clergy, the 
— in feudal society—16, 19, 254, 
333, 363, 372, 508, 512, 522, 528 
— and bourgeoisie — 436, 487, 522, 
528 
— in Belgium — 537 
— in England — 218, 283 
— in France — 218 
— in Germany—16, 31, 263, 333, 
512, 522 
— in Ireland — 309 
— in Italy — 372 
— in Spain — 22 
Code Napoléon — 19 
Colonies, colonial  policy—21,  23, 179, 185 
Commerce, trade 
— prerequisites for development of 
— 485,  627 
— demand as material content of— 
574 
— and development of the productive 
forces — 86, 87, 113, 119, 489 
— in the Middle Ages—149, 320, 
328, 575 
— period of prosperity —  69, 86, 160 
— world — 79, 119, 150 167,304,355 
— trade crises —82, 160, 286, 347, 
489, 490, 492, 632 
— in money — 79, 150, 351 
— maritime — 86, 185 
— small — 491, 494 
— wholesale — 90 
— trade legislation — 89 
See also Market 

=====第787页=====
Subject Index 759 
Commodity— 122, 124, 125, 127-30,132, 
134, 144, 145, 148,  150-51,  156, 289-
90, 343, 415, 419, 436, 490 
Commune (medieval) — 320, 485, 486 
Communism  (theory)  — 96-103, 331, 341-
57, 481-519, 577-78 
— as a revolutionary science — 178, 
303 
— as a teaching on the emancipation 
of the working class — 101, 304 
— objective historical prerequisites — 
101, 178, 303-04, 321, 496, 498, 
538 
— and German philosophy — 45 
— and religion — 7, 47, 102, 503-04 
— and doctrinairism — 178, 303, 337 
See also Communist League, Communist 
movement, Communist party, Communist 
society 
Communist League, the — 481 
— theoretical, programmatic princi­
ples of— 174-78, 212, 220-34, 292-
98, 331-32, 341-57, 477-519, 585-
88 
— aims of—303-04, 356, 497-98, 
504-06,518-19 
— congresses of — 355-57, 481, 586-
87, 589-600 
— and petty-bourgeois and bourgeois 
democrats — 76, 77, 291-99, 305-
06, 355, 356, 402-03, 518-19, 
537-39 
See also Brussels Communist Correspon­
dence Committee, Communist party, 
League of the Just 
Communist movement, the 
— as an expression of proletariat's 
interests — 76-77, 179, 303 
— as vanguard of democratic move­
ment — 5, 7, 14, 63, 299, 356-57, 
406-07,  440, 518 
— ultimate aim — 96 
— and religion — 45 
— and bourgeoisie — 356-57 
— in Europe — 50, 481 
— in Belgium — 356 
— in England — 7, 14, 55, 321, 356, 
538 
— in France — 55, 63, 76, 321, 356, 
407-08,  438, 443-44, 518, 538 
— in Germany — 55, 60, 75, 76, 220, 
291, 292, 321, 356-57, 519, 528, 
538 — in Poland — 518 
— in Switzerland — 356, 518 
— in USA — 41, 43, 321, 356 
See also Egalitarian communism, Press, 
Socialism, Utopian communism 
Communist party—  35, 55, 75, 220, 225, 
306 
— as most revolutionary party — 
220-21,  497, 518, 519 
— as true exponent of proletariat's 
interests — 76, 177, 225, 355, 493, 
497, 498 
— struggle against alien ideology — 
77, 291, 292, 295,  300-301,  306, 
355-56 
— and other workers' parties — 497-
98, 518 
— and democratic parties — 63, 298-
99, 356, 518 
— its attitude to bourgeoisie  — 332, 
356, 519 
See also Communist League 
Communist society— 96, 353-54, 500, 505-
06 
— material preconditions for estab­
lishment—178, 194, 212, 319-20, 
347-48,  351, 436, 498, 500 
— proletariat's political domination as 
a condition for transition to — 299 
— abolition of private and establish­
ment of public property — 96, 101, 
102, 295, 337, 348, 351-52, 441, 
498-500, 505, 633 
— as a classless society—134, 212, 
353, 389, 506, 519, 545, 633 
— elimination of political power 
proper —211-12, 505-06, 516 
— planning of production — 337, 
352-54, 505 
— distribution and consumption — 
133, 348, 352-54, 434 
— and personal property — 499, 500 
— and physical labour — 436 
— abolition of the antitheses between 
town and country — 351, 353-54, 
505, 516 
— social evolution as a form of de­
velopment of — 212 
— and personality — 96, 101, 351, 
353, 498-500 
— and the national question—102-
03, 354, 388, 503 

=====第788页=====
760 Subject Index 
— and the status of women—102, 
354, 502 
— and the famity —102, 354, 501, 
502, 516 
— and the education of children — 
102, 299, 351, 353, 500, 501, 505 
— and science — 352 
— and religion — 46, 49, 102, 354 
— criticism of idealist and Utopian 
conceptions of—39, 45, 142-45, 
194, 229, 230, 500, 515-16 
See also Period of transition from capital­
ism to communism, Political domination 
of the proletariat 
Competition 
— in bourgeois society—79, 81, 
82-84,  99-101,  159, 176, 183, 184, 
191-93,  194, 195, 209, 240, 278, 
284-86,  289, 295-96, 319, 322, 341, 
346-48,  388, 464, 489, 503 
— of capitals —82, 200, 281, 288, 429 
— and price—199-200, 202-203, 462 
— and wages—160, 206-207, 329, 
415, 435, 453 
— and profit—156, 206-07 
— and petty bourgeoisie — 491, 509 
— between workers and employers — 
423-24 
— among workers — 143, 195, 211, 
309, 350, 358, 422, 424, 428-30, 
459, 493, 496 
— and living standard of the pro­
letariat —  99-101,  160, 341, 344, 
423-24, 492 
— abolition of, as a condition for 
emancipation of proletariat — 101, 
295, 344, 348, 496 
— between nations — 22, 65, 66, 74, 
81, 87, 90, 167, 218, 276, 280, 281, 
286, 288, 388, 416, 436, 464 
Consciousness — 96, 251 
See also Reason, Social consciousness, 
Thought 
Constantinople—179 
Constitution, Constitutional question—56, 
294, 324, 356 
— in Belgium — 527 
— in England  —22,  59, 526 
— in France  —5,  6, 7, 18, 22, 270, 
363, 364, 526 
— in Germany  —25,  26, 27, 30, 32, 
71, 76, 79 — in Prussia — 23, 26, 52, 53,  64-71, 
292, 520-22 
— in Switzerland — 367 
— in USA — 335, 356 
Consumption — 113, 118-19, 130, 131, 
133, 137, 158, 196, 284, 286,459,464 
Continental blockade — 22, 65, 80 
Contradictions 
— as essence of dialectical develop­
ment — 133, 168, 493, 515 
— criticism of anti-dialectical under­
standing of—164, 168-73 
— solution of—256 
— in capitalist production—427, 
432, 509 
— class — 56, 126, 133,144,159,175, 
176-78,  212, 229, 248-49, 310,330, 
331, 362, 389, 391-92, 435, 485, 
498, 503, 506, 513-15 
— between the ruling class and nation 
— 85 
See also Unity and struggle of  opposites 
Convention— 19, 234, 265, 442 
Corn Laws, the — 28-29, 65, 207, 217, 
322, 333, 452-58, 463, 466, 521, 546 
See also Anti-Corn Law League 
Corvée labour — 83, 84, 227, 294 
Cosmopolitism — 3, 7, 8, 398-400, 410-
11,454,488,543 
Cost of production — 81, 88, 90, 118, 119, 
125, 128, 132, 134,149, 150, 197-203, 
217, 284-85, 343, 415, 422, 430, 436, 
455, 462, 491 
Country, the — 78, 174, 179, 345, 351, 
353-54, 488, 505, 516, 533 
See also Town 
Cracow insurrection of 1846 — 518, 545-
46, 630, 644 
Credit — 162, 167, 168, 173, 196-99 
Crises — 137, 320 
— industrial — 137, 307-09, 322,420, 
424, 429, 432, 462, 509 
— commercial — 69, 82, 160, 286, 
347, 489, 490, 492, 632 
— of the world market — 303 
Criticism — 409 
Crusades — 487, 574 
Customs — 31, 87 
Customs Union (Zollverein) (in Germany) 
— 66, 80, 87, 92, 266 
Cynicism — 125 

=====第789页=====
Subject Index 761 
D 
Deism — 248, 254 
Demand and supply— 118, 132, 137, 460, 
574 
— and wages — 225, 415 
— of labour — 130, 209-10, 285, 329, 
433 
Democracy,  democrats  — 3, 6, 367-68, 389, 
399, 409,  410-11,  440, 442, 519, 549 
— and liberal bourgeoisie — 29, 59, 
331, 377, 378-79, 385-86, 450 
— and petty bourgeoisie — 355-56 
— and democratic movement — 32, 
71, 295, 368, 391-92 
— and working class — 29, 103, 295, 
299, 350-51,  368, 372, 504 
— in Belgium — 392, 408, 537 
— in England —7,26-27,59,71,310, 
358, 361-63, 383-84, 389, 391-92, 
399, 408, 410, 412-13, 447, 449, 
450 
— in France — 4, 62, 71, 371, 376-79, 
380, 385-87, 399, 408-09,  410-11, 
439-42,  443-44 
— in Germany — 26, 32, 71, 255, 269, 
287, 291-99, 306, 389, 391, 392, 
408, 411 
— in Norway — 367-68 
— in Poland — 389, 549 
— in Switzerland — 367-68, 373-74 
— in USA — 356 
Denmark — 275, 542 
Despotism, tyranny—16-19, 21-27, 71, 
368, 392, 410, 427 
Dialectics— 165, 167, 170, 181, 182, 196, 
257 
See also Antagonism, Categories, Con­
tradictions, Negation of the negation, 
Opposition, Unity and struggle of oppo-
sites 
Dictatorship of the proletariat — see Politi­
cal domination of the proletariat (idea of 
dictatorship of proletariat) 
Distribution — 126, 143, 197, 289 
— in bourgeois society—184, 305, 
329 
— under communism — 348, 352 
Division of labour — 111, 118, 120, 127, 
143, 145, 158, 159, 162, 166, 172, 
178-91,  288, 319, 330, 342, 353-54, 420, 422, 427, 431, 435, 459, 464,485, 
490, 491, 509 
Dramaturgy— 18, 213 
Dynastic opposition (in France) — 62, 331, 
375, 376-79, 385-87, 406, 439-40, 
443-44 
E 
East and West — 488, 574 
Economic laws — 123, 124, 132-35, 147, 
162, 170, 176, 181, 202, 203, 290, 296, 
336, 440, 458, 462, 463 
Economy, economic relations — 44, 120, 
124, 131, 133, 138, 143, 146, 147, 
149-51,  165, 166, 168-73, 176-78, 184, 
191, 209, 211, 226, 228-29, 255, 280, 
322^23,  328-29, 330, 336-37, 343, 514 
See also Production relations 
Education — 17, 81, 94, 101, 102, 299-
300, 351, 354, 364, 427, 500, 501, 
500-02,  503, 505, 525 
Egalitarian communism—512, 514 
Egoism—41,  46, 193, 239 
Egypt— 167, 470, 487, 528 
Emigration — 6-7, 11, 14 
England 
— under absolutism — 196, 322 
— the glorious revolution of 1688 — 
17, 196, 322 
— industrial revolution — 341 
— monopoly in trade and industry — 
23 
— in the 19th century (first half) — 
58-59,  78, 285 
— industry and trade — 65, 87, 90, 
187, 208, 210, 308-09 
— railways — 398, 410, 533 
— agriculture, agricultural relations 
— 187, 201-02, 322 
— finances, budget — 196, 218, 229 
— parliamentary system — 213, 233, 
446, 526 
— election reform movement — 29, 
31-32,  380 
— foreign policy — 21, 438 
— prospects of a social (proletarian) 
revolution — 352, 389, 391-92 
See also Anti-Corn Law League, 
Bourgeoisie in  England,  Chartism,  Col­
onies, English revolution of the 17th 
century, Free Trade movement, Manches-

=====第790页=====
762 Subject Index 
ter, Peterloo, Poor laws, Reform Bill of 
1832 (in England), Ten Hours Bill, 
Tory, Trade unions, Workers' movement 
in Englazd, Working class in England, 
Young England 
English revolution of the 17th century — 17, 
233, 321, 322, 410 
Entail — 345 
Eauality — 5, 7, 19, 21, 28-29, 228, 346, 
442,51 i 
See also Proudhon's doctrine 
Essence — 32, 94 
Essence and appearance — 177 
Essenes — 50 
Estates,  orders  — 28, 31, 84, 132, 228, 326, 
328, 332-33, 337, 482-87, 494, 508-09 
Europe — 4, 5, 6, 21, 24, 26, 71, 179, 391, 
481, 522, 554, 574-75, 627 
Exchange— 79, 112-14, 118, 119, 124, 
126, 130, 131, 134, 137, 142-47, 150, 
151, 185, 187, 196, 209, 296, 304, 
319, 351, 352, 463, 464, 485, 486, 
489 
Exchange (exchangeable, marketable) value 
— 111-22, 124, 130-32, 134, 135, 145, 
156, 199 
F 
Factory, automatic workshop — 83, 87, 89, 
99, 101, 102, 159, 173, 182-85, 188, 
190, 202, 322, 342, 347, 491 
See also Industry 
Family — 41, 102, 194, 267, 323, 354, 
429, 453, 487, 494, 501, 502, 508, 509, 
516 
Federal Diet (Germany) — 15, 16, 25, 32, 
55 
Federation, federal state 
— as an ideal of the petty-bourgeois 
democrats  —318,  328-29, 336 
Federative Act (Germany) — 26, 27 
Feuerbach's philosophy— 73,  250-51,  256, 
258, 292, 293 
Feudalism — 29, 78, 101, 174, 179, 194, 
322, 349, 485, 489, 503, 508, 523, 532 
— and the inception of capitalist rela­
tions — 174, 211, 337, 485, 489 
— disintegration and collapse of — 
19-20,  78, 174, 192, 211, 267-68, 
319, 337, 485, 531, 533-34 
See also Entail, Guilds, Middle Ages, Property, Serf peasants, Town, Trade 
Fichte's doctrine—18 
Flanders—16 
Form and content— 177 
Fourier's doctrine— 209, 256, 429, 514, 
516, 576 
France 
— territory, population — 3, 4, 7, 16, 
20, 275, 276, 350, 509 
— peculiarities of historical develop­
ment of — 71, 486, 526 
— in the Middle Ages — 85, 116, 148 
295, 369, 410, 411, 486, 530 
— during absolutism — 70, 151, 160-
61, 218-19, 232, 333, 410 
— the Thermidor reaction and the 
Directory — 19, 370 
— during the Consulate and the First 
Empire — 22-27, 80 
— during the Restoration (1815-30) 
— 22, 25, 30, 506, 546 
— the July monarchy (1830-48) — 32, 
77, 78, 218, 238, 331, 364, 365, 
375-76,  520, 525, 526 
— economy and trade — 30, 69, 78, 
187, 192, 532 
— agriculture — 78 
— home policy, domestic situation — 
76, 214-17, 218-19, 331-32, 381-82, 
450, 521 
— September laws on the press (1835) 
— 331 
— political crisis of 1846-47 — 213-
17, 218-19, 375, 381-82, 438, 439, 
520 
— the election reform movement — 
62, 63, 76, 219, 376-82, 385-87, 
406, 409, 438-44, 520, 526 
— corruption of the ruling classes — 
213-17,  381-82, 438 
— parliament —61-62, 128, 213-17, 
266, 438, 439 
— prospects of revolution —  352,381, 
385-86 
— foreign policy — 365-66 
— and England —20, 91, 438 
— and Germany and Prussia—19, 
23, 25, 26, 27, 52, 78, 80, 81, 
269-70, 411 
— and other European states — 20, 
22, 23, 31, 366, 371-72 

=====第791页=====
Subject Index 763 
See alio Alsace, Babouvism, Blanquism, 
Bourgeoisie, Burgundian wars of the 15th 
century, Code Napoléon, French 
philosophy, French Revolution, July 
revolution of 1830 in France, Lorraine, 
Napoleonic wars, Paris, Revolution of 
1848 in France, Working  class  in France 
Fraternal Democrats (society)—384, 391, 
392, 466-67, 590, 647 
Freedom — 29, 117-19, 263, 304, 344, 
463, 498-99, 502, 505, 512, 515, 
528-29 
See also Freedom of the press, Man, 
Political freedoms 
Freedom of the  press  — 17, 25, 26, 28, 29, 
32, 56, 66, 7!, 76, 218, 225, 228, 232, 
252-53,  511, 545 
See also Publicity 
Free Trade movement—284, 288-90, 
450 «3 
— and the bourgeois political econ­
omy—94, 274-78, 288-90, 416, 
449-64, 539 
— as the principle of industrial 
bourgeoisie — 58, 275, 384, 450-
58, 461, 539 
— and the working class — 58, 94, 
280-81,  283-86, 287-88, ?,VS 
See also Protectionism 
French philosophy, the — 399, 410, 510 
See also Holbach's philosophy, Rous­
seau's philosophy, Voltairianism 
French Revolution, the — 3, 19, 27, 218, 
232-34, 253-54, 262, 263, 333, 546 
— character and specific traits of-r- 4. 
5, 319, 498, 547 
— historical significance of — 3, 319, 
322, 41Ï 
— stages of— 18, 65, 232 
— political groupings — 4, 5, 18, 270, 
376, 545 
— and the masses — 18, 233-34, 319, 
371 
— Le Comité de salut public (Com­
mittee of Public Safety) — 335 
— counter-revolutionary movement 
— 27, 232-34, 333 
— influence over Germany—15, 18, 
24, 25, 27, 510 
— and counter-revolutionary Euro­
pean powers — 5, 24, 530, 534 
— and Switzerland — 371-72 See also Convention, Girondists, Jacobins, 
Vendée, Wars of revolutionary France at 
the end of 18th century 
G 
Geneva — 524 
German Confederation, 1815-66 — 25, 26, 
27, 32, 55 
German Democratic Society in Paris — 656 
German philosophy— 3, 4, 18, 46, 73, 76, 
77, 109, 161, 510 
See also Feuerbach's philosophy, Fichte's 
doctrine, Hegel's philosophy, Kantianism, 
Young Hegelianism 
German Workers' Club in Paris — 654, 658 
German Workers' Educational Society (Lon­
don) — 590, 630 
German Workers'  Society  in Brussels — 403, 
560, 581, 626, 630 
Germany — 43 Î 
— peculiarities of its historical de­
velopment—17-18, 76, 78-79, 84-
85, 259, 267, 326-27, 331-32, 512, 
538, 543-44 
— in antiquity — 367, 368, 373, 482 
— in the Middle Ages — 15, 17, 80, 
84-85,  179, 326-27, 530-31 
— survivals of feudalism—16, 17, 
19-20,  23, 30, 79, 81, 83, 85, 94-95, 
332, 333, 335, 511, 519, 530-31 
— during the French Revolution and 
the Napoleonic wars — 18-28, 78, 
80, 81, 259, 510* 
— between 1815 and early 1848 — 
23-26,  28, 30-33,  78-95, 520-22 
— industry—17, 19, 30, 78,  80-81, 
83-85,  87-89,  91-93,  188, 276, 279, 
293, 296, 326-27, 332, 531 
— agriculture—17, 78-79, 81-82, 83, 
201 
— home and foreign trade—17, 66, 
78, 86, 87,  90-93,  326-32, 531 
— protectionist policy — 84, 87, 89, 
90-94,  232 
— estates, classes—17, 84, 92, 248-
49, 332 
— state and political system — 78, 79, 
294, 326-27, 328, 332, 511-12, 519 
— disunity and problems of unifica­
tion—24, 31,  32-33,  85, 293, 335, 
552, 553 

=====第792页=====
764 Subject Index 
— political parties — 78 
— bourgeois liberal movement—20-
21, 24-26,  30-33,  66, 69, 71, 77, 
220-25,  292-94, 299, 332-33, 356, 
510-11,  519-22 
— Hambach festival, 1832 — 332 
— youth, students — 20, 24, 30, 31, 
32 
— education—17, 81, 427, 512 
— religion and church — 20, 248 
— foreign policy— 16, 84, 90, 535-36 
— and oppression of Poland — 389, 
391-92,  535, 551-52 
— and other European states—15, 
16, 23, 24, 27, 411, 551-52 
— prospects of revolution — 85, 86, 
293, 352, 512, 519, 522, 538, 543, 
551-52,  554 
See also Austria, Bourgeoisie in Ger­
many, Burghers in Germany, Customs 
Union, Federal Diet, Federative Act, 
German Confederation, German philos­
ophy, Holy Roman Empire of the Ger­
man Nation, Peasant War in Germany, 
Prussia, Rhine province, Saxony,  Work­
ing class in Germany, Württemberg, 
Young Germany 
Girondists—18 
God, gods— 20, 171, 174, 231, 235, 241-
42, 257 
Good and evil — 167, 169, 172, 180 
Gothic — 487 
Greco-Persian wars, 500-449 B.C.—368, 
371 
Guilds, fraternities,  corporations  — 88, 101, 
174, 179, 184, 186, 190, 192,267,270, 
276, 322, 330, 345, 348-49, 355 
H 
Hamburg — 86 
Hanseatic towns — 80, 85 
Heathens — 258 
Hegel's philosophy — 18, 265 
— dialectical method of — 163-67, 
169, 256 
— and Feuerbach's philosophy — 
256, 258 
Historiography— 326 
History— 50, 133, 164, 170, 174, 178, 
179, 192, 204, 253, 319, 337, 345,494, 
507, 521, 530 Hobbes' philosophy — 233 
Holbach's philosophy — 254, 256 
Holy Alliance, the — 22, 31, 93, 320 
Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation 
— 15, 17, 19, 271 
Humanism — 6, 48, 125, 256, 270, 292, 
293 
Hungary — 7, 343, 527, 531, 535, 542 
I 
Ideas— 162, 165,  170-71,  177, 179, 184, 
196, 197, 501, 504 
Illuminati — 303 
Immigration — 43, 167, 309 
India — 167, 185, 187, 345, 422, 628 
Industrial revolution — 341, 343-47, 485 
Industry 
— under feudalism — 191, 320, 328, 
489 
— domestic — 174 
— and protectionist policy — 80, 93, 
279, 280, 287, 288, 328, 465, 573 
— large-scale —79, 81, 87-89, 99, 
127, 137, 138, 143, 183, 187, 207, 
210-11,  279, 287-88, 296, 328, 342, 
345-47,  349, 351-53, 355, 429, 
432-33,  465, 485, 486 
— contradictions within it under 
bourgeois mode of production — 
135, 515 
— and property relations—159, 
303-04, 322-23 
— and trade — 113, 167 
— small-scale — 138, 279, 429, 509, 
573 
— and peasantry — 83 
— and bourgeoisie — 79, 81, 486, 
493, 494, 524, 527 
— ousting of skilled workers and use 
of women's and children's labour 
— 420, 422, 427, 433, 491, 501, 
502 
— during the period of transition 
from capitalism to communism and 
under communism — 299, 304, 
305, 322,  350-51,  352-53, 505 
See also Guilds, Industrial revolution, 
Machines, Manufacture, Production cycle, 
Trade 

=====第793页=====
Subject Index 765 
Interest, interests 
— and private property — 388, 487 
— and social and economic progress 
— 85, 368, 493, 527, 542-43 
— opposite, and their elimination — 
6, 24, 28, 83-84, 87, 175, 211, 368, 
388-90 
— identity of — 390, 550 
— alleged harmony of, in bourgeois 
society — 144, 362, 514 
— general, particular and private --
6, 19, 79, 95, 175, 187, 210. i56, 
372, 379, 388-90, 489, 497, 525, 
534, 552 
— material, economic — 76 83, 93, 
211, 493 
— political — 31 350 
— national — 6, 84-85, 368, 372, 489, 
534, 542-43, 550, 552 
— social under communism — 348 
— and law — 89, 90, 494 
— their expression in ideology and 
theory — 333, 511-12 
— estate — 79, 333 
— class —76,83-85,95, 175,211,489 
— party — 75, 76, 78, 333, 390 
— during transition from capitalism 
to communism — 299 
— in communist society — 348, 388 
Internationalism, proletarian — 6, 390,497 
Inventions — 156, 159, 187, 158, 204, 
207, 284, 341, 346 
Iran — 528 
Ireland—13,  200, 286, 307-09, 425, 
445-49,  466, 482, 549 
Irish Confederation — 549 
Italy 
— in the Middle Ages  —205,  486, 
530 
— industry and trade —  523,  531, 
533, 541 
— home policy — 371-72 
— Austrian rule in — 520, 523 
— in the first half of the 19th century 
— 31, 371-72, 520, 532-34, 541, 
554 
— struggle for national liberation and 
reunification  —31,  371-72, 523, 
534, 540 
— revolution in Naples, 1799 — 371-
72 — revolution of 1820-21 —  31, 371-
72, 540 
— revolutionary events of 1831 — 31, 
366, 371-72, 520, 532, 533 
— liberal reforms in Papal states — 
521-23 
— revolutionary upsurge in 1847 — 
520-21,  523, 528, 532 
— and other European states — 366, 
371-72 
See ako Carbonari, Kingdom of the Two 
Sicilies, Lombardy, Papal  ~-.ates,  Fv. dmont 
(Kingdom of Sardinia), Revolution of 
1848 in Italian states, Rome 
J 
Jack Cade's rebellion, 1450—295 
Jacobins, Jacobin dictatorship, the — 4, 5, 
18, 19, 319, 335, 372, 376, 386, 403, 
545 
Jacquerie (France, 1358) — 295 
Jesuits — 524, 525 
Jews — 158, 237, 239, 243, 276 
July revolution of 1830 in France— 29, 31, 
52, 266, 371, 507,  520-21,  534, 540 
Junkers — see Nobility 
K 
Kantianism — 17, 182, 259 
Kingdom of the Two Sicilies (Naples)— 
371, 522, 539-40 
L 
Labour 
— as the source of value — 120, 127, 
132, 149, 150 
— simple and compound— 127, 182, 
185, 422, 427, 429 
— machine.— 79, 345 
— as an element of bourgeois produc­
tion — 82, 346 
— and capital — 133, 428, 463, 490, 
500, 573 
— struggle between labour and capi­
tal — 58, 178, 288, 310, 435, 440, 
515 
— as a commodity in bourgeois socie­
ty — 130, 341, 343, 344, 415, 433, 
436, 462, 491 

=====第794页=====
766 Subject Index 
— mental, as an article of trade in 
bourgeois society—436 
— child —422, 427, 491, 505 
— women's — 422, 491 
— in the period of transition from 
capitalism to communism — 295, 
350, 351, 377 
— under communism — 499 
See also Manual labour, Productivity of 
labour, Wage labour 
Labour power— 125, 127, 130, 285 
Labour time—127, 134-35, 143, 150, 
154, 203 
Landed property 
— as a basis of feudal system — 519 
— and industrial capital — 201, 203, 
322 
— and bourgeois revolution—66, 
322, 546 
— bourgeois — 89, 173, 199-202 
— evolution under capitalism — 89, 
90, 173, 197-99, 200-03, 205, 322 
— tendency to abolish and nationalise 
it under capitalism — 203, 322 
— preconditions for its transforma­
tion into social property — 352-
53, 505 
— small-peasant — 173, 322, 352 
— critique of bourgeois and petty-
bourgeois theories — 42, 197-99, 
201-03,  322 
— in England — 201-02, 322 
— in Germany — 201, 519 
— in Poland — 546 
— in Scotland — 173 
— in USA — 42 
Law — 31, 81, 83, 88-90, 119, 147, 150, 
164, 177, 184-85, 194, 197, 209, 253, 
494, 501, 504, 511, 577 
See also Legislation, Penal  code,  Right  of 
inheritance 
League of the Just, the — 589-600 
Legal procedure — 66, 88, 228 
Legislation 
— as expression of economic relations 
— 28, 147, 209, 346 
— and classes — 58, 61, 79, 80, 87-90, 
346, 467, 488-89, 493, 524-25 
— in England — 58, 187, 209, 213, 
456 
— in France — 61, 213, 218 
— in Prussia — 65, 228 
— in Switzerland — 524-25 Legitimism — 20, 22, 24, 31, 77, 331, 508 
Levant, the — 187 
Liberalism 
— bourgeois— 26, 28, 29, 59, 221-25, 
333, 356, 377, 379, 386, 523 
— and democracy — 29, 59, 384-86, 
450 
— in Belgium — 331, 521, 546 
— in England — 384, 450 
— in France  —22,  331, 377, 379, 
380-82,  385-87 
— in Germany and Prussia — 26, 
30-33,  66, 70, 221-25, 230, 243, 
292, 299, 331-33, 356, 511, 519, 
521, 522 
— in Italy — 522 
See also Free Trade movement 
Lisbon — 575 
Literature 
— world — 488 
— English — 7, 59 
— French — 397 
— German—18, 75, 244-45,  256-61, 
268-69,  270-71,  273-74, 312-16, 
332, 337, 339 
See also Poetry 
Logic—116, 158, 163-67, 169, 193, 
196 
Logos — 163 
Lombardy — 523, 533, 534, 542 
Lorraine — 16 
Lumpen proletariat — 83, 246, 494 
M 
Machiavellianism—254, 262 
Machines — 66, 79, 87,  99-101-,  127, 130, 
158, 167, 176, 178, 182-85, 186-89, 
200, 202, 207- 09, 279, 284, 287, 288, 
304, 341, 342, 345, 346, 353, 389-90, 
399, 419, 422-23, 426-32,  459-61, 
489-92,  500, 533, 627-28 
Malthusianism — 416, 426, 428 
Man,  individual, personality 
— nature and essence of — 43, 45, 76, 
147, 257, 265-66, 271, 415, 487, 
510-11 
— and Nature — 111, 197, 201-02 
— and society—155 
— and production—111-13, 125, 
127, 166, 170, 174-75, 186-87, 188-
90, 319-20, 347 

=====第795页=====
Subject Index 767 
— and private property — 498-99 
— and division of labour — 127, 180, 
187, 188-90, 304-05, 353 
— and classes — 330-31 
— in feudal society — 486 
— in bourgeois society—133, 176, 
442, 463, 486-87, 498-500 
— in communist society — 348, 351, 
353, 498-500, 505 
— and freedom — 29, 463, 498-500 
— as seen by Feuerbach — 249-50 
Manual labour— 158, 188, 206, 279, 280, 
287-88,  344-45, 423, 455, 459, 461, 
491, 532-34 
Manchester — 208 
Manufacture— 79, 84, 87, 88, 179, 185-
87, 327, 342, 343-45, 348-49, 352-53, 
355, 426, 532-33 
Market — 66, 69, 394 
— and industrial development— 173, 
186, 351 
— of labour power — 431 
— domestic and foreign — 218 
— continental — 24, 65, 275 
— world — 90, 187, 210, 217, 303, 
322, 327, 332, 345, 351, 388, 421, 
422, 429, 436, 465 
— struggle of the bourgeoisie for 
markets — 20, 22, 24, 25, 66-69, 
90, 173,  21 :  all 
— cotton — 311 
Masses— 3, 5, 71, 75, 222, 226, 232-33, 
294, 350, 440 
— as decisive force in revolutions — 
17, 19, 71, 232-34, S\0, 337 
Materialism — 254, 255, 407 
Means of produciion— 99, 118, 130, 135-
37, 173, 183, 186, 187, 193, 197, 199, 
200, 205-06, 211, 343-45, 348, 350, 
436, 440, 459, 461, 482, 488, 489, 
492, 502, 504, 509, 577 
Mechanics — 146, 187, 188, 207 
Mediterranean Sea — 179 
Metaphysics — 18, 49, 161, 163-65, 169, 
197, 546 
Method — 161, 164-66 
Mexico — 527 
Middle Ages, the — 82, 94, 113, 133, 182, 
185, 190, 231, 252,267,270,271,326, 
327, 330, 343, 348-49, 482, 522 
Mode of production — 144, 146, 166, 170, 174, 296, 304, 342, 348,441,486,487, 
504 
See also Capitalist mode of production, 
Communist society, Feudalism, Primitive 
communism, Production relations, Pro­
ductive forces 
Monarchy — 325-28, 345, 531 
— origin — 325-27, 345, 540 
— with estate representation — 26, 
66, 71, 486 
— constitutional —66, 78, 317, 321-
24, 333, 345, 540, 542 
— and bourgeoisie  —28,  30, 80, 87-
90, 318-19, 330 
See also Absolute monarchy 
Money 
— as a social relation — 145 
— as a measure of commodity value 
— 123 
— as the universal agent of exchange 
— 117, 145, 151 
— paper — 57, 150 
— metal — 57, 145-50, 252 
— in bourgeois society — 28, 29, 79, 
238, 271, 345, 421, 427, 436, 500 
— and political power —  320-21,  324 
— its abolition under communism — 
351 
Morality — 169, 194, 247, 259, 272, 301, 
317-18,  325, 494, 504 
See also Good and evil 
Mystic,  mysticism  — 50, 153, 158, 197, 
199, 258, 512 
Mythology— 157-60, 214, 313-15, 335-39 
N 
Naples — see Kingdom of the Two Sicilies 
Napoleonic wars — 19-28, 65, 320, 549, 
554 
See also Wars of revolutionary France at 
the end of 18th century 
Nation -3, 372, 465, 488, 503 
— under communism—102, 354, 
388, 503 
See also National question 
National Charter Association — 383 
Nationalism — 3, 6, 411, 488-89, 534, 
560, 562 
National question — 3, 4, 389, 390, 392, 
402-03,  449, 503, 540, 544-49, 551-52 
National reformers, National Reform As-

=====第796页=====
768 Subject Index 
sociation (USA) — 41, 42, 43, 48, 324, 
356 
Nature — 111, 137, 158, 174, 176, 187, 
197, 201, 202, 252, 315, 432-34, 464, 
489, 501, 577 
See also Society 
Needs — 86, 111, 112, 117-18, 132, 133, 
143, 150, 170, 173, 188, 190,192,193, 
200, 225-26, 347, 352-54, 487, 511 
Negation—163-64, 172, 182, 187, 192, 
195,317 
Negation of the negation, the — 163, 164, 
195 
Netherlands, the — 22, 116, 179, 186, 286, 
399, 410, 575 
New York — 43 
Nobility 
— in feudal society — 16, 17, 79, 81, 
82, 84-86, 326-28, 343, 486, 494 
— and peasantry — 79, 83, 84 
— and monarchy — 86. 235, 486 
— in bourgeois society — 79, 82, 83, 
89, 345-46, 528 
— in Germany — 16, 19, 79-88, 294, 
327, 511 
— in Italy — 371, 523, 533 
— in Prussia — 65, 66, 69-70, 82, 83, 
86, 89-90, 522 
Norway — 83, 367, 368, 381 
O 
Objects of prime necessity— 133, 147, 217, 
226, 453 
Officials — see Bureaucracy 
Opposition — 84, 114, 116, 133, 193, 208 
Orleanists — 378, 380, 386, 387 
Overproduction—136, 143, 284, 290, 
352, 458, 489, 490, 509, 632 
Owen's system — 209, 514, 517, 576 
P 
Palestine —- 205 
Pantheism — 264 
Papal states — 205, 371, 521, 522, 523, 
532 
Paris—5,  8, 13, 18, 62, 63, 376, 380, 
381, 407 
Party, parties 
— social basis of — 546 
— and sects — 30-31 — inter-party struggle — 47, 294 
— leaders of — 7, 76 
— and revolution—101, 349 
— progressive — 64, 71, 521, 525 
— revolutionary — 13, 29, 30, 220 
— democratic — 63, 71, 355-57 
— reactionary — 202 
— bourgeois — 86 
See also Chartism, Communist party, 
Democracy, Girondists, Jacobins, Legiti­
mism,  Orleanists, Proletarian party, Tory 
Pauperism — 43, 323, 324, 434, 495, 509 
Peasantry, peasants — 44 
— in feudal society — 79, 83, 84, 186, 
533 
— and commodity relations — 533 
— expropriation of — 187 
— free — 527, 549 
— role in bourgeois revolutions— 
498 
— in capitalist society — 353 
— conservatism of — 19, 83, 295, 494 
— small — 83, 233, 294-95, 420-425 
— and bourgeoisie — 82-83,488,494, 
525, 527 
— and working class — 294-95, 350, 
491, 494, 525 
— and proletarian revolution — 525 
See also Serf peasants 
Peasant War in Germany, 1524-25—27, 
295, 326 
Penal Code — 209 
People's Charter—14, 29, 59, 308, 361, 
414, 466, 647 
Period of transition from capitalism to 
communism—101,  102, 104, 295-96, 
299, 350-51,  355, 377-78, 505-06 
See Political domination of the proletariat 
Personal property — 498-500 
Peterloo  — 23, 29 
Petty bourgeoisie—7, 17, 81, 84-86, 178, 
339, 356 
— and bourgeoisie —79-80, 82, 88-
90, 267, 509, 512 
— and working class — 82, 294-95, 
350, 380, 509, 512 
Philistinism — 242, 245, 248, 253, 259, 
264, 266, 273, 302, 313, 316-17, 512, 
519 
Philosophy—163, 164, 178, 179, 181, 
255-56,  293, 317, 503, 511 
See also Deism, Dialectics, French phi-

=====第797页=====
Subject Index 769 
losophy, German philosophy, Logos, 
Materialism, Metaphysics, Mystic, Panthe­
ism, Sensationism 
Physics— 146 
Piedmont (Kingdom of Sardinia)—523, 
540 
Poetry— 240-42, 247-49 
— German—17, 20, 236, 243-44, 
255, 259, 272-73 
— of the "true socialists"—235-49, 
252, 265-66, 272-73 
Poland — 7, 22, 23, 31, 71,276, 334, 343, 
388, 389, 391, 392, 527, 535, 550, 
545-52 
See also Cracow insurrection of 1846, 
Polish insurrection of 1830-31, Polish 
question 
Polish insurrection of 1830-31 — 388, 
391-92,  532, 549, 550 
Polish question — 388-89, 391-92, 518, 
545-52 
Political domination of the proletariat (idea 
of dictatorship cf proletariat) 
— historical m.\.c:-At y and inevitability 
of winning political power by pro­
letariat—299, 319, 440, 495, 
497-98,  502, 504-05 
— as condition of proletariat's libera­
tion — 467 
— tasks of — 299, 351, 372, 504-05 
— and democracy —294-95, 299, 
350,351,368 
See also Classes, Class struggle, Period  of 
transition from capitalism to communism, 
Proletarian revolution 
Political economy, bourgeois 
— representatives of, as theoreticians 
of the class of the bourgeoisie — 
121, 125, 178 
— attitude of, to the working-class 
struggle  —206-11,  289-90, 329 
— classical—115, 120-25, 127-28, 
129, 135-36, 138, 146-47, 150, 
151, 156, 159-60, 174-76, 179, 
180, 186-87, 198-202, 289-90,319, 
329, 330, 337, 457, 462, 574 
— and vulgarisation tendencies — 
115, 120, 123-24, 129,136-37, 150, 
152-54, 156, 157, 160, 176-77, 
180, 181, 190, 196, 203, 252, 274-
77, 282-83, 419 
— humanistic school — 177 — romantic trend — 176 
— philanthropic school — 177 
See also Malthusianism, Free Trade 
movement 
Political freedoms—  31, 218, 225, 228, 
Political power— 28, 29, 81, 82, 212, 294, 
318-21,  345-46, 381, 440, 505, 524 
See also Political domination of the 
proletariat, State 
Political  rights  — 32, 233, 254, 255, 362, 
393 
Political system— 78, 102, 174, 222, 489 
Politics 
— as an expression of economic rela­
tions — 147, 319, 320, 327, 381, 
546-49 
— and social relations — 4, 5, 7, 17, 
75-76,  212, 292, 294-95, 321, 
324,328-31,  364, 380,381,546 
See also Class struggle 
Poor laws (England) — 434, 453 
Portugal— 28, 31, 179, 575 
Practice — see Theory and practice 
Press, the 
— partisanship  of—291,  294-95, 
297-99 
— bourgeois — 360 
— aristocratic —294-95, 392 
— democratic —64, 294-95, 298, 311, 
387, 392, 407-08, 439-42 
— proletarian and communist — 35, 
54, 59, 220, 221, 294, 295, 297, 
303, 306, 337, 576 
— in England — 59, 225, 331, 360 
— in France — 64, 82, 225, 387 
— in Germany—17, 19, 64, 253, 
294-95,  297 
— in Italy — 523 
See also Censorship, Freedom of the  press 
Price, prices 
— as a result of the fluctuation of 
demand and supply—115, 116, 
123, 125, 126, 132, 134, 148-50, 
156, 208, 459 
— and competition — 199-200, 202, 
343, 462 
— and costs of commodity production 
— 490-91 
— of industrial products and luxuries 
. — 137, 199, 200, 207, 217, 345 

=====第798页=====
770 Subject Index 
— of agricultural products—199, 
202, 204, 453, 455 
— of staple goods—133, 160, 217, 
225 
— and wages—126, 129, 160, 206, 
208, 217 
— market — 132, 199, 204, 208, 210, 
419 
Primitive communism—482 
Principles—5, 86, 162, 165, 170, 303, 
337 
Private property 
— as an embodiment of bourgeois 
production relations—197, 337, 
489 
— and productive forces — 304, 348-
49, 489, 490 
— historically transient character of 
forms of — 348-49, 498, 501 
— in the primitive and patriarchal 
family — 355 
— feudal form  of—323,  332, 337, 
338, 489 
— cooperative, or guild — 322, 348 
— based on producer's own labour — 
345, 498 
— transformation of feudal into 
bourgeois — 322-23, 337-38, 344, 
348, 498, 545-49 
— bourgeois — 296, 318-19, 348-49, 
388, 489, 498, 500 
— and law — 501 
— historical inevitability of abolition 
of — 95, 96, 295, 304-05, 322-23, 
332, 344, 348-49, 352-54, 388, 494, 
498, 500, 501 
— abolition of, in course of pro­
letarian revolution — 295,  350-51, 
504-05 
— as seen by bourgeois and petty-
bourgeois reformists — 44, 405, 
501-02 
Privilege— 16, 18, 28, 29, 101, 174, 181, 
191, 216, 218, 318, 320,345, 466, 467 
Production 
— development of—118, 349, 352-
55, 488 
— under feudalism — 337 
— under capitalism — 491 
— forms and methods of — 144, 492 
— and division of labour — 111 
— and classes — 132, 348-49, 503 — of means of subsistence—111, 
143, 166, 184, 488, 500, 503, 505 
— of social relations—162, 165 
— and needs—111, 118,352 
— intellectual  —488,  500, 503 
— in communist society — 352-54, 
505 
See also Cost of production, Means of 
production, Mode of production, Pro­
duction relations, Productive forces 
Production cycle— 137, 426, 458, 462 
Production relations 
— as a social form of productive 
forces—162, 166, 174-75, 193, 
197, 577 
— contradiction between productive 
forces and production relations—165, 
174-75,212,348-49,489 
— and classes — 506 
— criticism of anti-historical approach 
to understanding of—162, 173, 
174, 202, 319-20 
— bourgeois — 160, 162, 175, 176, 
194, 197, 202, 319-20, 337, 436, 
489, 499, 502, 504, 509, 513 
Productive forces — 99, 119, 137, 152-60, 
183, 184, 290, 489 
— prerequisites for development 
of—132,  159, 174, 176 
— and mode of production—166, 
348-49 
— and production relations as social 
form of — 166, 174-76, 193, 577 
— and superstructure — 170 
— contradiction between productive 
forces and production relations— 
165, 174-75, 212, 348-49, 489, 490 
— and condition of the working class 
— 422, 423, 428, 432-33, 459 
— development of, as a material con­
dition of transition to communism 
— 212, 303, 349, 352, 490, 495 
Productivity of labour — 158, 419 
Profit— 124, 154-57, 185, 191, 199-202, 
205-07,  225, 232, 305, 329, 341, 454, 
457 
Progress  — 345, 367, 390, 527, 528 
— and class struggle — 85, 132 
— and national interests — 542 
— in science and technology—152, 
293 
— in industry—137, 493, 495-96 

=====第799页=====
Subject Index 771 
— and bourgeois society — 29, 81, 
168, 217-18, 372, 526, 540, 569 
— under communism — 212, 352 
"Progressive conservatives" in  France  — 
214, 439 
Proletarian party— 3, 5,  210-11,  222-25, 
324, 493, 498, 519 
See also Communist party 
Proletarian revolution, the—519 
— historical inevitability of—94-95, 
319, 372, 495-96, 528-29, 599 
— as a means of the proletariat's 
liberation—178, 290, 345, 436, 
504, 515 
— as a means of liquidating social 
oppression — 294, 381 
— material prerequisites  of—101, 
178, 319-20, 346-47, 349-50, 352, 
436,  465, 515 
— as the peak of class struggle be­
tween bourgeoisie and proletariat 
— 212,  290, 495 
— international character of—352, 
388, 629 
— and possibility of a peaceful way of 
development—101,  349 
Proletariat—see Working  class 
Property, ownership— 100, 119, 197, 261, 
296, 322-23, 348-49, 436,  498-501, 
546, 577 
See also Appropriation, Landed property, 
Personal  property,  Private  property,  Social 
property, State property 
Prostitution—250, 354, 501, 502 
Protectionism—92, 276-83, 287-89, 464, 
465, 573, 628 
See also Protective tariffs 
Protective tariffs, duties—6, 65,69, 80,84, 
87, 90-94, 196, 232, 266, 267, 279, 
280, 284, 287, 288, 290, 324, 450, 
454, 465 
Protestantism—218, 631 
Proudhon's doctrine 
— as ideology of petty bourgeoisie — 
191 
— philosophical foundations of— 
109, 166, 178, 195 
— and Hegelian philosophy—109, 
161, 165, 167, 168, 169 
— distortion of dialectics—119, 163, 
172, 182, 183, 195 — elements of mysticism—153, 158, 
173, 197, 199 
— theory of the person-society— 
152-57,  159, 171 
— teaching on human reason  ("social 
genius")—171-73 
— view on the origin of authority— 
184-86 
— view on man—118, 119, 152-54, 
159, 192, 193, 197 
— political economy —  73, 74, 109, 
110, 147, 151, 158, 161, 162, 164, 
165, 168, 178-79 
— and classical political economy — 
120-25,  127, 128, 135, 138, 146, 
151, 156, 179, 180, 186, 188, 199 
— metaphysical method—113, 181, 
184 
— views on property—197-99, 260 
— views on labour—120, 124, 125, 
128-30, 136, 138, 144, 149, 150, 
153, 156, 158, 159, 190, 194 
— teaching on value—111-14, 115-
17, 120, 123-27,  128-31,  134-36, 
138, 144-47, 150-52, 154, 156, 160, 
172, 193, 199, 208, 209 
— theory of utility—115-17, 132, 134 
— views on industry and its origin — 
111, 112, 133, 174 
— views on needs— 112 
— views on division of labour and 
machines—112, 118, 158, 178, 
179, 181-84, 186, 187, 188 
— teaching on commodity and money 
— 113, 118, 144-52, 162 
— views on capital— 154-55, 205 
— views on demand and supply— 
115-17,  119, 131, 134, 137, 149, 
150 
— exchange bank—145 
— views on wages— 125, 128-29, 160, 
182, 192, 206, 207, 208 
— views on competition—119, 166, 
191-95 
— on taxes — 168 
— on science—178 
— petty-bourgeois equalisation—124, 
126-29,  138, 159, 172, 173, 181, 
184, 193, 196, 202, 203, 204 
— equalised distribution—159, 181, 
203 
— views on future society— 123, 129, 
138, 159, 160, 192-94 

=====第800页=====
772 Subject Index 
— negation of economic struggle of 
the working class — 206-209 
Prussia—26, 27 
— feudalism and its aftermath —  23, 
66, 83, 227, 333 
— during the French Revolution and 
the Napoleonic wars — 22, 23, 26, 
27, 65, 80, 523 
— reforms of 1801-14 —  23, 523 
— in 1815-early 1848 — 26, 27, 52, 
63-71,  89-90, 520 
— industry —  65, 66, 80 
— railways—69 
— finance, budget, taxes — 52, 53, 57, 
58, 69, 231-32, 522 
— trade — 65, 66 
— peasantry —66, 83, 225, 227, 229 
— political and state system — 30, 65, 
71, 92, 225, 227, 333, 522 
— bureaucracy —30, 65, 69, 89-92, 
227, 230, 292, 333, 522, 523 
— provincial assemblies of the estates 
— 31, 55, 64, 83, 243 
— prospects of revolution — 522 
— foreign policy — 89-90 
— oppression of Poland —  93, 545, 
552 
— and the German Con frcip ration— 
25, 26, 32, 65, "  • 
— and other European countries — 
26, 65, 542, 543 
See also Bourgeoisie in Prussia, 
Working class in Prussia 
Prussian society of maritime trade 
(Preußische Seehandlungsgesellschaft)— 
52 
Publicity—66, 89, 213, 218, 253 
Public opinion— 17, 26, 61, 64, 219, 227, 
361 
Puritans—85 
Q 
Qualification—28, 32, 379, 467 
Quality and quantity—  73, 124, 127, 128, 
130, 163 
R 
Railways—57, 62, 81, 86, 155, 157, 160, 
218, 227, 232, 299, 350,351,375, 398, 
410, 486, 489, 493 Reason, understanding'—162, 164, 165, 
166, 168-73, 195, 325, 577 
Reformation—16, 312 
Reform Bill of 1832 (in England)—SI 
Reforms—  280-81,  288-89, 295, 305, 309, 
355, 380, 466, 467, 573 
Religion— 20, 164, 256, 405 
— illusory character of conceptions of 
— 48, 317 
— ancient religions—503 
— religious fanaticism — 24, 26 
— religious wars — 20 
— and anti-scientific explanation of 
its origin—174, 325-26 
— criticism of, by German philosophy 
— 630 
— as a tool for spiritual enslavement 
— 24, 26, 225 
— creation of new religions—46-50, 
248 
— and bourgeoisie —  486,  525 
— the proletariat's and communists' 
attitude towards  it—7,  59, 102, 
231, 355, 494, 503 
— overcoming of, under communism 
— 46, 47, 102, 355 
See also Atheism, Christianity, Church, 
Clergy, God, Mythology 
Rent— 122, 124, 185, 197-206,322,455, 
457, 500, 505 
Rent,  tenants  — 83, 173, 200, 201, 203, 
205, 344, 455 
Repealers—448, 449 
Representative system—76, 77, 80, 324, 
325, 511 
Republicans—4, 7, 13, 22, 292, 321, 324, 
325, 334, 335, 377, 385, 438 
Republicans, moderate  ("National"  party)  in 
France—63,  364, 376, 377, 379-80, 
385-87,  406-08, 439-43 
Republics of antiquity— 179 
See also Ancient Greece, Ancient Rome 
Revolution— 101, 349 
— objective character of — 349 
— as the principal means of trans­
forming class society—212, 482 
— and people — 333 
— revolutionary epochs —  69, 312, 
317 
See also Bourgeois revolution, Pro­
letarian revolution 

=====第801页=====
Subject Index 773 
Revolution of 1848 in France—556-59, 
645-47,  649 
Revolution of 1848 in Italian states— 
540-44, 549, 553-56 
Revolutions of 1848 in Europe—512, 540, 
543-44, 556, 558-59 
Rhine province of Prussia— 19, 25 
Right of inheritance— 102, 296,  350-51, 
505 
Romanticism—176, 240, 260 
Rome—4, 18 
Rousseau's philosophy—334 
Russia — 20, 23, 26, 28, 71, 81, 247, 343, 
527, 541, 542, 545, 552, 646 
See also Bourgeoisie in Russia 
S 
Saint-Simon's doctrine—515, 576 
Saxony—78 
Science—18, 158, 161, 177, 178, 188, 
212, 251, 252, 312, 353 
See also Chemistry, Mechanics, Physics 
Social science 
Scotland—14, 173, 308 
Sensationism—255 
Serf peasants—84, 174, 343-44, 349, 
482-85,  495 
See also Corvée labour 
Slave, slavery— 100, 133, 167, 168, 201, 
231, 325, 343-44, 471, 482 
Social consciousness—504 
Social-Democratic Party ("Réforme" party) 
in France—  55, 75, 76, 365, 366, 
376-80, 385-87, 406-08, 438-39, 516-
17, 557 
Socialism 
— Utopian  —3,  138-44, 321, 421, 
509, 510, 512, 515-16, 576 
— feudal  —355,  506-07, 576 
— bourgeois — 355, 513, 576 
— petty-bourgeois — 508-09, 576 
— and Communists — 355-56 
— Christian —294, 508 
— in England  —3,  138, 209, 321 
— in France —209, 321, 511 
See also Fourier's doctrine, Owen's sys­tem, Saint-Simon's  doctrine,  Utopian com­
munism 
Social property—348, 352, 499-500, 508 
— preconditions for establishment of 
— 348-52, 490, 494-96, 498, 
504-06 
— transition to it in the course of a 
proletarian revolution —  349-51, 
353-54, 494-95, 498-99, 504-06 
— and management of production — 
348, 352-54, 500, 504-05 
— and distribution on its basis — 
352-53 
— and labour—353-54, 499-500 
— and abolition of classes — 353-54, 
499, 506 
See also Communist  society,  State  property 
Social relations— 145, 159, 163, 165, 166, 
170, 171, 174, 183, 193, 197,204,205, 
211, 229, 235, 249, 321-22, 487, 502 
Social science—515, 516 
Social system—89, 347-49, 352-53, 355, 
487, 508 
Society 
— history of— 144, 173-74, 495, 504 
— and classes  —89,  212, 248, 342-43, 
353 
— and division of labour—118, 119, 
179, 184-185 
— and productive forces — 348-49, 
352-53,  432-33 
— and the State  —326-28,  334-35 
— and individual—119, 193 
See also Bourgeois society, Civil society, 
Communist society, Feudalism, Social re­
lations, Social system, Primitive com­
munism 
Sonderbund (Switzerland)—371, 373 
South America — 22 
Sovereignty— 18, 362, 363, 376, 377 
Space— 163 
Spain— 16,  20-23,  25, 31, 179, 399, 410, 
438, 575 
Spirits— 134, 421, 508 
State, the— 187 
— as a tool of the ruling classes — 62, 
80, 90, 375, 486, 523, 525, 526-27 
— bourgeois  —28,  80, 318, 322-23, 
324, 486, 488, 491, 510, 513, 526 
— its transformation into simple man-

=====第802页=====
774 Subject Index 
agement of production under com­
munism— 516 
See also Absolute monarchy, Democracy, 
Dictatorship of the proletariat. Monarchy, 
Representation system 
State property—322-23, 504-05 
Stock exchange—61, 85, 86, 320, 375, 
569, 570, 632 
Students — 20, 30-32 
Suffrage 
— and bourgeoisie  — S8, 61, 346, 
375, 440, 526 
— in England  —308,  361, 449, 466, 
467 
— in France —62, 63, 76, 219, 363, 
375-80, 386-87, 440, 526 
See also Universal suffrage 
Switzerland — 7, IT- 83, 270, 299, 356, 
363, 367-74, vOS. 138,  5i:0-21,  523-25, 
534, 539, 546, "19, 593, 646 
See also Sonderbund (Switzerland), 
Working class in Switzerland 
T 
Tax, taxes— 148, 328-29 
— and bourgeoisie—195, 196, 329, 
346 
— progressive income tax — 56, 
225-26,  228-30, 231 
— and rent —203 
— and wages —217, 225-26, 329 
— and luxuries — 407 
— and proletariat —329, 420, 425 
— during transition from capitalism 
to communism— 102, 350, 505 
Ten Hours Bill in England—143, 456, 
457, 493, 577 
Terror—  253,  438 
— revolutionary  —5,  19, 319, 335 
Theory and practice 
— primacy of practice and secondary 
nature of theory—124, 144, 162, 
165, 194, 296-97, 303-04 
— material practice as basis of theory 
— 121-24, 296-97, 303-04, 337-38, 
497-98,  515 
— practice as criterion of truth — 
162, 165, 169, 175-78 
— dialectical relation of — 337-38 — discrepancy between — 48-50, 115-
16, 169, 175-78, 510-11 
— criticism of the idealistic concep­
tion of the relation between theory 
and practice—162, 165, 169, 194 
— leading role of practice in the 
process of cognition — 337-38 
— role of practice in changing reality 
— 299 
Thirty Years War, 1618-48—327 
Thought— 164, 165 
Tory—333 
Town—  78, 179, 295, 328, 485 
— separation from the countryside — 
179 
-- in the Middle Ages—15, 17, 269, 
295, 326, 328, 343, 349, 485, 486, 
524, 531, 533 
— struggle against feudals — 486 
— under capitalism — 346, 488 
— abolition of antithesis between 
town and country under commu­
nism—351,  353-54, 505, 516 
See also Burghers in Germany, Commune 
(medieval),  Country 
Trade, crafts— 17, 79, 99, 133, 201, 342, 
343-45,  380, 425, 628 
Trade unions—209, 212, 491-92, 522 
See also Workers' combinations 
Trial  by jury—  28, 29, 32, 66, 71, 88, 228, 
250 
"True socialism"— 3, 4, 8, 35, 36, 41, 43, 
44, 74-78, 235-73, 300-02, 338-39, 
510-12,  576, 590-91,597-98 
Truth—43,  76, 171, 178, 301 
Tunis —  471,  527 
Turkey— 7, 31, 527 
U 
Unemployment— 433, 458 
United Diet (Prussia)—64, 78, 92, 225, 
227-28,  230, 520, 522 
United States of America, the—40, 44, 
167, 323, 329, 334, 335, 343, 409-10, 
520, 526, 527, 539 
See also American War of Independence, 
National Reformers, New  York,  Working 
class in the USA, Young America 

=====第803页=====
Subject Index 775 
Unity and struggle of opposites— 164, 168, 
175, 195 
Universal suffrage— 29, 233, 323, 361, 
386, 449 
Universities—30, 286, 439 
Uprising of Silesian weavers—332 
Use value— 111, 112-17, 119, 121, 124 
Utility—116, 118, 121, 130, 133, 184 
Utopian communism — 3, 41, 76, 77, 138, 
141, 178, 209, 210, 254, 338, 404, 
407-08,  515, 516, 538 
See also Egalitarian communism, social­
ism, Weitling's theory 
V 
Value— 111, 120, 123, 124, 126-32, 135, 
13ß, 138, 144-45, 149, 150, 151, 154, 
160, 166, 194, 204 
See also Exchange value, Use value 
Vendée —26 
Vienna— 239, 533 
Vienna Congress of 1814-15—23-26, 545 
Voltairianism — 546 
W 
Wage labour— 99, 159, 183, 434, 436, 
463,  495, 498-500, 514, 516 
— and capital  —58,  178, 288, 310, 
435,  440 
Wages 
— as a component of cost of produc­
tion—118,  201, 217 
— as price of labour—124-26, 128, 
130, 289-90, 343, 415, 423, 426, 
436, 462-63, 499 
— as economic embodiment of the 
worker's subsistence — 329, 434-35 
— and competition—160, 206-07, 
329, 415, 453 
— fluctuations —419, 422-25, 427-28, 
430, 453, 458, 491 
— workers' struggle against reduction 
of—206-11,  308-09, 311, 415 
— real and nominal —  225,  424 
— absolute and relative — 422 
— minimum  —305,  329, 415, 421, 
425-26,  462-63, 492, 499 Wars of revolutionary France at the end of 
18th century— 19, 27, 370 
Wat Tyler's rebellion, 1381 — 295 
Wealth—131,  132, 151, 159, 160, 174, 
175, 176, 184, 196, 197, 345 
Weitling's theory—11-13, 426, 576, 590 
Will— 118, 119, 256 
Women's question— 36-39, 50, 102, 144, 
354, 491, 502 
Worker 
— in conditions of bourgeois produc­
tion—127, 133, 182, 185, 187, 
188-90, 207, 329, 342, 419-20,422, 
423, 426, 430-34, 442, 462, 490 
— vital necessities for his reproduc­
tion—124, 125, 160, 225-26, 
289-90, 343, 419, 432, 463, 490, 
499 
— and the capitalist class — 126, 
— 342-43,423-24,426,491 
See also Competition, Labour, Labour 
Power, Wages 
Workers ' movement—495, 519 
— prerequisites for rise of—30, 188, 
296, 331-32, 389-90,  440-41, 
491-92 
— stages of development —  29, 43, 
188, 491-92, 495, 515 
— aims of—389-90, 494 
— necessity of combining political and 
economic struggle—178, 210, 211 
— significance of unity — 390 
— struggle for general democratic 
demands —41-44, 59, 222-25, 228, 
233, 295-96, 298-99, 306,  350-51, 
355-56,  519 
— internationalism as its highest prin­
ciple—6,  389-90, 497 
— and the proletarian party — 493, 
497, 519 
See also Chartism, Communist move­
ment, Internationalism, proletarian, Pro­
letarian revolution, Uprising of the 
Silesian weavers, Workers' movement in 
various countries 
Workers' movement in Belgium—538, 
559-66,  569 
Workers' movement in England—30, 207, 
208, 307-11,  377, 440 
See also Chartism 

=====第804页=====
776 Subject Index 
Workers' movement in France—29, 30, 76, 
82, 345, 380-81 
Workers' movement in Germany—30, 84, 
331-33 
Workers' combinations — 207-12, 415-19, 
434-36,  441, 492, 496 
Workhouses— 309, 434, 453 
Working class—231, 341, 346, 490-95, 
502 
— as the only consistently revolution­
ary class  —231,  494 
— world-historic role of—94, 178, 
280, 345, 388, 436, 490, 494, 496, 
508 
— origin and formation of — 84, 175, 
185, 186, 211, 296, 341-45, 346, 
349, 353, 368, 389-90, 460,492-94, 
528 
— augmentation of, at the expense of 
all other classes and sections of the 
population —349, 350, 429, 491, 
493, 509, 524, 528 
— numerical growth of—176, 433, 
492 
— essence of, in the capitalist society 
— 341,  343, 344, 352, 440, 482, 
485,  490-91,  494, 495, 502 
— condition of, under capitalism — 
30, 94, 440, 461 
— concentration of, in industrial 
centres  —345,  346, 429, 491-93 
— industrial (factory)—175, 295, 
349, 353, 389 
— formation of, as a revolutionary 
class —84, 95, 178, 211, 212, 
332-33,  356, 372, 389-90, 491-95, 
497, 505, 515, 516, 539 
— class interests of — 58-59, 82, 95, 
299, 389 
— conditions for liberation of — 212, 
344, 355, 389-90, 502, 505, 515, 
528-29 
— and revolutionary theory — 372 
— theoretical and literary representa­
tives of—178 
— community of condition and inter­
ests of, in all countries — 6, 211, 
389-90, 492, 497 
— as leading class in the revolutionary 
process  —294-95,  350, 436, 468, 
494 
— and peasantry  —294-95,  350, 494, 
524-25 — and petty bourgeoisie — 82, 350, 
380, 509, 512 
— and struggle of bourgeoisie with 
feudal reaction  —71,  94, 332, 356, 
372, 492, 504-05, 519, 528, 529 
— role of, in bourgeois revolution— 
29, 71, 95, 222-25, 233, 294-95, 
319, 332,  350-51,  372, 492, 515, 
519, 544, 557 
— significance of a centralised state 
for activity  of—351,  372, 528 
— and national liberation movement 
— 3, 6, 388-90,449-50 
See also Internationalism, proletarian, 
Political domination of the proletariat, 
Worker, Workhouses, Working class in 
Austria, Working class in  England, 
Working  class  in France, Working  class  in 
Germany, Working class in Prussia, 
Working class in  Switzerland,  Working 
class  in the USA 
Working class in Austria—533 
Working class in England—58-59, 208, 
222, 310, 322, 350, 389-90, 449, 451, 
467, 528 
Working class in France—29, 30, 75, 76, 
83, 222, 227, 287, 345, 350, 377-78, 
380-81,  390, 467, 468 
Working class in Germany—30, 77, 80, 
84-87,  93-95, 222, 228, 233, 332, 350, 
390 
Working class in Prussia—32, 69, 227, 
229, 230 
Working class in Switzerland—368, 528 
Working class in the USA —  295,  329 
Württemberg — 78 
Y 
Young America—41-42 
Young England—77 
Young Europe—11,13 
Young Germany—243, 248 
Young Hegelianism—T*>, 292, 293, 335, 
336 
Youth—236, 271 
See also Students, Universities 

=====第805页=====
